

CHAPTER 12
It happened so fast and so drastically that I nearly slid after him, managing only instinctively to pivot on one foot and throw myself headlong back onto the boards still remaining solid behind the hole.
Harry, I thought ridiculously, was dead unlucky with cold dirty water.
I wriggled until I could peer over the edge into the wet depths below and I couldn't see him at all.
Shit, I thought, peeling off my jacket.
Come up for God's sake, Harry, so I can pull you out.
No sign of him.
Nothing.
I yelled to him.
No reply.
I kicked off my boots and swung down below, holding onto a bared crossbeam that creaked with threat, swinging from one hand while I tried to see Harry and not land on top of him.
All that was visible was brownish opaque muddy water.
No time for anything except getting him out.
I let go of the beam and dropped with bent legs so as to splash down softly and felt the breath rush out of my lungs from the iciness of the river.
Letting the water buoy up my weight I stretched my feet down to touch bottom and found the water came up to my ears; took a deep breath, put the rest of my head under and reached around for Harry, unable to see him, unable with open eyes to see anything at all.
He had to be there.
Time was short.
I stood up for a gasp of  air, ducked down again, searching with fingers, with feet, with urgency turning to appalling alarm.
I could feel things, pieces of metal, sharp spiky things, nothing living.
Another gasp of air.
I looked for bubbles rising, hoping to find him that way, and saw not bubbles but a red stain in the water a short way off, a swirl of colour against drab.
At least I'd found him.
I dived towards the scarlet streaks and touched him at once, but there was no movement in him, and when I tried to pull him to the surface, I couldn't.
Shit…
Shit…
Stupid word kept repeating in my brain.
I felt and slid my arms under Harry's and with my feet slipping on the muddy bottom yanked him upwards as fiercely as I could and found him still stuck and yanked again twice more with increasing desperation until finally whatever had been holding him released its grasp and he came shooting to the surface, only to begin falling sluggishly back again as a dead weight.
With my own nose barely above water I held him with his head just higher than mine, but he still wasn't breathing.
I laced my arms round his back, under his own arms, letting his face fall on mine, and in that awkward position I blew my own breath into him, not in the accepted way with him lying flat with most things in control, but into his open nostrils, into his flaccid mouth, into either or both at once, as fast as I could, trying to pump his chest in unison, to do what his own intercostal muscles had stopped doing, pulling his ribcage open for air to flow in.
They tell you to go on with artificial respiration for ever, for long after you've given up hope.
Go on and on, I'd been told.
Don't give up.
Don't ever give up.
He was heavy in spite of the buoyancy from the water.
My feet went numb down on the mud.
I blew my breath into him rhythmically, faster than normal breathing, squeezing him, telling him, ordering him in my mind to take charge of himself, come back, come back…
Harry, come back…
I grieved for him, for Fiona, for all of them, but most for Harry.
That humour, that humanity; they couldn't be lost.
I gave him my breath until I was dizzy myself and I still wouldn't accept it was all useless, that I might as well stop.
I felt the jolt in his chest as I hugged it in rhythm against mine and for a long second couldn't believe it, but then he  heaved again in my arms and coughed in my face and a mouthful of dirty water shot out in a spout and he began coughing in earnest and choking and gasping for air…gasping, gulping air down, wheezing in his throat, whooping like whooping cough, struggling to fill his functioning lungs.
He couldn't have been unconscious for long, looking back, but it seemed an eternity at the time.
With coughing, he opened his eyes and began groaning which was at least some sign of progress, and I started looking about to see how we were going to get out of what appeared to be uncomfortably like a prison.
Another door, Harry had said, down by the river's edge: and in fact, when I looked I could see it, a once-painted slab of wood set in brickwork, its bottom edge barely six inches above the water.
Across the whole end of the building, stretching from the ceiling down into the river, was a curtain of linked metal like thick over-sized chicken wire, presumably originally installed to keep thieves away from any boat in the dock.
Beyond it flowed the heavy mainstream, with small eddies curling along and through the wire on the surface.
The dock itself, I well understood, was deeper than usual because of the height of the river.
The door was still six inches above it, though…it didn't make sense to build a door high if the water was usually lower…not unless there was a step somewhere…a step or a walkway even, for the loading and unloading of boats…
Taking Harry gingerly with me I moved to the left, towards the wall, and with great relief found that there was indeed a walkway there at about the height of my waist.
I lifted Harry until he was sitting on the walkway and then, still gripping him tightly, wriggled up beside him so that we were both sitting there with our heads wholly above water, which may not sound a great advance but which was probably the difference between life and death.
Harry was semi-conscious, confused and bleeding.
The only good thing about the extreme cold of the water, I thought, was that whatever the damage, the blood loss was being minimised.
Apart from that, the sooner we were out of there, the better.
The hole through which Harry had fallen was in the centre of  the ceiling.
If I stood up on the walkway, I thought, I could probably stretch up and touch the ceiling, but wouldn't be able to reach the hole.
Might try jumping…might pull more of the floor down.
It didn't look promising.
There seemed to be part of a beam missing in the area.
Rotted through, no doubt.
Meanwhile I had to get Harry well propped so that he wouldn't fall forward and drown after all, and to do that I reckoned we needed to be in the corner.
I tugged him gently along the walkway, which was made of planks, I discovered, with short mooring posts sticking up at intervals, needing me to lift his legs over one at a time.
Still, we reached the end in a while, and I stood up and tugged him back until he was sitting wedged in the corner, supported by the rear and side walls.
He had stopped coughing, but still looked dazed.
The blood streaking scarlet was from one of his legs, now stretched out straight before him but still not in view on account of the clouded water.
I was debating whether to try to stop the bleeding first or to leave him in his uncertain state while I found a way out, trusting he wouldn't totally pass out, when I heard the main door creak open directly above our heads; the way Harry and I had come in.
My first natural impulse was to shout, to get help from whoever had come: and between intention and voice a whole stream of thoughts suddenly intruded and left me silent, open-mouthed to call out but unsure of the wisdom.
Thoughts.
Harry had come to this place to meet someone.
He didn't know who.
He'd been given a meeting place he knew of.
He'd gone there trustingly.
He'd walked into the boathouse and tried to pick up an envelope and the floor had given way beneath him and a piece of beam was missing, and if I hadn't been there with him he would certainly have drowned in the dock, impaled on something lurking beneath the surface.
Part of my later training had been at the hands of an ex-SAS instructor whose absolute priority for survival was evading the enemy; and with doubt but also awareness of danger I guessed at an enemy above our heads, not a saviour.
I waited for exclamations of horror from above, for someone to call Harry's  name in alarm, for some natural innocent reaction to the floor's collapse.
Instead there was silence.
Then the creak of a step or two, then the sound of the door being quietly closed.
Eerie.
All sounds from outside were muffled because of the dock being partly below ground level, set into the slope of the bank, but in a short while I heard the sound of a car door slamming and after that the noise of an engine starting up and being driven away.
Harry suddenly said, ‘Bloody hell.’
A couple of sweet words.
Then he said, ‘What the hell's happening?’ and then, ‘God, my leg hurts.’
‘We came through the boathouse floor.’
I pointed to the hole.
‘The floorboards gave way.
You landed on something that pierced your leg.’
‘I'm f…freezing.’
‘Yes, I know.
Are you awake enough to sit here on your own for a bit?’
‘John, for God's sake…’
‘Not long,’ I said hastily.
‘I'll not leave you long.’
As I stood on the walkway, the water level reached above my knees, and I waded along beside the wall in the direction of the lower door and the river.
There were indeed steps by the door, three steps up and a flat landing along below the door itself.
I went up the steps until the water barely covered my ankles and tried the doorlatch.
This time, no easy exit.
The door was solid as rock.
On the wall beside the door there was a row of three electric switches.
I pressed them all without any results from the electric light bulbs along the ceiling.
There was also a control box with cables leading to the top of the metal curtain: I opened the box and pressed the red button and the green button to be found inside there but, again, nothing changed in the boathouse.
The arrangement for raising the curtain was a matter of gear wheels designed to turn a rod to wind the metal mesh up onto it like a blind.
The sides of the curtain were held in tracks to help it run smoothly.
Without electricity, however, it wasn't going to  oblige.
On the other hand, because of its construction, the whole barrier had to be reasonably light in weight.
‘Harry?’
I called.
‘God, John…
’ His voice sounded weak and strained.
‘Sit there and don't worry.
I'll come back.’
‘Where…are you going?’
There was fear in his voice but also control.
‘Out.’
‘Well…hurry.’
‘Yes.’
I slipped back into the water and swam a couple of strokes to the curtain.
Tried standing up, but the water was much deeper there.
Hung onto the wire feeling the tug of the eddies from the river.
With luck, with extreme luck, the curtain wouldn't go all the way down to the river's bed.
It had no practical need to reach down further than the drought level of the river which had to leave a gap of at least two or three feet.
From the weight point of view, a gap was sensible.
Simple.
I took a breath and pulled myself hand over hand down the curtain, seeking to find the bottom of it with my feet: and there was indeed a gap between the bottom edge of the curtain and the mud, but only a matter of inches, and there was clutter down there, unidentifiable, pressing against the barrier, trying to get past it.
I came up for air.
‘Harry?’
‘Yes.’
‘There's a space under the metal curtain.
I'm going out into the river and I'll be back for you very soon.’
‘All right.’
More control this time: less fear.
Deep breath.
Dived, pulling myself down the wire.
Came to the end of it, felt the mud below.
The bottom edge of the curtain was a matter of free links, not a connecting bar.
The links could be raised, but only singly, not altogether.
Go under it, I told myself.
The temptation to return safely back up where I'd come from was enormous.
Go under …
I swung down at the bottom, deciding to go head first, face up, curling my back down into the soft river bed, praying…
Praying that the links wouldn't catch on my clothes…in my knitted sweater…should have stripped…head under, metal lying on my face, push the links up with hands, full strength, take care, don't rush, don't snag clothes, get free of the jumble of things on the mud around me, hold onto the wire outside, don't let go, the current in the river was appreciable, tugging, keep straight,hang on , shoulders through, raise the links, back through, bottom through, legs…links…short of breath…lungs hurting…careful, careful…unknown things round my ankles, hampering…had to breathe soon…feet catching…feet…through .
The river immediately floated my free legs away as if it would have them, and I had to grab the wire fiercely to avoid going with the current.
But I was through and not stuck in the dreadful clutch of metal links, not grasped by debris, not drowning without any chance of rescue.
I came up into the air gasping deeply, panting, aching lungs swelling, feeling a rush of suppressed terror, clinging onto the curtain in a shaky state.
‘Harry?’
I called.
The dock looked dark beyond the curtain and I couldn't see him, but he could indeed see me.
‘Oh John…
’ His relief was beyond measure.
‘Thank God.’
‘Not long now,’ I said, and heard the strain in my own voice too.
I edged along the curtain in the upstream direction of the shut door and by hauling my way up the links at the side managed to scramble round the boathouse wall and up out of the water to roll at last onto the grassy bank.
Bitterly cold, shivering violently from several causes, but out .
I stood up with knees that felt like buckling and tried to open the door into the dock; and it was as immovable from outside as from in.
It had a mortise lock, a simple keyhole and no key.
Perhaps the best thing to do, I thought despairingly, was to find a telephone and get professional help: the fire brigade and an ambulance.
If I couldn't find a telephone in Sam's big workshop I could drive Harry's car to the nearest house…
Big snag.
Harry's car had gone.
My mind started playing the shit tape monotonously.
Before I did anything, I thought, I needed to put on my boots.
Went into the boathouse through the top door.
Another big snag.
No boots.
No ski-suit jacket either.
Harry's voice came from below, distant and wavery, ‘Is anyone there?’
‘It's me, John,’ I shouted.
‘Just hold on.’
No reply.
He was weaker, perhaps.
Better hurry.
There was now no doubt about murderous intention on someone's part and the certainty made me perversely angry, stimulating renewed strength and a good deal of bloody-mindedness.
I ran along the stony path to Sam's large shed in my socks and hardly felt the discomfort, and found to my relief that I could get inside easily enough — no lock on the door.
The space inside looked as much like a junkyard as the space outside.
The centre, I saw briefly, was occupied by a large boat on blocks, its superstructure covered with lightweight grey plastic sheeting.
I spent a little precious time searching for a telephone, but couldn't find one.
There was no office, no place partitioned off or locked.
Probably Sam kept good tools somewhere, but he'd hidden them away.
All around lay old and rusting tools and equipment, but among the junk I found almost at once two perfect aids: a tyre lever and a heavy mallet for driving in mooring pegs.
With those I returned at speed to the boathouse and attacked the lower door, first hammering the toe of the tyre lever into a nonexistent crack between the wooden door frame and the surrounding brickwork at a level just below the keyhole, then bashing the far end of that iron, to put heavy leverage against the door frame, then wrenching out the lever and repeating the whole process above the lock, this time with fury.
The old wood of the door frame gave up the struggle and splintered, freeing the tongue of the lock, and without much more trouble I pulled the door open towards me, swinging it wide.
I  left the tyre lever and mallet on the grass and stepped down into the boathouse, the shocking chill of the water again a teeth-gritter.
At least, I thought grimly, it was a calm day.
No wind-chill to speak of, to polish us off.
I waded along to Harry who was sagging back against the corner, his head lolling only just above the surface.
‘Come on,’ I said urgently.
‘Harry, wake up.’
He looked at me apathetically through a mist of weakness and pain and one could see he'd been in that water a lot too long.
Apathy, like cold, was a killer.
I bent down and turned him until I had my hands under his arms, his back towards me, and I floated him along in the water to the steps and there strained to pull him up them and out onto the grass.
‘My leg,’ he said, moaning.
‘God, Harry, what do you weigh?’
I asked, lugging.
‘None of your bloody business,’ he mumbled.
I half laughed, relieved.
If he could say that, for all his suffering, he wasn't in a dying frame of mind.
It gave me enough impetus to finish the exit, though I dare say he, like me, felt only marginally warmer for being on land.
His leg seemed to have stopped bleeding, or very nearly, and he couldn't have severed an artery or he'd have bled to death by now, but all the same there had to be a pretty serious wound under the cloth of his trousers and the faster I could get him to a doctor the better.
As far as I remembered from our arrival, the boatyard lay down a lane with no houses nearby: I'd have a fair run in my socks to find help.
On the other hand, among the general clutter, only a few feet off, I could see the upturned keel of an old clinker-built rowing boat.
Small.
Maybe six feet overall.
A one-man job, big enough for two.
If it weren't full of holes…
Leaving Harry briefly I went to the dinghy and heaved it over right side up.
Apart from needing varnish and loving care it looked seaworthy, but naturally there were no rowlocks and no oars.
Never mind.
Any piece of pole would do.
Plenty lying about.
I picked up a likely length and laid it in the boat.
The dinghy had a short rope tied to its bow: a painter.
‘Harry, can you hop?’
I asked him.
‘Don't know.’
‘Come on.
Try.
Let's get you in the boat.’
‘In the boat ?’
‘Yes.
Someone's taken your car.’
He looked bewildered, but the whole afternoon must have seemed so unbelievable to him that hopping into a boat would seem to be all of a piece.
In any case, he made feeble efforts to help me get him to his left foot, and with my almost total support he made the few hops to reach the boat, though I could see it hurt him sorely.
I helped him sit down on the one centre thwart and arranged his legs as comfortably as possible, Harry cursing and wincing by turns.
‘Hang on tight to the sides,’ I said.
‘Tight.’
‘Yes.’
He didn't move, so I pulled his hands out and positioned them on the boat's edges.
‘Grip,’ I said fiercely.
‘Fine.’
His voice was vague, but his hands tightened.
I tugged and lugged the dinghy until it was sliding backwards down the bank, and then held on to the painter, digging my heels in, leaning back to prevent too fast and splashy a launch.
At the last minute, when the stern hit the swollen water and the dinghy's progress flattened out I jumped in myself and simply hoped against all reasonable hope that we wouldn't sink at once.
We didn't.
The current took the dinghy immediately and started it on its way downstream, and I edged past Harry into the stern space behind him and retrieved my piece of pole.
‘What's that?’
Harry asked weakly, trying to make sense of things.
‘Rudder.’
‘Oh.’
I made a crook of my left elbow on the back of the boat and laid the pole across it, the shorter end in my right hand, the longer end trailing behind in the water.
The steering was rudimentary, but enough to keep us travelling bow-first downstream.
Downstream was always the way to People …
Bits of the guide books floated familiarly to the surface.
Some of your traps are horrific.
Some of the traps described how to arrange for the prey to fall through seemingly firm ground into a pit full of spikes beneath.
Everyone had read the guides.
‘John?’
Harry said.
‘Where are we going?’
‘Maidenhead, possibly.
I'm not quite sure.’
‘I'm bloody cold.’
There was some water in the boat now, sloshing about under our feet.
Shit.
Nowhere on the Thames was far from civilisation, not even Sam's boatyard.
The wide river narrowed abruptly with a notice on our left saying DANGER in huge letters, and a smaller notice saying LOCK with an arrow to the right.
I steered the dinghy powerfully to the right.
DANGER led to a weir.
A lock would do just fine.
Locks had keepers.
At about then I took note that there weren't in fact any other boats moving on the river and I remembered that often the locks closed for maintenance in winter and maybe the lock-keeper would have gone shopping…
Never mind.
There were houses in sight on the right.
They proved to be summer cottages, all closed.
We floated on as if in a timeless limbo.
The water in the bottom of the boat grew deeper.
The current, away from the mainstream, was much weaker.
The lock cut seemed to last for ever, narrowing though, with high dark trees on the left; finally, blessedly, on the right, there were moorings for boats wanting passage through the lock to the lower level of the river below.
No boats there, of course.
No helping hands.
Never mind.
I took the dinghy as far as we could go, right up near to the lock gates.
Tied the painter to a mooring post and stepped up out of the boat.
‘Won't be long,’ I told Harry.
He nodded merely.
It was all too much.
I climbed the steps up onto the lock and knocked on the door  of the lock-keeper's house, and through great good fortune found him at home.
A lean man; kind eyes.
‘Fell in the river, did you?’ he asked cheerfully, observing my soaked state.
‘Want to use the phone?’
CHAPTER 13
I went with Harry in the ambulance to Maidenhead hospital, both of us swathed in blankets, Harry also in a foil-lined padded wrap used for hypothermia cases; and from then on it was a matter of phoning and reassuring Fiona and waiting to see the extent of Harry's injuries, which proved to be a pierced calf, entry and exit wounds both clean and clotted, with no dreadful damage in between.
While Fiona was still on her way the medics stuffed Harry full of antibiotics and other palliatives and put stitches where they were needed, and by the time she'd wept briefly in my arms he was warm and responding nicely in a recovery room somewhere.
‘But why,’ she asked, half cross, half mystified, ‘did he go to Sam's boatyard in the first place?’
Like a mother scolding her lost child, I thought, after he's come back safe: just like Perkin with Mackie.
‘He'll tell you about it,’ I said.
‘They say he's doing fine.’
‘You're damp!’
She disengaged herself and held me at arms, length.
‘Did you fall through the floor too?’
‘Sort of.’
The hospital's central heating had been doing a fine job of drying everything on me and I felt like one of those old-fashioned clothes-horses, steaming slightly in warm air.
Still no shoes or boots; couldn't be helped.
Fiona looked at my feet dubiously.
‘I was going to ask you to drive Harry's car home,’ she said, ‘but I suppose you can't.’
I explained that Harry's car had already been driven away.
‘Where is it, then?’ she asked, bewildered.
‘Who took it?’
‘Maybe Doone will find out.’
‘That man!’
She shivered.
‘I hate him.’
Before I could comment, a nurse came to fetch her to see Harry, and she went anxiously, calling over her shoulder for me to wait for her; and when she returned half an hour later she looked dazed.
‘Harry's sleepy,’ she said.
‘He kept waking up and telling me silly things…
. How could you possibly get to this hospital in a boat ?’
‘I'll tell you on the way home.
Would you like me to drive?’
‘But…’
‘It's quite easy with bare feet.
I'll take off my socks.’
She unlocked the car herself and handed me the keys without comment.
We arranged ourselves in the seats and as we headed for Shellerton in the early dark I told her calmly, incompletely and without terrors, the gist of what had befallen us in Sam's boatyard.
She listened with a frown, adding her own worry.
‘Turn right here,’ she said once, automatically, and another time, ‘Sorry, we should have turned left there, we'll have to go back,’and finally, ‘Go straight to Shellerton House.
I'll drive home from there.
I'm all right, really.
It's just so upsetting.
It made me shaky, seeing Harry dopey like that, pumped full of drugs.’
‘I know.’
I pulled up outside Tremayne's house and while I put on my socks again she said she would come in for a while for company, ‘to cure the trembles’.
Tremayne, Mackie and Perkin were all in the family room for the usual evening drinks.
Tremayne made more than his usual fuss over Fiona, sensing some sort of turmoil, telling her comfortably that Mackie had just come back from Ascot races where he'd sent a runner for the apprentice race which had proved a total waste of time.
The note I'd left for Tremayne, ‘GONE OUT WITH HARRY, BACK FOR GRUB was still pinned to the corkboard.
He took my arrival with Fiona as not needing comment.
‘I think someone tried to kill Harry,’ Fiona said starkly, cutting abruptly through Tremayne's continuing Ascot chat.
‘What?’
There was an instant silence and general shock on all the faces, including Fiona's own.
‘He went to Sam's boatyard and fell through some floorboards and was nearly drowned…
’ She told it to them much as I'd told her myself.
‘If John hadn't been with him to help…’
Tremayne said robustly, ‘My dearest girl, it must have been the most dreadful accident.
Whoever would want to kill Harry?’
‘No one,’ Perkin said, his voice an echo of Tremayne's.
‘I mean, what for?’
‘Harry's a dear,’ Mackie said, nodding.
‘You'd never think so to read the papers recently,’ Fiona pointed out, lines creasing her forehead.
‘people can be incredibly vicious.
Even people in the village.
I went into the shop this morning and everyone stopped talking and stared at me.
People I've known for years.
I told Harry and he was furious, but what can we do?
And now this…’
‘Did Harry say someone tried to kill him?’
Perkin asked.
Fiona shook her head.
‘Harry was too dopey.’
‘Does John think so?’
Fiona glanced at me.
‘John didn't actually say so.
It's what I think myself.
What I'm afraid of.
It scares me to think of it.’
‘Then don't, darling.’
Mackie put an arm round her and kissed her cheek.
‘It's a frightening thing to have happened, but Harry is all right.’
‘But someone stole his car,’ Fiona said, hollow-eyed.
‘Perhaps he left the key in the ignition,’ Tremayne guessed, ‘and a passer-by saw an opportunity.’
Fiona agreed unwillingly, ‘Yes, he would have left his keys.
He trusts people.
I've told him over and over again that you simply can't these days.’
They all spent time reassuring Fiona until the worst of the worry unwound from her body and I watched the movement of her silver-blond hair in the soft lights and made no attempt to throw doubts because it would have achieved nothing good.
With Doone, early the next afternoon, it was a different matter.
He'd had my bald account of events over the telephone in the morning, his first knowledge of what had happened.
Now he came into the dining-room where I was working and sat down opposite me at the table.
‘I hear you're a proper little hero,’ he said dryly.
‘Oh, really, who says so?’
‘Mr Goodhaven.’
I stared back blandly with the same expression that he was trying on me.
The morning's bulletin on Harry had been good, the prognosis excellent, his memory of events reportedly clarifying fast.
‘Accident or attempted murder?’
Doone asked, apparently seeking a considered answer.
I gave him one.
‘The latter, I'd say.
Have you found his car?’
‘Not yet.’
He frowned at me with a long look in which I read nothing.
‘Where would you search for it?’ he asked.
After a pause I said, ‘At the top of a cliff.’
He blinked.
‘Don't you think so?’
I said.
‘Beachy Head?
Dover?’ he suggested.
‘A long drive to the sea.’
‘Maybe a metaphorical cliff,’ I said.
‘Go on, then.’
‘Is it usual,’ I asked, ‘for policemen to ask for theories from the general public?’
‘I told you before, I like to hear them.
I don't always agree, but sometimes I do.’
‘Fair enough.
Then what would you have thought if Harry Goodhaven had disappeared for ever yesterday afternoon and you'd found his car later by a cliff, real or metaphorical?’
‘Suicide,’ he said promptly.
‘An admission of guilt.’
‘End of investigation?
Books closed?’
He stared at me sombrely.
‘Perhaps.
But unless we eventually found a body, there would also be the possibility of simple flight.
We would alert Australia…look for him round the world.
The books would remain open.’
‘But you wouldn't investigate anyone else, because you would definitely consider him guilty.’
‘The evidence points to it.
His flight or suicide would confirm it.’
‘But something about that evidence bothers you.’
I was beginning to learn his expressions, or lack of them.
The very stillness of his muscles meant that I'd touched something he'd thought hidden.
‘Why do you say so?’ he asked eventually.
‘Because you've made no arrest.’
‘That simple.’
‘Without your knowledge, I can only guess.’
‘Guess away,’ he invited.
‘Then I'd say perhaps Harry's sunglasses and pen and belt were with Angela Brickell because she took them there herself.’
‘Go on,’ he said neutrally.
It wasn't, I saw, a new idea to him.
‘Didn't you say her handbag had been torn open, the contents gone except for the photo in a zipped pocket?’
‘I did say so, yes.’
‘And you found chocolate wrappings lying about?’
‘Yes.’
‘And traces of dogs?’
‘Yes.’
‘And any dog worth his salt would bite open a handbag to get to the chocolate?’
‘It's possible.’
He made a decision and a big admission.
‘There were toothmarks on the handbag.’
‘Suppose then,’ I said, ‘that she did in fact have a thing about Harry.
He's a kind and attractive man.
Suppose she did carry his photo with the horse, not Fiona's, who's the owner, after all.
Suppose she'd managed to acquire personal things of Harry's, his sunglasses, a pen, even a belt, and wore them or carried them with her, as young people do.
They'd only be evidence of her crush on Harry, not of his presence at her death.’
‘I considered all that, yes.’
‘Suppose someone couldn't understand why you didn't arrest Harry, particularly in view of all the hounding in the papers, and decided to remove any doubts you might be showing?’
He sat for a while without speaking, apparently debating how many of his thoughts to share.
Not many more, it transpired.
‘Whoever took Harry's car,’ I said, ‘removed my jacket and boots as well.
I took them off before I went through the floor into the dock.’
‘Why didn't you tell me that?’
He seemed put out, severe.
‘I'm telling you now.’
I paused.
‘I would think that whoever took those things is very worried indeed now to find that I was with Harry and that he is alive.
I'd say there wasn't supposed to be any reason to think Harry had gone to Sam's boatyard.
No one would ever have looked for him there.
I'd say it was an attempt to confirm Harry's guilt that went disastrously wrong, leaving you with bristling new doubts and a whole lot more to investigate.’
He said formally, ‘I would like you to be present at the boatyard tomorrow morning.’
‘What do you think of the place?’
I asked.
‘I've taken statements from Mr and Mrs Goodhaven and others,’ he said stiffly.
‘I haven't been to the boatyard yet.
It has, however, been cordoned off.
Mr Yaeger is meeting me there tomorrow at nine a.m..
I would have preferred this afternoon but it seems he is riding in three races at Wincanton.’
I nodded.
Tremayne had gone there, also Nolan.
Another clash of the Titans.
‘You know,’ Doone said slowly, ‘I had indeed started to question others besides Mr Goodhaven.’
I nodded.
‘Sam Yaeger for one.
He told us.
Everyone knew you'd begun casting wider.’
‘The lass had been indiscriminate,’ he said regretfully.
Tremayne lent me his Volvo to go to the boatyard in the morning, reminding me before I set off that it was the day of the awards dinner at which he was to be honoured.
I'd seen the invitation pinned up prominently by Dee-Dee in the office: most of the racing world, it seemed, would be there to applaud.
For Tremayne, though he made a few self-deprecating jokes about it, the event gave proof of the substance of his life, much like the biography.
Sam and Doone were already in the boatyard by the time I'd found my way there, neither of them radiating joy, Sam's multicoloured jacket only emphasising the personality clash with grey plain clothes.
They'd been waiting for me, it seemed, in a mutual absence of civility.
‘Right, sir,’ Doone said, as I stood up out of the car, ‘we've done nothing here so far.
Moved nothing.
Please take us through your actions of Wednesday afternoon.’
Sam said crossly, ‘Asking for sodding trouble, coming here.’
‘As it turned out,’ Doone said placidly.
‘Go on, Mr Kendall.’
‘Harry said he was due to meet someone in the boathouse, so we went over there.’
I walked where we'd gone, the others following.
‘We opened this main door.
It wasn't locked.’
‘Never is,’ Sam said.
I pushed open the door and we looked at the hole in the floor.
‘We walked in,’ I said.
‘Just talking.’
‘What about?’
Doone asked.
‘About a great party Sam gave here once.
Harry was saying there had been a bar here in the boathouse and a grotto below.
He began to walk down to the windows and saw an envelope on the floor and when he bent to pick it up, the floor creaked and gave way.’
Sam looked blank.
‘Is that likely?’
Doone asked him.
‘How long ago was the floor solid enough to hold a party on it?’
‘A year last July,’ Sam said flatly.
‘Quick bit of rot,’ Doone commented, in his sing-song voice.
Sam made no answer, in itself remarkable.
‘Anyway,’ I said, ‘I took off my boots and jacket and left them up here and I dropped into the water, because Harry hadn't come up for air, like I told you.’
‘Yes,’ Doone said.
‘You can see better from the lower door,’ I remarked, turning to go down the path.
‘This door down here leads into the dock.’
Sam disgustedly fingered the splintered door frame.
‘Did you sodding do this?’ he demanded.
‘It wasn't locked.’
‘It was,’ I said.
‘With no key in sight.’
‘The key was in the keyhole on the inside.’
‘Absolutely not,’ I said.
Sam pulled the door open and we looked into the scene that was all too familiar to my eyes; an expanse of muddy water, the hole in the ceiling overhead and the curtain of iron mesh across the exit to the river; a dock big enough for a moderate-sized cabin cruiser or three or four smaller boats.
The water smelled dankly of mud and winter, which I hadn't seemed to notice when I'd been in it.
‘There's a sort of walkway along this right-hand wall,’ I told Doone.
‘You can't see it now because of the floodwater.’
Sam nodded.
‘A mooring dock, with bollards.’
‘If you care to walk along there,’ I suggested, deadpan, ‘I'll show you an interesting fact about that hole.’
They both stared at the water with reluctance stamped all over their faces, then Sam's cleared as he thought of a more palatable solution.
‘We'll go and look in a boat.’
‘How about the curtain?’
‘Roll it up, of course.’
‘Now, wait,’ Doone said.
‘The boat can wait.
Mr Kendall, you came through the hole, found Mr Goodhaven and brought him to the surface.
You sat him on the dock, then dived out under the curtain and climbed onto the bank.
Is that right?’
‘Yes, except that while I was pulling Harry along to that far corner to give him better support, someone opened the main door above our heads, like I told you, and then went away without saying anything, and I heard a car drive off, which might have been Harry's.’
‘Did you hear any car arriving ?’
Doone asked.
‘No.’
‘Why didn't you call out for help?’
‘Harry had been enticed here…
It all felt like a trap.
People who set traps come back to see what they've caught.’
Doone gave me another of his assessments.
Sam said, frowning, ‘You can't have dived out under the curtain, it goes right down to the river bed.’
‘I sort of slithered under it.’
‘You took a sodding risk.’
‘So do you,’ I said equably, ‘most days of the week.
And I didn't have much choice.
If I hadn't found a way out we'd both eventually have died of cold or drowning, or both.
Certainly by now.
Most likely Wednesday night.’
After a short thoughtful silence Doone said, ‘You're out on the bank.
What next?’
‘I saw the car had gone.
I went to collect my boots and jacket, but they'd gone too.
I called to Harry to reassure him, then I went over to that big shed to find a telephone, but I couldn't.’
Sam shook his head.
‘There isn't one.
When I'm here I use the portable phone from my car.’
‘I couldn't find any decent tools, either.’
Sam smiled.
‘I hide them.’
‘So I used a rusty tyre lever and a mallet, and I'm sorry about your woodwork.’
Sam shrugged.
‘Then what?’
Doone asked.
‘Then I got Harry out here and put him in a dinghy and we…er…floated down to the lock.’
‘My sodding dinghy!’
Sam exclaimed, looking at the imitation scrapyard.
‘It's gone!’
‘I'm sure it's safe down at the lock,’ I said.
‘I told the lock-keeper it was yours.
He said he'd look after it.’
‘It'll sink,’ Sam said.
‘It leaks.’
‘It's out on the bank.’
‘You'll never make a writer,’ he said.
‘Why not?’
‘Too sodding sensible.’
He read my amusement and gave me a twisted grin.
I said, ‘What happens to the rubbish lying in the dock when you roll up the curtain?’
‘Sodding hell!’
‘What are you talking about?’
Doone asked us.
‘The bed of this dock is mud, and it slopes downwards towards the river,’ I said.
‘When the curtain's rolled up, there's nothing to stop things drifting out by gravity into the river and being moved downstream by the current.
Bodies often float to the surface, but you of all people must know that those who drown in the Thames can disappear altogether and are probably taken by undercurrents down through London and out to sea.’
Sometimes from my high Chiswick window I'd thought about horrors down below the surface, out of sight.
Like hidden motives, running deadly, running deep.
‘Everyone in the Thames Valley knows they disappear,’ Doone nodded.
‘We lose a few holidaymakers every year.
Very upsetting.’
‘Harry's leg was impaled on something,’ I said mildly.
‘He was stuck underwater.
He'd have been dead in a very few minutes.
Next time Sam rolled the curtain up, Harry would have drifted quietly out of here, I should think, and no one would ever have known he'd been here.
If his body were found anywhere downstream, well then, it could be suicide.
If it wasn't found, then he'd escaped justice.’
I paused, and asked Sam directly, ‘How soon would you have rolled up the curtain?’
He answered at once, ‘Whenever I'd found the hole in the floor.
I'd have gone to take a look from beneath.
Like we're going to now.
But I hardly ever come over here.
Only in summer.’
He gave Doone a sly look.
‘In the summer I bring a mattress.’
‘And Angela Brickell?’
Doone asked.
Sam, silenced, stood with his mouth open.
A bull's-eye, I thought, for the Detective Chief Inspector.
I asked Sam, ‘What's under the water in the dock?’
‘Huh?’
‘What did Harry get stuck on?’
He brought his mind back from Angela Brickell and said vaguely, ‘Haven't a clue.’
‘If you raise the curtain,’ I said, ‘we may never know.’
‘Ah,’ Doone stared judiciously at Sam, all three of us still clustered round the open door.
‘It's a matter for grappling irons, then.
Can we get a light inside there?’
‘The main switch for here is over in the shed,’ Sam said as if automatically, his mind's attention elsewhere.
‘There's nothing in the dock except maybe a couple of beer cans and a radio some clumsy bimbo dropped when she was teetering out of a punt in high heels.
I ask you…’
‘Harry wasn't impaled on a radio,’ I said.
Sam turned away abruptly and walked along the path to his workshop.
Doone made as if to go after him, then stopped indecisively and came back.
‘This could have been an accident, sir,’ he said uneasily.
I nodded.
‘A good trap never looks like one.’
‘Are you quoting someone?’
‘Yes.
Me.
I've written a good deal about traps.
How to set them.
How to catch game.
The books are lying about all over the  place in Shellerton.
Everyone's dipped into them.
Follow the instructions and kill your man.’
‘You're not joking by any chance, are you, sir?’
I said regretfully, ‘No, I'm not.’
‘I'll have to see those books.’
‘Yes.’
Sam came back frowning and, stretching inside without stepping into the water, pressed the three switches that had been unresponsive two days earlier.
The lights in the ceiling came on without fuss and illuminated the ancient brick walls and the weathered old grey beams which crossed from side to side, holding up the planks of the floor above: holding up the planks, except where the hole was.
Doone looked in briefly and made some remark about returning with assistance.
Sam looked longer and said to me challengingly, ‘Well?’
‘There's a bit of beam missing,’ I said, ‘isn't there?’
He nodded unwillingly.
‘Looks like it.
But I didn't know about it.
How could I ?’
Doone, in his quiet way a pouncer, said meaningfully, ‘You yourself, sir, have all the knowledge and the tools for tampering with your boathouse.’
‘I didn't.’
Sam's response was belligerence, not fear.
‘Everyone knows this place.
Everyone's been here.
Everyone could cut out a beam that small, it's child's play.’
‘Who, precisely?’
Doone asked.
‘Besides you?’
‘Well…anybody.
Perkin!
He could.
Nolan…
I mean, most people can use a saw, can't they?
Can't you?’
Doone's expression assented but he said merely, ‘I'll take another look upstairs now, if you please, sir.’
We went in gingerly but as far as one could tell the floor was solid except for the one strip over the missing bit of beam.
The floorboards themselves were grey with age, and dusty, but not worm-eaten, not rotten.
Sam said, ‘The floorboards aren't nailed down much.
Just here and there.
They fit tightly most of the time because of the damp, but when we have a hot dry summer they shrink and you can lift them up easily.
You can check the beams for rot.’
‘Why are they like that?’
Doone asked.
‘Ask the people who built it,’ Sam said, shrugging.
‘It was like this when I bought it.
The last time I took the floorboards up was for the party, installing coloured spotlights and strobes in the ceiling underneath.’
‘Who knew you took the floorboards up?’
Doone asked.
Sam looked at him as if he were retarded.
‘How do I know?’ he demanded.
‘Everyone who asked how I'd done the lighting, I told them.’
I went down on my knees and edged towards the hole.
‘Don't do that,’ Doone exclaimed.
‘Just having a look.’
The way the floorboards had been laid, I saw, had meant that the doctored beam had been a main load-bearer.
Several of the planks, including those that had given way under Harry's weight, had without that beam's support simply been hanging out in space, resting like a seesaw over the previous beam but otherwise supported only by the tight fit of each plank against the next.
The floorboards hadn't snapped, as I'd originally thought: they'd gone down into the dock with Harry.
I tested a few planks carefully with the weight of my hand, then retreated and stood up on safer ground.
‘Well?’
Doone said.
‘It's still lethal just each side of the hole.’
‘Right.’
He turned to Sam.
‘I'll have to know, sir, when this tampering could have been carried out.’
Sam looked as if he'd had too much of the whole thing.
With exasperation, he said, ‘Since when?
Since Christmas?’
Doone said stolidly, ‘Since ten days ago.’
Sam briefly gave it some thought.
‘A week last Wednesday I dropped off a load of wood here on my way to Windsor races.
Thursday I raced at Towcester.
Friday I spent some time here, half a day.
Saturday I raced at Chepstow and had a fall and couldn't ride again until Tuesday.
So Sunday I was nursing myself until you came knocking on my door, and Monday I spent here, pottering about.
Tuesday I was back racing at Warwick.
Wednesday I went to Ascot, yesterday Wincanton, today Newbury…
’ He paused.
‘I've never been here at night.’
‘What races did you ride in on Wednesday afternoon?’
Doone asked.
‘At Ascot.’
‘What races?’
‘Yes.’
‘The two-mile hurdle, novice hurdle, novice chase.’
I gathered from Doone's face that it wasn't the type of answer he'd expected, but he pulled out a notebook and wrote down the reply as given, checking that he'd got it right.
Sam, upon whom understanding had dawned, said, ‘I wasn't here driving Harry's sodding car away, if that's what you're thinking.’
‘I'll need to ascertain a good many people's whereabouts on Wednesday afternoon,’ Doone said placidly in a flourish of jargon.
‘But as for now, sir, we can proceed with our investigations without taking any more of the time of either of you two gentlemen, for the present.’
‘Class dismissed?’
Sam said with irony.
Doone, unruffled, said we would be hearing from him later.
Sam came with me to where I'd parked Tremayne's car on stone-strewn grass.
The natural jauntiness remained in his step but there was less confidence in his thoughts, it seemed.
‘I like Harry,’ he said, as we reached the Volvo.
‘So do I.’‘Do you think I set that trap?’
‘You certainly could have.’
‘Sure,’ he said.
‘Dead easy.
But I didn't.’
He looked up into my face, partly anxious, partly still full of his usual machismo.
‘Unless you killed Angela Brickell,’ I said, ‘you wouldn't have tried to kill Harry.
Wouldn't make sense.’
‘I didn't do the silly little bimbo any harm.’
He shook his head as if to free her from his memory.
‘She was too intense for me, if you want to know.
I like a bit of a giggle, not remorse and tears afterwards.
Old Angie took everything seriously, always going on about mortal sin, and I got sodding tired of it, and of her, tell the truth.
She wanted me to marry her!’
His voice was full of the enormity of such a thought.
‘I told her I'd got my sights set on a high-born heiress and she damned near scratched my eyes out.
A bit of a hell-cat, she could be, old Angie.
And hungry for it!
I mean, she'd whip her clothes off before you'd finished the question.’
I listened with fascination to this insider viewpoint, and the moody Miss Brickell suddenly became a real person, not a pathetic collection of dry bones, but a mixed-up pulsating young woman full of strong urges and stronger guilts who'd piled on too much pressure, loaded her need of penitence and her heavy desires and perhaps finally her pregnancy onto someone who couldn't bear it all, and who'd seen a violent way to escape her.
Someone, I thought with illumination, who knew how easily Olympia had died from hands round the neck.
Angela Brickell had to have invited her own death.
Doone, I supposed, had known that all along.
‘What are you thinking?’
Sam asked, uncertainly for him.
‘What did she look like?’
I said.
‘Angie?’
‘Mm.’
‘Not bad,’ he said.
‘Brown hair.
Thin figure, small tits, round bottom.
She agonised about having breast implants.
I told her to forget bloody implants, what would her babies think?
That turned on the taps, I'll tell you.
She bawled for ages.
She wasn't much fun, old Angie, but effing good on a mattress.’
What an epitaph, I thought.
Chisel it in stone.
Sam looked out over the flooding river and breathed in the damp smell of the morning as if testing wine for bouquet, and I thought that he lived through his senses to a much greater degree than I did and was intensely alive in his direct approach to sex and his disregard of danger.
He said cheerfully, as if shaking off murder as a passing inconvenience, ‘Are you going to this do of Tremayne's tonight?’
‘Yes.
Are you?’
He grinned.
‘Are you kidding?
I'd be shot if I wasn't there to cheer.
And anyway,’ he shrugged as if to disclaim sentiment, ‘the old bugger deserves it.
He's not all bad, you know.’
‘I'll see you there, then,’ I said, agreeing with him.
‘If I don't break my neck.’
It was flippantly said, but an insurance against fate, like crossed fingers.
‘I'd better tell this sodding policeman where the main electric switch is.
I've got it rigged so no one can find it but me, as I don't want people being able to walk in here after dark and turn the lights on.
Inviting  vandalism, that is.
When the force have finished here, they can turn the electric off.’
He bounced off towards Doone, who was writing in his notebook, and they were walking together to the big boatshed as I drove away.
Even after having done the week's shopping en route, I was back at Shellerton House as promised in good time for Tremayne to drive his Volvo to Newbury races.
He had sent three runners off in the horse-box and was taking Mackie to assist, leaving me to my slowly growing first chapter in the dining-room.
When they'd gone Dee-Dee came in, as she often did now, to drink coffee over the sorted clippings.
I said, ‘I hope Tremayne won't mind my taking all these with me when I go home.’
‘Home…
’ Dee-Dee smiled.
‘He doesn't want you to go home, didn't you know?
He wants you to write the whole book here.
Any day now he'll probably make you an offer you can't refuse.’
‘I came for a month.
That's what he said.’
‘He didn't know you then.’
She took a few mouthfuls of coffee.
‘He wants you for Gareth, I think.’
That made sense, I thought; and I wasn't sure which I would choose, to go or to stay, if Dee-Dee was right.
When she'd returned to the office I tried to get on with the writing but couldn't concentrate.
The trap in Sam's boathouse kept intruding and so did Angela Brickell; the cold threat of khaki water that could rush into aching lungs to bring oblivion and the earthy girl who'd been claimed back by the earth, eaten clean by earth creatures, become earth-digested dust.
Under the day-to-day surface of ordinary life in Shellerton the fish of murder swam like a shark, silent, unknown, growing new teeth.
I hoped Doone would net him soon, but I hadn't much faith.
Fiona telephoned during the afternoon to say that she'd brought Harry home and he wanted to see me, so with a sigh but little reluctance I abandoned the empty page and walked down to the village.
Fiona hugged me as a long-lost brother and said Harry still  couldn't be quite clear in his mind as he was saying now that he remembered drowning.
However could one remember drowning?
‘Quite hard to forget, I should think.’
‘But he didn't drown!’
‘He came close.’
She led me into the pink-and-green chintzy sitting-room where Harry, pale with blue shadows below the eyes, sat in an armchair with his bandaged leg elevated on a large upholstered footstool.
‘Hello,’ he said, raising a phantom smile.
‘Do you know a cure for nightmares?’
‘I have them awake,’ I said.
‘Dear God.’
He swallowed.
‘What's true, and what isn't?’
‘What you remember is true.’
‘Drowning?’
‘Mm.’
‘So I'm not mad.’
‘No.
Lucky.’
‘I told you,’ he said to Fiona.
‘I tried not to breathe, but in the end I just did.
I didn't mean to.
Couldn't help it.’
‘No one can,’ I said.
‘Sit down,’ Fiona said to me, kissing Harry's head.
‘What's lucky is that Harry had the sense to take you with him.
And what's more, everyone's apologising all over the place except for one vile journalist who says it's possible a misguided vigilante thought getting rid of Harry the only path to real justice, and I want Harry to sue him, it's truly vicious.’
‘I can't be bothered,’ Harry said in his easy-going way.
‘Doone was quite nice to me!
That's enough.’
‘How's the leg?’
I asked.
‘Lousy.
Weighs a couple of tons.
Still, no gangrene as yet.’
He meant it as a joke but Fiona looked alarmed.
‘Darling,’ he said placatingly, ‘I'm bloated with antibiotics, punctured with tetanus jabs and immunised against cholera, yellow-spotted mountain fever and athlete's foot.
I have it on good authority that I'm likely to live.
How about a stiff whisky?’
‘No.
It'll curdle the drugs.’
‘For John, then.’
I shook my head.
‘Take Cinderella to the ball,’ he said.
‘What?’
‘Fiona to Tremayne's party.
You're going, aren't you?’
I nodded.
‘I'm not leaving you,’ Fiona protested.
‘Of course you are, love.
It wouldn't be the same for Tremayne if you weren't there.
He dotes on you.
John can take you.
And,’ his eyes brightened mischievously with reawakening energy, ‘I know who'd love to use my ticket.’
‘Who?’ his wife demanded.
‘Erica.
My sainted aunt.’
CHAPTER 14
The Lifetime Award to Tremayne was the work of a taken-over revitalised hotel chain aiming to crash the racing scene with sponsorship in a big way.
They, Castle Houses, had put up the prize for a steeplechase and had also taken over a prestigious handicap hurdle race already in the programme for Saturday.
The cash on offer for the hurdle race had stretched the racing world's eyes wide and excited owners into twisting their trainers' arms so that the entries had been phenomenal (Dee-Dee said).
The field would be the maximum allowed on the course for safety and several lightweights had had to be balloted out.
As a preliminary to their blockbuster, Castle Houses had arranged the awards dinner and subsidised the tickets so that more or less everyone could afford them.
The dinner was being held on the racecourse, in the grandstand with its almost limitless capacity, and the whole affair, Mackie had told me, was frankly only a giant advertisement, but everyone might as well enjoy it.
Before we went we met in the family room, Tremayne pretending nonchalance and looking unexpectedly sophisticated in his dinner jacket: grey hair smooth in wings, strong features composed, bulky body slimmed by ample expert tailoring.
Perkin's jacket by contrast looked a shade too small for him and in hugging his incipient curves diminished the difference between the sizes of father and son.
Gareth's appearance surprised everyone, especially Tremayne: he made a bravado entrance to cover shyness in a dinner jacket no one knew he had, and he looked neat, personable and much older than fifteen.
‘Where did you get that?’ his father asked, marvelling.
‘Picked it off a raspberry bush.’
He smiled widely.
‘Well, actually, Sam said I was the same height as him now and he happened to have two.
So he's lent it to me.
OK?’
‘It's great,’ Mackie said warmly, herself shapely in a shimmering black dress edged with velvet.
‘And John's jacket, I see, survived the plunge into the ditch.’
The ditch seemed a long time ago: two weeks and three days back to the lonely silent abandoned struggle in the attic, to the life that seemed now to be the dream, with Shellerton the reality.
Shellerton the brightly lit stage, Chiswick the darkened amphitheatre where one sat watching from the gods.
‘Don't get plastered tonight, John,’ Tremayne said.
‘I've a job for you in the morning.’
‘Do you know how to avoid a hangover for ever?’
Gareth asked me.
‘How?’
I said.
‘Stay drunk.’
‘Thanks a lot,’ I said, laughing.
Tremayne, happy with life, said, ‘You feel confident riding Drifter now, don't you?’
‘More or less,’ I agreed.
‘Tomorrow you can ride Fringe.
I own a half-share in him.
He's that five-year-old in the corner box.
You can school him over hurdles.’
I must have looked as astonished as I felt.
I glanced at Mackie, saw her smiling, and knew she and Tremayne must have discussed it.
‘Second lot,’ Tremayne said.
‘Ride Drifter first lot as usual.’
‘If you think so,’ I said a shade weakly.
‘If you stay here a bit longer,’ Tremayne said, ‘and if you ride schooling satisfactorily, I don't see why you shouldn't eventually have a mount in an amateur race, if you put your mind to it.’
‘Cool ,’ Gareth said fervently.
‘I shouldn't think he wants to,’ Perkin remarked as I hadn't answered in a rush.
‘You can't make him.’
An offer I couldn't refuse, Dee-Dee had said; and I'd thought only of money.
Instead, he was holding out like a carrot a heart-stopping headlong plunge into a new dimension of existence.
‘Say you will,’ Gareth begged.
Here goes impulse again, I thought.
To hell with the helium balloon, it could wait a bit longer.
‘I will.’
I looked at Tremayne.
‘Thank you.’
He nodded, beaming and satisfied, saying, ‘We'll apply for our permit next week.’
We all loaded into the Volvo and went down to Shellerton Manor where everyone trooped in to see Harry.
Tired but cheerful he held court from his chair and accepted Mackie's heartfelt kiss with appreciative good humour.
‘I'm so glad you're alive,’ she said, with a suspicion of tears, and he stroked her arm and said lightly that he was too, on the whole.
‘What did it feel like?’
Perkin said curiously, glancing at the bandaged leg.
‘It happened too fast to feel much,’ Harry said, smiling lopsidedly.
‘If John hadn't been there I'd have died without knowing it, I dare say.’
‘Don't!’
Fiona exclaimed.
‘I can't bear even to think of it.
Tremayne, off you go or you'll be late.
John and I will pick up Erica and see you soon.’
She swept them out, following them, fearing perhaps that they would add to Harry's fatigue, and he and I looked at each other across the suddenly empty room in a shared fundamental awareness.
‘Do you know who did it?’ he asked, weariness and perhaps despair returning, stress visible.
I shook my head.
‘Couldn't be someone I know.’
He meant that he didn't want it to be.
‘They meant to kill me, dammit.’
‘Dreary thought.’
‘I don't want to guess.
I try not to.
It's pretty awful to know someone hates me enough…
’ He swallowed.
‘That hurts more than my leg.’
‘Yes.’
I hesitated.
‘It was maybe not hate.
More like a move in  a chess game.
And it went wrong, don't forget.
The strong presumption of guilt has changed to a stronger presumption of innocence.
Entirely and diametrically the wrong result.
That can't be bad.’
‘I'll hang onto that.’
I nodded.
‘Better than a funeral.’
‘Anything is.’
He dredged up a smile.
‘I've got a neighbour coming in to be with me tonight while you're all out.
I feel a bit of a coward.’
‘Rubbish.
Bodyguards make good sense.’
‘Do you want a permanent job?’
Fiona returned, pulling on a fluffy white wrap over her red silk dress, saying she really didn't want to go to the dinner and being persuaded again by her husband.
He would be fine, he said, his friend would be there in a moment and goodbye, have a good time, give Tremayne the evening of his life.
Fiona drove her own car, the twin of Harry's (still lost), and settled Erica Upton in the front beside her when we collected her on a westerly detour.
The five-star novelist gave me an unfathomable glimmer when I closed the car door for her and remarked that she'd had a long chat with Harry that afternoon on the telephone.
‘He told me to lay off you, as you'd saved his life,’ she announced baldly.
‘A proper spoilsport.’
I said in amusement, ‘I don't suppose you'll obey him.’
I heard the beginning of a chuckle from the front seat, quickly stifled.
The battle lines, it seemed, had already been drawn.
Hostilities however were in abeyance during arrival at the racecourse, disrobing, hair-tidying and first drinks.
Half the racing world seemed to have embraced the occasion, for which after the last race that afternoon there had been much speedy unrolling of glittering black and silver ceiling-to-floor curtaining, transforming the workaday interior of the grandstand into something ephemerally magnificent.
‘Theatrical,’ Erica said disapprovingly of the décor, and so it was, but none the worse for that.
It lifted the spirits, caused conversation, got the party going.
Background music made a change from bookies' cries.
Fiona looked at the seating plan and said to meet at table six.
People came and surrounded her and  Erica, and I drifted away from them and around, seeing a few people I knew by sight and hundreds I didn't.
Like being at a gravediggers' convention, I thought, when one had marked out one's first plot.
My thoughts ran too much on death.
Bob Watson was there, dapper in a dark grey suit, with Ingrid shyly pretty in pale blue.
‘Couldn't let down the guv'nor,’ Bob said cheerfully.
‘Anyway, he gave us the tickets.’
‘Jolly good,’ I said inanely.
‘You're riding Fringe tomorrow,’ he said, halfway between announcement and question.
‘Schooling.
The guv'nor just told me.
‘Yes.’
‘Fringe will look after you,’ he said inscrutably, looking around.
‘Done this place up like an Egyptian brothel, haven't they?’
‘I don't really know.’
‘Oh, very funny.’
Ingrid giggled.
Bob quelled her with a look, but I noticed slightly later and indeed all evening that she stuck very closely to his side, which could have been interpreted as her own insecurity if I hadn't remembered Mackie saying that meek little Ingrid never gave Bob much chance to stray with the likes of Angela Brickell and God help him if he did.
Sam Yaeger, ever an exhibitionist, had come in a white dinner jacket, having lent Gareth his black.
He also had a frilled white shirt, a black shoestring tie and a definite air of strain under the confident exterior.
Doone, it appeared, had more or less accused him straight out of sabotaging his own boathouse.
‘He says I had the tools, the knowledge, the opportunity and the location, and he looked up those races I rode at Ascot and worked out that I could have had time between the first two and the last to drive to Maidenhead and remove Harry's car.
I asked why should I bother to do that when presumably if I had set the trap I would expect Harry's car still to be there after the races, and he just wrote down my answer as if I'd made a confession.’
‘He's persistent.’
‘He listens to you,’ Sam said.
‘We've all noticed.
Can't you tell him I didn't sodding do it?’
‘I could try.’
‘And he whistled up his cohorts after you'd gone,’ Sam complained, ‘and they came with wet-suits and grappling irons and a heavy magnet and dredged up a lot of muck from the dock.
An old broken bicycle frame, some rusted railings, an old disintegrating metal gate…it had all been lying here and there on the property.
They clammed up after a bit and wouldn't show me everything, but he thinks I put it all in the water hoping Harry would get tangled in it.’
‘Which he did.’
‘So I'm asking you, how come you didn't get spiked when you went down there after him?’
‘I learned how to jump into shallow water very young.
So I didn't go down far.
Put my feet down cautiously after I was floating.’
He stared.
‘How the sod do you do that?’
‘Jump shallow?
The second your feet touch the water you raise your knees and crumple into a ball.
The water itself acts as a brake.
You must have done it yourself some time or other.
And I had the air in my clothes to hold me up, don't forget.’
‘Doone asked me if I'd left your jacket and boots in Harry's car.
Tricky bastard.
I know now how Harry's been feeling.
You get that flatfoot looking to tie you in knots and it's like being squeezed by coils and coils of a sodding boa constrictor.
Everything you say, he takes it in the wrong way.
And he looks so damned harmless.
He got me so riled I lost a race this afternoon I should have won.
Don't say I said that.
I don't bloody know why we all tell you things.
You don't belong here.’
‘Perhaps that's why.’
‘Yeah, perhaps.’
He seemed to have let out sufficient steam and resentment for the moment and turned to flirt obligingly with a middle-aged woman who touched his arm in pleased anticipation.
Owners, Tremayne had said, either loved or hated Sam's manner: the women loved it, the men put up with it in exchange for winners.
Nolan, glowering routinely at Sam from a few feet away, switched his ill-humour to me.
‘I don't want you treading on my effing toes,’ he said forcefully.
‘Why don't you clear off out of Shellerton?’
‘I will in a while.’
‘I told Tremayne there'll be trouble if he gives you any of my rides.’
‘Ah.’
‘He has the effing gall to say I suggested it myself and he knows bloody well I was taking the piss.’
He glared at me.
‘I don't understand what Fiona sees in you.
I told her you're just a bag of shit with a pretty face who needs his arse kicked.
You keep away from her horses, understand?’
I understood that he like everyone else was suffering from the atmospheric blight cast by Angela Brickell, he perhaps most because the strain of his own trial and conviction was so recent.
There was no way I was ever going to ride as well as he did and he surely knew it.
Fiona would never jock him off, in racing's descriptive phrase.
He stomped away, his place almost immediately taken by his brother, who gave me a malicious imitation of a smile and said, ‘Nolan doesn't expletive like you, dear heart.’
‘You don't say.’
Lewis was sober, so far.
Also unaccompanied, like Nolan, though Harry had mentioned at one time that Lewis was married: his reclusive wife preferred to stay at home to avoid the fuss and fracas of Lewis drunk.
‘Nolan likes to be the centre of attention and you've usurped his pinnacle,’ Lewis said.
‘Rubbish.’
‘Fiona and Mackie look to you, now, not to him.
And as for Tremayne, as for Gareth…
’ He gave me a sly leer.
‘Don't put your neck within my brother's reach.’
‘Lewis!’
His lack of fraternal feeling shocked me more than his suggestion.
‘You stuck your neck out for him, anyway.’
‘Sometimes I hate him,’ he said with undoubted truth, and wheeled away as if he had said enough.
Glasses in hand, the chattering groups mixed and mingled, broke and re-formed, greeted each other with glad cries as if they hadn't seen each other for years, not just that afternoon.
Tremayne, large smile a permanence, received genuinely warm congratulations with believable modesty and Gareth, appearing eel-like at my elbow, said with gratification, ‘He deserves it, doesn't he?’
‘He does.’
‘It makes you think a bit.’
‘What about?’
‘I mean, he's just Dad.’
He struggled to get it right.
‘Everyone's two people, aren't they?’
I said with interest, ‘That's profound.’
‘Get away.’
He felt awkward at the compliment.
‘I'm glad for him, anyway.’
He snaked off again and within minutes the throng began moving towards dinner, dividing into ten to a table, lowering bottoms onto inadequate chairs, fingering menus, peering at the print through candlelight, scanning their allotted neighbours.
At table number six I found myself placed between Mackie and Erica Upton, who were already seated.
Erica was inevitable, I supposed, though I suspected Fiona had switched a few place cards before I reached there: a certain bland innocence gave her away.
‘I did ask to sit next to you,’ Erica remarked, as if reading my thoughts as I sat down, ‘once I knew you'd be here.’
‘Er…why?’
‘Do you have so little self-confidence?’
‘It depends who I'm with.’
‘And by yourself?’
‘In a desert, plenty.
With pencil and paper, little.’
‘Quite right.’
‘And you?’
I asked.
‘I don't answer that sort of question.’
I listened to the starch in her voice, observed it in the straightness of her backbone, recognised the ramrod will that made no concessions to hardship.
‘I could take you across a desert,’ I said.
She gave me a long piercing inspection.
‘I hope that's not an accolade.’
‘An assessment,’ I said.
‘You've found your courage since I met you last.’
She had a way of leaving one without an answer.
She turned away, satisfied, to talk to Nolan on her other side, and I, abandoned, found Mackie on my right smiling with enjoyment.
‘She's met her match,’ she said.
I shook my head regretfully.
‘If I could write like her…or ride like Sam or Nolan…if I could do anything that well, I'd be happy.’
Her smile sweetened.
‘Try cooking.’
‘Dammit…’
She laughed.
‘I hear the power of your bananas flambées made Gareth oversleep.’
Perkin, on her other side, murmured something to get her attention and for a while I watched Tremayne make the best of our table having been graced by the sponsor's wife, a gushing froth of a lady in unbecoming lemon.
He would clearly have preferred to be talking to Fiona on his other side, but the award was having to be paid for with politeness.
He glanced across the table, saw me smiling, interpreted my thought and gave me a slow ironic blink.
He soldiered manfully through the salmon soufflé and the beef Wellington while Lewis on the lady's other side put away a tumbler full of vodka poured from a half-bottle in his pocket.
Fiona watched him with a frown: Lewis's drinking, even to my eyes, was increasingly without shame.
Almost as if , having proclaimed himself paralytic in court, he was setting about proving it over and over again.
Glumly fidgeting between Lewis and Perkin, Gareth ate everything fast and looked bored.
Perkin with brotherly bossiness told him to stop kicking the table leg and Gareth uncharacteristically sulked.
Mackie made a placatory remark and Perkin snapped at her too.
She turned her head my way and with a frown asked, ‘What's wrong with everyone?’
‘Tension.’
‘Because of Harry?’
She nodded to herself.
‘We all pretend, but no one can help wondering …
This time it's much worse.
Last time at least we knew how Olympia died.
Angela Brickell's on everyone's nerves.
Nothing feels safe any more.’
‘You're safe,’ I said.
‘You and Perkin.
Think about the baby.’
Her face cleared as if automatically: the thought of the baby could diminish to trivia the grimmest forebodings.
Perkin on her other side was saying contritely, ‘Sorry, darling, sorry,’ and she turned to him with ever-ready forgiveness, the  adult of the pair.
I wondered fleetingly if Perkin, as a father, would be jealous of his child.
Dinner wound to a close: speeches began.
Cultured gents, identified for me by Mackie as being the Himalayan peaks of the Jockey Club, paid compliments to Tremayne from an adjacent table and bowed low to the sponsor.
He, the lemon lady's husband, eulogised Tremayne, who winced only slightly over Top Spin Lob being slurred to Topsy Blob, and a minion in the livery of Castle Houses brought forth a tray bearing the award itself, a silver bowl rimmed by a circle of small galloping horses, an award actually worthy of the occasion.
Tremayne was pink with gratification.
He accepted the bowl.
Everyone cheered.
Photos flashed.
Tremayne made a brief speech of all-round thanks: thanks to the sponsors, to his friends, his staff, his jockeys, to racing itself.
He sat down, overcome.
Everyone cheered him again and clapped loudly.
I began to wonder how many of them would buy Tremayne's book.
I wondered whether after that night Tremayne would need the book written.
‘Wasn't that great?’
Mackie exclaimed, glowing.
‘Yes, indeed.’
The background music became dance music.
People moved about, flocking round Tremayne, patting his back.
Perkin took Mackie to shuffle on the square of dance floor adjoining the table.
Nolan took Fiona, Lewis got drunker, Gareth vanished, the sponsor retrieved his lady: Erica and I sat alone.
‘Do you dance?’
I asked.
‘No.’
She looked out at the still-alive party.
‘The Duchess of Richmond's Ball,’ she said.
‘Do you expect Waterloo tomorrow?’
‘Sometime soon.
Who is Napoleon?’
‘The enemy?’
‘Of course.’
‘I don't know,’ I said.
‘Use your brains.
What about insight through imagination?’
‘I thought you didn't believe in it.’
‘For this purpose, I do.
Someone tried to kill Harry.
That's extremely disturbing.
What's disturbing about it?’
It seemed she expected an answer, so I gave it.
‘It was premeditated.
Angela Brickell's death may or may not have been, but the attack on Harry was vastly thought out.’
She seemed minutely to relax.
‘My God!’
I said, stunned.
‘What?
What have you thought of?’
She was alert again, and intent.
‘I'll have to talk to Doone.’
‘Do you know who did it?’ she demanded.
‘No, but I know what he knew.’
I frowned, ‘Everyone knows it.’
‘What?
Do explain.’
I looked at her vaguely, thinking.
‘I don't believe it's very important,’ I said in the end.
‘Then what is it?’ she insisted.
‘Wood floats.’
She looked bemused.
‘Well, of course it does.’
‘The floorboards that went down to the water with Harry, they stayed under.
They didn't float.’
‘Why not?’
‘Have to find out,’ I said.
‘Doone can find out.’
‘What does it matter?’
‘Well,’ I said, ‘no one could be absolutely certain that Harry would be spiked and drown immediately.
So suppose he's alive and swimming about.
He's been in that place before, at Sam's party, and he knows there's a mooring dock along one wall.
He knows there's a door and he has daylight and can see the river through the metal curtain.
So how does he get out?’
She shook her head.
‘Tell me.’
‘The door opens outwards.
If you're inside, and you're standing in only six inches of water, not six feet, and you've got three or four floorboards floating about, you use one of them as a ram to break the lock or batter the door down.
You're big and strong like Harry and also wet, cold, desperate and angry.
How long does it take you to break out?’
‘I suppose not long.’
‘When Napoleon came to the boathouse,’ I said, ‘there wasn't any sound of Harry battering his way out.
In fact,’ I frowned, ‘there's no saying how long the enemy had been there, waiting.
He might have been hiding…heard Harry's car arrive.’
Erica said, ‘When your book's published, send me a copy.’
I looked at her open-mouthed.
‘Then I can tell you the difference between invention and insight.’
‘You know how to pierce,’ I said, wincing.
She began to say something else but never completed it.
Instead our heads turned in unison towards the dancers, among whom battle seemed already to have started.
There was a crash and a scream and bizarrely against the unrelentingly cheerful music two figures could be seen fighting.
Sam…and Nolan.
Sam had blood on his white jacket and down the white ruffles.
Nolan's shirt was ripped open, showing a lot of hairy chest.
They were both reeling about exchanging swinging blows not ten feet from table six and I stood up automatically, more in defence than interference.
Perkin tried to pull them apart and got smartly knocked down by Nolan, quick and tough with his fists as with his riding.
I stepped without thinking onto the polished square and tried words instead.
‘You stupid fools,’ I said: not the most inventive sentence ever.
Nolan took his attention off Sam for a split second, lashed out expertly at my face and whirled back to his prime target in time to parry Sam's wildly lunging arm and kick him purposefully between the legs.
Sam's head came forward.
Nolan's fist began a descent onto the back of Sam's vulnerable neck.
With instinct more than thought, I barged into Nolan bodily, pushing him off line.
He turned a face of mean-eyed fury in my direction and easily transferred his hatred.
I was vaguely aware that the dance floor had cleared like morning mist and also acutely conscious that Nolan knew volumes more about bare-knuckle fisticuffs than I did.
Racing people were extraordinary, I thought.
Far from piling into Nolan in a preventative heap, they formed an instant ring around us and, as the band came to a straggling sharp-flat unscheduled halt, Lewis's drunken aristocratic voice could be heard drawling, ‘Five to four the field.’
Everyone laughed.
Everyone except Nolan.
I doubted if he'd heard.
He was high on the flooding wave from the bursting dam  of his dark nature, all the anxiety, guilt, hate and repressions sweeping out in a reckless torrent, no longer containable.
In a straight fight I wasn't going to beat him.
All I would be was a punchbag for his escaping fury, the entity he saw as a new unbearable threat to his dominance in Tremayne's stable; the interloper, usurper, legitimate target.
I turned my back on him and took a step or two away.
All I knew about fighting was ruse and trickery.
I could see from the onlooking faces that he was coming for me and at what speed, and when I felt the air behind me move and heard the brush of his clothes I went down fast on one knee and whirled and punched upwards hard into the bottom of his advancing rib cage and then shifted my weight into his body and upwards so as to lift him wholesale off the floor, and before he'd got that sorted out I had one of his wrists in my hand and he ended up on his feet with me behind him, his arm in a nice painful lock and my mouth by his ear.
‘You stupid shit,’ I said intensely.
‘The Jockey Club are here.
Don't you care about your permit?’
For answer, he kicked back and caught me on a shin.
‘Then I'll ride all your horses,’ I said unwisely.
I gave him a hard releasing shove in the general direction of Sam, Perkin and an open-mouthed Gareth and at last watched a dozen restraining hands clutch and keep him from destroying himself entirely, but he struggled against them and turned his vindictive face my way and shouted in still exploding rage, ‘I'll kill you.’
I stood unmoving and listened to those words, and thought of Harry.
15
I apologised to Tremayne.
‘Nolan started it,’ Mackie said.
She peered anxiously at the reddening bruise on Perkin's cheek, a twin to one on mine.
Perkin sat in angry confusion at table six while the racing crowd, entertaining skirmish over, drifted away and got the band re-started.
Nolan was nowhere in sight.
Sam took off his stained jacket, wiped his bloody nose, sucked his knuckles and began making jokes as a form of released tension.
‘I bumped into him, that's all I did,’ he proclaimed with tragicomic gestures.
‘Well, say I then took Fiona off him and maybe I told him to go find himself another filly and the next thing was he got a pincer-hold on my ear and was bopping me one on the nose and there I was bleeding fit to fill the Frenchy furrows so naturally I gave him one back.’
He collected an appreciative audience which definitely didn't include Tremayne.
The shambles at the end of his splendid evening was aggravating him sorely and he propelled Fiona into a seat at the table with some of the disgruntled force he'd shown in Ronnie Curzon's office.
Fiona said anxiously, ‘But, Tremayne, Sam meant it as a joke.’
‘He should have had more sense.’
Tremayne's voice was rough.
Gareth, next to Perkin, looked at his father with apprehension, knowing the portents.
‘Nolan's been through a lot,’ Fiona said excusingly.
‘Nolan's a violent man,’ Tremayne stated with fierce irritation.
‘You don't go poking a stick at a rattlesnake if you don't want to get bitten.’
‘Tremayne!’
She was alarmed at his brusqueness, which he immediately softened.
‘My dear girl, I know he's your cousin.
I know he's been through a lot, I know you're fond of him, but he and Sam shouldn't be in the same room together just now.’
He looked from her to me.
‘Are you all right?’
‘Yes.’
‘John was splendid!’
Mackie exclaimed, and Perkin scowled.
Erica grinned at me like a witch, saying, ‘You're much too physical for the literati.’
‘Let's go home,’ Tremayne said abruptly.
He stood, kissed Fiona, picked up the box containing his silver bowl and waited for obedience from his sons, his daughter-in-law and his prospective biographer.
We stood.
We followed him meekly.
He made a stately, somewhat forbidding exit, his displeasure plainly visible to all around, his mien daring unkind souls to snigger.
No one did.
Tremayne was held in genuine respect and I saw more sympathy than smirks: yet he in many respects was the stoker of the ill-feeling between his warring jockeys, and putting me among them wasn't a recipe for a cease-fire.
‘Perhaps I'd better not ride schooling in the morning,’ I suggested, as we reached the gate to the car park.
‘Are you scared?’ he demanded, stopping dead.
I stopped beside him as the other three went on ahead.
‘Nolan and Sam don't like it, that's all,’ I said.
‘You bloody well ride.
I'll get you that permit.
I'll tame Nolan by threats.
Understand?’
I nodded.
He stared at me intently.
‘Is that why Nolan said he would kill you?
Besides your making a public fool of him?’
‘I think so.’
‘Do you want to ride in a race or two, or don't you?’
‘I do.’
‘School Fringe tomorrow, then.
And as for now, you'd better go back with Fiona.
Make sure she gets home safe.
Harry won't want Nolan pestering her and he's quite capable of it.’
‘Right.’
He nodded strongly and went on towards his Volvo, and I returned to find Fiona arguing with Nolan in the entrance hall.
She and Erica beside her saw me with relief, Nolan with fresh fury.
‘I was afraid you'd gone,’ Fiona said.
‘Thank Tremayne.’
Nolan said angrily, ‘Why is this bag of slime always hanging about?’
He made no move, though, to attack me.
‘Harry asked him to see me home,’ Fiona said placatingly.
‘Get some rest, Nolan, or you won't be fit for Groundsel tomorrow.’
He heard, as I did, the faint threat in the cousinly concern, and at least it gave him an excuse for a face-saving exit.
Fiona watched his retreating back with a regret neither Erica nor I shared.
I rode Drifter with the first lot in the morning and crashed off on to the wood chippings halfway up the gallop.
Tremayne showed a modicum of anxiety but no sympathy, and the anxiety was for the horse.
He sent a lad after it to try to catch it and with disgust watched me limp towards him rubbing a bruised thigh.
‘Concentrate,’ he said.
‘What the hell do you think you were doing?’
‘He swerved.’
‘You weren't keeping him straight.
Don't make excuses, you weren't concentrating.’
The lad caught Drifter and brought him to join us.
‘Get up,’ Tremayne said to me testily.
I wriggled back into the saddle.
I supposed he was right about not concentrating: a touch of the morning afters.
They'd all gone to bed the night before when I'd returned from a last noggin with Harry.
I'd walked up from the village under a brilliantly starry sky, breathing cold shafts of early-morning air, thinking of murder.
Sleep had come slowly with anxiety dreams.
I felt unsettled, not refreshed.
I rode Drifter back with the rest of the string and went into breakfast, half expecting to be told I wouldn't be allowed to ride Fringe.
Tremayne's own mood appeared to be a deepening depression over the evening's finale, and I was sorry because he deserved to look back with enjoyment.
He was reading a newspaper when I went in, and scowling heavily.
‘How did they get hold of this so damned fast?’
‘What?’
‘This.’
He pushed the opened paper violently across the table and I read that a brace of brawling jockeys had climaxed the prestigious award dinner with a bloody punch-up.
Ex-champion Yaeger and amateur champion Nolan Everard (recently convicted of manslaughter) had been restrained by friends.
Tremayne Vickers had said ‘no comment’.
The sponsor was furious.
The Jockey Club were ‘looking into it’.
End of story.
‘It's rubbish,’ Tremayne snorted.
‘I never said ‘no comment’.
No one asked me for any comment.
The sponsor had left by the time it happened, so how can he be furious?
So had the Jockey Club members.
They went after the speeches.
I talked to some of them as they were leaving.
They congratulated me.
Huh!’
‘The fuss will die down,’ I assured him.
‘Makes me look a bloody fool.’
‘Make a joke of it,’ I suggested.
He stared.
‘I don't feel like joking.’
‘No one does.’
‘It's this business about Harry, isn't it?
Upsets everyone.
Bloody Angela Brickell.’
I made the toast.
He said, ‘Are you fit enough to ride Fringe?’
‘If you'll let me.’
He studied me, some of his ill-feeling fading.
‘Concentrate, then.’
‘Yes.’
‘Look,’ he said a touch awkwardly, ‘I don't mean to take my bad temper out on you.
If you hadn't been here we'd all be in a far worse pickle.
Best thing I ever did, getting you to come.’
In surprise, I searched for words to thank him but was forestalled by the telephone ringing.
Tremayne picked up the receiver and grunted ‘Hello?’, not all his vexation yet dissipated.
His face changed miraculously to a smile.
‘Hello, Ronnie.
Calling to find out how the book's going?
Your boy's been working on it.
What?
Yes, he's here.
Hold on.’
He passed me the receiver, saying unnecessarily, ‘It's Ronnie Curzon.’
‘Hello, Ronnie,’ I said.
‘How's it going?’
‘I'm riding a good deal.’
‘Keep your mind on the pages.
I've got news for you.’
‘Good or bad?’
‘My colleague in America phoned yesterday evening about your book.’
‘Oh.’
I felt apprehensive.
‘What did he say?’
‘He says he likes Long Way Home very much indeed.
He will gladly take it on, and he is certain he can place it with a good publisher.’
‘Ronnie!’
I swallowed, unable to get my breath.
‘Are you sure?’
‘Of course, I'm sure.
I always told you it was all right.
Your English publisher is very enthusiastic.
She told my American colleague the book is fine and he agrees.
What more do you want?’
‘Oh…’
‘Come down from the ceiling.
A first novel by an unknown British writer isn't going to be given a huge advance.’
He mentioned a sum which would pay my rent until I'd finished the helium balloon and leave some over for sandwiches.
‘If the book takes off like they hope it will, you'll get royalties.’
He paused.
‘Are you still there?’
‘Sort of.’
He laughed.
‘It's all beginning.
I have faith in you.’
Ridiculously, I felt like crying.
Blinked a few times instead and told him in a croaky voice that I'd met Erica Upton twice and had sat next to her at dinner.
‘She'll destroy you!’ he said, horrified.
‘I don't think so.
She wants a copy of the book when it's published.’
‘She'll tear it apart.
She likes making mincemeat of new  writers.’
He sounded despairing.
‘She does hatchet jobs, not reviews.’
‘I'll have to risk it.’
‘OK, and Ronnie…thanks.’
‘Yes, yes…’
I handed back the receiver and heard Ronnie being agitated on the other end.
‘Hold on,’ Tremayne said, ‘she likes him.’
I distinctly heard Ronnie's disbelieving ‘What ?’
‘Also she's very fond of her nephew, Harry, and on Wednesday John saved Harry's life.
I grant you she may write him a critical review, but she won't demolish him.’
Tremayne listened a bit and talked a bit and then gave me the receiver again.
‘All right,’ Ronnie said more calmly, ‘any chance you get, save her life too.’
I laughed, and with a sigh he disconnected.
‘What happened?’
Tremayne asked.
‘What did he tell you?’
‘I'm going to be published in America.
Well…probably.’
‘Congratulations.’
He beamed, pleased for me, his glooms lifting.
‘But that won't change things, will it?
I mean here, between us.
You will still write my book, won't you?’
I saw his anxiety begin to surface and promptly allayed it.
‘I will write it.
I'll do the very best I can and just hope it does you justice.
And will you excuse me if I run and jump and do handsprings?
I'm bursting…
Ronnie said it's all beginning.
I don't know that I can bear it.’
I looked at him.
‘Did you feel like this when Top Spin Lob won the National?’
‘I was high for days.
Kept smiling.
Topsy Blob, I ask you!’
He stood up.
‘Back to business.
You'll come up with me in the Land Rover.
Fringe's lad can ride him up, then change with you.’
‘Right.’
Ronnie's news, I found, had given me a good deal more confidence in Fringe than I had had on Drifter, illogical though it might be.
It's all beginning …
Concentrate.
Fringe was younger, whippier and less predictable than Drifter: rock music in place of classical.
I gathered the reins and  lengthened the stirrup leathers a couple of holes while Fringe made prancing movements, getting used to his new and heavier rider.
‘Take him down below the three flights of hurdles,’ Tremayne said, ‘then bring him up over them at a useful pace.
You're not actually racing.
Just a good half-speed gallop.
Bob Watson will be with you for company.
Fringe jumps well enough but he likes guidance.
He'll waver if you don't tell him when to take off.
Don't forget, it's you that's schooling the horse, not the other way round.
All ready?’
I nodded.
‘Off you go, then.’
He seemed unconcerned at letting me loose on his half-share investment and I tried telling myself that ahead lay merely a quick pop over three undemanding obstacles, not the first searching test of my chances of racing.
I'd ridden over many jumps before, but never on a racehorse, never fast, never caring so much about the outcome.
Almost without being aware of it I'd progressed from the hesitancy of my first few days there to a strong positive desire to go down to the starting gate: any starting gate, anywhere.
I had to admit that I envied Sam and Nolan.
Bob was circling on his own horse, waiting for me.
Both his horse and Fringe, aware they would be jumping, were stimulated and keen.
‘Guv'nor says you're to set off on the side nearest him,’ Bob said briefly.
‘He wants to see what you're doing.’
I nodded, slightly dry-mouthed.
Bob expertly trotted his mount into position, gave me a raised-eye query about readiness and kicked forward into an accelerating gallop.
Fringe took up his position alongside with familiarity and eagerness, an athlete doing what he'd been bred for, and enjoyed.
First hurdle ahead.
Judge the distance…give Fringe the message to shorten his stride…
I gave it to him too successfully, he put in a quick one, got too near to the hurdle, hopped over it nearly at a standstill, lost lengths on Bob.
Damn, I thought.
Damn .
Second hurdle, managed it a bit better, gave him the signal three strides from the jump, felt him lift off at the right time, felt  his assurance flow back and his faith in me revive, even if provisionally.
Third hurdle, I left him too much to his own devices as the distance was awkward.
I couldn't make up my own mind whether to get him to lengthen or shorten and in consequence I didn't make his mind up to do either and we floundered over it untidily, his hooves rapping the wooden frames, my weight too far forward…a mess.
We pulled up at the end of the schooling stretch and trotted back to where Tremayne stood with his binoculars.
I didn't look at Bob; didn't want to see his disapproval, all too wretchedly aware that I hadn't done very well.
Tremayne with pursed lips offered no direct opinion.
Instead he said, ‘Second pop, Bob.
Off you go,’ and I gathered we were to go back to the beginning and start again.
I seemed to have more time to get things together the second time and Fringe stayed beside Bob fairly smoothly to the end.
I felt exalted and released and newly alive in myself, but also I'd watched Sam Yaeger in a schooling session one morning and knew the difference.
Tremayne said nothing until we were driving back to the stable and then all he did was ask me if I were happy with what I'd done.
Happy beyond expression in one way, I thought, but not in another.
I knew for certain I wanted to race.
Knew I had elementary skill.
‘I'll learn,’ I said grimly, and he didn't answer.
When we reached the house, however, he rummaged about in the office for a while complaining that he could never find anything on Dee-Dee's days off and eventually brought a paper into the dining-room, plonked it on the table and instructed me to sign.
It was, I saw, an application for a permit to race as an amateur jockey.
I signed it without speaking, incredibly delighted, grinning like a maniac.
Tremayne grunted and bore the document away, coming back presently to say I should stop working and go with him to Newbury races, if I didn't mind.
Also Mackie would be coming with us and we'd be picking up Fiona.
‘And frankly,’ he said, coming to the essence of the matter, ‘those two don't want to go without you, and Harry wants you to be there and…well…so do I.’
‘All right,’ I said.
‘Good.’
He departed again and, after a moment's thought, I went into the office to put through a call to Doone's police station.
He was off duty, I was told.
I could leave my name and a message.
I left my name.
‘Ask him,’ I said, ‘why the floorboards in the boathouse didn't float.’
‘Er…would you repeat that, sir?’
I repeated it and got it read back with scepticism.
‘That's right,’ I confirmed, amused.
‘Don't forget it.’
We went to the races and watched Nolan ride Fiona's horse Groundsel and get beaten by a length into second place, and we watched Sam ride two of Tremayne's runners unprofitably and then win for another trainer.
‘There's always another day,’ Tremayne said philosophically.
Fiona told us on the way to the races that the police had phoned Harry to say they'd found his car in the station car park at Reading.
‘They said it looks OK but they've towed it off somewhere to search for clues.
I never knew people really said ‘search for clues’, but that's what they said.’
‘They talk like their notebooks,’ Tremayne nodded.
From Reading station one could set off round the world.
Metaphorical cliff, I thought.
A guilty disappearance had been the intended scenario, not a presumption of suicide.
Unless of course the car had been moved again after Harry had made his unscheduled reappearance.
The racecourse was naturally buzzing with accounts of the row at Tremayne's dinner, most of the stories inflamed and inaccurate because of the embroidery by the press.
Tremayne bore the jokes with reasonable fortitude, cheered by the absence of enquiry or even remarks from the Jockey Club, not even strictures about ‘bringing racing into disrepute’, which I'd learned was the yardstick for in-house punishment.
By osmosis of information, both Sam and Nolan knew details of Fringe's schooling.
Sam said, ‘You'll be taking my sodding job  next,’ without meaning it in the least, and Nolan, bitter-eyed and cursing, saw Tremayne's warning glare and subsided with festering rancour.
‘How on earth do they know?’
I asked, mystified.
‘Sam phoned Bob to find out,’ Tremayne said succinctly.
‘Bob told him you did all right.
Sam couldn't wait to tell Nolan.
I heard him doing it.
Bloody pair of fools.’
All afternoon Fiona kept me close by her side, looking around for me any time I fell a step behind.
She tried unsuccessfully to hide what she described as ‘preposterous fear’, and I understood that her fear had no focus and no logic, but was becoming a state of mind.
Tremayne, sensing it also, fussed over her even more than usual and Fiona herself made visible efforts to act normally and as she said ‘be sensible’.
Whenever Mackie wasn't actively helping Tremayne she stayed close also to Fiona, and although I tried I couldn't dislodge the underlying anxiety in their eyes.
Silver-blond and red-head, they clung to each other occasionally as long-time friends, and spoke to Nolan, cousin of one, ex-fiancé of the other, with an odd mixture of dread, exasperation and compassion.
Nolan was disconcerted by having lost on Groundsel though I couldn't see that he'd done anything wrong.
Tremayne didn't blame him, still less did Fiona, but the non-success intensified if possible his ill-will towards me.
I was truly disconcerted myself to have acquired so violent an enemy without meaning to and could see no resolution short of full retreat; and the trouble was that since that morning's schooling, any inclination to retreat had totally vanished.
I looked back constantly to the morning with huge inward joy; to Ronnie's phone call, to the revelation over hurdles.
Doors opening all over the place.
All beginning.
The afternoon ending, we took Fiona home and went on to Shellerton House where Perkin came through for drinks, Tremayne went out to see the horses and Gareth returned from a football match.
An evening like most others in that house, but to me the first of a changed life.
The next day, Sunday, Gareth held me to my promise to take him and Coconut out on another survival trip.
The weather was much better; sunny but cold still with a trace of a breeze, a good day for walking.
I suggested seven miles out, seven miles back; Gareth with horror suggested two.
We compromised on borrowing the Land Rover for positioning, followed by walking as far as their enthusiasm took them.
‘Where are you going?’
Tremayne asked.
‘Along the road over the hills towards Reading,’ I said.
‘There's some great woodland there, unfenced, no signs saying ‘keep out’.’
Tremayne nodded.
‘I know where you mean.
It's all part of the Quillersedge Estate.
They only try to keep people out just before Christmas, to stop them stealing the fir trees.’
‘We'd better not light a fire there,’ I said, ‘so we'll take our food and water with us.’
Gareth looked relieved.
‘No fried worms.’
‘No, but it will be survival food.
Things you could pick or catch.’
‘OK,’ he said with his father's brand of practical acceptance.
‘How about chocolate instead of dandelion leaves?’
I agreed to the chocolate.
The day had to be bearable.
We set off at ten, collected Coconut and bowled along to the woods.
There were parking places all along that road, not planned official tarmacked areas but small inlets of beaten earth formed by the waiting cars of many walkers.
I pulled into one of them, put on the handbrake and when the boys were out, locked the doors.
Gareth wore of course his psychedelic jacket.
Coconut's yellow oilskins had been superseded by an equally blinding anorak and I, in the regrettable absence of my ski-suit jacket, looked camouflaged against the trees in stone-washed jeans and a roomy olive-drab Barbour borrowed from Tremayne.
‘Right,’ I said, smiling, as they slid the straps of bright blue nylon knapsacks over their shoulders, ‘we'll take a walk into the Berkshire wilderness.
Everyone fit?’
They said they were, so we stepped straight into the tangled maze of alder, hazel, birch, oak, pine, fir and laurel and picked our steps over dried grass, scratchy brambles and the leafless  knee-high branching shoots of the wood's next generation.
None of this had been cleared or replanted; it was scrub woodland as nature had made it, the real thing as far as the boys were concerned.
I encouraged them to lead but kept them going towards the sun by suggesting detours round obstructing patches, and I identified the trees for them, trying to make it interesting.
‘We're not eating the bark again, are we?’
Coconut said, saying ugh to a birch tree.
‘Not today.
Here is a hazel.
There might still be some nuts lying round it.’
They found two.
Squirrels had been there first.
We went about a mile before they tired of the effort involved, and I didn't mean to go much further in any case because according to the map I had in my pocket we were by then in about the centre of the western spur of the Quillersedge woods.
We'd come gently up and down hill, but not much further on the ground fell away abruptly, according to the map's contour lines, with too hard a climb on the return.
Gareth stopped in one of the occasional small clearings and mentioned food hopefully.
‘Sure,’ I said.
‘We can make some reasonable seats with dead twigs to keep our bottoms off the damp ground, if you like.
No need today for a shelter.’
They made flat piles of twigs, finished them off with evergreen, then emptied their rucksacks and spread the blue nylon on top.
We all sat fairly comfortably and ate the things I'd bought for the occasion.
‘Smoked trout!’
Gareth exclaimed.
‘That's an advance on roots.’
‘You could catch trout and smoke them if you had to,’ I said.
‘The easiest way to catch them is with a three-pronged spear, but don't tell that to fishermen.’
‘How do you smoke them?’
‘Make a fire with lots of hot embers.
Cover the embers thickly with green fresh leaves: they'll burn slowly with billows of smoke.
Make a latticed frame to go over the fire and put the trout on it or otherwise hang them over the smoke, and if possible cover it all with branches of more leaves to keep the  smoke inside.
The best leaves for smoking are things like oak or beech.
The smell of the smoke will go into the fish to some extent, so don't use anything you don't like the smell of.
Don't use holly or yew, they're poisonous.
You can smoke practically anything.
Strips of meat.
Bits of chicken.’
‘Smoked salmon!’
Coconut said.
‘Why not?’
‘First catch your salmon,’ said Gareth dryly.
He had brought a camera and he took photos of everything possible; the seats, the food, ourselves.
‘I want to remember these days when I'm old like Dad,’ Gareth said.
‘Dad wishes he'd had a camera when he went round the world with his father.’
‘Does he?’
I asked.
He nodded.
‘He told me when he gave me this one.’
We ate the trout with unleavened bread and healthy appetites and afterwards filled up with mixed dried fruit and pre-roasted chestnuts and almonds.
The boys declared it a feast compared with the week before and polished off their chocolate as a bonus.
Gareth said casually, ‘Was it in a place like this that someone killed Angela Brickell?’
‘Well…
I should think so.
But five miles or so from here,’ I said.
‘And it was summer,’ he commented.
‘Warm.
Leaves on the trees.’
‘Mm.’
Imaginative of him, I thought.
‘She wanted to kiss me,’ he said with a squirm.
Both Coconut and I looked at him in astonishment.
‘I'm not as ugly as all that,’ he said, offended.
‘You're not ugly,’ I assured him positively, ‘but you're young.’
‘She said I was growing up.’
He looked embarrassed, as did Coconut.
‘When did she say that?’
I asked mildly.
‘In the Easter holidays, last year.
She was always out there in the yard.
Always looking at me.
I told Dad about it, but he didn't listen.
It was Grand National time and he couldn't think of anything but Top Spin Lob.’
He swallowed.
‘Then she went away and I was really glad.
I didn't like going out into the yard when she was there.’
He looked at me anxiously.
‘I suppose it's wrong to be glad someone's dead.’
‘Is glad what you feel?’
He thought about it.
‘Relieved,’ he said finally.
‘I was afraid of her.’
He looked ashamed.
‘I used to think about her, though.
Couldn't help it.’
‘It won't be the last time someone makes a pass at you,’ I said prosaically.
‘Next time, don't feel guilty.’
Easier said than done, I supposed.
Shame and guilt tormented the innocent more than the wicked.
Gareth seemed liberated by having put his feelings into words and he and Coconut jumped up and ran around, throwing mock punches at each other, swinging on tree branches, getting rid of bashfulness with shouts and action and shows of strength.
I supposed I'd been like that too, but I couldn't remember.
‘Right,’ I said, as they subsided onto the seats and panted while I packed away our food wrappings (which would have started a dinky fire).
‘Which way to the Land Rover?’
‘That way,’ said Gareth immediately, pointing east.
‘That way,’ Coconut said, pointing west.
‘Which way is north?’
I asked.
They both got it instinctively wrong, but then worked it out roughly by the sun, and I showed them how to use a watch as a compass, which Gareth half remembered, having learned before.
‘Something to do with pointing the hands at the sun,’ he guessed.
I nodded.
‘Point the hour hand at the sun, then halfway between the hand and twelve o'clock is the north — south line.’
‘Not in Australia,’ Gareth said.
‘We're not in Australia,’ Coconut objected.
He looked at his watch and around him.
‘That way is north,’ he said, pointing.
‘But which way is the Land Rover?’
‘If you go north you'll come to the road,’ I said.
‘What do you mean ‘you’?’
Gareth demanded.
‘You're coming too.
You've got to guide us.’
‘I thought,’ I said, ‘that it would be more fun for you to find your own way back.
And,’ I went on as he tried to interrupt, ‘so as you don't get lost if the sun goes in, you can paint the trees as you go with luminous paint.
Then you can always come back to me.’
‘cool ,’ he said, entranced.
‘What?’
Coconut wanted to know.
Gareth told him about finding one's way back to places by blazing the trail.
‘I'll follow you,’ I said, ‘but you won't see me.
If you go really badly wrong, I'll tell you.
Otherwise, survival's up to you.’
‘Ace,’ Gareth said happily.
I unzipped the pouch round my waist and gave him the small jar of paint and the sawn-off paintbrush.
‘Don't forget to paint so you can see the splash from both directions, coming and going, and don't get out of sight of your last splash.’
‘OK.’
‘Wait for me when you hit the road.’
‘Yes.’
‘And take the whistle.’
I held it out to him from the pouch.
‘It's just a back-up in case you get stuck.
If you're in trouble, blow it, and I'll come at once.’
‘It's only a mile,’ he protested, slightly hurt, not taking it.
‘What do I say to your father if I mislay you?’
He grinned in sympathy, giving way, and put the best of all insurances in his pocket.
‘Let's go back the way we came,’ Coconut said to Gareth.
‘Easy!’
Gareth agreed.
I watched them decide on the wrong place and paint the first mark carefully round a sapling's trunk.
They might just possibly have been able to find the morning's path if they'd been starting again from the road, but tracking backwards was incredibly difficult.
All the identifiable marks of our passage, like broken twigs and flattened grass, pointed forward into the wood, not out of it.
They consulted their watches and moved north through the trees, looking back and painting as they went.
They waved once and I waved back, and for some time I could see their bright jackets in the dappled shade of the afternoon sun.
Then, when they had gone, I began slowly to follow their splashes.
I could go much faster than they could.
When I saw them again I dropped down on one knee, knowing that even though they were constantly looking back they wouldn't see me at that low level, in my nature-coloured clothes.
Besides the map, I'd brought along my faithful compass, and by its reckoning checked the boys' direction all the time.
They wandered off to the north-east a bit but not badly enough to get really lost, and after a while made a correction to drift back to north.
The pale cream splashes were easy to spot, never far apart.
Gareth had intelligently chosen smooth-barked saplings all the way and all the marks were at the same height, at about waist level, where painting came to him most naturally, it seemed.
I kept the boys in sight intermittently all the way.
They were talking to each other loudly as if to keep lurking wood-spirits at bay, and I did vividly remember that teenage spooky feeling of being alone in wild woodland and at the mercy of supernatural eyes.
Even in sunshine one could be nervous.
At night a couple of times at fifteen I'd been terrified.
On that day, as I slowly followed the trail, I simply felt at home and at peace.
There were birds singing, though not yet many, and apart from the boys' voices the quiet was as old and deep as the land.
The woods still waited the stirring of spring, lying chilly and patient with sleeping buds and butterflies in cocoons.
The smells of autumn, of compost and rot, still faintly lingered into the winter thaw, only the pines and firs remaining fragrant if one brushed them.
Pine resin, collected by tapping, dried to lumps that made brilliant firelighters.
It was a slow-going mile, but towards the end one could hear occasional cars along the road ahead and Gareth and Coconut with whoops crashed through the last few yards, again, as the week before, relieved to be back in the space age.
I speeded up and stepped out behind them, much to Gareth's surprise.
‘We thought you were miles back,’ he exclaimed.
‘You laid an excellent trail.’
‘The paint's nearly finished.’
He held it up to show me and the jar slipped out of his hand, rolling the remains of its contents onto the earth.
‘Hey, sorry,’ he said.
‘But there wasn't much left.’
‘Doesn't matter.’
I picked up the jar which was slippery on the outside from dripped paint and, screwing its lid on, dropped it with the brush into a plastic bag before stowing it again in my pouch.
‘Can we get some more?’
Coconut asked.
‘Sure.
No problem.
Ready to go home?’
The boys, both pumped up by their achievement, ran and jumped all along the road to the Land Rover that we found round the next bend, and rode back in euphoric good spirits.
‘Terrific,’ Gareth told Tremayne, bursting into the family room after we'd dropped Coconut and returned to Shellerton.
‘Fantastic.’
Whether they wanted to or not, Tremayne, Mackie and Perkin received a minute-by-minute account of the whole day with the sole exception of the discussion about Angela Brickell.
Tremayne listened with veiled approval, Mackie with active interest, Perkin with boredom.
‘It's real wilderness,’ Gareth said.
‘You can't hear anything .
And I took lashings of photos —’ He stopped, suddenly frowning.
‘Hold on a minute.’
He sped out of the room and came back with his blue knapsack, searching the contents worriedly.
‘My camera's not here!’
‘The one I gave you for Christmas?’
Tremayne asked, not overpleased.
‘Perhaps Coconut's got it,’ Perkin suggested languidly.
‘Thanks.’
Gareth leapt to the telephone in hopes that were all too soon dashed.
‘He says he didn't see it after lunchtime.’
He looked horrified.
‘We'll have to go back at once.’
‘No, you certainly won't,’ Tremayne said positively.
‘It sounds a long way and it'll be getting dark soon.’
‘But it's luminous paint,’ Gareth begged.
‘That's the whole point, you can see it in the dark.’
‘No,’ said his father.
Gareth turned to me.
‘Can't we go back?’
I shook my head.
‘Your father's right.
We could get lost in those woods at night, paint or no paint.
You've only got to miss one mark and you'd be out there till morning.’
‘You wouldn't get lost.’
‘I might,’ I said.
‘We're not going.’
‘Did you drop it on the path back?’
Mackie asked sympathetically.
‘No…
’ He thought about it.
‘I must have left it where we had  lunch.
I hung it on a branch to keep it from getting damp.
I just forgot it.’
He was upset enough for me to say, ‘I'll get it tomorrow after ‘Will you?’
Disaster swung back to hope.
‘Oh,great .’
Tremayne said doubtfully, ‘Will you find one little camera hanging in all those square miles of nothing?’
‘Of course he will,’ Gareth told him confidently.
‘I told you, we left a trail .
And oh!’
He thought of something.
‘Isn't it lucky I dropped all the paint, because now you can see where the trail starts, because we didn't paint any trees once we could see the road.’
‘Do explain,’ Mackie said.
Gareth explained.
‘Will you really find the trail?’
Mackie asked me, shaking her head.
‘As long as someone hasn't parked on the patch of paint and taken it all away on their tyres.’
‘Oh, no,’ Gareth said, anguished.
‘Don't worry,’ I told him.
‘I'll find your camera if it's still in the clearing.’
‘It is.
I'm sure.
I remember hanging it up.’
‘All right then,’ Tremayne said.
‘Let's talk about something else.’
‘Grub?’
Gareth asked hopefully.
‘Pizza?’
CHAPTER 16
On Monday morning, first lot, I was back on Drifter.
‘He's entered in a race at Worcester the day after tomorrow,’ Tremayne said as we walked out to the yard at seven in the half-dawn.
‘Today's his last training gallop before that, so don't fall off again.
The vet's been here already this morning to test his blood.’
Tremayne's vet took small blood samples of all the stable's runners prior to their last training gallop before they raced, the resulting detailed analysis being able to reveal a whole host of things from a raised lymphocyte count to excreted enzymes due to muscle damage.
If there were too many contra-indications in the blood the vet would advise Tremayne that the horse was unlikely to run well or win.
Tremayne said the process saved the owners from wasting money on fruitless horsebox expenses and jockey fees and also saved himself a lot of inexplicable and worrying disappointments.
‘Are you going to Worcester yourself?’
I asked.
‘Probably.
Might send Mackie.
Why?’
‘Er…
I wondered if I could go to see Drifter race.’
He turned his head to stare at me as if he couldn't at once comprehend my interest, but then, understanding, said of course I could go if I wanted to.
‘Thanks.’
‘You can gallop Fringe this morning, second lot.’
‘Thanks again.’
‘And thanks to you for giving Gareth such a good day yesterday.’
‘I enjoyed it.’
We reached the yard and stood watching the last preparations as usual.
‘That's a good camera,’ Tremayne said regretfully.
‘Stupid boy.’
‘I'll get it back.’
‘Along his precious trail?’
He was doubtful.
‘Maybe.
But I had a map and a compass with me yesterday.
I know pretty well where we went.’
He smiled, shaking his head.
‘You're the most competent person.
Like Fiona says, you put calamities right.’
‘It's not always possible.’
‘Give Drifter a good gallop.’
We went up to the Downs and at least I stayed in the saddle, and felt indeed a new sense of being at home there, of being at ease.
The strange and difficult was becoming second nature in the way that it had when I'd learned to fly.
Racehorses, helicopters; both needed hands responsive to the messages reaching them, and both would usually go where you wanted if you sent the right messages back.
Drifter flowed up the gallop in a smooth fast rhythm and Tremayne said he would have a good chance at Worcester if his blood was right.
When I'd left the horse in the yard and gone in for breakfast I found both Mackie and Sam Yaeger sitting at the table with Tremayne, all of them discussing that day's racing at Nottingham.
The horse that Tremayne had been going to run had gone lame, and another of Sam's rides had been withdrawn because its owner's wife had died.
‘I've only got a no-hoper left,’ Sam complained.
‘It's not bloody worthwhile going.
Reckon I'll catch flu and work on the boat.’
He telephoned forthwith, made hoarse-voiced excuses and received undeserved sympathy.
He grinned at me, putting down the receiver.
‘Where's the toast, then?’
‘Coming.’
‘I hear you played cowboys and Indians all over Berkshire with Gareth and Coconut yesterday.’
‘News travels,’ I said resignedly.
‘I told him,’ Mackie said, smiling.
‘Any objections?’
I shook my head and asked her how she was feeling.
She'd stopped riding out with the first lot because of nausea on waking, and Tremayne, far from minding, continually urged her to rest more.
‘I feel sick,’ she said to my enquiry.
‘Thank goodness.’
‘Lie down, my dear girl,’ Tremayne said.
‘You all fuss too much.’
Sam said to me, ‘Doone spent all Saturday afternoon at the boatyard.’
‘I thought he was off duty.’
‘He got a message from you, it seems.’
‘Mm.
I did send one.’
‘What message?’
Tremayne asked.
‘I don't know,’ Sam answered.
‘Doone phoned me yesterday to say he'd been to the boatyard and taken away some objects for which he would give me a receipt.’
‘What objects?’ asked Tremayne.
‘He wouldn't say.’
Sam looked at me.
‘Do you know what they were?
You steered him to them, it seems.
He sounded quite excited.’
‘What was the message?’
Mackie asked me.
‘Um…
’ I said.
‘I asked him why the floorboards didn't float.’
Tremayne and Mackie appeared mystified but Sam immediately understood and looked thunderstruck.
‘Bloody hell, how did you think of it?’
‘Don't know,’ I said.
‘It just came.’
‘Do explain,’ Mackie begged.
I told her what I'd told Erica at Tremayne's dinner, and said it might not lead to anything helpful.
‘But it certainly might,’ Mackie said.
Sam said to me thoughtfully, ‘If you hadn't stopped me, I'd have rolled up the curtain so as to go into the dock in a boat, and all that stuff under the water would have slithered away into the river and no one would have been any the wiser.’
‘Fiona's sure John will find out, before Doone does, who set that trap for Harry,’ Mackie said.
I shook my head.
‘I don't know who it was.
Wish I did.’
‘Matter of time,’ Tremayne said confidently.
He looked at his watch.
‘Talking of time, second lot.’
He stood up.
‘Sam, I want a trial of that new horse Roydale against Fringe.
You ride Roydale, John's on Fringe.’
‘OK,’ Sam said easily.
‘John,’ Tremayne turned to me, ‘don't try to beat Sam as if it were a race.
This is a fact-finder.
I want to see which has most natural speed.
Go as fast as you can but if you feel Fringe falter, don't press him, just ease back.’
‘Right.’
‘Mackie, talk to Dee-Dee or something.
I'm not taking you up there to vomit in the Land Rover.’
‘Oh, Tremayne, as if I would.’
‘Not risking it,’ he said gruffly.
‘Don't want you bouncing about on those ruts.’
‘I'm not an invalid,’ she protested, but she might as well have argued with a rock.
He determinedly left her behind and drove Sam and me up to the gallops.
On the way, Sam said to me dryly, ‘Nolan usually rides any trials.
He'll be furious.’
‘Thanks a lot.’
Tremayne said repressively, ‘I've told Nolan he won't be riding work here again until he cools off.’
Sam raised his eyebrows comically.
‘Do you want John shot?
Nolan's a whiz with a gun.’
‘Don't talk nonsense,’ Tremayne said a shade uneasily, and bumped the Land Rover across the ruts of the track and onto the smooth upland grass before drawing to a halt.
‘Keep your mind on Roydale.
He belongs to a new owner.
I want your best judgment.
His form's not brilliant, but nor is the trainer he's come from.
I want to know where we're at.’
‘Sure,’ Sam said.
‘Stay upsides Fringe as long as you can.’
Sam nodded.
We took Roydale and Fringe from the lads and when Tremayne had driven off and positioned himself on his hillock we started together up the all-weather gallop, going the fastest I'd been ever.
Fringe, flat out at racing pace, had a wildness about him I couldn't really control and I guessed it was  that quality which won him races.
Whenever Roydale put his nose in front, Fringe found a bit extra, but it seemed there wasn't much between them, and with the end of the wood chippings in sight the contest was still undecided.
I saw Sam sit up and ease the pressure, and copied him immediately, none too soon for my taxed muscles and speed-starved lungs.
I finished literally breathless but Sam pulled up nonchalantly and trotted back to Tremayne for a report in full voice.
‘He's a green bugger,’ he announced.
‘He has a mouth like elephant skin.
He shies at his own shadow and he's as stubborn as a pig.
Apart from that, he's fast, as you saw.’
Tremayne listened impassively.
‘Courage?’
‘Can't tell till he's on a racecourse.’
‘I'll enter him for Saturday.
We may as well find out.
Perhaps you'd better give him a pop over hurdles tomorrow.’
‘OK.’
We handed the horses back to their respective lads and went down the hill again with Tremayne and found Doone waiting for us, sitting in his car.
‘That man gives me the sodding creeps,’ Sam said as we disembarked.
The greyly persistent Detective Chief Inspector emerged like a turtle from his shell when he saw us arrive, and he'd come alone for once: no silent note-taker in his shadow.
‘Which of us do you want?’
Tremayne enquired bullishly.
‘Well, sir.’
The sing-song voice took all overt menace away, yet there was still a suggestion that collars might be felt at any minute.
‘All of you, sir, if you don't mind.’
Just the same if we did mind, he meant.
‘You'd better come in, then,’ Tremayne offered, shrugging.
Doone followed us into the kitchen, removed a grey tweed overcoat and sat by the table in his much-lived-in grey suit.
He felt comfortable in kitchens, I thought.
Tremayne vaguely suggested coffee, and I made a mug of instant for us each.
Mackie came through from having breakfasted with Perkin saying she wanted to know how the trial had gone.
She wasn't surprised to see Doone, only resigned.
I made her some coffee and she sat and watched while Doone picked a piece of paper out of his breast pocket and handed it to Sam.
‘A receipt, sir,’ he said, ‘for three lengths of floorboard retrieved from the dock in your boathouse.’
Sam unfolded the paper and looked at it dumbly.
‘Why didn't they float?’
Tremayne asked bluntly.
‘Ah.
So everyone knows about that?’
Doone seemed disappointed.
‘John just told us,’ Tremayne nodded.
Doone gave me a sorrowful stare, but I hadn't given a thought to his wanting secrecy.
‘They didn't float, sir, because they were weighted.’
‘With what?’
Sam asked.
‘With pieces of paving stone.
There are similar pieces of paving stone scattered on a portion of your boatyard property.’
‘Paving stone?’
Sam sounded bemused, then said doubtfully, ‘Do you mean broken slabs of pink and grey marble?’
‘Is that what it is, sir, marble?’
Doone didn't know much about marble, it appeared.
‘It might be.’
Doone pondered, made up his mind, went out to his car and returned carrying a five-foot plank which he laid across the kitchen table.
The old grey wood, though still dampish, looked as adequate for its purpose as its fellows still forming the boathouse floor and didn't seem to have been weakened in any way.
Slightly towards one end, on the surface that was now uppermost on the table, rested a long, unevenly shaped darkish slab of what I might have thought was rough-faced granite.
‘Yes,’ Sam said, glancing at it.
‘That's marble.’
He stretched out his hand and tried to pick it up, and the plank came up an inch with it.
Sam let it drop, frowning.
‘It's stuck on,’ Doone said, nodding.
‘From the looks of the other pieces lying about, the surface that's stuck to the wood is smooth and polished.’
‘Yes,’ Sam said.
‘Superglue, we think,’ Doone said, ‘would make a strong enough bond.’
‘A lot of plastic adhesives would,’ Sam said, nodding.
‘And how do you happen to have chunks of marble lying about?’
Doone asked, though not forbiddingly.
‘It came with a job-lot of stuff I bought from a demolition  firm,’ Sam explained without stress.
‘They had some panelling I wanted for a boat I did up, and some antique bathroom fittings.
I had to take a lot of oddments as well, like the marble.
It came from a mansion they were pulling down.
They sell off things, you know.
Fireplaces, doors, anything.’
Doone asked conversationally, ‘Did you stick the marble onto the floorboards, sir?’
‘No, I sodding well did not ,’ Sam said explosively.
‘Onto the underside of the floorboards,’ I said.
‘There were no slabs of marble in sight when Harry and I went into the upstairs room of the boathouse.
I expect, if there are some other blocks still in place, that you can see them from underneath, in the dock.’
Doone with slight reluctance admitted that there seemed to be marble stuck to the underside of one more floorboard on each side of the hole.
The plank on the table was about eight inches across.
Harry had taken three of them down with him; five altogether had been doctored.
The trap with its missing section of beam had been three and a half feet across, and Harry, taking the envelope bait, had gone through its centre.
‘Have you finished snooping round my place now?’
Sam demanded, and Doone shook his head.
‘I want to work on my boat,’ Sam objected.
‘Go ahead, sir.
Never mind my men, if they're there.’
‘Right.’
Sam stood up with bouncing energy, quite unlike a patient suddenly stricken with flu.
‘Bye, Tremayne.
Bye, Mackie.
See you, John.’
He went out to his car carrying his jazzy jacket and tooted as he drove away.
The kitchen seemed a lot less alive without him.
‘I'd like to talk to Mr Kendall alone,’ Doone said placidly.
Tremayne's eyebrows rose but he made no objection.
He suggested I took Doone into the dining-room while he told Mackie about Roydale's gallop, and Doone followed me docilely, bringing the plank.
The formality of the dining-room furnishings seemed at first to change his mood from ease to starch, but it appeared to me after a short while that he was troubled rather by indecision as to which side I was now on, them or us.
He seemed to settle finally for us, us being the police, or at least the fact-seekers and, clearing his throat, he told me that his men with grappling irons and magnets had missed finding the floorboards the first time, probably because the floorboards weren't magnetic.
Did I, he wanted to know, think the trapsetter had taken magnetism into account.
I frowned.
‘Stretching it a bit,’ I said.
‘I should think he looked around for something heavy that would take glue, and with all that junk lying around there was bound to be something.
The marble happened to be perfect.
But the whole thing was so thoroughly thought out, you really can't tell.’
‘Do you know who did it?’ he asked forthrightly.
‘No,’ I said truthfully.
‘You must have opinions.’
He shifted on his chair, looking around him.
‘I'd like to hear them.’
‘They're negative more than positive.’
‘Often just as valuable.’
‘I'd assume the trapsetter had been a guest at Sam Yaeger's boatyard party,’ I said, ‘only you warned me never to assume.’
‘Assume it,’ he said, almost smiling and in some inner way contented.
‘And,’ I went on, ‘I'd assume it was the person who killed Angela Brickell who wanted to fix the blame for ever on Harry by making him disappear, only…’
‘Assume it,’ he said.
‘Anyone could have killed Angela Brickell, but only a hundred and fifty or so people went to Sam's party, and half of those were women.’
‘Don't you think a woman could have set that trap?’ he asked neutrally.
‘Sure, a woman could have thought it out and done the carpentering.
But what woman could have lured Angela Brickell and persuaded her to take all her clothes off in the middle of a wood?’
He sucked his teeth.
‘All right,’ he said, ‘I agree, a man killed her.’
He paused, ‘Motive?’
‘I'd guess…to keep a secret.
I mean, suppose she was  pregnant.
Suppose she went out into the woods with…him , and they were going to make love…or they'd done it…and she said ‘I'm pregnant, you're the father, what are you going to do about it?’
She was full of jumbled religious guilts but it was she who was the seducer…
’ I paused.
‘I'd think perhaps she was killed because she wanted too much…and because she wouldn't have an abortion.’
He made a sound very like a purr in his throat.
‘All right,’ he said again.
‘Method: strangulation.
Guaranteed to work, as everyone around here knew, after the death of that other girl, Olympia.’
‘Yes.’
‘Opportunity?’ he said.
‘No one can remember what they were doing the day Angela Brickell disappeared.’
‘Except the murderer,’ he observed.
‘What about opportunity on the day Mr Goodhaven fell through the floor?’
‘Someone was there to drive his car away…no fingerprints, I suppose?’
‘Gloves,’ he said succinctly.
‘Too few of Mr Goodhaven's prints are still there.
No palm print on the gear lever, for instance.
I don't know if we'd have worried about that if we'd thought he'd done a bunk.
It was a cold day, after all.
He might have worn gloves himself.’
‘You might have guessed at collusion,’ I suggested.
‘Did you ever consider police work?’
‘Not good at that sort of discipline.’
‘You don't like taking orders, sir?’
‘I prefer giving them to myself.’
He smiled without criticism.
‘You'd be no good in uniform.’
‘None at all.’
He was entitled, I supposed, to his small exploratory excursion around my character; and if he himself, I thought, had been wholly fulfilled by uniform, he would still be in it.
Perkin in his overalls appeared in the open doorway, hovering.
‘Is Mackie over here?’ he said.
‘I can't find her.’
‘In the kitchen with Tremayne,’ I said.
‘Thanks.’
He swept a gaze over Doone and the plank and said with irony, ‘Sorting it out, then?’
Doone said a shade heavily, ‘Mr Kendall's always helpful,’ and Perkin made a face and went off to join Mackie.
‘About Harry's car,’ I said to Doone.
‘There must have been just a small problem of logistics.
I mean, perhaps our man parked his own car in Reading station car park, then took a train to Maidenhead station and a bus from there to near the river, and went on foot from there to the boatyard…wouldn't that make sense?’
‘It would, but so far we haven't found anyone who noticed anything useful.’
‘Car park ticket?’
‘There wasn't one in the car.
We don't know when the car arrived in the car park.
It could have been parked somewhere else on Wednesday and repositioned when our man discovered Mr Goodhaven was still alive.’
‘Mm.
It would mean that our man had a lot of time available for manoeuvring.’
‘Racing people do have flexible hours,’ he observed, ‘and they mostly have free afternoons.’
‘I don't suppose there's a hope that my jacket and boots were still in the car?’
I asked.
‘No sign of them.
Sorry.
They'll be in a dump somewhere, shouldn't wonder.’
He was looking round the room again, and this time revealed his purpose.
‘About those guide books of yours, I'd like to see them.’
They were in the family room.
I went to fetch them and returned with only three I'd found,jungle, Safari and Ice .
The others, I explained, could be anywhere, as everyone had been reading them.
He opened jungle and quickly flipped through the opening chapters, which were straightforward advice for well-equipped jungle holidays: ‘Never put a bare foot on the earth.
Shower in slip-ons.
Sleep with your shoes inside your mosquito netting.
Never drink untreated water…never brush your teeth with it…don't wash fruit or vegetables in it, avoid suspect ice-cubes.’
‘Never get exhausted’!’
Doone said aloud.
‘What sort of advice is that?’
‘Exhausted people can't be bothered to stick to life-saving routines.
If you don't drive yourself too hard you're more likely  to survive.
For instance, if you've a long way to go, it's better to get there slowly than not at all .’
‘That's weak advice,’ he said, shaking his head.
I didn't argue, but many died from exhaustion every year through not understanding the strengths of weakness.
It was better to stop every day's travel early so as to have good energy for raising a tent, digging an igloo, building a platform up a tree.
Dropping down exhausted without shelter could bring new meaning to the expression ‘dead tired,.
‘Food,’’ Doone read out.
‘Fishing, hunting, trapping.’
He flicked the pages.
‘In the jungle, hang fishhooks to catch birds.
Don't forget bait.
You always need bait.’’
He looked up.
‘That envelope was bait, wasn't it?’
I nodded.
‘Good bait.’
‘We haven't found it.
That water's like liquid mud.
You can't see an inch through it, my men say.’
‘They're right.’
He stared for a second.
‘Oh, yes.
I'd forgotten you'd been in it.’
He went back to the book.
‘It's possible to bring down game with a spear or a bow and arrow, but these take considerable practice and involve hours spent lying in wait.
Let a trap do the waiting…
’’ He read on.
‘The classic trap for large animals is a pit with sharpened staves pointing upwards.
Cover the pit with natural-looking vegetation and earth, and suspend the bait over the top.’’
He looked up.
‘Very graphic illustrations and instructions.’
‘Afraid so.’
Eyes down again to the book, he went on, ‘All sharpened staves for use in traps (and also spears and arrows) can be hardened to increase their powers of penetration by being charred lightly in hot embers, a process which tightens and toughens the wood fibres.’’
Doone stopped reading and remarked, ‘You don't say anything about sharpening old bicycle frames and railings.’
‘There aren't many bicycle frames in the Jungle.
Er…were they sharpened?’
He sighed.
‘Not artificially.’
He read on.
‘If digging or scraping out a pit is impracticable because of hard or waterlogged ground, try netting.
Arrange a net to entangle game when it springs the trap.
To make a strong net you can use tough plant  fibres…
’’ He silently read several pages, occasionally shaking his head, not, I gathered, in disagreement with the text, but in sorrow at its availability.
‘How to skin a snake,’’ he read.
‘Dear God.’
‘Roast rattlesnake tastes like chicken,’ I said.
‘You've eaten it?’
I nodded.
‘Not at all bad.’
‘First aid.
How to stop heavy bleeding.
Pressure points…
To close gaping wounds, use needle and thread.
To help blood clot, apply cobwebs to the wound.’’
Cobwebs !
I don't believe it.’
‘They're organic,’ I said, ‘and as sterile as most bandages.’
‘Not for me, thanks.’
He put down Jungle and flipped through Safari and Ice .
Many of the same suggestions for traps appeared in all the books, modified only by terrain.
‘Don't eat polar bear liver,’’ Doone read in amazement, ‘‘it stores enough vitamin A to kill humans.’’
He smiled briefly.
‘That would make a dandy new method for murder.’
First catch your polar bear…
‘Well, sir,’ Doone said, laying the books aside, ‘we can trace the path of ideas about the trap, but who do you think put them into practice?’
I shook my head.
‘If I throw names at you,’ he said, ‘give your reasons for or against.’
‘All right,’ I said cautiously.
‘Mr Vickers.’
‘Tremayne?’
I must have sounded astonished.
‘All against.’
‘Why, exactly?’
‘Well, he's not like that.’
‘As I told you before, I don't know these people the way you do.
So give me reasons.’
I said, thinking, ‘Tremayne Vickers is forceful, a bit old-fashioned, straightforward, often kind.
Angela Brickell would not have been to his taste.
If, and to my mind it's a colossal if,if she managed to seduce him and then told him he was the father-to-be, and if he believed it, it would have been more his style to pack her off home to her parents and provide for her.
He doesn't shirk responsibility.
Also, I can't imagine him taking any woman  out into deep woods for sex.
Impossible.
As for trying to kill Harry…
’ Words failed me.
‘All right,’ Doone said.
He brought out a notebook and methodically wrote ‘KENDALL'S ASSESSMENTS ’ at the top of the page.
Underneath he wrote ‘Tremayne Vickers ’, followed by a cross, and under Tremayne, ‘Nolan Everard ’.
‘Nolan Everard,’ he said.
Not so easy.
‘Nolan is brave.
He's dynamic and determined…and violent.’
‘And he threatened to kill you,’ Doone said flatly.
‘Who told you that?’
‘Half the racing world heard him.’
Sighing, I explained about my riding.
‘And when he attacked you, you picked him up like a baby in front of all those people,’ Doone said.
‘A man might not forgive that.’
‘We're talking about Angela Brickell and Harry,’ I pointed out mildly.
‘Talk about Nolan Everard then.
For , first.’
‘For …
Well, he killed Olympia, not really meaning to, but definitely by putting her life at risk.
He couldn't afford another scandal while waiting for trial.
If Angela Brickell had seduced him — or the other way round — and she threatened a messy paternity suit…
I don't know.
That's again a big if, but not as impossible as Tremayne.
Nolan and Sam Yaeger often bed the same girl, more or less to spite each other, it seems.
Nolan regularly rides the horse, Chickweed, that Angela Brickell had care of, and there would have been opportunities for sex at race meetings, like in a horse-box, if he wanted to take the risk.
He could sue me for slander over this.’
‘He won't hear of it,’ Doone said positively.
‘This conversation is just between you and me.
I'll deny I ever discussed the case with you if anyone asks.’
‘Fair enough.’
I thought a bit.
‘As for the trap for Harry, Nolan would be mentally and physically capable.’
‘But?
I hear your but.’
I nodded.
‘Against .
He's Fiona's cousin, and they're close.
He depends on Fiona's horses to clinch his amateur-champion status.
He couldn't be sure she would have the heart to go on running  racehorses if she were forced to believe Harry a murderer…if she thought he had left her without warning, without a note, if she were worried sick by not knowing where he'd gone, and was also haunted by the thought of Harry with Angela Brickell.’
‘Would Everard have stopped to consider all that?’ he mused doubtfully.
‘The trap was well thought out.’
Doone wrote a question mark after Nolan's name.
‘Doesn't anyone have a solid alibi for Wednesday afternoon?’
I asked.
‘That's the one definite time our man has to explain away.’
‘And don't think we don't know it,’ Doone nodded.
‘Not many of the men connected with this place can account for every hour of that afternoon, though the women can.
We've been very busy this morning, making enquiries.
Mrs Goodhaven went to a committee meeting, then home in time to be there when you telephoned.
Mrs Perkin Vickers was at Ascot races, vouched for by saddling a horse in the three-mile chase.
Mr Vickers' secretary Dee-Dee made several telephone calls from the office here and Mrs Ingrid Watson went shopping in Oxford with her mother and can produce receipts.’
‘Ingrid ?’
‘She can't vouch for what her husband did.’
He wrote ‘Bob Watson ’ under Nolan.
‘For him being our man,’ I said dubiously, ‘is, I suppose, Ingrid herself.
She wouldn't put up with shenanigans with Angela Brickell.
But whether Bob would kill to stay married to Ingrid…
’ I shook my head.
‘I don't know.
He's a good head lad, Tremayne trusts him, but I wouldn't stake my life on his loyalty.
Also he's an extremely competent carpenter, as you saw yourself.
He was serving drinks at the party when Olympia died.
He went to the boatyard party as a guest.’
‘Against ?’
I hesitated.
‘Killing Angela Brickell might have been a moment's panic.
Setting the trap for Harry took cunning and nerve.
I don't know Bob Watson well enough for a real opinion.
I don't know him like the others.’
Doone nodded and put a question mark after his name also.
‘Gareth Vickers ’ he wrote.
I smiled.
‘It can't be him.’
‘Why not?’
Doone asked.
‘Angela Brickell's sexuality frightened him.
He would never have gone into the woods with her.
Apart from that, he hasn't a driving licence, and he was at school on Wednesday afternoon.’
‘Actually,’ Doone said calmly, ‘he is known to be able to drive his father's jeep on the Downs expertly, and my men have discovered he was out of school last Wednesday afternoon on a field trip to Windsor Safari Park.
That's not miles from the boatyard.
The teacher in charge is flustered over the number of boys who sloped off to buy food.’
I considered Gareth as a murderer.
I said, ‘You asked me for my knowledge of these people.
Gareth couldn't possibly be our man.’
‘Why are you so sure?’
‘I just am.’
He wrote a cross against Gareth's name, and then as an afterthought, a question mark also.
I shook my head.
Under Gareth's name he wrote ‘Perkin Vickers ’.
‘What about him ?’ he asked.
‘Perkin…
’ I sighed.
‘He lives in another world half the time.
He works hard.
For , I suppose, is that he makes furniture, he's good with wood.
I don't know that it's for or against that he dotes on his wife.
He's very possessive of her.
He's a bit childlike in some ways.
She loves him and looks after him.
Against …he doesn't have much to do with the horses.
Seldom goes racing.
He didn't remember who Angela Brickell was, the first morning you were here.’
Doone pursed his lips judiciously, then nodded and wrote a cross against Perkin, and then again a question mark.
‘Keeping your options open?’
I asked dryly.
‘You never know what we don't know,’ he said.
‘Deep.’
‘It might be reasonable to assume that Mr Goodhaven didn't set the trap himself, to persuade me of his innocence,’ he said, writing ‘Henry Goodhaven ’on the list.
‘A hundred per cent,’ I agreed.
‘However, he took you along as a witness.’
He paused.
‘Sup  pose he planned it and it all went wrong?
Suppose he needed you there to assert he'd walked into a trap?’
‘Impossible.’
He put a question mark against Harry, all the same.
‘Who drove his car away?’
I said, a shade aggressively.
‘A casual thief.’
‘I don't believe it.’
‘You like him,’ Doone said.
‘You're unreliable.’
‘That page is headed ‘KENDALL'S ASSESSMENTS .’,’
I protested.
‘My assessment of Harry merits a firm cross.’
He looked at what he'd written, shrugged and changed the question mark to a negative.
Then he made a question mark away to the right on the same line.
‘My assessments,’ he said.
I smiled a little ruefully and said reflectively, ‘Have you worked out when the trap was set?
Raising the floorboards, finding the marble and sticking it on, cutting out the bit of beam — and I bet that went floating down the river — remembering to lock the lower door…
It would all have taken a fair time.’
‘When would you say it was done, then?’ he asked, giving nothing away.
‘Any time Tuesday, or Wednesday morning, I suppose.’
‘Why, exactly?’
‘Anti-Harry fever was publicly at its height on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday, but by the Sunday before, at least, you'd begun to spread your investigation outwards…which must horribly have alarmed our man.
Sam Yaeger spent Monday at the boatyard because he'd been medically stood down from racing as a result of a fall, but by Tuesday he was racing again, and on Wednesday he rode at Ascot, so the boathouse was vulnerable all day Tuesday and again Wednesday morning.’
Doone looked at me from under his eyelids.
‘You're forgetting something,’ he said, and added ‘Sam Yaeger ’to his list.
17
‘Put a cross,’ I said.
Doone shook his head.
‘You admire him.
You could be blinded.’
I thought it over.
‘I do in many ways admire him, I admit.
I admire his riding, his professionalism.
He's courageous.
He's a realist.’
I paused.
‘I'll agree that on the For side you could put the things you listed the other day, that he has all the skills to set the trap and the perfect place to do it.’
‘Go on,’ Doone nodded.
‘You'd begun actively investigating him,’ I said.
‘Yes, I had.’
‘He'd rolled around a bit with Angela Brickell,’ I said, ‘and that's where we come to the biggest Against .’
‘You're not saying he couldn't have had the irritation, the nerve, the strength to strangle her?’
‘No, I'm not, though I don't think he did it.
What I'm saying is that he wouldn't have taken her out into the woods.
He told you himself he moves a mattress into the boathouse on such occasions.
If he'd strangled her on impulse it would have been there , and he could have slid her weighted body into the river, no one the wiser.’
Doone listened with his head on one side.
‘But what if he'd deliberately planned it?
What if he'd suggested the woods as being far away from his own territory?’
‘I wouldn't think he'd need to cover his sins with strangulation,’ I said.
‘Everyone knows he seduces anything that moves.
He would pass off an Angela Brickell sort of scandal with a laugh.’
Doone disapproved, saying, ‘Unsavoury,’ and maybe thinking of his assailable daughters.
‘We haven't got very far,’ I said, looking at his list.
All my own assessments were a cross except the question mark against Nolan.
Not awfully helpful, I thought.
Doone clicked his pen a few times, then at the bottom wrote Lewis Everard .
‘That's a longshot,’ I said.
‘Give me some Fors and Againsts .’
I pondered.
‘Against first.
I don't think he's bold enough to have set that trap, but then…
’ I hesitated, ‘there's no doubt he's both clever and cunning.
I wouldn't have thought he would have gone into the woods with Angela Brickell.
Can't exactly say why, but I'd think he'd be too fastidious, especially when he's sober.’
‘For ?’
Doone prompted, when I stopped.
‘He gets drunk…
I don't know if he'd tumble Angela Brickell in that state or not.’
‘But he knew her.’
‘Even if not in the biblical sense,’ I agreed.
‘Sir!’ he said with mock reproach.
‘He would have seen her at the races,’ I said, smiling.
‘And for …he is a good liar.
According to him, he's the best actor of the lot.’
‘A question mark, then?’
Doone's pen hovered.
I slowly shook my head.
‘A cross.’
‘The trouble with you,’ Doone said with disillusion, looking at the column of negatives, ‘is that you haven't met enough murderers.’
‘None,’ I agreed.
‘You can't exactly count Nolan Everard.’
‘And you wouldn't know a murderer if you tripped over one.’
‘Your list is too short,’ I said.
‘It seems so.’
He put away the notebook and stood up.
‘Well, Mr Kendall, thank you for your time.
I don't discount your impressions.
You've helped clarify my thoughts.
Now we'll have to step up our enquiries.
We'll get there in the end.’
The sing-song accent came to a stop and he shook my hand  and let himself out, a grey man in grey clothes following his own informal idiosyncratic path towards the truth.
I sat for a while thinking of what I'd said and of what he'd told me, and I still couldn't believe that any of the people I'd come to know so well was really a murderer.
No one was a villain, not even Nolan.
There had to be someone else, someone we hadn't begun to consider.
I worked on and off on Tremayne's book for the rest of the morning but found it hard to concentrate.
Dee-Dee drifted in and out, offering coffee and company, and Tremayne put his head in to say he was going to Oxford to see his tailor, and to ask if I wanted an opportunity to shop.
I thanked him and declined.
I would probably have liked to replace my boots and ski-jacket, but I still hadn't much personal money.
It was easy at Shellerton House to get by without any.
Tremayne would doubtless have lent me some of the quarter-advance due at the end of the month but my lack was my own choice, and as long as I could survive as I was, I wouldn't ask.
It was all part of the game.
Mackie came through from her side to keep company with Dee-Dee, saying Perkin had gone to Newbury to collect some supplies, and presently the two women went out to lunch together, leaving me alone in the great sprawling house.
I tried again and harder to work and felt restless and uneasy.
Stupid, I thought.
Being alone never bothered me: in fact, I liked it.
That day, I found the size of the silent house oppressive.
I went upstairs, showered and changed out of riding clothes into the more comfortable jeans and shirt I'd worn the day before and pulled on sneakers and the red sweater for warmth.
After that I went down to the kitchen and made a cheese sandwich for lunch and wished I'd gone with Tremayne if only for the ride.
It was the usual pattern of finding something to do —anything —— rather than sit down and face the empty page, except that that day the uneasiness was extra.
I wandered in a desultory fashion into the family room which looked dead without the fire blazing and began to wonder what I could make for dinner.
Gareth's ‘BACK FOR GRUB’ message was  still pinned to the corkboard, and it was with a distinct sense of release that I remembered I'd said that I would go back for his camera.
The unease vanished.
I found a piece of paper and left my own message: I'VE BORROWED THE LAND ROVER TO FETCH GARETH'S CAMERA.
BACK FOR COOKING THE GRUB!’
I pinned it to the corkboard with a red drawing pin and a light heart, and went upstairs again to change back into jodhpur boots to deal with the terrain and to pick up the map and the compass in case I couldn't find the trail.
Then I skipped downstairs and went out to the wheels, locking the back door behind me.
It was a good day, sunny like the day before but with more wind.
With a feeling of having been unexpectedly let out of school, I drove over the hills on the road to Reading and coasted along the unfenced part of the Quillersedge Estate until I thought I'd come more or less to where Gareth had dropped the paint: parked off the road there and searched more closely for the place on foot.
No one had driven the paint away on their tyres.
The splash was dusty but still visible and, without much trouble, I found the beginning of the trail about twenty feet straight ahead in the wood and followed it as easily through the tangled trees and undergrowth as on the day before.
Gareth a murderer…
I smiled to myself at the absurdity of it.
As well suspect Coconut.
The pale paint splashes, the next one ahead visible all the time, weren't all that marked the trail: it showed signs in broken twigs and scuffed ground of our passage the day before.
By the time I came back with the camera it would be almost a beaten track.
Wind rattled and swayed the trees and filled my ears with the old songs of the land, and the sun shone through the moving boughs in shimmering ever-changing patterns.
I wound my slow way through the maze of unpruned growth and felt at one with things there and inexpressibly happy.
The trail strayed round and eventually reached the small clearing.
Our improvised seats were frayed by the wind but still identified the place with certainty, and almost at once I spotted Gareth's camera, prominently hanging, as he'd said, from a branch.
I walked across to collect it and something hit me very hard indeed in the back.
Moments of disaster are disorientating.
I didn't know what had happened.
The world had changed.
I was falling.
I was lying face down on the ground.
There was something wrong with my breathing.
I had heard nothing but the wind, seen nothing but the moving trees but, I thought incredulously,someone had shot me .
From total instinct as much as from injury I lay as dead.
There was a zipping noise beside my ear as something sped past it.
I shut my eyes.
There was another jolting thud in my back.
So this was death, I thought numbly; and I didn't even know who was killing me, and I didn't know why.
Breathing was terrible.
My chest was on fire.
A wave of clammy perspiration broke out on my skin.
I lay unmoving.
My face was on dead leaves and dried grass and pieces of twig.
I could smell the musty earth.
Earth-digested, come to dust.
Someone, I thought dimly, was waiting to see if I moved: and if I moved there would be a third thud and my heart would stop.
If I didn't move someone would come and feel for a pulse and, finding one, finish me off.
Either way, everything that had been beginning was now ending, ebbing away without hope.
I lay still.
Not a twitch.
I couldn't hear anything but the wind in the trees.
Could hear no one moving.
Hadn't heard even the shots.
Breathing was dreadful.
A shaft of pain.
Minimum air could go in, trickle out.
Too little.
In a while…
I would go to sleep.
A long time seemed to pass, and I was still alive.
I had a vision of someone standing not far behind me with a gun, waiting for me to move.
He was shadowy and had no face, and his patience was for ever.
Clammy nausea came again, enveloping and ominous.
My skin sweated.
I felt cold.
I didn't exactly try to imagine what was happening in my body.
Lying still was anyway easier than moving.
I would slide unmoving into eternity.
The man with a gun could wait for ever, but I would be gone.
I would cheat him that way.
That's delirium, I thought.
Nothing happened in the clearing.
I lay still.
Time drifted.
After countless ages I seemed to come back to a real realisation that I was continuing to breathe, even if with difficulty, and didn't seem in immediate danger of stopping.
However ghastly I might feel, however feeble, I wasn't drowning in blood.
Wasn't coughing it up.
Coughing was a bleak thought, the way my chest hurt.
My certainty of the waiting gun began to fade.
He wouldn't be there after all this time.
He wouldn't stand for ever doing nothing.
He hadn't felt my pulse.
He must have thought it unnecessary.
He believed I was dead.
He had gone.
I was alone.
It took me a while to believe those three things utterly and another while to risk acting on the belief.
If I didn't move I would die where I lay.
With dread but in the end inevitability, I moved my left arm.
Christ , I thought, that hurt .
Hurt it might, but nothing else happened.
I moved my right arm.
Just as bad.
Even worse.
No more thuds in the back, though.
No quick steps, no pounce, no final curtain.
Perhaps I really was alone.
I let the thought lie there for comfort.
Wouldn't contemplate a cat-and-mouse cruelty.
I put both palms flat on the decaying undergrowth and tried to heave myself up on to my knees.
Practically fainted.
Not only could I not do it but the effort was so excruciating that I opened my mouth to scream and couldn't breathe enough for that either.
My weight settled back on the earth and I felt nothing but staggering agony and couldn't think connectedly until it abated.
Something was odd, I thought finally.
It wasn't only that I couldn't lift myself off the ground but that I was stuck to it in some way.
Cautiously, sweating, with fiery stabs in every inch, I wormed my right hand between my body and the earth, and came to what seemed like a rod between the two.
I must have fallen on to a sharp stick, I thought.
Perhaps I hadn't been shot.
But yes, I had.
Hit in the back.
Couldn't mistake it.
Slowly, trying to ration the pain into manageable portions, I slid my hand out again, and then after a while, hardly believing it, I bent my arm and felt round my back and came to the rod there also, and faced the grim certainty that someone had shot me not with a bullet but an arrow .
I lay for a while simply wrestling with the enormity of it.
I had an arrow right through my body from back to front somewhere in the region of my lower ribs.
Through my right lung, which was why I was breathing oddly.
Not, miraculously, through any major blood vessels, or I would by now have bled internally to death.
About level with my heart, but to one side.
Bad enough.
Awful.
But I was still alive.
I'd been hit twice, I remembered.
Maybe I had two arrows through me.
One or two, I was still alive.
‘Survival begins in the mind .’
I'd written that, and knew it to be true.
But to survive an arrow a mile from a road with a killer around to make sure I didn't make it…where in one's mind did one search for the will to survive that?
Where, when just getting to one's knees loomed as an unavoidable torture and to lie and wait to be rescued appeared to be merely common sense?
I thought about rescue.
A long long way off.
No one would start looking for me for hours; not until after dark.
The sun on my back was warm, but the February nights were still near zero and I was wearing only a sweater.
Theoretically the luminous trail should lead rescuers to the clearing even at night…but any sensible murderer would have obliterated the road end of it after he'd found his own way out.
I couldn't realistically be rescued before tomorrow.
I thought I might die while I waited: might die in the night.
People died of injuries sometimes because their bodies went into shock.
General trauma, not just the wound, could kill.
One thought, one decision at a time.
Better die trying.
All right.
Next decision.
Which way to go?
The trail seemed obvious enough, but my intended killer had  come and gone that way — must have done — and if he should return for any reason I wouldn't want to meet him.
I had a compass in my pocket.
The distant road lay almost due north of the clearing and the straightest line to the road lay well to the left of the paint trail.
I waited for energy, but it didn't materialise.
Next decision: get up anyway.
The tip of the arrow couldn't be far into the earth, I thought.
I'd fallen with it already through me.
It could be only an inch or so in.
No more than a centimetre, maybe.
I shut my mind to the consequences, positioned my hands, and pushed.
The arrow tip came free and I lay on my side in frightful suffering weakness, looking down at a sharp black point sticking out from scarlet wool.
Black.
The length of a finger.
Hard and sharp.
I touched the needle tip of it and wished I hadn't.
Only one arrow.
Only one all the way through, at least.
Not much blood, surprisingly.
Or perhaps I couldn't tell, blood being the same colour as the jersey, but there was no great wet patch.
A mile to the road seemed an impossible distance.
Moving an inch was taxing.
Still, inches added up.
Better get started.
First catch your compass…
With an inward smile and a mental sigh I retrieved the compass carefully from my pocket and took a bearing on north.
North, it seemed, was where my feet were.
I rolled with effort to my knees and felt desperately, appallingly, overwhelmingly ill.
The flicker of humour died fast.
The waves of protest were so strong that I almost gave up there and then.
Outraged tissues, invaded lungs, an overall warning.
I stayed on my knees, sitting back on my heels, head bowed, breathing as little as possible, staring at the protruding arrow, thinking the survival programme was too much.
There was a pale slim rod sticking into the ground beside me.
I looked at it vaguely and then with more attention, remembering the thing that had sung past my ear.
An arrow that had missed me.
It was about as long as an arm.
A peeled fine-grained stick, dead straight.
A notch in its visible end, for slotting onto a bowstring.
No feather to make a flight.
The guide books all gave instructions for making arrows.
‘Char the tips in hot embers to shrink and toughen the fibres for better penetration…’
The charred black tip had penetrated all right.
‘Cut two slots in the other end, one shallow one for the bowstring, one deep one to push a shaped feather into, to make a flight so that the arrow will travel straighter to the target.’
Illustrations thoughtfully provided.
If the three arrows had all had flights…if there'd been no wind…
I closed my eyes weakly.
Even without flights, the aim had been deadly enough.
Gingerly, sweating, I curled my left hand behind my back and felt for the third arrow, and found it sticking out of my jersey though fairly loose in my hand.
With trepidation I took a stronger hold of it and it came away altogether but with a sharp dagger of soreness, like digging out a splinter.
The black tip of that arrow was scarlet with blood, but I reckoned it hadn't gone in further than a rib or my spine.
I only had the first one to worry about.
Only the one.
Quite enough.
It would have been madness to pull it out, even if I could have faced doing it.
In duels of old, it hadn't always been the sword going into the lungs that had killed so much as the drawing of it out.
The puncture let air rush in and out, spoiling nature's enclosed vacuum system.
With holes to the outer air, the lungs collapsed and couldn't breathe.
With the arrow still in place, the holes were virtually blocked.
With the arrow in place, bleeding was held at bay.
I might die with it in.
I'd die quicker with it out.
The first rule of surviving a disaster, I had written, was to accept that it had happened and make the best of what was left.
Self-pity, regrets, hopelessness and surrender would never get one home.
Survival began, continued and was accomplished in the mind.
All right, I told myself, follow your own rules.
Accept the fact of the arrow.
Accept your changed state.
Accept that it hurts, that every movement will hurt for the foreseeable future.
Take that for granted.
Go on from there.
Still on my knees I edged round to face north.
The clearing was all mine: no man with a gun.
No archer with a bow.
The day in some respects remained incredibly the same.
The sun still threw its dappled mantle and the trees still creaked and resonantly vibrated in the oldest of symphonies.
Many before me, I thought, had been shot by arrows in ancient woodland and faced their mortality in places that had looked like this before man started killing man.
But I, if I stirred myself, could reach surgeons and antibiotics and hooray for the National Health Service.
I slowly shifted on my knees across the clearing, aiming to the left of the painted trail.
It wasn't so bad…
It was awful.
For God's sake, I told myself, ignore it.
Get used to it.
Think about north.
It wasn't possible to go all the way to the road on one's knees: the undergrowth was too thick, the saplings in places too close together.
I would have to stand up.
So, OK, hauling on branches, I stood up.
Even my legs felt odd.
I clung hard to a sapling with my eyes closed, waiting for things to get better, telling myself that if I fell down again it would be much much much worse.
North.
I opened my eyes eventually and took the compass out of my jeans pocket, where I'd stowed it to have hands free for standing up.
Holding on still with one hand, I took a visual line ahead from the north needle to mark into memory the furthest small tree I could see, then put the compass away again and with infinite slowness clawed a way forward by inches and after a while reached the target and held on to it for dear life.
I had travelled perhaps ten yards.
I felt exhausted.
‘Never get exhausted’, I had written.
Dear God.
I rested out of necessity, out of weakness.
In a while I consulted the compass, memorised another young  tree and made my way there.
When I looked back I could no longer see the clearing.
I was committed, I thought.
I wiped sweat off my forehead with my fingers and stood quietly, holding on, trying to let the oxygen level in my blood climb back to a functioning state.
A functioning mode, Gareth might have said.
Gareth…
Sherwood Forest, I thought, eight hundred years ago.
Whose face should I pin on the Sheriff of Nottingham…
I went another ten yards, and another, careful always not to trip, holding onto branches as onto railings.
My breath began wheezing from the exertion.
Pain had finally become a constant.
Ignore it.
Weakness was more of a problem, and lack of breath.
Stopping again for things to calm down I began to do a few unwelcome sums.
I had travelled perhaps fifty yards.
It seemed a marathon to me but realistically it was roughly one thirty-fifth of a mile, which left thirty-four thirty-fifths still to go.
I hadn't timed the fifty yards but it had been no sprint.
According to my watch it was already after four o'clock, a rotten piece of information borne out by the angle of the sun.
Darkness lay ahead.
I would have to go as fast as I could while I could still see the way, and then rest for longer, and then probably crawl.
Sensible plan, but not enough strength to go fast.
Fifty more yards in five sections.
One more thirty-fifth of the way.
Marvellous.
It had taken me fifteen minutes.
More sums.
At a speed of fifty yards in fifteen minutes it would take me another eight hours to reach the road.
It would then be half-past midnight, and that didn't take into account long rests or crawling.
Despair was easy.
Survival wasn't.
To hell with despair, I thought.
Get on and walk.
The shaft of the arrow protruding from my back occasionally knocked against something, bringing me to a gasping halt.
I didn't know how long it was, couldn't feel as far as the end, and I couldn't always judge how much space I needed to keep it clear.
I'd come out on the simple camera-fetching errand without the complete zipped pouch of gadgets but I did have with me the belt holding my knife and the multi-purpose survival tool, and on the  back of that tool there was a mirror.
After the next fifty yards I drew it out and took a look at the bad news.
The shaft, straight, pale and rigid, stuck out about eighteen inches.
There was a notch in the end for the bowstring, but no flight.
I didn't look at my face in the mirror.
Didn't want to confirm how I felt.
I returned the small tool to the pouch and went another fifty yards, taking care.
North.
Ten yards visible at a time.
Go ten yards.
Five times ten yards.
Short rest.
The sun sank lower on my left and the blue shadows of dusk began gathering on the pines and firs and creeping in among the sapling branches and the alders.
In the wind, the shadows threw barred stripes and moved like prowling tigers.
Fifty yards, rest.
Fifty yards, rest.
Fifty yards, rest.
Think of nothing else.
There would be moonlight later, I thought.
Full moon was three days back.
If the sky remained clear, I could go on by moonlight.
Dusk deepened until I could no longer see ten yards ahead, and after I'd knocked the shaft of the arrow against an unseen hazard twice within a minute I stopped and sank slowly down to my knees, resting my forehead and the front of my left shoulder against a young birch trunk, drained as I'd never been before.
Perhaps I would write a book about this one day, I thought.
Perhaps I would call it…
Longshot.
A long shot with an arrow.
Perhaps not so long, though.
No doubt from only a few yards out of the clearing, to get a straight view.
A short shot, perhaps.
He'd been waiting there for me, I concluded.
If he'd been following me he would have to have been close because I had gone straight to the camera, and I would have heard him, even in the wind.
He'd been there first, waiting, and I'd walked up to the carefully prominent bait and presented him with a perfect target, a broad back in a scarlet sweater, an absolute cinch.
Traps.
I'd walked into one, as Harry had.
I leaned against the tree, sagging into it.
I did feel comprehensively dreadful.
If I'd been the archer, I thought, I would have been waiting in position, crouched and camouflaged, endlessly patient, arrow notched on bow.
Along comes the target, happily unaware, going to the camera, putting himself in position.
Stand up, aim…a whamming direct hit, first time lucky.
Shoot twice more at the fallen body.
Pity to waste the arrows.
Another nice hit.
Target obviously dead.
Wait a bit to make sure.
Maybe go near for a closer look.
All well.
Then retreat along the trail.
Mission accomplished.
Who was the Sheriff of Nottingham…?
I tried to find a more comfortable position but there wasn't one, really.
To save my knees a bit I slid down onto my left hip, leaning my head and my left side against the tree.
It was better than walking, better than fighting the tangle of woodland, but whether it was better than lying in the clearing, I couldn't decide.
Yet he, the archer, might have gone back there to check again after all and if he had he would know I was alive, but he would never find me where I was now, deep in impenetrable shadow along a path he couldn't follow in the dark.
It was ironic, I thought, that for the expedition for Gareth and Coconut I'd deliberately chosen to aim for a spot on the map that looked as remote from any road as possible.
I should have had more sense.
The darkness intensified down in the wood though I could see stars between the boughs.
I listened to the wind.
Grew cold.
Felt extremely alone.
I let go of things a bit.
Simply existed.
Let thoughts drift.
I felt formless, part of time and space, an essence, a piece of cosmos.
The awareness of the world's antiquity which was often with me seemed to intensify, to be a solace.
Everything was one.
Every being was integral, but alone.
One could dissolve and still exist…
I hovered on the edge of consciousness, semi-asleep, making nonsense.
I relaxed too far.
My weight shifted against the tree, slipping downwards, and the shaft of the arrow hit the ground.
The explosive pain of it brought me hellishly back to full savage consciousness and to a revived desire not to become part of the eternal mystery just yet.
I struggled back into equilibrium and  tried to ride the pulverising waves of misery and found to my desperate dismay that the finger of arrow in front was almost an inch longer.
I'd pushed the arrow further through.
I'd done hell knew what extra damage in my lung.
I didn't know how to bear what my body felt.
I went on breathing.
Went on living.
That's all one could say.
The worst of it got better.
I sat for what seemed a long time in the cold darkness, breathing shallowly, not moving at all, just waiting, and eventually there was a lightening of the shadows and a luminosity in the wood, and the moon rose clear and bright in the east.
To eyes long in the dark, it was as daylight.
Time to go.
I pulled out the compass, held it horizontally close to my eyes, let the needle settle onto north, looked that way and mapped the first few feet in my mind.
Putting thought into action was an inevitable trial.
Everything was sore, every muscle seemed wired directly to the arrow.
Violent twinges shot up my nerves like steel lightning.
So what, I told myself.
Stop bellyaching.
Ignore what it feels like, concentrate on the journey.
Concentrate on the Sheriff…
I pulled myself to my feet again, rocked a bit, sweated, clung onto things, groaned a couple of times, gave myself lectures.
Put one foot in front of the other, the only way home.
Knocking the arrow seemed after all not to have been the ultimate disaster.
Moving seemed to require the same amount of breath as before, which was to say more than could be easily provided.
I couldn't always see so far ahead by moonlight and needed to consult the compass more often.
It slowed things up to keep slipping it in and out of my jeans pocket so after a while I tucked it up the sleeve of my jersey.
That improvement upset the old fifty-yard rhythm but it didn't much matter.
I looked at my watch instead and stopped every fifteen minutes for a rest.
The moon rose high in the sky and shone unfalteringly into the woods, a silver goddess that I felt like worshipping.
I became numb again to discomfort to a useful degree and plodded on methodically taking continual bearings, breathing carefully, aiming performance just below capability so as to last out to the end.
The archer had to have a face.
If I could think straight, if every scrap of attention didn't have to be focused on not falling, I could probably get nearer to knowing.
Things had changed since the arrow.
A whole lot of new factors had to be considered.
I tripped over a root, half lost my balance, shoved the new factors into oblivion.
Slowly, slowly, I went north.
Then one time when I put my hand in my sleeve to bring out the compass, it wasn't there.
I'd dropped it.
I couldn't go on without it.
Had to go back.
Doubted if I could find it in the undergrowth.
I felt swamped with liquefying despair, weak enough for tears.
Get a bloody grip on things, I told myself.
Don't be stupid.
Work it out.
I was facing north.
If I turned precisely one hundred and eighty degrees I would be facing where I'd come from.
Elementary.
Think .
I stood and thought and made the panic recede until I could work out what to do, then I took my knife out of its sheath on my belt and carved an arrow in the bark of the tree I was facing.
An arrow pointing skywards.
I had arrows on the brain as well as through the lungs, I thought.
The tree arrow pointed north.
The compass had to be somewhere in sight of that arrow.
I would have to crawl to have any hope of finding it.
I went down on my knees carefully and as carefully turned to face the other way, south.
The tangle of brown foot-long dried grass and dead leaves and the leafless shoots of new growth filled every space between saplings and established trees.
Even in daylight with every faculty at full steam it wouldn't have been an easy search, and as things were it was abysmal.
I crawled a foot or two, casting about, trying to part the undergrowth, hoping desperate hopes.
I looked back to the arrow on the tree, then crawled another foot.
Nothing.
Crawled another and another.
Nothing.
Crawled until I could see the  arrow only because it was pale against the bark, and knew I was already further away than when I'd taken the last bearing.
I turned round and began to crawl back, still sweeping one hand at a time through the jumbled growth.
Nothing.
Nothing.
Hope became a very thin commodity.
Weakness was winning.
The compass had to be somewhere .
If I couldn't find it, I would have to wait for morning and steer north by my watch and the sun.
If the sun shone.
If I lasted that long.
The cold of the night was deepening and I was weaker than I'd been when I set out.
I crawled in a fruitless search all the way back to the tree and then turned and crawled away again on a slightly different line, looking, looking, hope draining away yard by yard in progressive debility, resolution ebbing with failure.
One time when I turned to check on the arrow on the tree, I couldn't see it.
I no longer knew which was north.
I stopped and slumped dazedly back on my heels, facing utter defeat.
Everything hurt unremittingly and I could no longer pretend I could ignore it.
I was wounded to death and dying on my knees, scrabbling in dead grass, my time running out with the moonlight, the shadows closing in.
I felt that I couldn't endure any more.
I had no will left.
I had always believed that survival lay in the mind but now I knew there were things one couldn't survive.
One couldn't survive unless one could believe one could, and belief had leaked out of me, gone with sweat and pain and weakness into the wind.
18
Time…unmeasured time…slid away.
I moved in the end from discomfort, from stiffness: made a couple of circling shuffles on my knees, an unthought-out search for a nest to lie in, to die in, maybe.
I looked up and saw again the arrow cut into the tree.
It hadn't been and wasn't far away, just out of sight behind a group of saplings.
Apathetically, I thought it of little use.
The arrow pointed in the right direction, but ten feet past it, without the compass, which way was north?
The arrow on the tree pointed upwards.
I looked slowly in that direction, as if instructed.
Looked upwards to the sky: and there, up there, glimpsed now and then between the moving boughs, was the constellation of the great bear…and the pole star.
No doubt from then on my route wasn't as straight or as accurate as earlier, but at least I was moving.
It wasn't possible after all to curl up and surrender, not with an alternative.
Clinging onto things, breathing little, inching a slow way forwards, I achieved again a sort of numbness to my basic state and in looking upwards to the stars at every pause felt lighter and more disembodied than before.
Light-headed, I dare say.
I looked at my watch and found it was after eleven o'clock, which meant nothing really.
I couldn't reach the road by half past midnight.
I didn't know how long I'd wasted looking for the compass or how long I'd knelt in capitulation.
I didn't know at what rate I was now travelling and no longer bothered to work it out.
All I was really clear about was that this time I would go on as long as my lungs and muscles would function.
Survival or nothing.
It was settled.
The face of the archer…
In splinters of thought, unconnectedly, I began to look back over the past three weeks.
I thought of how I must seem to them, the people I'd grown to know.
The writer, a stranger, set down in their midst.
A person with odd knowledge, odd skills, physically fit.
Someone Tremayne trusted and wanted around.
Someone who'd been in the right place a couple of times.
Someone who threatened.
I thought of Angela Brickell's death and of the attacks on Harry and me and it seemed that all three had had one purpose, which was to keep things as they were.
They were designed not to achieve but to prevent.
One foot in front of the other…
Faint little star, half hidden, revealed now and then by the wind; flickering pin-point in a whirling galaxy, the prayer of navigators…see me home.
Angela Brickell had probably been killed to close her mouth.
Harry was to have died to cement his guilt.
I wasn't to be allowed to do what Fiona and Tremayne had both foretold, that I would find the truth for Doone.
They all expected too much of me.
Because of that expectation, I was half dead.
All guesses, I thought.
All inferences.
No actual objects that could prove guilt.
No statements or admissions to go on, but only probability, only likelihood.
The archer had to be someone who knew I was going to go back for Gareth's camera.
It had to be someone who knew how to find the trail.
It had to be someone who could follow instructions to make an effective bow and sharp arrows, who had time to lie in wait, who wanted me gone, who had a universe to lose.
The way information zoomed round Shellerton, anyone theoretically could have heard of the lost camera and the way to find it.
On the other hand the boys' expedition had occurred only yesterday…dear God, only yesterday …and if…when …
I got back, I could find out for certain who had told who.
One step and another.
There was fluid in my lungs, rattling and wheezing at every breath.
People lived a long time with fluid…asthma…emphysema…years.
Fluid took up air space…you never saw anyone with emphysema run upstairs.
Angela Brickell had been small and light; a pushover.
Harry and I were tall and strong, not easy to attack at close quarters.
Half the racing world had seen me pick up Nolan and knew I could defend myself.
So, sharp spikes for Harry and arrows for John, and it was only luck in both cases that had saved us.
I'd been there for Harry and the arrow had by-passed my heart.
Luck.
The clear sky was luck.
I didn't want to see the face of the archer.
The sudden admission was a revelation in itself.
Even with his handiwork through me, I thought of the sadness inevitably awaiting the others; yet I would have to pursue him, for someone who had three times seen murder as a solution to problems couldn't be trusted never to try it again.
Murder was habit-forming, so I'd been told.
Endless night.
The moon moved in silver stateliness across the sky behind me.
Left foot.
Right foot.
Hold on to branches, Breathe by fractions.
Midnight.
If ever this ended, I thought, I wouldn't go walking in woodland for a very long time.
I would go back to my attic and not be too hard on my characters if they came to pieces on their knees.
I thought of Fringe and the Downs and wondered if I would ever ride in a race, and I thought of Ronnie Curzon and publishers and American rights and of Erica Upton's reviews and it all seemed as distant as Ursa Major but not one whit as essential to my continued existence.
Grapevine round Shellerton.
A mass of common knowledge.
Yet this time…this time…
I stopped.
The archer had a face.
Doone would have to juggle with alibis and charts, proving opportunity, searching for footprints.
Doone would have to deal with a cunning mind in the best actor of them all.
Perhaps I was wrong.
Doone could find out.
I tortoised onwards.
A mile was sixty-three thousand three hundred and sixty inches.
A mile was roughly one point six kilometres or one hundred and sixty thousand centimetres.
Who cared?
I might have travelled at almost eight thousand inches an hour if it hadn't been for the stops.
Six hundred and sixty feet.
Two hundred and twenty yards.
A furlong!
Brilliant.
One furlong an hour.
A record for British racing.
Twinkle twinkle little star…
No one but a bloody fool would try to walk a mile with an arrow through his chest.
Meet J. Kendall, bloody fool.
Light-headed.
One o'clock.
The moon, I thought briefly, had come down from the sky and was dancing about in the wood not far ahead.
Rubbish, it couldn't be.
It certainly was.
I could see it shining.
Lights .
I came to sensible awareness; to incredulous understanding.
The lights were travelling along the road.
The road was real, was there, was not some lost myth in a witch-cursed forest.
I had actually got there.
I would have shouted with joy if I could have spared the oxygen.
I reached the last tree and leaned feebly against it, wondering what to do next.
The road had for so long been the only goal that I'd given no thought to anything beyond.
It was dark now; no cars.
What to do?
Crawl out onto the road and risk getting run over?
Hitchhike?
Give some poor passing motorist a nightmare?
I felt dreadfully spent.
With the trunk's support I slid down to kneeling, leaning head and left shoulder against the bark.
By my reckoning, if I'd steered anything like a true course, the Land  Rover was way along the road to the right, but it was pointless and impossible to reach it.
Car lights came round a bend from that direction and seemed not to be travelling too fast.
I tried waving an arm to attract attention but only a weak flap of a hand was achieved.
Have to do better.
The car braked suddenly with screeching wheels, then backed rapidly until it was level with me.
It was the Land Rover itself.
How could it be?
Doors opened.
People spilled out.
People I knew.
Mackie.
Mackie running, calling, ‘John, John,’ and reaching me and stopping dead and saying, ‘Oh my God .’
Perkin behind her, looking down, his mouth shocked open in speechlessness.
Gareth saying, ‘What's the matter,’ urgently, and then seeing and coming down scared and wide-eyed on his knees beside me.
‘We've been looking for you for ages ,’ he said.
‘You've got an arrow…
’ His voice died.
I knew.
‘Run and fetch Tremayne,’ Mackie told him, and he sprang instantly to his feet and sprinted away along the road to the right, his feet impelled as if by demons.
‘Surely we must take that arrow out,’ Perkin said, and put his hand on the shaft and gave it a tug.
He hardly moved it in my chest but it felt like liquid fire.
I yelled…it came out as a croak only but it was a yell in my mind…
‘Don't.’
I tried to move away from him but that made it worse.
I shot out a hand and gripped Mackie's trouser leg and pulled with strength I didn't know I still had left.
Strength of desperation.
Mackie's face came down to mine, frightened and caring.
‘Don't…move…the arrow,’ I said with terrible urgency.
‘Don't let him.’
‘Oh God.’
She stood up.
‘Don't touch it, Perkin.
It's hurting him dreadfully.’
‘It would hurt less out,’ he said obstinately.
The vibrations from his hand travelled through me, inducing terror as well.
‘No.
No .’
Mackie pulled at his arm in a panic.
‘You must leave it.
You'll kill him.
Darling, you must leave it alone.’
Without her, Perkin would have had his way but he finally took his dangerous hand off the shaft.
I wondered if he believed that it would kill me.
Wondered if he had any idea what force he would have needed to pull the arrow out, like a wooden skewer out of meat.
Wondered if he could imagine the semi-asleep furies he'd already reawakened.
The furies had claws and merciless teeth.
I tried to breathe even less.
I could feel the sweat running down my face.
Mackie leaned down again.
‘Tremayne will get help.’
Her voice was shaky with stress, with the barbarity of things.
I didn't answer: no breath.
A car pulled up behind the Land Rover and disgorged Gareth and then Tremayne who moved like a tank across the earthy verge and rocked to a halt a yard away.
‘Jesus Christ ,’ he said blankly.
‘I didn't believe Gareth.’
He took charge of things then as a natural duty but also, it seemed, with an effort.
‘Right, I'll call an ambulance on the car phone.
Keep still,’ he said to me unnecessarily.
‘We'll soon have you out of here.’
I didn't answer him either.
He sped away back to the car and we could hear his urgent voice, though not the words.
He returned shortly telling me to hang on, it wouldn't be for long; and the shock had made him breathless too, I noticed.
‘We've looked for you for hours,’ he said, anxious, I thought, to prove I hadn't been forgotten.
‘We telephoned the police and the hospitals and they had no news of a car crash or anything, so then we came out here…’
‘Because of your message,’ Mackie said, ‘on the corkboard.’
Oh, yes.
Gareth's camera was swinging from Perkin's hand.
Mackie saw me watching it and said, ‘We found the trail, you know.’
Gareth chimed in, ‘The paint by the road had gone but we looked and looked in the woods.
I remembered where we'd been.’
He was earnest.
‘I remembered pretty well where it started.
And Perkin found it.’
‘He went all the way along it with a torch,’ Mackie said, stroking her husband's arm, ‘clever thing — and he came back  after absolutely ages with Gareth's camera and said you weren't there.
We didn't know what to do next.’
‘I wouldn't let them go home,’ Gareth said.
A mixture of stubbornness and pride in his voice.
Thank God for him, I thought.
‘What happened exactly?’
Tremayne asked me bluntly.
‘How did you get like this?’
‘Tell you…later.’
It came out not much above a whisper, lost in the sound of their movements around me.
‘Don't bother him,’ Mackie said.
‘He can hardly speak.’
They waited beside me making worried encouragements until the ambulance arrived from the direction of Reading.
Tremayne and Mackie went to meet the men in uniform, to tell them, I supposed, what to expect.
Gareth took a step or two after them and I called him in an explosive croak, ‘Gareth,’ and he stopped and turned immediately and came back, bending down.
‘Yes?
What?
What can I do?’
‘Stay with me,’ I said.
It surprised him but he said, ‘Oh, OK,’ and stayed a pace away looking troubled.
Perkin said irritably, ‘Oh, go on, Gareth.’
I said, ‘No,’ hoarsely.
‘Stay.’
After a pause Perkin put his back towards Gareth and his face down near mine and asked with perfect calmness, ‘Do you know who shot you?’
It sounded like a natural question in the circumstances, but it wasn't.
I didn't reply.
I looked for the first time straight into his moonlit eyes, and I saw Perkin the son, the husband, the one who worked with wood.
I looked deep, but I couldn't see his soul.
Saw the man who thought he'd killed me…saw the archer.
‘Do you really know?’ he asked again.
He showed no feeling, yet my knowledge held the difference between his safety and destruction.
After a long moment, in which he read the answer for himself, I said, ‘Yes.’
Something within him seemed to collapse but he didn't outwardly fall to pieces or rant or rave or even again try to pull out the arrow or finish me in any other way.
He didn't explain or show remorse or produce justification.
He straightened and  looked across to where the men from the ambulance were advancing with his father and his wife.
Looked at his brother, a pace away, listening.
He said to me, ‘I love Mackie very much.’
He'd said everything, really.
I spent the night thankfully unaware of the marathon needlework going on in my chest and drifted back late in the morning to a mass of tubes and machines and techniques I'd never heard of.
It seemed I was going to live: the doctors were cheerful, not cautious.
‘Constitution like a horse,’ one said.
‘We'll have you back on your feet in no time.’
A nurse told me a policeman wanted to see me, but visitors had been barred until tomorrow.
By tomorrow, which was Wednesday, I was breathing shallowly but without mechanical help, sitting propped up sideways and drinking soup; talking, attached to drainage tubes and feeling sore.
Doing just fine, they said.
The first person who came to see me wasn't Doone after all but Tremayne.
He came in the afternoon and he looked white, fatigued and many years older.
He didn't ask about my health.
He went over to the window of the post-operation side-ward I was occupying alone and stood looking out for a while, then he turned and said, ‘Something awful happened yesterday.’
He was trembling, I saw.
‘What?’
I asked apprehensively.
‘Perkin…
’ His throat closed.
His distress was overwhelming.
‘Sit down,’ I said.
He fumbled his way into the chair provided for visitors and put a hand over his lips so that I shouldn't see how close he was to tears.
‘Perkin,’ he said after a while.
‘After all these years you'd think he'd be careful.’
‘What happened?’
I asked, when he stopped.
‘He was carving part of a cabinet by hand…and he cut his leg open with the knife.
He bled…he tried to reach the door …there was blood all over the floor…pints of it.
He's had cuts sometimes before but this was an artery…
Mackie found him.’
‘Oh, no,’ I said in protest.
‘She's in a terrible state and she won't let them give her sedatives because of the baby.’
Despite his efforts, tears filled his eyes.
He waited for his face to steady, then took out a handkerchief and fiercely blew his nose.
‘Fiona's with her,’ he said.
‘She's been marvellous.’
He swallowed.
‘I didn't want to burden you with this but you'd soon have wondered why Mackie didn't come.’
‘That's the least of things.’
‘I have to go back now, but I wanted to tell you myself.’
‘Yes.
Thank you.’
‘There's so much to see to.’
His voice wavered again.
‘I wish you were there.
The horses need to go out.
I need your help.’
I wanted very much to give it but he could see I couldn't.
‘In a few days,’ I said, and he nodded.
‘There has to be an inquest,’ he said wretchedly.
He stayed for a while sitting exhaustedly as if loath to take up his burdens again, postponing the moment when he would have to go back to supporting everyone else.
Eventually he sighed deeply, pushed himself to his feet and with a wan smile departed.
Admirable man, Tremayne.
Doone arrived very soon after Tremayne had gone and came straight to the point.
‘Who shot you?’
‘Some kid playing Robin Hood,’ I said.
‘Be serious.’
‘Seriously, I didn't see.’
He sat in the visitors' chair and looked at me broodingly.
‘I saw Mr Tremayne Vickers in the car park,’ he said.
‘I suppose he told you their bad news?’
‘Yes.
Dreadful for them.’
‘You wouldn't think, would you,’ he added, ‘that this could be another murder?’
He saw my surprise.
‘I hadn't thought of it,’ I said.
‘It looks like an accident,’ he said with a certain delicacy, ‘but he was experienced with that knife, was young Mr Vickers, and after Angela Brickell, after Mr Goodhaven, after your little bit of trouble…
’ He left the thought hanging and I did nothing to bring it to earth.
He sighed after a while and asked how I was feeling.
‘Fine.’
‘Hm.’
He bent down and picked up a carrier that he'd lain on the floor.
‘Thought you might like to see this.’
He drew out a sturdy transparent plastic inner bag and held it up to the light to show me the contents.
An arrow, cut into two pieces.
One half was clean and pale, and the other stained and dark, with a long black section sharpened at the tip.
‘We've had our lab take a look at this,’ he said in his sing-song way, ‘but they say there are no distinctive tool marks.
It could have been sharpened by any straight blade in the kingdom.’
‘Oh,’ I said.
‘But charring the point, now, that's in your books.’
‘And in other books besides mine.’
He nodded.
‘Yesterday morning, at Shellerton House, Mr Tremayne Vickers and young Mr and Mrs Perkin Vickers all told me they'd spent three or four hours looking for you on Monday night.
Young Gareth didn't want them to give up, they said, but Mr Vickers senior told him you'd be all right even if you had got lost.
You knew how to look after yourself, he said.
They were just about to go home when they found you.’
‘Lucky me.’
He nodded.
‘An inch either way and you'd be history, so I hear.
I told them all not to worry, I would go on working with you as soon as you were conscious and we would see our way together to a solution of the whole case.’
‘Did you?’
He took away what breath I still had.
‘Mr Tremayne Vickers said he was delighted.’
He paused.
‘Did you follow that trail of paint towards the clearing they talk about?’
‘Mm.’
‘And was it along the trail that someone shot at you?’
‘We'll be taking a look at it ourselves, I shouldn't wonder.’
I made no comment and he looked disappointed.
‘You should be wanting your assailant brought to justice.’
Text book words again.
‘You don't seem to care.’
‘I'm tired,’ I said.
‘You wouldn't be interested then in the glue.’
‘What glue?’
I asked.
‘Oh yes, glue.’
‘For sticking marble to floorboards,’ he said.
‘We had it analysed.
Regular impact adhesive.
On sale everywhere.
Untraceable.’
‘And the alibis?’
‘We're working on them, but everyone moved about so much except poor young Mr Vickers, who was in his workroom all the time.’
He seemed to be waiting for me to react, rather as if he'd floated a fly in front of a fish.
I smiled at him a little and displayed no interest.
His moustache seemed to droop further from the lack of good results.
He rose to go and told me to take care.
Good advice, though a bit too late.
He would proceed, he said, with his enquiries.
I wished him luck.
‘You're too quiet,’ he said.
When he'd gone I lay and thought for a long time about poor young Mr Vickers, and of what I should have told Doone, and hadn't.
Perkin, I thought, was one of the very few people who'd known about the camera and the trail.
I'd listened to Gareth tell him in detail on Sunday evening.
Mackie had told Sam Yaeger on Monday morning.
Theoretically she could also have told Fiona on the telephone who could have told Nolan or Lewis, but it wasn't the sort of item one would naturally bother to pass on.
On Monday morning Doone had turned up at Shellerton House with the plank.
Perkin knew it was I who had remembered that the floorboards should have floated, and on Monday he'd seen the plank on the dining-room table and heard Doone and me talking in close private consultation.
Everything Fiona and Tremayne believed of me must have looked inevitable at that moment.
John Kendall would lead Doone to the quarry, who was himself.
Any quarry was entitled to take evasive action: to pre-empt discovery by striking first.
By lunchtime Perkin had driven off, going to Newbury for supplies, he'd said.
Going to the Quillersedge woods, more like.
Tremayne had gone to Oxford to his tailor.
Mackie was out to lunch with Dee-Dee.
Gareth was at school.
I'd abandoned the empty house and walked joyfully into the woods and only by chance did I know what had hit me.
I imagined Perkin threading along that trail at night, following the paint quite easily as he'd been that way already in daylight, and being secretly pleased with himself because if he had inadvertently left any traces of his passage the first time they could be explained away naturally by the second.
That satisfaction would smartly have evaporated when he reached the clearing and found me gone.
A nasty shock, one might say.
He might have been intending to go back to his family and appear utterly horrified while breaking the news of my death.
Instead, he'd looked shocked and utterly horrified at seeing me still alive.
Open-mouthed.
Speechless.
Too bad.
If I'd tried to walk out along the trail, I would have met Perkin face to face.
I shivered in the warm hospital room.
Some things were better unimagined.
For Perkin, making arrows would have been like filing his nails, and he'd had a stove right in his workroom for the charring.
He must have constructed a pretty good strong bow too (according to my detailed instructions) which would by now no doubt be broken into unidentifiable pieces in distant undergrowth.
Perhaps he'd risked time to practise with a few shots before I got there.
Couldn't tell unless I went back to look for spent arrows, which I wasn't going to do.
Random thoughts edged slowly into my mind for the rest of the day.
For instance, Perkin thought in wood, like a language.
Any trap he made would be wooden.
Nolan had knocked Perkin down at Tremayne's dinner.
I'd picked Nolan up and made a fool of him.
Perkin wouldn't have  risked any way to kill me that meant creeping up on me, not after what he'd seen.
Perkin had had to get over the shock of finding my familiar ski-jacket and boots in the boathouse and then the far worse shock of the cataclysmic reversal of his scheme when Harry and I both lived.
The best actor of them all, he had contained those shocks within himself with no screaming crises of nerves.
Many a convicted murderer had displayed that sort of control.
Maybe it was something to do with a divorce from reality.
There were books on the subject.
One day I might read them.
Perkin had resented Mackie's friendly feelings towards me.
Not strongly enough to kill me for that, but certainly strongly enough to make killing me satisfying in that respect also.
Never assume…
Perkin had always been presumed to be busy in his workshop, and yet there were hours and days when he might not have been, when Mackie was out of the house seeing to the horses.
On the Wednesday of Harry's trap, Mackie had been saddling Tremayne's runner in the three-mile chase at Ascot.
Perkin had made none of the classic mistakes.
Hadn't scattered monogrammed handkerchiefs about or faked alibis or carelessly dropped dated train tickets or shown knowledge he shouldn't have had.
Perkin had listened more than he'd talked, and he'd been cunning and careful.
I thought of Angela Brickell and of all the afternoons Perkin had spent alone in the house.
She had tried to seduce even Gareth.
Not hard to imagine she'd set her sights also on Perkin.
Intelligent men in love with their wives weren't immune to blatantly offered temptations.
Sudden arousal.
Quick, casual gratification.
End of episode.
Except not the end of the episode if there were a failure of a birth control measure and the result was conception.
Not the end if the woman asked for money or threatened disclosure.
Not the end if she could and would destroy the man's marriage.
Say Angela Brickell had definitely been pregnant.
Say she was sure who the father was; and working in a racing stable with thoroughbreds she would know that proving paternity was increasingly an exact science.
The father wouldn't be able to deny  it.
Say she enticed him into the woods and became demanding in every way and heavily emotional, piling on pressure.
Perkin had not long before seen Olympia lying dead at Nolan's feet.
He'd heard over and over again how fast she'd died.
Say that picture, that certainty, had flashed into his mind.
The quick way out of all his troubles lay in his own two strong hands.
I imagined what Perkin might have been feeling.
Might have been facing.
Mackie at that time had been unable to conceive and was troubled and unhappy because of it.
Angela Brickell however was devastatingly carrying Perkin's child.
Perkin loved Mackie and all too probably couldn't face her knowing what he'd done.
Couldn't bear to hurt her so abominably.
Was perhaps ashamed.
Didn't want his father to find out.
Irresistible solution: a fast death for Angela too.
Easy.
Perhaps he, not she, had chosen the woods.
Perhaps he'd planned it, perhaps it hadn't been a lightning urge but the first of his traps.
Impossible to know now if either scenario were right.
Possible, likely, probable; no more than one of those.
I wondered if he had gone home feeling anything but relief.
Long before Doone came knocking on the door, Perkin could have decided, in case the girl's body were ever found, to say he didn't remember her.
No one had thought it odd that he didn't; he was seldom seen with the horses.
His one catastrophic mistake had been to try to settle the mystery for ever by making Harry disappear.
By his actions shall you know him…
By his arrows.
I thought that Doone might not think of looking in Perkin's workroom for a match to the arrow's wood.
Perkin hadn't had much time to hunt elsewhere for anything suitable.
He would have used a common wood, not exotic, but all the same, there would be more of it to be found, perhaps even in the cabinet he was making of bleached oak.
He hadn't had any handy feathers, so no flights.
Perkin would have known that a wood match could be made.
He knew more about wood than anyone else.
Doone, with his promise of instant detection once I woke up, must have been the end of hope.
He did love Mackie.
His universe was lost.
One way out remained.
I thought of Tremayne and his pride in Perkin's work.
Thought of Gareth's vulnerable age.
Thought of Mackie, her face alive with the wondrous joy of discovering she was pregnant.
Thought of that child growing up, loved and safe.
Nothing could be gained by trying to prove what Perkin had done.
Much would be smashed.
They all would suffer.
The families always suffered most.
No child would become a secure and balanced adult with a known murderer for father.
Without knowledge, Mackie's grief would heal normally in time.
Tremayne and Gareth wouldn't be crippled by undeserved shame.
All of them would live more happily if they and the world remained in ignorance, and to try to achieve that I would give them the one gift I could.
Silence.
At the short uncomplicated inquest on Perkin a week later the coroner found unhesitatingly for ‘Accident’ and expressed sympathy with the family.
Tremayne came to collect me from the hospital afterwards and told me on the way to Shellerton that Mackie had got through the court ordeal bravely.
‘The baby?’
I asked.
‘The baby's fine.
It's what's giving Mackie strength.
She says Perkin is with her, will always be with her that way.’
‘Mm.’
Tremayne glanced briefly across at me and back to the road.
‘Has Doone found out yet who put that arrow through you?’ he asked.
‘I don't think so,’ I said.
‘You don't know, yourself?’
‘No.’
He drove for a while in silence.
‘I just wondered…’ he said uncertainly.
After a while I said, ‘Doone came to see me twice.
I told him I didn't know who shot me.
I told him I had no ideas of any sort any more.’
I certainly hadn't told him where to look for arrow wood.
Doone had been disgustedly disillusioned with me: I had closed ranks with them , he said.
Goodhavens, Everards, Vickers and Kendall.
‘Yes,’ I'd agreed, ‘I'm sorry.’
Doone said there was no way of proving who had killed Angela  Bickell .
‘Let her lie,’ I'd said, nodding.
After a silence he'd risen greyly to his feet to leave and told me to look after myself.
Wryly I'd said, ‘I will.’
He'd gone slowly, regretfully, seeing regret in my face also, an unexpected mutual liking, slipping away into memory.
‘You don't think,’ Tremayne said painfully, ‘I mean, it had to be someone who knew you would fetch Gareth's camera, who shot you.’
‘I told Doone it was a kid playing Robin Hood.’
‘I'm…afraid…’
‘Block it out,’ I said.
‘Some kid did it.’
‘John…’
He knew, I thought.
He was no fool.
He could have worked things out the same way I had, and he'd have had a hellish time believing it all of his own son.
‘About my book,’ he said, hesitating, ‘I don't know that I want to go on with it.’
‘I'm going to write it,’ I said positively.
‘It's going to be an affirmation of your life and your worth, just as was intended.
It's all the more important now, for you especially, but for Gareth, for Mackie and your new grandchild as well.
For you and for them, it's essential I do it.’
‘You do know,’ he said.
‘It was a kid.’
He drove without speaking the rest of the way.
Fiona and Harry were with Mackie and Gareth in the family room.
Perkin's absence was to me almost a shock, so accustomed had I become to his being there.
Mackie looked pale but in charge of things, greeting me with a sisterly kiss.
‘Hi,’ Gareth said, very cool.
‘Hi yourself.’
‘I've got the day off from school.’
‘Great.’
Harry said, ‘How are you feeling?’ and Fiona put her arms carefully round me and let her scent drift in my senses.
Harry said his Aunt Erica sent good wishes, his eyes ironic.
I asked Harry how his leg was.
All on the surface and polite.
Mackie brought cups of tea for everyone; a very English balm in troubles.
I remembered the way Harry had laced the coffee after the ditch, and would have preferred that, on the whole.
It was a month yesterday, I thought, that I came here.
A month in the country…
Harry said, ‘Has anyone found out who shot at you?’
He was asking a simple unloaded question, not like Tremayne.
I gave him a simple answer, the one that eventually became officially accepted.
‘Doone is considering it was a child playing out a fantasy,’ I said.
‘Robin Hood, cowboys and Indians.
That sort of thing.
No hope of ever really knowing.’
‘Awful,’ Mackie said, remembering.
I looked at her with affection and Tremayne patted my shoulder and told them I would be staying on as arranged to write his book.
They all seemed pleased, as if I belonged; but I knew I would leave them again before summer, would walk out of the brightly lit play, and go back to the shadows and solitude of fiction.
It was a compulsion I'd starved for, and even if I never went hungry again I would feel that compulsion for ever.
I couldn't understand it or analyse it, but it was there.
After a while I left the family room and wandered through the great central hall and on into the far side of the house, into Perkin's workroom.
It smelled aromatically and only of wood.
Tools lay neatly as always.
The glue-pot was cold on the stove.
Everything had been cleaned and tidied and there were no stains on the polished floor to show where his life had pumped out.
I felt no hatred for him.
I thought instead of the extinction of his soaring talent.
Thought of consequences and seduction.
What's done is done, Tremayne would say, but one couldn't wipe out an enveloping feeling of pathetic waste.
A copy of Return Safe from the Wilderness lay on a workbench, and I picked it up idly and looked through it.
Traps.
Bows and arrows.
All the familiar ideas.
I flipped the pages resignedly and they fell open as if from use at the diagram in the first-aid section showing the pressure points for stopping arterial bleeding.
I stared blankly at the carefully drawn and accurate illustration of exactly where the main arteries could be found nearest the surface in the arms and wrists…and in the legs.
Dear God, I thought numbly.
I taught him that too.