

LEGEND OR HISTORY? 1587–1987
Mary Queen of Scots was born in the palace of Linlithgow on 7 or 8 December 1542.
It is perhaps appropriate that even the date of the birth of a personality who still eludes us despite the myriad of books written about her is uncertain.
She herself claimed the 8th, the feast of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary, and in this, if in nothing else, that most powerful of Protestant reformers, John Knox, agreed with her, while one of her staunchest supporters, the Catholic John Leslie, bishop of Ross, believed it was the earlier date.
It does not much matter.
Far more important was the fact that this baby girl, born two weeks after the defeat of a Scottish army by the English at Solway Moss, and at a time when her remarkable father James V was lying burnt out at the age of thirty in his glorious hunting-lodge at Falkland, was to be within a week of her birth queen of the Scots.
James's comment, when the news of her birth was brought to him, that ‘it cam wi' a lass and it will gang wi' a lass’(a reference to the way in which the house of Stewart had come to the throne, through the marriage of Walter the Steward to Robert Bruce's daughter Marjorie) may be apocryphal and was, as it turned out, inaccurate; the ‘lass’ who was to bring Stewart rule to an end was not Queen Mary, but Queen Anne in 1714.
But it may still be significant of at least part of contemporary reaction to Mary.
For James's saying was first recorded by John Knox, in the version ‘The devil go with it!
It will end as it began: it came from a woman; and it will end in a woman’.
This was in the mid 1560s, when Mary was still in power, so that it reads like Knox's wishful thinking rather than anything else; and it was then recast into the famous phrase by the Protestant chronicler Robert  Lindsay of Pitscottie, writing in the 1570s, by which time the representative of the house of Stewart was the child James VI, and the lass had long gone — into English captivity.
Thus the words supposedly uttered by a despairing king, just before he turned his face to the wall to die, are an immediate symbol of the reaction of very many of those on whom Mary Queen of Scots was to make an impact, in her lifetime and thereafter.
And there was nothing apocryphal about what her undutiful son was to say, half a century later, in his book Basilikon Doron , when he wrote of how his grandfather had been punished by God for his immorality, for his infant sons had predeceased him, and he died ‘leaving a double curse behind him to the land, both a Woman of sex, and a new borne babe of age to reign over them’.
In the late 1520s and 1530s, Henry VIII had embarked on a spectacular, even murderous matrimonial career in an attempt to save his kingdom from the first part of that curse.
For the Scots, Mary embodied both.
From the very beginning of her own spectacular career, therefore, even before her own personality could make its distinctive mark, she was a person to create doubts, and even fear.
Four centuries later, doubts have not been dispelled.
This is scarcely because she has been neglected.
‘Daughter of debate’ Elizabeth called her; and mother of a remarkably impassioned series of debates she subsequently became.
Did she, or did she not, murder her second husband, Henry Stewart, lord Darnley?
Was she the author of the Casket Letters, those letters which totally implicated her in the murder, or were they forgeries?
Was she raped by James Hepburn, earl of Bothwell, and forced to marry him, or did she connive at her own abduction?
It may seem a little curious that these are the problems which have exercised the minds of so many of the writers on Mary Queen of Scots above all else.
They relate to a brief two-year crisis period in her forty-four year life; and although they are by no means irrelevant to her political role, the approach to them has had such a predominantly personal — one might almost say tabloid — quality that the historiographical Mary is immediately marked out from all other historical monarchs, Scottish or otherwise.
Yet these questions have sustained a massive publishing industry, briefly and for good political and confessional reasons in the late sixteenth century, and then almost without interruption from the mid eighteenth.
As the subject of historical studies, and the heroine of romantic fiction, Mary Queen of Scots has a massive lead over all other earthly Maries, only the Virgin scoring more heavily — as even the most cursory glance at the British Library Catalogue of Printed Books makes  clear.
Thus in the 1962 Catalogue, the Virgin Mary has 150 pages devoted to her; Mary Queen of Scots 455 books; the English queen Mary Tudor —‘Bloody Mary’— 73.
And that other central figure in a great murder mystery, Richard III, has the pathetic total of 38.
Nevertheless, I. B. Cowan could publish a book in 1971 justifiably entitled The Enigma of Mary Stuart .
For much of what has been written about her does not elucidate; rather, it creates a barrier between us and the historical ruler of mid sixteenth-century Scotland.
The prolific contemporary literature about Mary, which has been extensively and effectively reviewed by J. E. Phillips,Images of a Queen , was all understandable enough.
For her earlier years, there are the famous Ronsard poems extolling her charm and beauty, along with those in similar vein by the man who was to become her most vicious detractor, the great Scottish scholar George Buchanan — exactly the kind of thing which would naturally be written about an attractive young queen.
Her later career, from the time of her marriage to Darnley in the summer of 1565, inevitably gave rise to writing of a very different and much more partisan nature.
The heights were to be reached with her execution in 1587, when accusers and defenders rushed into print, producing works with titles like ‘An excellent dyttye made as a generall rejoycinge for the cuttinge of the Scottishe queene’, or ‘Marie Stewarde late Quene of Scotland hath defiled her owne bodie with many adulteries…’, compared with ‘The Martyrdom of the Queen of Scotland…’ or ‘L'Histoire et Martyre de la Royne D'Escosse’.
The attackers had far better titles than the supporters; but the scope for emotive, impassioned language was the same for both sides.
One of the most remarkable examples occurs in the set of poems known as de Jezebelis , collected and contributed to by an exiled Catholic Scots lawyer and philosopher, Adam Blackwood, one of Mary's earliest and most strenuous defenders.
Jezebel, therefore, was Elizabeth of England, that she-wolf, monster of vice and cruelty, sprung of vicious and degenerate stock, for she was born of the incestuous relationship between Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn, who was not only his wife but also his illegitimate daughter.
But the Jezebel poems went far beyond vilification of Elizabeth.
The majority were written to arouse French opinion, and to push the French king, Henri III, into revenge.
One depicts Mary's first husband, Francis II, three times rushing to welcome her in heaven, and three times finding that he can only embrace a headless body, so that he curses his people; whereupon the poet exhorts them to forget their own troubles, and unite to destroy England and send its queen to a dreadful death.
France failed to respond.
But another  European country, Spain, did seek to conquer England, in 1588; and it was encouraged by the dramatic ‘Address to the Captains and Men on the Armada’, which promised the sailors the aid of the saints of England, John Fisher, Thomas More and Edmund Campion, and above all ‘The blessed and innocent Mary queen of Scotland, who, still fresh from her sacrifice, bears copious and abounding witness to the cruelty and impiety of this Elizabeth and directs her shafts against her.’
And the future pope Urban VIII could write of Mary as the queen who died without honour due; yet the shadows of night were her funeral robes, the stars her tapers.
It was all very stirring.
What is immediately notable, however, is that Mary's own subjects, the Scots — that is, those in Scotland left to deal with the crisis created by her deposition in 1567 and flight to England in 1568, rather than Catholic exiles like Blackwood and the bishop of Ross, on whom there were no restraints — had the good sense to keep as quiet as possible.
Initially, of course, those who drove her out had to justify their actions to Elizabeth and prevent the English queen making any serious attempt to restore her sister of Scotland; and they used that scholar of European distinction, George Buchanan, as their apologist, thus enabling the grave and learned humanist to display a remarkable talent for writing, as it were , copy for the Sun in the style of The Times , in his sensational Ane detectioun of the doinges of Marie quene of Scottes .
But generally the arena for attack or defence was in England and Europe.
Thus Mary had already passed into legend.
But it was legend on a European scale.
Her contemporaries were well aware — sometimes all too uncomfortably aware — that she was, in her life and in her death, a figure of European significance.
No one in the sixteenth century made the mistake which was to become such a feature of later writings about her, of seeing her crimes or her innocence as a little domestic matter, locking her into a Scottish bedroom debate in which, as far as the outside world was concerned, only Elizabeth had an interest beyond the fleeting and casual.
The move from the international and political to the insular and personal was interrupted by something of a lull in the seventeenth century.
The accession of Mary's Protestant son James VI to the English throne naturally cooled anti-Marian passion.
James constructed magnificent tombs for the two protagonists, Mary and Elizabeth, in Westminster Abbey; and the more-or-less ‘official’ account by William Camden in his Annals (1615) emphasized Mary's evil fortunes rather than her evil character.
Up in the north, there was the occasional extreme Protestant rumble about the evils of that character; but in general, the Britain of the seventeenth century was absorbed by more  immediate concerns.
Even the hysterical anti-Catholicism stirred up by Titus Oates, inventor of the so-called Popish Plot of 1681, produced only a minor squall.
But almost immediately thereafter the basis for modern Mariography was created.
The end of the seventeenth and early eighteenth century saw the publication of Buchanan's works (just after one of them, his treatise on Scottish political theory,De Iure Regni apud Scotos , had enjoyed the distinction of being burned, with Hobbes' Leviathan , by the University of Oxford in 1683); to begin with, it was works particularly dealing with Mary, the Detectioun and the History of Scotland, which were published, and then in 1715 came Thomas Ruddiman's Opera Omnia Georgii Buchanani .
There was also the publication of various other sources relating to Mary, such as the Collections relating to Mary Queen of Scots by James Anderson (1727–8); and the first critical edition of John Knox's History of the Reformation in Scotland (1732).
And then in the mid eighteenth century the storm broke, when in 1754 the antiquary and historian William Goodall published An examination of the letters said to be written by Mary Queen of Scots to James earl of Bothwell; shewing by intrinsick and extrinsick evidence that they are forgeries .
But the new interest had a significant twist.
Violence, sexual scandal and murder had of course been seized on by Mary's sixteenth-century detractors as admirable means of blackening the character of a major political figure — particularly a female political figure.
But what in the sixteenth century had been a highly convenient part of a wider whole, a matter of partisanship for immediate political and religious reasons, now took on an objective life of its own.
The historical ruler, who might or might not have made disastrous political mistakes, gave way to the woman who might or might not have written the Casket Letters; and scholars plunged into the absorbing task of deciding whether letters whose originals had not been seen since 1584, and whose texts had been translated from French into Scots and then back into French, were forgeries or not.
Scholarly ink, mixed with scholarly gall, was poured forth upon this fascinating and wholly insoluble mystery.
Goodall's own parti pris title showed clearly where he stood; and he inspired almost immediate counterblasts.
Those great figures of the Enlightenment, William Robertson and David Hume, both argued for Mary's guilt of adultery (with Bothwell) and murder (of Darnley), on the grounds that the Casket Letters were genuine, in their histories of Scotland and England respectively which they published in 1759; and they in turn were attacked a year later by William Tytler, in his Historical and Critical  Enquiry into the evidence against Mary Queen of Scots .
The complaint of the contemporary historian David lord Hailes that ‘the Marian controversy has already become too angry and too voluminous’ was prophetic.
The hurricane would never blow itself out; and at its eye was a figure already taking on the lineaments of a familiar enough twentieth-century ‘type’, the male-dominated, passion-ridden female so well-known to the readers of the novels of Barbara Cartland.
Even in this era of psycho-history, it is impossible to think of any other historical character of note whose public persona has been so submerged, and private morality so relentlessly pursued with such ruthless subjectivity on the part of those who have written about her.
Titles like Mary Stuart, Queen and Woman by June Meade (pseudonym, 1933), or A Tribute to the Memory of Mary Queen of Scots: being an attempt to relate simply and truly the history of her life by J.B. and E.M.
Rose (1868), do not obviously suggest serious historical study, but are rather part of a long series of more popular works on Mary, in which Jean Plaidy and Madeleine Bingham are among the most recent exponents; and there is a certain charm about the publication, in 1793, of a work by one J. F. Gaum,Marie Stuart und Marie Antoinette in der Underwelt.
Zwo Königinnen über ihre Schicksale in der Oberwelt.
Eine Unterredung .
But it was surely more than a matter of stylistic fashion which prompted the Jesuit scholar Fr J. H. Pollen to preface his very useful collection of sources for the Babington Plot of 1586, designed to kill Elizabeth, published in 1922, with statements such as‘The interest attaching to Queen Mary's wonderful personality is so great, that when she is taken away, all else seems to fade into insignificance.’
The personal engagement encapsulated here is not, after all, wholly different from the introduction to that much more objective modern study, the justly acclaimed biography of Mary by Lady Antonia Fraser; for Lady Antonia describes how ‘being possessed since childhood by a passion for the subject of Mary Queen of Scots, I wished to test for myself the truth or falsehood of the many legends which surround her’.
The legends, of course, are primarily associated with the period from the Darnley marriage to the flight to England, 1565–8; and the next high point of drama came with her involvement in the Babington Plot and her execution in 1587.
The balance of Lady Antonia's very long and extremely well-researched book reflects this exactly; she devotes 75 pages to the period of Mary's personal rule from 1561–5, compared to 137 for the years 1565–8 and 81 for 1586–7.
In the course of her book, she gives us by far the most detailed and interesting portrait of Mary ever written, free from the excesses of adulation or attack which  characterize so much of the writing about her.
But as she was writing a personal biography, she inevitably concentrated on Mary at a very personal level, so that her book is rather familiar ground well trod by its author than a foray into new territory.
Lady Antonia's biography is the most substantial example of what may be regarded as the new and sober school of historians of Mary Queen of Scots.
Professors Gordon Donaldson and I. B. Cowan have both tried to assess her as a character of history rather than drama, going further than Lady Antonia in considering her political role.
Yet the drama and the dramatic personality still insistently break through.
The new school is drawn as irresistibly as its predecessors to the great central mystery about Mary, her involvement in the murder of Darnley.
That debate — and therefore the debate over the Casket Letters — is still very much alive.
The most recent sustained attempt to resolve it, made by a Newcastle doctor, M. H. Armstrong Davison, is also the most recent example of the inexplicable difficulty of avoiding the temptation to become an advocate for the prosecution or defence of Mary Queen of Scots.
Dr Armstrong Davison, captivated by the legend like so many others, began on the prosecution side, convinced by what he called the ‘orthodox belief that Mary was a wanton and a murderess’.
Ten years of study persuaded him that she was no such thing.
If he did not go quite so far as Eric Linklater in believing that what Mary was doing down at Kirk o' Field during the last days of Darnley's life in February 1567 was indulging a ‘womanly zeal for nursing’, he certainly had no doubt of her innocence.
Yet in this book is a sub-theme which immediately raises a highly promising — and unexplored — line of enquiry; for the author remembered that he was a doctor, and added an appendix on Mary's medical history.
Like Lady Antonia, he therefore drew attention to a very important fact about Mary.
Wanton and murderess she may or may not have been.
But hysteric she was, subject to the fatal political weakness of collapsing in time of trouble.
The significance of this was not appreciated.
So obsessed was he with Mary's charm and the Casket Letters, that it did not occur to him to ask the much more prosaic but crucially important question: what effect did it have on her kingdom, in this age of religious and political upheaval and trauma, to be saddled with a ruler who shut herself off from reality whenever reality became difficult?
There is one honourable exception to the problems of Marian historiography surveyed here.
In 1983, Gordon Donaldson published his fascinating All The Queen's Men .
This prosopographical study of Mary's  supporters and opponents certainly ‘broke the mould’, and indicated a way forward.
But there is a long way to go.
Professor Cowan rightly commented that
the enigma (of innocent martyr or adulterous murderess, the dual legend created in the sixteenth century) will persist until histories of the Queen of Scots no longer command attention.
Historians will never agree to her character, and in these circumstances, it is perhaps inevitable that the picture of a romantic but ill-fated queen painted by Schiller and Swinburne, amongst others, is the one most likely to engage popular sympathy.
No doubt.
But there is an important implication here, which deserves to be explored.
Until now, the question of Mary's personal behaviour has been all-important; what has mattered was to establish her guilt or innocence, as if that would be the end of the story.
The Marian-centred approach has produced writing which ranges from the absurd and lurid to the scholarly and balanced — about Mary Queen of Scots.
Though the last twenty years has seen a major step forward in our understanding of the Scottish Reformation and of Scottish society in the sixteenth century, there is still an extraordinary gulf between the personality and the reign of Mary Queen of Scots.
Of course any early modern monarch's personality was of fundamental importance, in Scotland or elsewhere, and to that extent seeking to understand Mary's personality is an entirely legitimate and necessary exercise.
But Cowan's assertion shows all too clearly where the particular problem lies in the case of this ruler.
Books about Mary the Woman — almost, one feels, Mary the little woman (if only metaphorically, given her physical size); books about her marriages, at the level of personal relationships; books about her Italian secretary Rizzio, Darnley and the Casket Letters; all these make her personality, whether good or evil, an end in itself.
It is particularly ironic that a ruler in the age of Machiavelli should have caused such obsession with personal morality, or immorality — not least because her reign produced the first politician in the British Isles, her secretary William Maitland of Lethington, who was described as ‘machiavellian’.
What far too few historians have done is to treat this monarch as other monarchs are treated, and to ask what effect her sex and her personal relationships and actions had on her subjects and kingdom.
The business of the historian is not to love or to hate Mary Stuart, to judge her as a saint or a criminal, but to ask about the success or failure of her rule.
For example: it can be said at once — and briefly — that the  probability that she was massively involved in the murder of Darnley is very strong.
If she was not, then she must have been almost the only member of Edinburgh political society who managed to know nothing about it — and that in itself would be a comment on her political awareness.
If she was, then it is for her God to judge her personal action — and for the historian to wonder whether this was not one of the most sensible political decisions she ever made.
Although the most recent writings on Mary have taken us away from the image of pantomime villainess or fairy queen, created in the sixteenth century and revived with such enthusiasm in the eighteenth and thereafter, and provided us instead with a human being of more believable proportions, nevertheless Mary still remains an infinitely more shadowy figure as queen of Scotland than her Stewart predecessors and successors.
We know that she came to grief.
We do not yet really know why.
But we can be fairly confident, as a starting-point, that Rizzio, Darnley and Bothwell, chief actors in the drama of the last two years of her personal rule, are at best only a part of the explanation.
In June 1561, just before the personal rule began, Elizabeth's ambassador Nicholas Throckmorton warned her that ‘your realm is in no other case at this day, than all other realms of Christendom are’, by which he meant torn by religious controversy and conflict; in the twentieth century, J. H. Elliott was to characterize this period as the decade of revolution, when Scotland was only one of eight countries including France, Spain, the Netherlands and England which experienced upheaval and revolt.
That takes us very far away from the little local Scottish drama; and it is in this context that Mary's reign should be understood.
This book therefore is not just ‘another on Mary Queen of Scots’, in the sense of being another personal biography.
Antonia Fraser's admirable book has entirely filled that need.
It is about Mary as a mid sixteenth-century monarch.
That must mean a new balance.
In her forty-four year life, Mary ruled for only six, so that we are faced with another thirty-eight years when she had virtually no role in her kingdom, being a minor and absentee ruler for the first nineteen, and a deposed queen for the second.
A study of Mary as queen rather than as a woman of great misfortune and ultimate tragedy necessitates discussion of what was happening when the central figure of the monarch was off-stage, and especially before her debut, when the scene of her rule was set; the problems which her absence created, and the way in which others struggled to resolve them are as relevant as the short period of her personal reign.
Moreover, when turning to that  short period, the spotlight cannot be focused exclusively on the drama of the last two years.
It must be deployed also on the hitherto comparatively neglected first four years of the reign, that brief part of her life which is the only one which can be considered in any way typical for a reigning monarch.
In this period alone — the period of normality — do we have the chance to assess her abilities, or lack of them, as queen.
Above all, it is essential to regard her not as sui generis , but as one of a line of Scottish monarchs.
This brings us to the question central to the understanding of Queen Mary: the nature of Scottish monarchy, and the factors which made the relationship between kings and their subjects successful or unsuccessful.
It is a question not answered by the superficial assumptions about the impossible Scottish nobility found in so many of the books about Mary, in stage-plays such as Bolt's Vivat Regina and in the celluloid romanticizing of Hollywood and Hal Wallis.
This book will not provide a definitive study of the reign of Mary Queen of Scots; such a study lies far in the future, if it can ever be achieved at all.
It seeks only to open up the lines of enquiry sketched out here; and it does so in the hope that by bringing them into the debate, it may contribute towards a fuller and more objective assessment of Mary's reign — and Mary's misfortunes.
THE QUEEN'S INHERITANCE, 1424–1542
On 4 April 1558, shortly before her marriage to the French Dauphin, Mary Queen of Scots signed away her Scottish kingdom to France, in three secret agreements.
First, she made a free gift of Scotland, and her claim to England, to the French king, should she die without issue; second, she put her country in pawn, for the money spent by France in defending it and educating her; and third, she negated in advance any agreement between her and the Scottish Estates which ran counter to her disposal of Scotland in the interests of France.
Seven months later, when Mary Tudor died; her father-in-law Henri II had her proclaimed queen of England, Scotland and Ireland, and she began publicly to assume the royal arms of England.
Young as she was, these might be considered the most revealing political acts of her life.
They stand as a devastating comment on her view of Scotland, the one kingdom which was actually hers to govern.
Yet their significance has been consistently played down.
It is simply not enough to accept, almost as if it were an understandable and reasonable attitude, that Mary preferred to remain in France, and dream of the English throne, rather than return to Scotland.
For much more was at stake than an individual's choice of where she wanted to spend her life.
The very year when Mary offered her kingdom to France saw the death of the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V, that colossal and most admired figure of the sixteenth century, who had achieved the impossible by holding together an inheritance which sprawled across Europe.
The contrast with Mary Queen of Scots could not be more stark.
In an age when personal monarchy was the motivating force of government, and kings were straining every nerve to increase their power and authority, she provides the unique spectacle of an adult reigning monarch who did not want to reign.
As it happened, the death of her husband after a brief period as king of France, and Mary's failure to find a replacement in the royal houses of France or Spain, forced her back to Scotland.
Most of the subsequent writing on Mary Queen of Scots has stressed the immense, even intolerable burden placed on the shoulders of this young and carefully nurtured girl, when at the age of eighteen she was driven from the civilized country of France, where she had lived since she was five, to the backward and lawless kingdom of Scotland.
In the context of personal biography, this view may be legitimate enough.
But it is not the whole story; and it is certainly not the correct starting-point.
Reluctance and preconceived distrust of one's subjects, such as Mary showed, are a quite abnormal approach to royal rule, and one which was bound to make its own abnormal impact on her country.
The extent to which her attitude violated the traditions of her kingdom is therefore the critical question which underlies all the problems of her reign.
Effective rule of any kingdom necessarily depends on an understanding of its particular characteristics.
And here Mary did have an obvious problem; what could she have learned about Scotland?
When she did return to her kingdom, what she saw was, inevitably, very small-scale and impoverished compared to what she had known in France.
What she undoubtedly failed to see was just how remarkable her Scottish kingdom was, both in its political life and in its perceptions of itself and other nations.
This may not appear surprising; it was certainly a serious drawback for Mary as queen that her upbringing had given her only second-hand knowledge of her country.
She was one of two Stewart monarchs who had this experience, the other being James I (1406–37), who was an English prisoner for the first eighteen years of his reign.
Both were naturally affected by what happened to them.
But it was one thing for James I to have his ideas influenced by Scotland's natural enemy, England.
It was quite another for Mary to spend her childhood and adolescence in the most powerful and civilized country in Europe, which was also Scotland's traditional ally, so that she might assume that what she learned there was not the product of hostile bias.
And what she seems to have done was to listen too attentively and unquestioningly to ideas about Scottish barbarity and backwardness, and, crucially, Scottish lack of respect for their kings.
She was not alone, of course, in making the unwarranted assumption that an unruly Scots noble was in some way a fundamentally different  and far more dangerous animal than an unruly French, or English, one; generations of historians, up to modern times, have seriously distorted the history of Scotland by taking exactly that view.
But what in the case of the academics has simply been misleading, for a reigning queen was to have profound and ultimately disastrous political consequences.
Difficult though it was for her, however, are we entitled to assume that her French upbringing was bound to give her an adverse picture of her Scottish kingdom, and that her view was justified?
It was certainly true that, as far as outside observers were concerned, Scotland was unlikely to get a very good press.
Apart from any other consideration, this age of travel and commentary was also the age of the emergent nation-state, with all the navel-gazing pride which that engendered.
The English, for example, were famed for their assumptions of innate superiority.
‘The English are great lovers of themselves, and of everything belonging to them’, wrote the Venetian diplomat Andrea Trevisano at the end of the fifteenth century; ‘they think that there are no other men than themselves, and no other world but England; and whenever they see a handsome foreigner, they say that he ‘looks like an Englishman'’ and that ‘it is a great pity that he should not be an Englishman’, words echoed exactly in 1521 by the Scottish scholar John Major; while the German knight Nicolas von Popplau, who visited England in 1484, found a people who regarded themselves as the wisest in the world.
The fifteenth-century Germans were themselves building on earlier traditions of Germania to create, despite appalling practical difficulties, the idea of the deutscher Nation , presided over by the Holy Roman Emperor —Teutscher Kaiser , as he was described by the chronicler Hartmann Schedel in 1492.
Spain, its two kingdoms brought together by the dual monarchy of the Catholic Kings, Ferdinand and Isabella, and beginning to benefit from the riches of the New World, was emerging out of its previous isolation and preoccupation with internal affairs to become one of the two dominant powers of Europe.
And if national sentiment in the other, France, was initially a response to the threat from England, just as it was in Scotland, there was no doubt of France's position by the end of the fifteenth century; the dazzling army and glittering artillery train which Charles VIII led down through the length of Italy in 1494 — for no good reason other than that a young king, with a well-stuffed treasury, would naturally use his wealth to win military renown — symbolized in the most spectacular manner what this kingdom, so recently weakened by war and internal dissension, had now become.
None of this left much room for openly expressed admiration for other countries, particularly small and peripheral ones.
We know what Mary's adopted country thought.
Some time before her marriage to the dauphin in November 1558, a memorandum was drawn up describing ‘L'Etat et puissance du royaulme d'Escosse’.
It was hardly flattering, with its account of the miserable climate — the vehement cold and the winds — and the forbidding landscape, with many rough mountains (for it was to be another two centuries before Rousseau was to alert the attention of Europe to the beauty of mountain scenery).
The people were said to be lazy, their manner of living rustic.
They were ‘assez fins, astutes et inconstans daffection ’—(sufficiently subtle, astute and inconstant in affection)— a very unattractive lot, in other words, apart from those courtiers who had been brought up in France.
On the face of it, the crown had a very raw deal.
Little justice could be done, especially among the nobility, obsessed as they were by family pride and the need to revenge their kin; instead, in order to attract them to his service, the king had to remit the penalty of death.
He had no great domain; many of the nobles and churchmen — and especially the latter — were richer and more powerful than he.
Nor could he tax: he simply did not have the power to levy impositions like the taille and the gabelle , as the French king did.
The saving grace here was very much played down: that instead of being taxed, every man at his command had to muster armed under his chief.
It was the comment by a member of one kind of society on a quite different one, poorer, less directly governed from the centre, and therefore to be despised.
It was a subjective, not an objective view; but it happened to be the attitude of a man living in the kingdom which harboured Mary Queen of Scots.
Another way of making the same point about the superior and the inferior societies of France and Scotland came from the pen of the French ecclesiastic Estienne Perlin, who visited England and Scotland in 1551–2.
His account showed that French antagonism to England was still very much alive; but of Scotland: ‘how happy oughtest thou to esteem thyself, O kingdom of Scotland, to be favoured, fed and maintained, like an infant, on the breast of the most puissant and magnanimous King of France, the greatest lord in the whole world, and future monarch of that round machine, for without him thou wouldst have been laid in ashes, thy country wasted and ruined by the English, utterly accursed by God.’
He was to add that the French should also be glad to be allied to the Scots, ‘for from Scotland we may repulse the English, and from thence enter easily into their country, which gives no great odds against them, and thus enables us to curb and check  them.’
There was no doubt who was the junior partner!
For Mary Queen of Scots, who, as Lady Antonia Fraser has reminded us, had been conscious all her life that she was a queen regnant, there was therefore a considerable problem.
Queen in her own right, yes; but only of that junior partner, while being fêted and ultimately enjoying the pleasures of being queen consort of the senior.
It was to be — at best— a confusing experience.
But there is a difference between a confusing experience and an insoluble problem.
Mary was indeed brought up in a country far wealthier and more powerful than that which she was to rule.
From her point of view, wealthier and more powerful was probably synonymous with easier and more rewarding, though it is questionable whether those who actually had to rule early modern France would have seen it in quite these terms.
But the dismissive reactions of the French were by no means the only way in which foreigners described the Scots.
For all outsiders, it was common ground that Scotland was indeed small, geographically remote, and impoverished.
This only makes it the more significant that contempt and disdain were very far from the whole story of foreign attitudes, and where they were expressed there was normally some particular reason for it.
The bias of that early fifteenth-century visitor Aeneas Piccolomini, the future Pope Pius II, for example, was natural enough.
Having had a gruesome storm-tossed journey, his first act on landing was to fulfil his vow to travel barefoot to the nearest shrine in thanksgiving for his delivery; the rheumatism which resulted was with him for the rest of his life — as was the sourness with which he regarded Scotland.
It is not surprising either to find that English visitors were hostile; the notable point is that their real venom was unleashed not in the period before 1560, when England and Scotland were nourishing their long-standing enmity, but afterwards, when they were officially allies, and particularly once the unthinkable and shameful had happened, and Scotland had given England a king, in the person of James VI in 1603.
Thus it was not until 1598 that an English account — by the scholar, traveller and self-consciously perfect English gentleman, Fynes Morrison — was actually redolent with patronizing contempt, and only in 1617 that there was a complete hatchet job, when Anthony Weldon accompanied James VI and I to Scotland and found the experience utterly abhorrent.
Even in that period, reactions were not always as bad as these; in 1618 the water-poet John Taylor had a wonderful Scottish holiday (having gone there, as a result of a bet with Ben Jonson, without  money, so that his account stands as a testimony to the generosity of the Scots).
But the general line is understandable enough.
There were few English visitors to Scotland in any case.
Those who did go before 1560 were writing about a country which the English wanted to conquer.
It might be contemptible, but it still had to be worth conquering; and the fifteenth-century verse chronicle by John Hardyng, which demonstrated that Scotland, with its three fair university cities and fruitful countryside, could easily victual incoming English armies, makes the point very well.
By contrast, English anxiety to forget about Scotland — and to persuade their Scottish king to forget about his northern kingdom — produced a much less ambivalent reaction.
But there were also those who were neither ambivalent nor hostile, but impressed — normally to their surprise — by what they saw.
For one thing at least the Scots enjoyed a generally high reputation: they were hardy and courageous fighters.
Even the English paid grudging tribute to this; those who accompanied Margaret Tudor north in 1503, for her marriage to Mary's grandfather, James IV, were less than gracious about the elaborate and highly expensive entertainment provided by the king, but their contempt was mitigated, for they ‘returned into their country giving more praise to the manhood than to the good manner and nurture of Scotland’.
That ‘manhood’ was something which served the fifteenth-century kings of France well, when Scottish aristocrats and soldiers of fortune went to fight in their armies against the English; from their number, Charles VII created the prestigious Scots guard in 1446.
And from that centre of chivalry, the Burgundian court, came the nobleman Jacques de Lalain in 1448, to challenge James, brother of William earl of Douglas, ‘neither for hatred nor envy nor any evil wish whatsoever, but to do the greatest honour in his power to one who came of such high descent, and was besides of such great renown and courage, that he desired his acquaintance more than that of any lord in the said kingdom of Scotland’.
Three Burgundians therefore met three Scots in a tournament at Stirling presided over by James II, which began with all the appropriate pomp and ceremony, and then acquired all the merits of a punch-up, which the Burgundians duly won three-nil.
Honour was thereby satisfied.
The Scots had lost — but members of the most dazzling court in Europe, the model for the kingdoms of northern Europe, found that they were worth visiting, and they were worth fighting.
Another who seems to have greatly appreciated his visit to Scotland was the Spanish ambassador Don Pedro d'Ayala, who wrote an account of the country at the desire of Ferdinand and Isabella in 1498.
Like the  French and Burgundians, d'Ayala was aware of the fighting qualities of the Scots; it was indeed, he claimed, because they preferred fighting to work that the country was poor, rather than because of a lack of natural resources.
He was highly enthusiastic about the women, whom he compared very favourably with their English counterparts for their courtesy, their ability to manage their households and even their husbands, their grace, and the beauty of their head-dresses.
He also lavishly praised the king, James IV, for his learning, love of his religion, humanity and political skill, although he expressed grave and prophetic doubts about the courage which toppled over into foolhardiness in war.
What he says about the king's own explanation for his forwardness in battle is one of a number of examples of d'Ayala's perception of the Scottish kingdom: ‘He (the king) said to me that his subjects serve him with their persons and goods, in just and unjust quarrels, exactly as he likes, and that therefore he does not think it right to begin any warlike undertaking without being himself the first in danger.’
The words are an echo of the great series of Scottish bonds of protection and service — maintenance and manrent — made from the mid fifteenth to the early seventeenth century by the nobles and the lairds; the only difference is that rather than being completely mutual, as these bonds were, the king had the confident assurance that his subjects would serve ‘exactly as he likes’— a confidence very far removed from the idea that Scottish kings were in any way at the mercy of their most powerful subjects.
But perhaps most interesting of all is d'Ayala's thumb-nail sketch of the Scots:
the people are handsome.
They like foreigners so much that they dispute with one another as to who shall have and treat a foreigner in his house.
They are vain and ostentatious by nature.
They spend all they have to keep up appearances.
They are as well dressed as is possible to be in such a country as that in which they live.
They are courageous, strong, quick and agile.
They are envious (? jealous) to excess.
It is Perhaps a pity that Mary Queen of Scots was not brought up on a diet of d'Ayala.
For this passage very accurately and very succinctly encapsulates the characteristics of the Scots of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
Those who observed the Scots without the disadvantages of succumbing to rheumatism or feeling the humiliation of having failed to conquer them — or having been brought up in luxury in France — could see beyond the poverty to these characteristics.
The Scots were, in fact, an amazing success story; and that success came from their pride, and their enthusiasm for the world outside.
The people whom Mary  came to rule in Scotland were not simply able to rest on their laurels of size, wealth and power, like the French whom she had ruled as queen consort; nor were they introspective and xenophobic, like the English whom she wanted to rule.
It was indeed precisely the combination of as much ‘national’ pride as was to be found among the greater kingdoms of Europe, with far less material resources on which to base it, which made Scotland so unusual.
The Scots had compensated for the lack of indigenous wealth by developing a tradition, over the previous century and a half, of regarding themselves as far more powerful, more important, more interesting than their remote geographic position and comparative poverty actually entitled them to be.
In other words, they created a self-image and then sold it to the greater powers of western Europe; and whatever their reaction, be it incredulous, admiring or contemptuous, these powers now found it impossible to ignore the Scots' insistent demands that they should be noticed.
It was a remarkable achievement.
It all stemmed from the fact that England had tried for almost a century to conquer Scotland — and failed.
That failure owed as much to English inability to sustain their efforts for long enough as to successful Scottish resistance.
This was especially so after the death of Edward 1 in 1307, and in particular when Edward III decided to turn his imperialist ambitions against France.
But the hostilities also included the spectacular and almost unique victory of a Scottish army over an English one, at Bannockburn in 1314.
In the 1370s, when the real struggle was over, and the southern Scottish nobility were cheerfully driving the English out of such border territory as they still held, the failure to conquer the Scots produced one of the great literary epics, The Brus by John Barbour.
This poem extolled the achievements of Robert Bruce and Sir James Douglas — the Good Sir James — and directly appealed to the patriotism of the Scots.
Shortly afterwards came the Chronica Gentis Scottorum of John of Fordun, again stressing the achievements of the Scots, and the villainy of Edward I. This was followed up in the early fifteenth century by the verse chronicle of Andrew of Wyntoun, prior of Lochleven.
The quality of the poetry might have left something to be desired, but not the subject matter.
For Wyntoun broadened out the whole context of Scottish history, invoking the model of the fourth-century World Chronicle of Eusebius of Caesarea in order to set it, as John MacQueen has written, ‘firmly within the framework of the Christian world-picture, and by so doing to demonstrate the links joining the Scottish monarchy and people to the overall providential scheme’.
Then came  the most popular of the late medieval works, Walter Bower's Scotichronicon , written in the mid fifteenth century, heavily dependent on Fordun, and heavily nationalist.
Its famous colophon
Non Scotus est, Christe,
Cui liber non placeat iste'
has been translated ‘he is no good Scot, O Christ, to whom this book is not pleasing’, and good Scots duly enjoyed their Bower.
Scottish pride was given a further boost in the 1470s by the second of the great epics about the Wars of Independence,The Wallace , written by the poet known as Blind Hary.
The image was well established; and it is hardly surprising that when, in 1521, the canny and obsessively fair-minded scholar John Major produced his book entitled A History of Greater Britain , in which he argued that better relations with England would make good sense, for political and economic reasons, the plea fell on ears deafened by the awareness that a little nation had fought off a monster by courage and tenacity.
It was heady knowledge.
And Major himself, an unusually objective Scottish commentator who was not averse to criticizing his fellow-countrymen, is good testimony to the result.
‘I am not able to acquit the Scots of this fault (pride)’, he wrote; and ‘ill est fier comme ung Escossoys’(he is as proud as a Scot) was his record of what the French thought of the matter.
The effects of Scottish resistance were not, however, only confined to literary creation.
The hostility between Scotland and England began at the end of the thirteenth century with the Scottish succession crisis caused by the death of Alexander III in 1286 and of his only direct heir, his granddaughter Margaret Maid of Norway, in 1290.
This left the throne to be fought over by thirteen competitors and the kingdom vulnerable to the ambitions of Edward I. Wars resulting from territorial ambitions were in no way unusual.
But the particular psychological shock involved in this one arose from the fact that for the previous two centuries family ties among the landholding classes of England and Scotland and inter-marriage between the royal families had made relations between the two countries very close.
Lingering in the background was the English claim to overlordship of Scotland, occasionally dragged out as a diplomatic counter to Scottish military ambitions on England's northern border; but these neither seriously interrupted the peace between the two countries nor undermined Scotland's status as an independent kingdom.
The Wars of Independence which began in the 1290s and lasted into the late fourteenth century changed that situation radically.
Anglo-Scottish  trade came virtually to a halt, and did not begin to pick up again until the late sixteenth century.
Scottish scholars stopped going to the English universities; the veneer of English influence on Scottish law and judicial practice was torn away.
The Scots had not only to reconstruct their self-image, but also to build up contacts with new friends and allies, the main but by no means the only one being France.
The result was dramatic.
As the south of Britain became hostile territory, the Scots ceased to be north Britons, and became enthusiastic Europeans.
Thus when the two English universities closed their doors, the Scots in the fifteenth century founded three, St Andrews, Glasgow and Aberdeen: an admirable example of the new Scottish combination of pride at home and interest abroad, in that these foundations were to remain largely first-degree colleges.
Scottish graduates went on to the major foreign universities, notably to Paris, and to Cologne, Louvain, Bologna and Montpellier.
Hector Boece, first principal of Aberdeen, and John Major, teacher of Calvin (though with results which that learned theologian would never have desired), were luminaries of the university of Paris.
Boece was the friend of Erasmus; and Erasmus became the tutor of James IV's illegitimate son Alexander, Archbishop of St Andrews, whose death at Flodden he mourned with the most moving grief.
Foreign scholars as well as foreign diplomats found to their surprise that where they had been led to expect barbarity, they found civilization and love of learning; for Giovanni Ferreri, who settled in the abbey of Kinloss, close to the university of Aberdeen, Girolamo Aleandro, teacher of Greek and Hebrew at Paris, and Girolamo Cardano, physician of Milan, Scottish scholars were welcome members of the academic community of Europe.
Scottish merchants grumbled rather more about the new dispensation; they were perfectly willing and able to be Europeans, but any outlet for trade would do, and there were complaints — in 1524, for example— about the Auld Alliance with France, because it affected their opportunities not only in Flanders and Spain, but also in England.
But they were hardly doing badly, with their wide area of trading networks operating in Scandinavia, western and also eastern Europe.
In general, fifteenth- and sixteenth-century Europe was well accustomed to the appearance of Scottish scholars, merchants and soldiers of fortune, as settlers or visitors; and by the mid sixteenth century, their presence was felt, on both sides of the divide, in the religious revolution.
In the words of Luther's great disciple Melanchthon, it was ‘a Parisian sophist, a blind Scot’, the Catholic Robert  Wauchope, who drew up the Tridentine decree on justification, and it was Melanchthon's Scottish friends Alexander Alesius and John McAlpine who, as professors of theology, spread the Protestant gospel at Frankfurt and Copenhagen.
Scotland may have been a remote country.
But there was nothing remote about the Scots.
We can still get a profound sense of all this today from that astonishing visual image of Scottish self-awareness, the heraldic ceiling of St Machar's cathedral in Aberdeen, constructed by bishop Gavin Dunbar between 1519 and 1522 and, as David McRoberts said in his account of it, ‘quite unique in Europe’.
For ‘it is not just a decorated ceiling; it is a vision of the political situation of Scotland and Christendom’.
It displays forty-eight coats of arms, in three lines of sixteen.
The central series consists of the arms of the pope, Leo X, the thirteen archbishops and bishops of Scotland, plus the prior of St Andrews, and the university of Aberdeen; on the right are the arms of the king of Scotland, James V, St Margaret, the major nobles, and the royal burgh of Aberdeen; and on the left, the arms of the Holy Roman Emperor, Charles V, the principal European kings and dukes — and the burgh of Old Aberdeen.
From locality to Christendom: that was the range of vision of leading Scotsmen, kings, churchmen and nobles — transmitted, we may assume, to all those who sat in St Machar's, their attention on the clergy at the altar distracted by what soared above them.
It was all presided over and to a large extent inspired by a line of kings who personified and embodied the aspirations of this impressive little kingdom.
If other powers saw Scotland mainly as France's back door to England, this was certainly not the view taken by the kings of Scotland themselves, who roared for attention, like the most demanding of lusty infants.
In the 1450s, James II wrung concessions out of the papacy, offered to arbitrate in a dispute between the king of France and the dauphin, and ran an aggressive foreign policy towards England.
In 1469, during the reign of James III, Scotland was first described as an ‘Impyre’— sixty-four years before the much better known claim of Henry VIII to the same effect.
The king had himself portrayed on the last coinage of his reign, issued c. 1485, wearing the closed crown of the emperor, at much the same time as Henry VII introduced the style into England; but James went one better by having himself shown in a realistic three-quarters face portrait, thereby producing what the numismatist Ian Stewart has described as ‘probably the earliest Renaissance coin portrait outside Italy’.
He was also to obtain the first formal recognition from the pope of the right of the crown to nominate holders of major benefices, before  the kings of either France or Spain; and he indulged grandiose dreams of annexing continental territories.
James IV, most charismatic of the Stewarts, was, like his father, the crucial intermediary in negotiations between France and Denmark.
His passionate ambition was to lead a crusade against the Turks, and in so doing to unite Christendom — a vision which anticipated that of Charles V, and a policy which was to be a major preoccupation of both Charles and Philip II throughout the sixteenth century.
James was foiled mainly by the determination of the European powers, including the Warrior Pope Julius II, to fight one another instead, and certainly not by any substantial doubt on the part of his subjects that a king from Scotland was overreaching himself; indeed, his popularity was to bring him an enormous Scottish army for the campaign against the English in 1513 which ended in the disaster of Flodden.
By contrast, his son James V was the most terrifying of his line; but he was no less successful.
His continuing loyalty to the Catholic church was sought, and well rewarded, by the popes Clement VII and Paul III, as Protestantism spread in Europe, and even into England.
More generally, he was certainly the most effective in making his mark abroad; he was the most sought-after of them all in the European marriage market, which was both highly profitable and rewarding to morale when this Scottish king succeeded where an English one failed and Mary of Guise became James's second wife, rather than Henry VIII's fourth.
Clearly not all the ambitious schemes of the Stewart kings were successful.
James III's idea of soldiering abroad, for example, to win renown and territory in Brittany and the county to the south, Saintonge, and in Guelders, was blocked by resistance at home; in 1473 parliament tartly pointed out that if renown was what he was after, what he should be doing was ‘to travel through his realm and put such justice and policy in his own realm that the brute and the fame of him might pass in other countries’.
That was only in part because of good sense.
The different reactions to the military adventures of James III and James IV owe much to that most fundamental aspect of rule, the ability to evoke enthusiasm and affection — love, as contemporaries would have said; the former failed to inspire what the latter clearly got in such great measure that the Scots were willing to countenance the idea of a crusade against the Turks, and in 1513 were even prepared to break the habit of more than a century, of avoiding major pitched battles with the English.
More important, James IV lived in what J. R. Hale has described as a new age — the age when European wars became more than a matter of ‘violent housekeeping’.
The date of the change was  1494, the year of Charles VIII's Italian campaign, beginning the destructive French, and therefore Spanish, involvement in Italy which was to be such a dominant theme in European politics and war in the sixteenth century.
James III, lacking the French treasury, had had much the same idea — twenty years too soon.
His son could capitalize on the mood of the moment, and thereby once again remind his Scottish subjects that they were not mere inhabitants of ‘the outpost of mankind’, but mainstream, up-to-date Europeans.
That is the crucial point about this amazing monarchy, with its ridiculous assumptions about itself.
It consistently indulged in folies de grandeur — and somehow it made them believable.
The fact that it managed to do so stands out with a clarity so insistent that each individual ruler — including Mary Queen of Scots — must be assessed by the extent to which he or she successfully fostered the self-perception that the Scots were a people who mattered.
But we are still left with the problem of just how the Stewart monarchy could achieve what it did.
The answer surely lies in the very curious political situation of early modern Scotland.
To begin with, the reality of Scotland's position in Europe meant that she was not vulnerable to attack from countries other than England.
Who, after all, was particularly interested in annexing Scotland, other than her powerful neighbour to the south, to whom she was a threat because of her alliance with France?
Her kings, in their self-determined role as European monarchs, were therefore in an unusually advantageous position.
They were able to take a high line, look impressive, cut a dash — on the cheap.
It cost very little, after all, to demand to be heard, to involve themselves in European negotiations, as all of them did, to capitalize — as James V did with supreme ability — on the problems of popes and European kings.
It might look all wrong to the author of ‘L'Etat et puissance’; to him, kings who could not tax by definition lacked power as well as wealth.
The point he missed was that they did not tax because they did not need to tax; he despised the Scottish crown for its failure to collect the infamous taille , but this had, after all, been introduced to France only because of the need to finance military expeditions.
And it is, above all, rarity of war and absence of foreign adventuring which is the key to understanding early modern Scotland.
This had a profound effect not just on the monarchy's place in foreign affairs, but on its strength and prestige at home.
Scotland was a state which was never burdened by excessive demands, for men or money.
This immediately changed the normal rules about the relationship  between governor and governed, significantly reducing tension and resentment between them.
No early modern king in England or Europe, however wealthy and powerful, actually had the resources to control the localities in his kingdom; all had to persuade, to rely on the co-operation of those with influence in these localities.
When, as in Scotland, little was asked, there was little need for strenuous efforts to direct and control local affairs from the centre, little to arouse opposition.
The direct result of this was that government institutions, especially the bureaucratic side of government, were comparatively undeveloped; and to those precociously centralized kingdoms, England and France — and therefore, of course, to those who influenced Mary — Scotland appeared backward and less controlled.
It was the inevitable mistake made by those who equate bureaucratic efficiency with political stability.
The fact that obligations of kinship and personal lordship, and the justice of the feud, were extremely effective methods of control in the localities of early modem Scotland naturally carried little conviction for societies who prided themselves on having advanced beyond these things; and since a long historiographical tradition has much preferred kings who reduced the powers of their aristocracies, and signed their account books, the Scottish monarchy, whose power rested on quite different things, has not attracted much praise.
Nevertheless, an instinct for splendour and the ability to give their kingdom importance were actually still far more fundamental aspects of Renaissance monarchy than the colder, more cautious approach of a Henry VII or Elizabeth, or even a Philip II; and in these terms, the achievement of the Scottish monarchy can indeed be described as remarkable.
There is no doubt of its instinct for splendour; the Stewart kings all had a taste for lavish spending, and the ability to find the money to indulge it.
It was not actually the case that the crown never taxed.
James I did, on the specious excuse of the ransom due to England for his release; James V blackmailed the papacy into allowing him to extort vast amounts of taxation from the church.
And they had other ways of raising money.
Remissions for crime, given as part of the justice of the feud when the victims of the crime or their kin had been satisfied, were not in fact a sign of weakness on the part of the crown, forced to acquiesce with an aristocracy resistant to justice, as the author of ‘L'Etat et puissance’ had suggested; they were the crown's part in a highly effective means of controlling crime, dispute and disorder.
They were also financially advantageous.
So were the compositions demanded for grants and privileges, particularly by James IV and V. In the same  period, royal rents were increased as the crown converted its grants of land to feuferme, hereditary tenure for which its tenants paid heavily.
And because all this money was not needed for war, it was available, and extensively used, to show its subjects that their monarchy lived in style and elegance.
These kings were, for instance, fully alive to the prestigious military developments of the day, and determined to add to their prestige at home by having them.
Guns and ships fascinated the Stewarts.
James II's marriage to Mary of Gueldres had the attraction of providing him with a queen who came from the great artillery-making centre of northern Europe.
That monstrous bombard Mons Meg was heaved over from the Low Countries to Scotland.
Scarcely ever to be used in war — and as ineffective as so many of these guns were when she was — Mons Meg was nevertheless a source of pride then, and is admired to this day by visitors to Edinburgh Castle.
James IV, idealistic and militaristic, ‘first and foremost a warrior’ as Dr Norman Macdougall has described him, spent at least £100,000 Scots (rather more than three years' income) on artillery and even more on his navy; £30,000 alone went on the building of the huge and spectacular Great Michael , a ship so impressive that it was promptly copied by Henry VIII, whose Henri Grace a Dieu was built virtually to the same specifications in 1512, a year after the Michael 's completion.
But this was a warrior king who had all the trappings but little of the reality of war.
The trappings, the international tournaments which he staged, contributed considerably to his popularity and prestige at home and even his standing abroad.
But expensive as these things were for a king of a small country, they were not the crippling drain on his purse that genuine warfare would have been.
To that extent — until war eventually came in 1513, and with it his death — James IV undoubtedly had the best of both worlds, the pleasure but not the pain and the expense.
It was a very effective balance.
The crown also gave a lead in secular architecture.
Every king from James I to James V (though not Mary) built; as with the great guns and the great ships, so they managed to find money for the great buildings.
Enough survives today to give a compelling impression of the extent to which the crown supplied visual evidence to its subjects of the splendour of Scottish monarchy; the buildings may be small-scale by comparison with those of wealthier kings, but they are also lovely, and imposing, and above all utterly fashionable.
James I began the trend, with a vast and magnificent great hall on the site of the older royal manor of Linlithgow.
At Stirling, James IV was to create an even more  magnificent hall, of unprecedented size and great beauty; and the same king began the palace of Holyrood in Edinburgh.
But the most lavish and the greatest of the royal builders was James V, and he was also the most consciously French.
The courtyard design of Linlithgow was completed under his inspiration; it was this architectural gem of a palace which so impressed Mary of Guise, whose admiration was by no means merely wifely tact.
The royal hunting-lodge of Falkland in Fife was transformed into a Renaissance palace, ornate with pilasters, medallions and allegorical statuary.
At Stirling, he created the so-called palace block, with exteriors modelled on French palace architecture like those of Falkland and adorned with statues ranging from dignified sculpture to the grotesque — the latter seen in the splendid representation of the king himself.
Inside, the ceiling of the Presence Chamber was decorated with the remarkable collection of oak roundels, the ‘Stirling Heads’, depicting members of the court, often satirically, and allegorical figures; only on the other side of Europe, in the Wawel palace at Krakow, is there any parallel.
As Dr David Starkey has pointed out, James's palace is today the best example in Britain of that style of royal architecture which had such an effect on the political life of the court.
Whereas James I and James IV had built great halls, James V, like the first two Tudor kings, created a series of rooms, in Scotland described as the guard hall, the presence chamber and the bedchamber.
The king no longer spent his time in the full company of his court in the hall.
He could withdraw — and he could become inaccessible.
The change from openness to selective accessibility fundamentally influenced the nature of factional politics at court.
For this reason, as we shall see, the architecture of Holyrood palace was to be of crucial political importance in the reign of Mary Queen of Scots.
There were, then, good reasons for the very positive side of the Stewart monarchy.
But there was another element in the creation of its unusual nature, one which appears at first sight a source of significant weakness rather than strength.
Scotland between 1424 and 1542 was ruled by five kings of great personal power.
All of them died leaving a minor to succeed.
Royal minorities were things to strike fear; who would control the country in the absence of an adult king?
‘Woe unto thee, o land, when thy king is a child.’
Scotland's lot was, in these terms, woeful indeed.
Yet the actual experience was surprisingly different.
First, every king when he came of age had remarkably little difficulty in getting rid of the faction which had been dominant during the minority; Albany Stewarts, Livingstones, Boyds, Douglases, the  families who had enjoyed power in the minorities of the fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries, all lost it when the king began his personal rule.
It is a spectacle which takes us very far from the idea of lawless Scottish magnates.
The evidence is that the magnates infinitely preferred strong royal rule to lack of it; for no king could have ousted powerful ruling cliques without support.
Second, and even more striking, it only took the experience of one minority (strictly speaking, in the case of James I, the absence of the king as an English prisoner) to produce the remarkable expedient of the Act of Revocation, which every king thereafter passed when he came of age.
Nothing more clearly shows the power of the crown and the attitude of the aristocracy than this astonishing procedure by which kings revoked all grants made in their names during minority.
The agreement certainly included the expectation that the king would regrant what he had revoked.
But he did not need to do so; and he could make men pay heavily for the privilege of the regrant, as James V certainly did.
If, therefore, minorities created insecurity, in Scotland it was not the crown but the nobility who suffered, making hay, no doubt, while the sun shone, but knowing that in the end the sileage would be the king's.
Moreover, the Stewart kings' lamentable habit of dying young had two consequences, both of which enhanced rather than diminished the strength and prestige of Scottish kingship.
One was the absence of faction round an heir to the throne old enough to provide a focal point for political opposition, The only exception came in the last years of James III; in 1488, in the second and final crisis of his reign, his opponents could use his fifteen-year-old son, the future James IV, as their figurehead.
The other consequence was that, if Stewart kings did not live and reign until a ripe old age, they had the immeasurable advantage of always having been kings; most were barely aware, some not at all, of any time in their lives when they had not worn the crown.
Antonia Fraser's observation about Mary applies, in other words, to most of her Stewart predecessors.
In their case, there seems no doubt that it greatly enhanced their belief in the strength of their royalty as kings of Scotland.
The question which remains is how far Mary was to follow their example in linking her perception of her royalty to interest in the rule of her kingdom.
Finally, if absence of war created an acceptable balance between royal and local power, so the recurrent minorities created an acceptable level of royal rule.
They, and they alone, provided a breathing space from a crown which was always harsh, even if occasionally leavened with  the charisma of a James IV.
They prevented the development of royal autocracy, even absolutism.
For these kings could be frightening men; and kings who can frighten may not be ‘nice people’, but they will impose their kingship.
A host of examples can be cited throughout the period of Stewart rule up to 1542; the fate of the mighty earls of Douglas at the hands of James II in the mid fifteenth century, the case, enshrined in ballad, of the over-confident border reiver Johnnie Armstrong, who suddenly found himself the victim of the utter ruthlessness of James V, tell the same story about how royal power was exercised in Scotland.
It was only because it was repeatedly interrupted that it did not become all-pervasive, and ultimately intolerable.
How, then, can we characterize early modern Scottish kingship?
It was certainly something which operated on two unusually distinct levels.
On the one hand, Edinburgh was far less prevalent and oppressive, in the eyes of the kingdom at large, than Paris or London were already coming to be; great and small in the localities were on the whole left alone to live out their lives.
But on the other hand, when the great came into contact with the king, when he held his councils and parliaments, when he decided that a mighty subject had stepped out of line, or had acquired too much power and wealth for himself, as happened to James V's former favourite Sir James Hamilton of Finnart, executed in 1540: then there was a high level of direct interventionist rule, very tough and irresistibly powerful.
It was precisely that peculiar combination of laisser-faire rule over the kingdom at large, but absolute personal involvement with all that went on at the centre, in institutional as well as individual and personal affairs, which is the notable quality of kingship in Scotland and explains the high level of prestige and control which the crown enjoyed.
Individuals could and did suffer at the hands of individual kings.
But men in Scotland could look to the monarchy as the focal point and representative of their aspirations, not as the frustrator of them.
This, then, was Mary's inheritance: by a combination of political circumstances, luck, strong personalities on the throne and sheer nerve and drive, she was heir to a remarkably stable and remarkably outward-looking society, whose kings commanded a great deal of respect, and exercised a great deal of power.
Indeed, the Stewart monarchy can be seen as having an unusually easy time, in comparison with the difficulties faced by others in imposing royal rule elsewhere in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
Much has been made of the fact that two fifteenth-century kings, James I and James III, came spectacularly to grief.
They did; the first was assassinated in 1437, the second killed in battle in 1488.
But comparison with the disasters which afflicted mid fifteenth-century Spain, and most of fifteenth-century England, immediately puts the Scottish experience into context; Scotland was undoubtedly fortunate in being spared the experience of a Henry IV of Castile or Henry VI of England.
There was no challenge to the ruling house as such, no Wars of the Roses, no disputes over the legitimacy of heirs.
There were no great magnate coalitions, such as the League of the Commonwealth which assailed Louis XI of France.
In other words, Scotland had its share of political problems between the crown and its greatest subjects, and here, as elsewhere, these problems were sometimes resolved violently.
The difference was that there was no hint whatsoever of any kind of collective or ideological opposition.
All that happened was that individual kings and individual magnates or magnate families sometimes came into collision.
It was politically very low-key.
And the tally of crown successes over its opponents far outnumbers its few failures; Douglases, Crichtons, Livingstones, Erskines, Gordons, Hamiltons and many other members of aristocratic families who lost out to the crown over a huge range of disputes, from the heights of violent conflict to the crown's ability to beat off rival claimants to lands, would have been astonished by the belief of later historians that they were more powerful than the monarchy.
In fact, every Stewart king between 1424 and 1542 was able to make his presence felt abroad precisely because he could impose it so effectively at home.
Whatever went wrong in the years of Mary's personal rule, therefore, simply cannot be explained by inherited weakness; her problems have nothing to do with insecure monarchy and overmighty subjects.
More specifically, an analysis of Scottish kingship, and of the particular reasons for its strength, enables us to discard the lingering idea that Mary's failure was predetermined by the fact that she was a woman — and worse and more pathetic, a young woman.
Youth itself was hardly a disadvantage, in an age when people were ruling kingdoms and leading armies in their teens; the Stewart kings themselves, all but one beginning his personal rule in his teens, two dead at thirty, and only one surviving beyond the age of forty, could hardly have waited for age and experience to bless their undertakings and achievements.
To be a woman ruler of course posed problems, severely practical ones.
Elizabeth's famous Armada speech —‘I know that I have the body of a weak and feeble woman, but I have the heart of a king and a king of England too’— and Mary's much-quoted desire to live the life of a soldier, wearing a Glasgow buckler and sleeping under the stars, are testimony  to one (it is perhaps worth adding that the context for Elizabeth was fighting Spain, for Mary fighting her half-brother).
Their different solutions to the question of marriage, neither of which was in any way adequate, are witness to another, even more serious.
Yet there are two reasons why Mary's sex will not explain her failure and downfall.
First, the mid sixteenth century saw an astonishing rash of woman rulers: Mary Tudor, Catherine de Medici, Mary of Hungary, Margaret of Parma, Mary's own mother Mary of Guise.
With the possible exception of the first, the ability and success of these women are unquestionable, even if they exercised power faute de mieux , against the natural order of things.
The modern equivalent of Mary Queen of Scots might well be the unsuccessful businesswoman who owes her position to her family, and therefore profoundly irritates women who are achieving success — against the natural order of things.
Second, the problem of female rule was arguably less severe in Scotland than elsewhere.
Scotland was still, by contemporary standards, an unusually localized country, in which the government impinged less; and it had two centuries of experience of long periods of royal minorities in which government and political life had to be kept going without the guiding hand of a monarch.
For precisely these reasons, there was a well-developed sub-stratum of social and political control at local level in the kingdom at large; and when people are accustomed to running affairs without any monarch at all , then the advent of a female ruler might well not be a substantial cause for concern.
Lurking behind all this in Mary's case is, of course, the notion of the gentler sex, with all that entails; if nice men made bad kings, because successful kingship meant toughness and ruthlessness, how could the more emotional, gentler female hope to make a good queen?
A string of female rulers, from Boudicca to Margaret Thatcher, gives the lie to that idea.
In the end, success or failure was a matter not of sex, but of personality and political intelligence.
Rulers who let their hearts rule their heads tended to court disaster, be they male or female; and there have been plenty of examples of both.
It is therefore Mary the political animal, not Mary the female of the species, which has to be assessed.
This chapter has been concerned to sketch in the general background to the reign of Mary Queen of Scots, and to clear it of some of the misconceptions about Scottish kingship which have tended to confuse the issues.
The advent of the Reformation, which began to influence Scotland from the 1520s, undoubtedly created new problems, and had a significant impact on political life and political relationships.
And Mary was to arrive at precisely the time when the reformers were  beginning to add a new dimension to Scottish self-perception.
God particularly favoured the Scots; and as it was a Protestant God who did so, the position of a Catholic queen was inevitably made more difficult.
But the significance of the political and religious events of the mid sixteenth century, and in particular Mary's part in shaping them, can only be properly understood in the context of the traditional political and social patterns which had created the sixteenth-century Scottish kingdom.
For the Scots would hardly have accepted the reformers' belief in God's especial guidance with such assurance had they not been long accustomed to think of themselves with a high level of worldly confidence.
This brings us back, finally, to the question of Mary's own attitude.
She was of course aware that she came from a Catholic to a barely Protestant country in a state of intense flux and religious upheaval; her new subjects presented her with a set of pressing confessional and political problems.
But behind the imminent business of dealing with the Scotland of the early 1560s lay the even more complex matter of appreciating the nature of her kingdom, and the particular qualities needed for successful royal rule.
Had she tried to do so, she would have discovered what her predecessors had known well: that ruling this unusual little kingdom was not an infinitely inferior business to ruling France or England.
It does not appear that she did try.
For Mary, Scotland was a poor relation of France, which ranked only third in her interests as queen.
She seems to have been wholly unaware that she was in fact queen of a kingdom with a justifiably high opinion of itself — so much so that it is actually supremely ironic that Mary, brought up in one of the greatest of European countries, should have found this one, smaller, but passionately European, so much less interesting and appealing than the kingdom of England, not only Scotland's traditional enemy, but already beginning the descent into the isolation which it was to maintain for much of the seventeenth century.
Yet such was her view.
But the answer to the question posed at the beginning of this chapter, whether her upbringing in France made this inevitable, must be no.
Foreign observers were not universally dismissive; and the contact with Scotsmen which she had, particularly in the last year of her life in France, could have told her much, had she cared to listen.
It was indifference, even a degree of antagonism, as much as available information, which dictated her approach.
This surely puts into perspective the fundamental problem of Mary Queen of Scots, which was neither a matter of sex nor of religion.
It was her perceptions of her kingdom which differed so crucially both  from those of earlier kings of Scotland (and, indeed, of her son James VI, who as James I was to infuriate his English subjects by his insistent interest in Scotland, and by his belief that his importance lay not in being king of England but in being a leading European monarch), and from those of her subjects.
Because of these perceptions, many of the sources of confidence so completely associated with the monarchy — from its role in European affairs to its architecture — came to an end when Mary reigned; it was left to others to give a lead.
The Scottish kingdom's pride in itself had been largely invested in the monarchy.
By dissipating this investment she made her first, and her greatest political error.
THE MINORITY: MARY'S FIRST WOOING 1542–50
On 14 December 1542, James V died in his splendid royal bedchamber at Falkland, the beauty he himself had created no longer enough to pierce the malaise of his profound melancholy.
His sole surviving child, Mary, succeeded to the throne at the age of a week, and was crowned in the following September when she was nine months old; even by the standards of Scottish minorities, this was spectacularly young.
The date of the coronation — an event regarded at the time as a rushed and shabby affair — has inspired comment, for it was the 13th, the thirtieth anniversary of the battle of Flodden.
Since we may acquit the Scots of choosing a day of such apparent ill-omen because of their foreboding that Mary represented a new disaster, we have here a good example of their ability to recover self-confidence, and consign catastrophe to the past.
They had need of all their self-confidence.
The survival of the Stewart line now hung by the thread of a baby's life, and not surprisingly Mary's health was one of the major worries of the first year of the reign.
When the English diplomat Sir Ralph Sadler visited her mother, Mary of Guise, on 22 March 1543, the infant was duly unwrapped, so that her healthy state could be clearly seen, and Sadler could report that ‘it is as goodly a child as I have seen of her age, and as like to live, with the grace of God’.
For a frightening moment in July, it looked as though God's grace was withdrawn when Mary fell ill with smallpox.
She recovered — though the royal nursery in Linlithgow can hardly have been a peaceful place, with its occupant combining convalescence with the more normal infant problem of  teething; but she was entirely well by the time Sadler saw her again, in early August.
The question of whether the queen would survive was not the only problem created by James V's early death.
There was now another minority, one which would in fact be the longest of them all, lasting for nineteen years.
That in itself did not necessarily matter; experience had shown that Scotland could successfully cope with a series of minorities.
But Mary's minority was to be very different from any of the earlier ones, for two reasons.
One was her sex.
Unlike the infant boys of previous minorities, an infant girl would be a pawn in the marriage market — the traditional female role — but one who took with her to her husband not just a dowry, but a kingdom.
The choice of husband was stark and unpalatable.
She could be married abroad, in which case her kingdom was likely to become subordinate; or she could be married into a native aristocratic house, which would inevitably provoke rivalry, jealousy and faction.
The other reason was religious division within Scotland.
Both were to create an unprecedented level of faction fighting at home, and an equally unprecedented degree of intervention from England and France.
Scotland had of course been embroiled in the long-standing hostility between England and France before; but not until the 1540s and 1550s did these powers actually try to determine the government and internal affairs of the country.
The fact that they did so makes Mary's minority fall so clearly into two distinct parts.
In the first period, up to 1548, Scotland seemed to be moving towards alliance with her traditional enemy England; in the second, she swung back towards France.
Never before had events within Scotland been so firmly set on the international stage.
The warning note that it was all going to be very different this time was sounded right at the beginning, with the efforts to establish a minority government.
In so far as any rules had been devised in the past, the principle seems to have been to give power to someone close to the throne, and invested therefore with some of the aura of royalty.
Immediate adult royal relatives had been embarrassingly scarce; but there was usually a queen mother, who had at least personal legal rights as tutrix of her son.
As it happened, the Stewart kings between 1406 and 1542 had married wives of considerable personality and, except in the case of Margaret Tudor, skill; in the power-sharing between Mary of Gueldres, widow of James II, and the then elder statesman, James Kennedy, bishop of St Andrews, during the early years of James III's minority, for example, it was the Queen Mother who  pursued a much more intelligent foreign policy towards England than the bishop.
The disadvantage was that they were, inevitably, the greatest prizes in the domestic marriage market — and a target for scandal.
When Mary Queen of Scots embarked on her headline-hitting affair with James Hepburn, earl of Bothwell, she not only created an immense drama for herself, but raised echoes of earlier headlines; for two previous queens, Mary of Gueldres and her own mother Mary of Guise were, if rumour could be believed, on the receiving end of the Hepburn family's habit of being ‘kind to queens’.
Most problematic of all was Margaret Tudor, widow of James IV, whose marital antics were less sensational than those of her brother Henry VIII only in terms of number: three, rather than six.
Her marriage to Archibald earl of Angus — whose name, with unwitting appropriateness, she spelt ‘Anguisshe’— and subsequent divorce, combined with her demands for a place in political life, produced on one occasion the agonized response that she might have it if only she would be ‘a good Scots woman’, and created continuing and profoundly irritating headaches for those who were trying to control Scottish affairs.
It is therefore no surprise that in the minority of James V the Scots turned with relief to the fact that this time there actually was a close royal relative, John duke of Albany, son of James III's brother; brought up in France, because of his rebellious father's exile, Albany was invited to Scotland as regent.
His problems, as ‘the Scot who was a Frenchman’, were considerable.
So it is worth bearing in mind, when considering the later reign of ‘the Scot who was a Frenchwoman’, that the story of Albany frantically ‘cramming’ on Scottish chronicles on the ship which brought him from France is a good pointer to the attitude of a man who managed, with some success, to understand and deal with the domestic problems of Scotland, even while caught in the intolerable welter of shifting relations between France and England, with their rival demands for Scottish support.
Inevitably political faction was a feature of the minorities.
In each case, the faction which gained control of the king's person gained control of government.
The Livingstones and Crichtons did this in 1439, when they seized James II and then settled down to squabble for the next decade; the Boyds did the same thing with James III; and Angus found time, despite his matrimonial problems with Margaret Tudor, to get possession of James V in 1526 and dominate politics for the last two years of the minority.
But the important point about this manoeuvring is how essentially low-key it was.
It operated within the  limited confines of government at the centre, and in a society as localized as Scotland, did not necessarily have an impact on the domestic affairs of the country as a whole.
Nor was it a regular determinant of foreign relations; the faction-fighting between Mary of Gueldres and bishop Kennedy was the exception rather than the rule.
Such was the pattern up to and including the minority of James V. With Mary's, it became abundantly clear that the age of limited political struggles was over.
This was seen at the very moment of James V's death.
It was entirely unexpected, and its cause a mystery, so much so that poison was inevitably suspected.
The late sixteenth-century diplomat James Melville of Halhill wrote of the ‘Italian posset’ given to the king; the leading churchman, and one of the main contenders for power, David cardinal Beaton, archbishop of St Andrews, was of course the major suspect.
But Melville's claim that James was ‘vexed by some unkindly medicine’ sounds more like a comment on sixteenth-century doctors than poisoners; and his other explanation, that he died ‘for displeasure’— presumably some form of extreme nervous exhaustion — is probably as close as we can get to what happened.
Certainly for the king who died, and for the politicians who survived, the last two years of the reign had given few grounds for pleasure, in sharp contrast to the enormous activity and success of the previous decade.
His two infant sons had died within a few days of one another in April 1541.
In September of that year, he had taken a high line with Henry VIII, letting him trundle up to York only to gaze north at an empty road, for James, probably at the persuasion of his council, failed to keep his appointment with the English king.
A year later, the sourness thus created flared into open aggression.
The upshot was the appalling rout of the Scottish army by the English at Solway Moss on 24 November 1542.
Three days before the battle, James had been with his army.
Three weeks after it, he was dead.
He left behind him a baby daughter, a huge political and religious crisis, and a power-struggle far more savage than had ever been experienced before, which began literally at the death-bed.
Historians are familiar with the events surrounding the death of Henry VIII in January 1547, and in particular the debate over the authenticity of his will.
The situation in Scotland four years earlier was very similar.
Four or five days after James's death, Deaton produced what purported to be James's will, nominating four protectors, himself and the earls of Moray, Argyll and Huntly.
The notable omission was James Hamilton, earl of Arran, heir presumptive because of his descent from Mary, daughter of James II, who had married his grandfather  James Lord Hamilton, and Beaton's greatest political rival.
The document survives today — in the Hamilton archives at Lennoxlove.
It has one very curious feature; it was drawn up by one ‘Henry Balfour, priest of Dunkeld diocese, notary public by apostolic authority’, who was in fact no notary at all, and this did give ground for doubt.
Indeed, John Knox was later to claim that after Beaton had cried into the dying king's ear that there should be four regents, with himself as principal, ‘a dead man's hand was made to subscribe a blank’.
This story improves on the original version emanating from Arran himself, that the king was almost dead when Beaton took his hand and traced his signature.
In such circumstances, clearly the more vilification the better.
It is a measure of what, this time, was at stake.
Just as at Henry VIII's death in 1547, what was at stake in 1542 was nothing less than the religious and political future of the kingdom; and that was entirely uncertain.
For Scotland, like all other European countries, was now severely affected by the Reformation movement, which not only injected religious confusion and conflict into the church, but profoundly disturbed long-established political traditions, especially in foreign relations.
Those who fought for political control after James V's death, therefore, were fighting for far more than personal position.
It was no longer a matter of one family or political grouping showing that it was domestically more powerful than any other.
Ideological commitments now affected political ambitions.
It was a question of which faction would win, that which was at least potentially pro-English and Protestant, or that which wanted to maintain the status quo, pro-French and Catholic.
James's death, in fact, released a great deal which had been held in check during his reign.
The king himself had strongly favoured the Auld Alliance with France, particularly as he had been able to use it so much to his advantage, and had certainly upheld the Catholic church.
But the idea of closer political ties with England had first been mooted as far back as the late fifteenth century, by James III; and even though it was then an extremely unpopular policy, it was an idea which never again quite went away.
The marriage of James's son James IV to Margaret Tudor, from which the Stewart claim to the English throne derived, came about more because of pressure from Henry VII than from any Scottish enthusiasm; and the Treaty of Perpetual Peace which accompanied it would last for no more than eleven years, collapsing because James could not sustain his obligations to both France and England when Henry VIII joined the pope's grotesquely named Holy League against France.
It has been suggested that because Flodden was  fought to serve French interests, Scottish hearts were hardened against their old ally after the disaster; and indeed there were striking examples of their refusal to fight on France's behalf thereafter, most notably the spectacle of the Scots sitting on the sidelines, as at a football match, while regent Albany's French troops engaged the English at Wark in 1523.
But in fact it was Flodden which was a significant break in the pattern of cold rather than hot war with England, and after it the Scots simply reverted to their usual distant hostility.
During James V's personal rule, however, two new factors came into play, which shifted Scottish attitudes further along the road towards friendship with England rather than automatic hostility.
One was Archibald, earl of Angus, driven out of Scotland by the king in 1528, and an exile in England until James's death.
The other, and much more serious, was the growth of Protestantism.
The early stages of the Reformation movement in Scotland have been played down, compared to the sudden rush to success of the Protestant party in 1559–6.
But reforming ideas were already circulating from the early 1520s.
The fact that the rector of the Aberdeen grammar school, Robert Marshall, was teaching Lutheran ideas from 1521, before having to recant in 1523, shows how quickly they had spread to Scotland; it was only four years earlier, in 1517, that the little-known Augustinian monk had first startled Europe by sensationally nailing his ninety-five theses to the door of the castle church of Wittenberg.
In 1525, parliament was sufficiently alarmed by ‘the damnable opinions of heresy’ of ‘the heretic Luther and his disciples’to pass the first of the acts which sought to prevent Lutheran literature being brought into the kingdom.
And in 1528, Patrick Hamilton, one of the great martyrs in the eyes of John Knox and John Foxe, was burned for heresy at St Andrews.
But the trend went on.
In the 1530s, there were pockets of Lutheranism in various parts of the country, notably in Ayrshire, and in eastern Scotland from Lothian to Aberdeenshire; Edinburgh itself witnessed ‘a great abjuration of the favourers of Martin Luther’ at Holyrood Abbey in 1532, and the burning of five heretics in 1539.
It has been argued that at this stage ‘the growth of Protestantism was far from a major problem’; its spread, and the numbers involved, were very limited.
Even John Knox found himself somewhat gravelled for lack of matter.
The point is, however, that it was there and it was growing; and no ruler in the uncertain world of the 1530s could afford to ignore even limited evidence of its existence within his country.
James V certainly moved to meet the threat, with acts like those of  1535 and 1541 against heresy, and, more interestingly, acts designed to safeguard and improve the spiritual standing of the Catholic church: reform, in other words, from within.
His 1541 parliament issued a string of acts seeking to underwrite the authority of the pope (despite his own highly cavalier and damaging treatment of the papacy), to insist on greater respect and reverence for the sacraments, for the Virgin and saints, and for statues and images, and to reform ‘kirks and kirkmen’ so that divine service might be properly held, and churchmen better equipped to hold it.
It was the last statement of faith in the church by this most enigmatic and perplexing of kings.
It was not enough.
For not only was James trying to hold back a tide, even if a small one, within Scotland.
To the south lay a country whose king was trying to establish an English Catholic church, in the teeth not only of the papists but also of those who were much more convinced Protestants.
England, therefore, might not be a clearly Protestant kingdom in the 1530s, but for leading Scottish Protestants she offered a better haven than James V's Scotland.
A number of reforming scholars and preachers, men like the highly polemical Alexander Alesius, John McAlpine, Walter Abercromby, Florence Wilson, George Wishart and others went to England to seek protection and the patronage of Thomas Cromwell.
After an absence of more than two centuries, the Scots were back in England; and for marginal political reasons but much clearer religious ones, the image of England began to change.
England was no longer necessarily the ‘old enemy’.
Equally, Scotland was no longer inevitably pro-French and Catholic.
This, then, was the situation when Mary succeeded to the throne, and the rival factions lined up.
As it turned out, Beaton's efforts, whether nefarious or not, were very quickly nullified.
Arran convened his kin and friends, and all the other nobles who would support him, and asked for their backing against the cardinal.
At some point in the days following James's death, there was a spectacular public row between Beaton and Arran; Beaton, asserting the advantages of power-sharing in a way which hardly conformed to his natural inclinations, insisted that the Gang of Four Regents was certainly preferable to one, and particularly if that one was a member of the Hamilton family, whom he described as ‘cruel murderers, oppressors of innocents, proud, avaricious, double and false’.
But the weight of opinion was on the side of the man closest to the throne, murderous and oppressive or not.
Arran was proclaimed regent, probably on 3 January 1543.
Beaton was initially given a sop; on 10 January he was made chancellor.
But by the 26th, he was in ward in Dalkeith, and during the next two months was  moved from there to Seton, and then to Blackness and St Andrews before finally being released on lo April.
First blood (metaphorically) had certainly gone to the Arran faction.
Apart from Beaton himself, the major casualty was Mary of Guise.
For the first time, the queen mother was not given the chance to show whether she could exercise responsible control or not.
As it happened, this queen mother was the most remarkable and able of them all, and it is therefore something of an irony that she had to wait for twelve years, until 1554, and stage a successful coup, before obtaining the place which earlier queen mothers had immediately enjoyed.
When that happened, however, there would at least be the compensation that she became the first of them to have her power formally acknowledged with the title of regent.
Meanwhile, in 1542–3, her exclusion was by no means the only indication of the profound change taking place in the nature of political life.
The other is the way in which Arran had won.
He had done it by convening his kin and friends and other nobles in his support.
That may seem in no way remarkable.
But it was an action far more deeply rooted in the local and social customs of Scotland than in its political traditions.
All Scottish sources of the period are full of descriptions of the actions of great men being taken with their ‘kin, friends, allies, partakers, men and servants’; that is, the nobles and greater lairds stood at the head of closely united and sometimes very extensive affinities.
These were built primarily round the kin-group, and expanded by the making of bonds of maintenance and manrent, whereby lords and men offered one another protection and support, normally for life, sometimes in perpetuity.
When, for example, Alexander Gordon of Strathdon came to Elgin on 5 November 1539 to bind himself in manrent to George earl of Huntly, promising to serve him in peace and war, give him counsel, and protect him against harm, he was only one of many hundreds of men throughout the country during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries making such an obligation, and thereby creating strong personal relationships based always in theory and normally in reality not just on mutual self-interest but on mutual loyalty and trust.
Because of the localized nature of the kingdom, and the comparative lack of great political events and activity, it was for local rather than national purposes that these bonds were made.
‘Local purposes’ might involve disorder and violence, when heads of kindreds and lords were at feud with one another.
But it was these same heads of kindreds and lords who were the major factor in ending feud and in maintaining  order within local society; and they were able to do so not as individuals but as men of power with powerful backing.
What had been very much less a feature of Scottish society were bonds made for immediate political needs and opportunism, rather than to create lifelong and general obligations.
Bonds of this type were not entirely unprecedented; in 1466, for example, during the minority of James III, the Boyds had used them to create support for their seizure of the young king, and then dropped their allies once they had achieved their end.
In the 1460s, that was an outrage to accepted norms, and it had much to do with their downfall two years later.
But such bonds were rare.
In the minority of Mary, this — like so much else — was to change dramatically.
The language of the local bonds of maintenance and manrent was used in the bonds that politicians, including Mary of Guise, made during the 1540s and 1550s; indeed, if anything they were even loftier in their talk of mutual support.
But their purpose was very different, short-term and political rather than long-term and social; and that was no longer an outrage.
In other words, political faction as a regular and fundamental fact of Scottish political life burst fully into life after the death of James V, affecting not just those involved with the immediate concerns of central government but the kingdom as a whole.
The change is strikingly illustrated by the number of surviving political bonds.
For the century before 1542, there was a total of seven.
In Mary's reign, between 1542 and 1574, when the civil war which followed her deposition was finally over, there were twenty-five large-scale bonds involving groups of people, five of which were made in the first six years of the minority, as well as the thirty-six individual bonds made mainly for political purposes by Arran and Mary of Guise, and the two by Beaton which, in view of the comment by John Knox about the extensive number of his bonds, can only be a small proportion of the total.
The minority, in particular the 1540s, also produced a concentration of the more ‘normal’ bonds by the magnates, hitherto made for local purposes but now reflecting the need for support in a major political crisis.
Political faction had become far more pervasive because the Reformation raised the temperature of Scottish politics, which now took on a focused European dimension, and because once the strong rule of James V had gone, men without the aura of royalty had to struggle with religious and political problems that they had never experienced before.
Yet at least in the first two decades of this major shift in political life, faction was based on commitments other than the  purely personal.
It was in the brief period of Mary's adult rule, as we shall see, that the pattern shifted once again.
The great political bonds, which — for all the associated chicanery — did articulate political groupings and attitudes based on considerations of foreign policy and religious belief, gave way to bonds motivated by reactions to the personal behaviour of the monarch.
The aristocracy of this period has been castigated for its naked self-interest and expediency.
True, Scottish nobles happily accepted bribes from the kings of England and France, as well as the two regents, Arran and Mary of Guise, without necessarily doing much in return.
Understandably, much has been made of Henry VIII's offer of a pension of £1000 to the pro-English and Protestant earl of Glencairn in 1544 and of the money to be sent from France for Mary to distribute to Arran, Beaton and others in 1545.
And then there were Henri II's handouts to various Scottish nobles, including Glencairn, who accompanied Mary of Guise on her begging expedition to France in the winter of 1550 — 1.
Moreover, the most impressive and unusual feature of Scottish bonding, the loyalty to a single lord which had done so much to make lordship so stabilizing a factor, was inevitably diminished.
Men now changed sides under the pressures of shifts in the political situation and inducements.
Thus Mary of Guise and cardinal Beaton fought for the support of lord Gray and lord Ruthven; Beaton won the first, though in 1548 he came over to Mary; two years after the cardinal's death, Mary won the second.
Patrick earl of Bothwell made two bonds of manrent, one to Mary in August 1543 for a yearly pension of £1000, the other to her great rival regent Arran in January 1546, not for the normal term of his life, but for as long as Arran remained governor.
Small wonder, then, that the Scotsman Sir George Douglas burst out, as the English ambassador Sir Ralph Sadler reported to Henry VIII on 13 October 1543, that ‘the world is so full of falsehood, that he knew not whom he might trust!’.
The English ambassador — and the English king — no doubt found the spectacle of what was going on in Scotland rather less surprising than Sir George Douglas.
The whirling kaleidoscope of factional politics, the patronage which now included financial inducements, the intensity of concern and confusion about foreign policy, were a new experience for the Scots; it was familiar enough territory in other kingdoms of early modern Europe.
This no doubt explains why historians writing about Scotland in Mary's minority have tended to sound more shocked about the activities of the Scottish nobility than historians of other contemporary societies, and find it harder to reconcile the idea of  ideological commitment with changes of the political and even religious heart produced by additions to the pocket.
But there is another way of looking at it.
The Scots had never been parochial in their cultural self-perceptions.
Now, as Scotland's religious and political position came to be a matter of major concern to France and England, they fully grabbed the chance to enter the world of European politics, and to behave like those who already inhabited it.
Naturally they took what was on offer, and no doubt thoroughly enjoyed the experience — just as a later Scottish politician, James VI, did when he collected £58,000 in pensions from the notoriously parsimonious Elizabeth, without feeling any need to deviate from the path which suited him and his kingdom, and without being regarded as particularly unprincipled.
Equally naturally, in Scotland as elsewhere, there were few in this age of profound uncertainty who maintained an unchanging stance throughout.
This is the context in which the immensely complex events of the minority were played out.
Yet in the early months of 1543, it almost looked as though the complexities might be avoided by a pre-emptive strike by the English which would immediately and radically resolve Scotland's position.
They seized the chance offered by the dominance of Arran's party, while the pro-French Beaton was in ward and Mary of Guise had not yet established a major political role.
Henry VIII began cautiously enough.
A group of Scots taken prisoner at Solway Moss, the earls of Glencairn and Cassillis, lords Fleming, Maxwell, Somerville and others, obtained their release and were sent back to Scotland when they signed a request to Henry that he should take Mary into his care, with the intention of marrying her to his son, the future Edward VI; their offer that they would help to bring him to power in Scotland, should Mary die, was kept entirely secret.
And Henry also sent north those men who had fallen foul of James V and been in exile in England during his personal rule, Archibald earl of Angus, his brother Sir George Douglas, and Patrick earl of Bothwell.
France rushed to counter this move by sending back her own notable exiles, Matthew earl of Lennox, and John Hamilton, abbot of Paisley, bastard half-brother of Arran and no supporter of Protestant reform.
For the moment, her effort was ineffective.
Instead, it almost looked as though the English would succeed.
On 13 March, parliament met.
It was, by Scottish standards, a comparatively large body: seventy people.
Some, like Archibald earl of Argyll and Bothwell, initially stayed away; but Bothwell at least turned up on 15 March, to promise the support of himself and his kin and  friends to Arran, for which his estates in Liddesdale were restored.
Parliament trumpeted — somewhat repetitively — Arran's position as ‘second person of this realm and nearest to succeed to the crown’ if Mary failed to have heirs of her body, and therefore ‘tutor lawfull to the queen's grace and governor of this realm’.
Such an assertion must have come as a considerable relief to Arran.
His place as governor was publicly recognized.
So was his position as heir presumptive, a necessary acknowledgement in order to remove any doubt created by the fact that he was the son of a divorced father and his second wife.
This doubt allowed the possibility of a claim by his rival, Matthew Stewart, earl of Lennox, even though by the rules of primogeniture Arran had the stronger case; for he was descended from the son of James II's daughter Mary, whereas Lennox was descended from her daughter.
Now, the Lennox claim was formally set aside.
Parliament then took two critical decisions.
First, it agreed that negotiations with Henry VIII for the marriage of Mary and Edward should begin.
Second, despite the instant protest by Gavin, archbishop of Glasgow, on behalf of the clergy, it authorized the reading of scripture in the vernacular.
It looked as though the repressive policy of James V had died with him, and that Scotland, presided over by Arran and the powerful Hamilton faction, was now moving with almost unbelievable ease towards alliance with England and some measure of Protestant reform.
Knox, when he wrote his History of the Reformation in the 1560s, looked back to the time when ‘all men esteemed the Governor to have been the most fervent Protestant that there was in all Europe’, so that although ‘The Papists raged against the Governor’, his fame ‘was spread in divers countries’.
It was not, of course, as simple as that.
Arran was giving an impression of strength and direction wholly at odds with his personality.
This was the man whom Mary of Guise described to Sadler as ‘a simple and the most inconstant man in the world; for whatsoever he determineth today, he changeth tomorrow’; and there were plenty of people in Scotland to help him to change from his position of March 1543.
In sharp contrast, there was no doubt about the determination and constancy of Henry VIII.
The English king was, and remained, stubbornly deaf to the point crucial to the Scots: that the marriage of Mary and Edward should not in any way endanger Scottish independence.
The point was made by the very parliament which supported the marriage.
Memories of what had happened in the 1290s, when John Balliol was a vassal king and Edward I intervened all too directly in Scottish affairs, produced a careful spelling-out of the Scottish position.
Thus, at no  time in the future should any Scot be summoned to court or parliament outside Scotland — a direct reminder of Edward I's particular offence.
More immediately, while realism dictated that Mary would go to England when she married, Henry was told very bluntly that she must not go sooner: such a demand would be ‘a right high and right great inconvenience to the realm of Scotland’, and parliament trusted to the English king's ‘high wisdom’, and assumed that he would not insist.
Henry's wisdom was not high enough.
Despite the outspoken warning by the Scottish parliament, and the reiteration of it by his own envoy, Sadler, he continued to demand that Mary be given into his keeping immediately.
It was the main reason why the marriage was never to take place.
For the moment, however, negotiations went ahead, and seemed to go well.
They culminated in the treaties of peace and marriage, agreed to by both sides at Greenwich on 1 July 1543.
Scottish fears of absorption by England seemed to have been allayed.
Her status as a separate kingdom was guaranteed; and if there were no heirs of the marriage, succession to the respective thrones would diverge, leaving Mary's Scottish heir to inherit her crown.
Mary would remain in Scotland until she was ten, when she would be married by proxy and go to England.
Yet the English king was not satisfied.
He found it necessary to try to offset any lingering Scottish doubts by suggesting his daughter Elizabeth as a bride for Arran's son, and, more to the point, offering 5000 men to aid Arran in defeating any opposition.
It was a deeply tactless idea.
What Arran wanted was £5000; what he saw clearly enough was that the support of 5000 Englishmen would lose him four times that number of Scots.
But Henry's indifference to the realities of the Scottish situation came out most clearly in this third, amazing, offer: if resistance to the marriage was successful, he would respond by making Arran king of Scotland north of the Forth by force.
The Scots did not initially resist; they ratified the Treaties of Greenwich, at Holyrood Abbey on 25 August.
It was the English who failed to do so within the agreed period of two months.
But already the whole scheme was looking increasingly doubtful.
It is from this period that the first two political bonds of the mid sixteenth century come.
One, undated, but clearly made while the negotiations were taking place, bound the earls of Angus, Argyll, Crawford, Marischal, Cassillis and Glencairn and ten others to fulfil the council decision that pledges should be sent to England as surety for the accomplishing of the marriage — that is, human pledges.
The council meeting took place on 6 or 8 June.
It was clearly not an easy one; and  the small group who made the bond designed to shore up its decision pales into insignificance when set against the numbers involved in the second bond.
This was made on 24 July, between cardinal Beaton, the earls of Huntly, Argyll, Lennox, Bothwell, Sutherland and Menteith, the bishops of Moray, Whithorn, Dunblane and Orkney, and thirty-six prominent lords and lairds.
Its justification was the lack of policy in the country since the death of James V; it attacked the desire for private profit of those who governed, and the threat of the subjugation of Scotland by the old enemy, England; and it asserted the signatories, zeal for justice, and the liberty and honour of the realm.
It was made at Linlithgow, where the infant queen and her mother were then living.
Mary of Guise's name nowhere appears, but she must surely have been involved.
Two days later, on 26 July, the dowager and the queen left Linlithgow for the greater safety of Stirling, presumably an indication that, with the making of this bond, the relatively straightforward period of the first half of 1543 was over.
It is stretching cynicism too far to doubt that these men meant what they said, even though other less obviously praiseworthy intentions crept in.
Beaton was visibly trying to regain power.
Bothwell, sent back from English exile with the Douglases by Henry VIII, and present — perhaps reluctantly — at the March parliament, was no longer even a wavering supporter of the English king and the governor.
The arch-ditherer Argyll, signatory of the first bond, now subscribed the second.
Lennox, despite his anti-English position, would find it intolerable to be a member of the Beaton faction; within a few weeks, he would go over to the pro-English party, his hopes of his marriage to Margaret, daughter of Angus and Margaret Tudor, and of English recognition of him as heir-presumptive, should Arran break with England, weighing more with him than the desire for liberty and honour expressed in the July bond.
Nevertheless, the bond is not just a conglomeration of individual ambitions and fears.
It is a collective expression of extensive opposition to — even outrage at — the attempt by Henry VIII and Arran to stampede the Scots, the moment the opportunity appeared to present itself, into a complete denial of their long tradition of independence fought for and achieved in the teeth of English aggression.
The opportunity was there, of course, because everything centred round the life of a baby girl, and therefore the politics of the minority were inevitably a matter of potential marriage alliances.
That a sufficient number of influential Scots initially entertained the idea of Mary's marriage to Henry VIII's son shows immediate awareness of the  problem, and the preferred solution: marriage into a foreign royal house rather than into a Scottish aristocratic family.
It may be that long experience of minorities encouraged them to feel that they could cope better with an absentee ruler than one who upset the balance of power at home.
Their attempts to impose conditions on a man like Henry VIII only show how far, in the initial stages, they were turning a blind eye to the implications of their policy.
They did not remain blind for long.
What sprang the trap in which they found themselves was not so much any actions of theirs, but the intense pressure which Henry applied.
The English king was being offered what English kings had so long desired.
He reacted by behaving in a way which rammed home to the Scots memories of Edward I. The events of 1543 took on a sinister familiarity; for Edward's attempted annexation of Scotland had also begun with a proposed marriage, between the infant Margaret, Maid of Norway, who succeeded Alexander III in 1286, and Edward's son, the future Edward II.
Now, even while the treaties were being negotiated, Henry was seizing Scottish shipping, demanding the queen's person, trying to bully Arran into handing over the Scottish castles south of the Forth into English hands, considering setting up Arran as a client king.
What Henry wanted was control of Scotland, no matter whether by marriage treaty or by force.
Indeed, his actions, and his refusal to listen to advisors telling him to proceed gently, made a negotiated settlement look almost irrelevant.
The result was predictable.
Arran gave way to the persuasions of his half-brother, the abbot of Paisley, and to the ascendant Beaton faction.
On 28 August, he ratified the Greenwich treaties.
At the beginning of September, he slipped out of Holyrood and went to Falkirk.
There on 4 September he met Beaton, and they ‘agreed very well’.
That night, they went to Stirling, to join with Huntly, Argyll and Bothwell, and made plans for Mary's coronation.
Arran's capitulation was remarkable.
He agreed to hand over ‘the castles, holds and fortresses of Scotland to the cardinal and the said earls, to cause them to be kept by such as they thought meet’.
He confessed to Beaton all that he had done at the behest of the English king, including ‘the suppression of sundry abbeys and friaries’.
For this, he incurred the sentence of excommunication, from which he was promptly absolved by the cardinal after public penance; he then heard mass and received the sacrament, while ‘the earls of Argyll and Bothwell held the towel over his head’.
The wonder of Protestant Europe, the ally of Henry VIII, the ruler of Scotland, had, said Sadler, ‘forsaken both God and man’.
The English policy was in ruins.
Yet despite Arran's defection, the  pro-English party was not; it survived, and was indeed strengthened by the addition of Lennox.
For the next few months, foreign and domestic policies were in stalemate.
In December 1543, parliament declared the treaty with England to have expired, renewed the Auld Alliance with France, recorded Beaton's acceptance of the chancellorship, and renewed the laws against heresy.
During the winter, the pro-English party continued to negotiate with Henry VIII, to no great effect for either side.
And then on 10 April 1544 came Henry's chilling order to his brother-in-law Edward, earl of Hertford, to put all to fire and sword, burn Edinburgh town, so razed and defaced when you have sacked and gotten what ye can of it, as there may remain forever a perpetual memory of the vengeance of God lightened upon (them) for their falsehood and disloyalty…and as many towns and villages about Edinburgh as ye may conveniently, sack Leith and burn and subvert it and all the rest, putting man, woman and child to fire and sword, without exception where any resistance shall be made against you; and this done, pass over to the Fifeland and extend like extremities and destructions in all towns and villages whereunto you may reach conveniently, not forgetting among all the rest so to spoil and turn upside down the Cardinal's town of St Andrews, as the upper stone may be the nether, and not one stick stand by another, sparing no creature alive within the same…
And after this sort spending one month there.
The English king was certainly identifying himself with God, and with a vengeance.
In 1547, after the English victory over the Scots at Pinkie, Huntly was to say ‘I hold well with the marriage, but I like not this wooing’.
That gave a name to the war; in May 1544, the Rough Wooing had begun.
It happened because Henry had no options left.
He desperately needed at least a neutral, if not a friendly neighbour to the north.
His own break with Rome in the 1530s had led to strenuous efforts to persuade his nephew James V to do likewise, and to desert France for England.
These had failed.
Not surprisingly, therefore, a man never noted for the quality of patience had rushed bullheaded on the opportunity offered by the accession of Mary.
Force and diplomacy went hand in hand in 1543.
But more than impatience was involved.
The basis for his Scottish policy was his conviction that English safety lay in separating France and Scotland, and that conviction reached fever pitch in 1543.
In February, he had entered into alliance with Charles V against France; by June, he was sending English soldiers to the Netherlands in response to a French attack.
In 1544 there was a full-scale onslaught on France, in which the English took Boulogne.
So whereas he had treated with  the pro-English party in Scotland in the first half of 1543, in 1544 it was the pro-French faction which was uppermost in his mind.
Hertford's first expedition to Scotland was Henry's way of eliminating the Scots, potential allies of France.
The campaign against the Scots was operated with ruthless efficiency, and was violent and vengeful in the extreme.
The years 1544 and 1545 were to see a number of English invasions, of which those of May 1544 and the autumn of 1545 — timed for the destruction of the harvest — were by far the worst.
Hertford took his instructions seriously, devastating Lothian and Edinburgh and laying waste the great border abbeys, as well as destroying numerous small towns and villages.
His detailed reports to his master are a hideous record of fire and bloodshed, chronicled in the most factual and laconic manner.
It was easy to burn Haddington, a substantial town south of Edinburgh (and birthplace of John Knox); at Dunbar, the inhabitants were trapped inside the town and burned with it.
And so on.
It was not entirely one-sided.
Its impact drove the strongly pro-English Angus into the Arran-Beaton camp; his lands lay in the path of oncoming English armies, and the Scottish government could capitalize on this, by appealing to his position as the great man and protector of his locality, reinforcing such sentiments with a pension.
And Angus had the pleasure — rare for a Scot in any century — of defeating an English army at Ancrum in February 1545.
But this was no more than a temporary reversal in the most savage onslaught from England which the Scots had ever experienced.
Yet for all the expense, the effort, the bloodshed, Henry achieved only one obvious success, and that had nothing to do with Hertford's armies.
His support of plots against Beaton in 1544 and 1545 came to fruition in May 1546, when a group of Fifeshire lairds headed by Norman Leslie, son of the earl of Rothes, broke into the episcopal castle at St Andrews, murdered the cardinal and slung his body over the castle walls; the murderers, henceforth known as the Castalians, barricaded themselves inside the castle, which they held as a Protestant stronghold.
John Knox joined them in April 1547.
Yet even this was not a long-lasting achievement.
The earl of Hertford had emerged supreme from the power-struggle which surrounded the death of Henry VIII in January 1547.
Although this ardent Protestant was now protector (and duke of Somerset), his government did nothing to help the Protestant Castalians.
It was the hostile French who turned up.
They arrived in July 1547 and took the castle, after a brief siege featuring a spectacular air-battle in which the outer walls were battered by artillery hoisted on to the church steeple of St Salvator's College and  the abbey walls; the lairds disappeared into prison in France, and Knox and others went to the galleys.
The failure of the English to intervene at St Andrews, however, brought no general relief to the Scots.
The Rough Wooing was to continue, not this time as a series of devastating raids, but by seizing and garrisoning Scottish fortresses as the basis for English control, and by Somerset's own comprehensive victory over the Scots at Pinkie in September 1547.
It may be that Somerset was as much in the grip of the obsession to unite England and Scotland as ever Edward I or Henry VIII had been, while like them asserting English power in France; for he continued Henry's policy of war on two fronts, at enormous financial expense, and ultimately at the cost of his own position in England.
Indeed, as C. S. L. Davies has suggested, the arrogance with which he treated his fellow-councillors in the two years before his fall in October 1549 may owe a lot to his outstanding success at Pinkie, when he may have believed that he was about to achieve what some of the greatest of English kings had failed to do.
Yet he had no more chance than they did.
He did manage to establish the English in a ring of garrisons in southern Scotland, but — like Edward I before him — he found that he could not extend his grip in any effective way into northern Scotland beyond the Tay; and his southern castles could be recaptured.
The geography of Scotland, in the sixteenth as in the thirteenth century, allowed temporary successes directed from London, whether taking castles or winning battles.
But it utterly prevented permanent victory.
What it did make possible was stalemate; and that was what happened in the 1540s.
The Scots could not rid themselves of the English.
The English could not make that final spurt, establish dominance and impose their demands for the marriage.
One way out for the Scots was to contemplate a different marriage for their queen.
Formal negotiations for the English match might have been dead by the end of 1543; discussions about the queen's marriage were not.
The collapse of the English plan had opened the way for the possibility of marriage within Scotland, to Arran's son.
On 11 July 1546, at a council meeting at which Mary of Guise was present, the idea was rejected.
Arran had to promise to destroy the ‘contract and bond’ made to him concerning the queen's marriage, and discharge all noblemen who had consented to it — a considerable number, according to the letter written to the dowager by John, son of lord Somerville, in October 1545.
Mary responded by cancelling all bonds made against the Arran agreement.
And generally the making of bonds was now  prohibited.
This was, of course, a dead letter; no council ordinance was going to dissuade Mary of Guise or Arran from the useful practice of making bonds with their potential allies.
Nor did Arran obey the injunction to destroy all his bonds; one, made by Hugh, master of Eglinton in 1545, still exists in the Hamilton archives.
Its stated intention was that Mary should not marry any foreign prince; she must marry a prince born of this realm — and Arran's son was the most suitable candidate.
The problem for the Hamiltons was that there was an obvious alternative.
The idea of marriage into the royal house of France had been openly raised at least as early as September 1543, and presumably had been in the mind of Mary of Guise long before that.
Arran himself had joined Beaton and the dowager at the end of 1544, when they ‘promised and made bond to the French ambassador, that the French king shall have the young queen, to marry where he list…and also that they shall at the spring of the year, send both the young queen and the old (Mary of Guise) into France’.
Nothing came of it in 1545, though in June French troops arrived to give the Scots temporary assistance against the English.
But the stunning defeat at Pinkie in September 1547 changed wavering into decision.
Mary herself was moved to the island stronghold of Inchmahome, west of Stirling, for her safety during the Pinkie campaign.
Her visit produced a flowering of names associated with her on the little island, like Queen Mary's Bower and Tree, and stories grew up that the five-year-old child began to learn Latin, Greek, Italian and other subjects there, including the art of embroidery for which she was later famous, while taking time off for gardening.
As she seems to have stayed on the island for only three weeks, however, being moved back to Stirling when the English army left Scotland at the end of September, we can only conclude that these are testimony not to Mary as an infant prodigy, but to her fascination as a source of romance and legend.
But fears for her were real enough.
The need to enlist French help, with the awareness that it would come on French terms, was agreed by the council which met at Stirling on 2 November 1547.
In January 1548 Arran, in return for the promise of a French duchy, made a formal contract with Henri II of France.
He agreed to summon the Scottish parliament, that it should consent to Mary's marriage with the dauphin Francis and to her departure for France, and that Scottish castles should be handed over to the French — as indeed Dunbar and Blackness were.
The queen was taken to the west-coast town of Dumbarton in February.
In June, French troops arrived at Leith, and the French and Scots settled  down to besiege Haddington.
Parliament met at the nunnery outside the English-occupied town, and on 7 July agreed with the French commander and envoy, the seigneur d'Essé, that ‘the ancient bond, confederation and amity standing between the realm of France and this country’ was the best chance against ‘the mortal wars, cruelties, depredations and intolerable injuries done by our old enemies of England’.
The French king would offer Scotland protection.
Mary would marry the dauphin.
Meanwhile, the Scots who had refused to allow her to be brought up in England sent her, at the beginning of August, to France.
The Treaty of Haddington — unlike the Treaty of Greenwich — was to last.
The pay-off came fairly quickly.
Already Arran's son had gone to France, in pursuit of the bride offered by Henri II, the eldest daughter of the duke of Montpensier.
In reality, he was a hostage; the marriage never took place.
But Arran did get his duchy of Châtelherault, worth 12,000 livres (£1000 sterling) per annum, in February 1549; and in June or July of that year, his half-brother John Abbot of Paisley was finally recognized as Beaton's successor in the archbishopric of St Andrews, to which he had been provided in November 1547.
More important, the Franco-Scottish armies succeeded where the Scottish ones had not.
The years 1548 — 9 were years of English reversal, as the fortresses they held were recovered.
By September 1549, when Haddington fell, it was virtually all over.
Meanwhile, the French were mounting a major attack on Boulogne.
The combination was impossible.
The deeply unpopular Somerset was overthrown in October, and power passed to those who had opposed the war; his successor, John Dudley, earl of Warwick, was only recognizing the inevitable when he gave up Boulogne at the same time as peace was made with Scotland in March 1550, when the last stronghold held by the English, Lauder, capitulated.
In April, the French and the Scots embarked on a polite exchange of congratulatory diplomatic compliments, with the French claiming that they had attacked Boulogne only for the sake of the Scots.
The Auld Alliance looked very strong; English hopes in Scotland seemed to be annihilated.
But as in 1543, when the English appeared to be completely in the ascendant, it was not a straightforward matter.
It had been a decade of bloodshed and confusion: English bloodshed and Scottish confusion.
The most notable thing about the Rough Wooing is not that in the end the savagery of the English attack drove the Scots away from the new idea of friendship with England and back into the arms of their natural and ancient allies, the French.
That was  only part of the story.
What was really remarkable was that although people did change their ground as a result of English pressure, Henry VIII and Somerset never actually dispelled all their support in Scotland.
Throughout the period of the Rough Wooing, there existed in Scotland men known as the ‘assured Scots’, those who formally contracted with and were often paid by the English — in other words collaborators.
These were not the great nobles.
They were lesser men, lairds, burgesses and others, mainly from southern Scotland — the area of the English ‘pale’— but not exclusively so; it was ‘assured Scots’ from the Highlands, bound to and paid by Henry VIII, who ravaged parts of Argyllshire in 1545.
So there were many others besides the great earls like Lennox or Glencairn who saw advantages in supporting England.
Undoubtedly many collaborated out of fear, or under pressure.
But there were positive as well as negative reasons which influenced Scotsmen in the 1540s.
So it was not only English hopes which were dashed in 1550.
The great difference between the events of the 1540s and earlier periods of hostility between England and Scotland was that this episode was far more than a particularly dramatic example of the eternal political and military triangle of England, Scotland and France, or even just the revival by Henry VIII and Somerset of that old English dream, the unification of England and Scotland.
For this time there were others who shared in that dream, at least to the extent of wanting friendship between England and Scotland.
In 1542, Henry received a long and rambling letter from a crank, one John Elder, clerk of the diocese of Caithness, and therefore claiming to speak for the Highlander.
Elder assured Henry that, with Highland support, he could achieve what the Scots themselves wanted: freedom from France, the establishment of the Protestant faith, and union with England.
This claim very much fitted with Henry's own ideas about what the Scots should be wanting.
But he could justify this because there were other Scots besides Elder, drawn from the ranks of the leading politicians, who gave him the same message.
The king's initial statement on the matter,A Declaration, conteyning the iust causes and consyderations, of this present warre with the Scottis, wherin alsoo appereth the trewe & right title, that the kinges most royall maiesty hath to the souerayntie of Scotlande , produced in 1542 during the Anglo-Scottish war, was a singularly tactless trumpeting of the old claim of English overlordship.
It could be conveniently set aside in the changed circumstances after James V's death, when the real issue became clear.
It has been called the ‘British Problem’, brought into being by a  combination of renewed English ambition and, for the first time, a new attitude among at least some of the Scots to their southern neighbour.
It was to last throughout the 1540s, and then go into abeyance, lying dormant — despite Mary Queen of Scots' burning awareness of her position as Elizabeth's heir presumptive — until it had to be faced again, when James VI succeeded to the English throne in 1603.
It was given expression not only in the letter by Elder and the Declaration by Henry VIII, but in an intensive burst of propaganda in 1547–8.
In that year, the Scots were assailed by no less than five tracts extolling the benefits of union, including one by Somerset himself, the Epistle or exhortacion to uniti & peace to the inhabitauntes of Scotland .
Not all were as moderate as Somerset's, with its stress on equality; the title of one of the others, Nicholas Bodrugan's Epitome of the title that the Kynges Maiestie of Englande hath to the souereigntie of Scotland , shows how willing the English were to assume that the Scots could be persuaded to accept a union of unequal partners.
And indeed some were.
Among these tracts were two written by a Scotsman, James Harryson or Henderson, merchant of Edinburgh, who had joined Somerset in 1544 and been an English pensioner since 1546:An Exhortion to the Scottes (1547) and The Godly and Golden Booke for Concorde of England and Scotland (1548), which remained unprinted because, ironically enough, the Scot was continuing the propaganda battle on behalf of England after the English had withdrawn from it.
These works produced only two Scottish replies arguing against the English case,The Complaynt of Scotland , and the recently discovered Ane Resonying of ane Scottis and Inglis merchand betuix Rawand (Rouen) and Lionis (Lyons)by the royal councillor and administrator William Lamb, an imagined discourse between two merchants travelling in France, in which the Scottish merchant utterly refuted, point by point, the claims of Henry VIII set out in his 1542 Declaration .
But there was no wholesale Scottish rejection.
So we are faced with the amazing fact that neither the insistence on English superiority nor a savage level of English military aggression was enough to produce widespread, let alone total, resistance by a people who for well over two centuries had determinedly and successfully resisted both.
There is, of course, no single explanation for this.
But over and above other factors such as the growing disenchantment, after long experience, with the Auld Alliance, and the beginning of awareness that living at peace with the English might be better than suffering the massive destruction inflicted during the Rough Wooing, there was one compelling new element: Protestantism.
(Above ) James V (1513–42), father of Mary Queen of Scots.
(Below ) Mary of Guise, mother of Mary Queen of Scots and regent 1554–60.
Henri II (1547–59), king of France and first father-in-law of Mary Queen of Scots; woodcut showing his ceremonial entry into Rouen, 1550.
Catherine de Medici, queen of France and Mary's first mother-in-law.
The palace of Fontainebleau (right ) and the castle of Chenonceaux (below ).
Examples of the architecture to which Mary was accustomed during her early life in France.
Mary as dauphiness of France.
(Above ) Ivory and gilded copper cup (hanape) showing Mary and her first husband Francis (the future Francis II, 1559–60) as dauphin and dauphiness of France, 1558.
(Below ) Mary in white mourning after the death of Francis —en deuil blanc ; unknown artists, after François Clouet.
(Above ) Henry lord Darnley, second husband of Mary Queen of Scots, and his brother Charles Stewart, 1563; by Hans Eworth.
(Below ) Miniature of James Hepburn, earl of Bothwell, third husband of Mary Queen of Scots; artist unknown.
(Above ) James Stewart, earl of Moray, half-brother of Mary and regent 1567–70.
(Right ) First page of John Knox's First Blast of the Trumpet against the Monstrous Regiment of Women (Geneva, 1558).
Armorial bearing of Charles V from the heraldic ceiling.
St Machar's Cathedral, Aberdeen.
The double-headed eagle is thought to represent the united empires of the east and the west.
Whatever the brutality of their methods, or the tactlessness of their secular claims, there is no doubt that both Henry VIII and Somerset were also motivated by religious considerations, seeing themselves as releasing Scottish Protestants from Catholic bondage; old claims had a dramatic new dimension.
The Scots themselves provided sufficient evidence that the English mission was to be welcomed.
In 1543, Knox joyfully recorded the effect of allowing the reading of scripture in the vernacular: ‘Then might have been seen the Bible lying upon almost every gentleman's table.
The New Testament was born about in many men's hands…’.
Ralph Sadler wrote of the thirst for the vernacular scriptures and other works, ‘marvellously desired now of all the people in Scotland’, and of Arran's particular request for guidance in his reading.
It is a measure of the enthusiasm which he observed that, when Sadler duly provided a reading-list — tactfully headed with the ‘King's Book’, an episcopal compilation in which Henry VIII had had a hand — he felt it necessary to advise caution; religious works circulating too freely had their own dangers, as Henry had recognized, when he passed an act in that year forbidding the reading of them by unfit groups, women, artificers and labourers.
Somerset seems to have felt less restraint.
Certainly he saw the Pinkie campaign not only as a military endeavour, but as something in the nature of a religious crusade; Scotland would be snatched not just from alliance with France, but from the yoke of Rome.
It was not the most obvious way to proselytize.
But it was followed by slightly more peaceful methods.
In February 1548 the English captain, Thomas Wharton, sent a bible to Dumfries, at the request of the citizens — while leading an English force in a border raid.
The English government followed this up by sending them the preacher John Rughe, and by giving pensions to some Scottish preachers.
Not all of the English government's assured men were Protestants; not all Scottish protestants assured.
Nevertheless, it was now possible for men to decide their political allegiance for religious reasons; England could be identified with the Protestant cause.
In March 1544, before the Rough Wooing began, Lennox had been warned against being one of those who ‘favoured the case of England or their new opinions’— a warning which he did not heed.
In June 1548, when the Scots had suffered it for four years, lord Methven reported to Mary of Guise the results of his inquiries as to why the Englishmen were favoured.
Methven gave four reasons.
Three were fear, desire for profit, and the assumption that there might be more quietness and better justice under the English than under Arran's rule.
But the first reason was religious: ‘part of the leiges  has taken new opinions of the scripture, and has done against the law and ordinance of holy kirk’.
So Protestant opinions had not been silenced by Arran's change of heart after the initial heady days of 1543; and the Rough Wooing had not broken the link between the English and the hopes of Scottish Protestants.
In 1544 and 1545, one of the most attractive of the leading Scottish reformers — and a man certainly working on behalf of England — George Wishart, was preaching openly, with remarkably little difficulty; only in the spring of 1546 was he finally apprehended by Beaton, and burned for heresy.
This act led, with Henry VIII's blessing, to Beaton's murder two months later; and it was while he was with the Castalians in St Andrews that Knox first went far further than any earlier reformer in Scotland.
In a sensational sermon in the parish church of St Andrews at Easter 1547 he articulated his radical view of the papacy as Antichrist.
Individual popes therefore could not be reformed.
The whole must be torn out by the roots.
And even after that high point of drama and inspiration had passed, and the French had launched their successful attack on the Castalians, Protestantism survived in pockets throughout the kingdom; it was a fallow period, but that in itself would prepare the ground for more spectacular growth.
When the Scottish government turned to France for aid in 1547–8, therefore, it was undoubtedly recognizing that the level of English aggression was both intolerable, and irresistible without foreign help.
It could and did then turn on the assured men — but as collaborators, rather than as religious dissidents.
Except in the case of Mary of Guise, however, it is going too far to see this as a general affirmation of enthusiasm for the Auld Alliance, and total alienation from England, or as a means of eradicating Protestantism.
The Scots themselves remained divided, on religious as well as political grounds.
In these circumstances, there could hardly be a clear-cut foreign policy.
One only has to compare Scotland with England to see where the real problem lay.
The ‘official’ religious position of England never encompassed all English men and women, once Henry VIII had shattered the unity of the church.
Nor did it have a consistent history in the sixteenth century.
But it did relate to — and therefore change with — the monarch on the throne.
At no time did England lack a government which could give direction to religious affairs, whether that of Henry VIII, Mary and Elizabeth, or the minority government of Edward VI, presided over by the exceedingly tough Somerset and Northumberland.
There was no such government in Scotland during Mary's minority.
Arran was far too weak to pursue a consistent policy.
Mary of Guise  had infinitely more ability and determination, but for the first twelve years of the minority she had no official role in government, and throughout the whole period her main interest lay in achieving a French marriage for her daughter, even if that meant doing little about the existence of Protestantism.
There was therefore no authority powerful or concerned enough to encourage or root out any of the religious persuasions in Scotland.
The events of the 1540s led not to decision, but to increased floundering, and a rush for cover.
What happened in 1548 was that the ruling party came to terms with France, in order to find quick relief for only one of their difficulties.
In the circumstances, they had little choice.
But in so doing, they ignored a continuing problem; and they created a new one, for the price they paid for the French troops who solved the English military problem was a monarch who was taught to be French and Catholic, and who would return to her country only when both these things clashed with the prevailing balance of power in Scotland.
On 7 August 1548, Mary Queen of Scots sailed for France.
‘Everything’, as Mary of Guise rejoiced, ‘was put into the hands of the French.’
Her jubilation was understandable.
But for John Knox, ‘so she was sold to go to France, to the end that in her youth she should drink of that liquor (the Catholic faith) that should remain with her all her lifetime, for a plague to this realm and for her final destruction’.
Both were thinking about the kingdom of Scotland.
For Mary Queen of Scotland, it was a very different matter.
She was embarking on what she would always regard as the pleasantest years of her life.
THE MINORITY: THE AULD ALLIANCE RAMPANT, 1548–60
It was undoubtedly unusual — and normally disadvantageous — for any ruler brought up in one country to rule over another, very different, one.
As a Fleming, Charles V was never loved by the Spaniards; as a Spaniard, his son Philip II was alienated from the Flemings.
Both were at home in their country of origin, and had to struggle to establish viable contacts and understanding with their subjects elsewhere.
It was far from ideal, in an age which put such a premium on the identification of the ruler with his kingdom; Elizabeth's boast of being ‘mere English’, James VI and I's difficulty with his English subjects because he was a Scot, make the point very well.
But it was a rather different matter in Mary's case.
The cultural difference between Spain and the Spanish king's northern dominions was considerably greater than that between France and Scotland; Scotland managed to resist becoming a permanent part of the French political hegemony, but she had long been an enthusiastic member of the cultural one.
The swing towards England in the 1540s had not eradicated the outward-looking tradition built up throughout the later Middle Ages.
A queen brought up in France was therefore geographically remote, but she was certainly not alien.
French architectural styles at home, the desirability of French education for Scots abroad, military and economic ties, all combined to produce the feeling that even if a French upbringing for their monarch was only to be countenanced because of the extreme dangers created by the Rough Wooing, it was not unnatural in the way that an English upbringing would have been.
A French accent in Scotland was a good deal less unacceptable than a Scottish one in England.
In 1548, therefore, there was no reason for the Scots to fear  the alienation of their queen.
As in the earlier case of David II, sent as a child to France in 1334 in exactly the same circumstances, when the English were menacing southern Scotland, the presumption was that she could grow up in safety, until she could return as an adult to rule her kingdom.
In the event, Mary of Guise's optimism would turn out to be misplaced, Knox's stricture correct.
But this was not simply because Mary was sent to France.
The reasons are more complex than that.
There was of course the complicating factor that this time it was ‘Mary’, not ‘David’.
From the moment of her arrival in France, her royalty was fully acknowledged.
Henri II insisted that, as a reigning monarch, she must take precedence over his daughters.
But her value in his eyes was that she was his son's future bride, through whom he would control Scotland; he did not envisage her doing so herself as an individual monarch, and the secret agreements she made just before her marriage show how far she agreed with him.
Indeed, his view of this independent sovereign as purely a pawn in the French political game was never more clearly seen than in 1556, when he contemplated marrying her to the English nobleman Edward lord Courtenay, in response to the threat that Philip of Spain, then married to Mary Tudor, would give her sister Elizabeth as a bride to Ferdinand of Austria.
Such a match, compared to that with the dauphin, would have been distinctly disparaging for Mary.
For Henri, the desire for French control of Scotland had for the moment given way to Valois need to counter an extension of Hapsburg power; and Mary was as useful for the one as for the other.
For most of the time, however, it was as their future queen that this undoubtedly attractive child — Henri II's ‘most perfect child’— was to enchant everyone in France, apart from Catherine de' Medici.
For ten years, from the time she arrived in France — after a journey in which she showed considerable enthusiasm for the new life to which she was going, and very little sign of regret about leaving her country, let alone her ‘dearest mother’(in contrast to Mary of Guise's grief)— until her marriage, she was the fêted darling of the French court.
Money was poured out in an endless, and, as far as she was concerned, inexhaustible stream for her clothes and entertainment.
Her wardrobe was, of course, immediately refurbished when she arrived, and continually added to, though on occasion she did wear ‘Scottish dress’, to the patronizing admiration of the French.
As far as possible, her Scottish attendants were removed and replaced with French ones.
Her famous ‘four Maries’— Beaton, Seton, Fleming  and Livingstone — who had accompanied her to France, remained there with her, to join the new friends in France, the king's daughters Elisabeth and Claude, the dauphin Francis, and the other royal children.
But her other Scottish attendants were quickly despatched home; only at the insistence of Mary of Guise was her daughter's governess, Lady Fleming, allowed to remain — until 1551, when a brief affair with the French king ensured her disgrace and expulsion.
Mary was regularly on the move, from one spectacular French château to another; as well as the royal palaces, St Germain-en-Laye, Fontainebleau, Meudun and Blois, there was also Anet, magnificent home of Henri's mistress, Diane de Poitiers.
Antonia Fraser has aptly described the dream-like quality of these years.
It was an enchanting and heady experience, and one which could hardly be other than irresistible: a delightful upbringing for the future queen consort of France, but not one which at first sight looks like adequate preparation for the future queen regnant of Scotland.
But Mary was not actually being singled out for special treatment or favour, except in so far as her own attractiveness and charm marked her out.
On the contrary, she was given an upbringing just like that of the dauphin, heir to one of the two most powerful monarchies in Europe; and that was certainly designed to train a king.
Her education was heavily concentrated on languages, Latin, Spanish and Italian, even probably some Greek; among her formal Latin letters, written as exercises, one stands out with ironic interest, for it was addressed to John Calvin.
It was less demanding than the similar education given to Elizabeth or Lady Jane Grey, and Mary was undoubtedly of far less intellectual a cast of mind.
This did not particularly matter.
She was not a scholar but a queen, to be trained for the needs of diplomacy, and also as the centrepiece of a Renaissance court; and she was certainly skilled in the courtly arts, music and dancing.
She was, therefore, simply being treated in the way in which the French thought royal children should be brought up.
It may be, therefore, that the dream-like quality of growing up in one of the most cultured courts in Europe had its own dangers for any who experienced it.
In other words, a French upbringing for the future queen of Scots was not in principle a matter for concern; but the particular nature of French royal upbringing in the mid sixteenth century may have been.
After all, none of Henri II's three sons, all of whom sat on the French throne, and all of whom were products of the same education as Mary, was in any way an impressive or successful ruler.
Admittedly, dealing with a woman as dominating as Catherine  de Medici and a family as powerful as the Guises, which all three had to do, would have put strains on personalities far stronger than Francis II, Charles IX and Henri III; but the fact remains that while, unlike Mary, they did not show indifference to their kingdom, they were exactly like her in failing to assert their control of it.
What we are surely witnessing is the effect on these people of the ‘divinity which doth hedge a king’, which may be translated more prosaically as the persistent flattery and adulation with which kings were treated — and in France, it seems, not only kings, but their children.
Monarchs themselves encouraged such attitudes with spectacular ceremonial, from coronation to funeral.
One only has to look at the woodcuts of Henri II's entry into Rouen in 1550 — which Mary very probably witnessed — to get a breath-taking impression of the splendour of royal pageantry, with the king himself riding on a chariot of immense size and grandeur, accompanied by heavily caparisoned elephants.
Henri II and, perhaps to an even greater extent, Catherine de Medici, were notable exponents of the art; so were Henry VIII, though in a less dramatic way, and his daughter Elizabeth.
The monstrous arrogance of a Henry VIII, the pathological need for flattery of an Elizabeth, may suggest that this was a side of kingship which was in danger of taking monarchs out of touch with reality, as they wound themselves into a cocoon of adulation.
Indeed, given the high claims monarchs made for themselves, and the excesses of adoration with which they were treated — and by the time of Mary Queen of Scots, this had reached a very high level indeed — we may wonder that so many of them retained any sense of balance at all.
But the great monarchs of the sixteenth century knew very well how to use that adulation to enhance their power.
The cult of monarchy which they so strenuously and even sometimes grotesquely encouraged made very good political sense; it was a visual demonstration of monarchy as in theory envisaged, and therefore a substantial basis for monarchy as in practice exercised.
Thus such monarchs were in fact profoundly in touch with reality.
But it took a hard head to be so.
Arguably the necessary detachment was more likely to be found in people who had not had the kind of upbringing so thoroughly enjoyed by Mary Queen of Scots.
The extreme contrast is with her cousin Elizabeth, declared bastard before she was three, enduring four stepmothers thereafter, and brought up mainly away from court circles.
Their different reactions to political pressures when both were aged fifteen are therefore instructive.
Mary was signing away her kingdom, at the behest of Henri II.
Elizabeth was preserving her reputation, and the possibility of one day ruling her  country, in the face of irresponsible sexual scandal about her created by one step-uncle, Thomas Seymour, her supposed lover, and of implacable hostility from the other, Edward duke of Somerset and protector of England.
Moreover, despite Elizabeth's personal danger during the Seymour affair, she added to the risks to herself by strenuously protecting her governess, Catherine Ashley; loyalty to those who had given loyalty was the mark of the true ruler.
At the same age, Mary's understanding of the nature and exercise of royal power found its most direct and deeply-felt expression not in awareness of the great political and religious crises of her day, but in quarrels with her governess, Madame de Parois, which were the subject of her most impassioned, ‘near hysterical’ letters to her mother, her regent in Scotland, in 1556 — 7.
Elizabeth's upbringing was certainly at the other end of the spectrum from Mary's.
But it does indicate the extent to which Mary's cushioned childhood created not only a cocoon of adulation, but a cocoon of immaturity which she seemed remarkably reluctant to pierce.
But this was not the whole story; for there were people all too anxious to pierce that cocoon.
One, a strong influence on her while she was in France, was her maternal grandmother, Antoinette duchess of Guise, a woman of formidable personality who seems to have regarded membership of the house of Guise as a distinctly higher form of life than membership of the French royal family.
Antoinette would therefore have hardly rated queenship of Scotland as a matter of much importance.
But for her, Mary was a Guise; and a Guise was not a court butterfly.
She was the daughter of the woman controlling Scotland, and niece of both the leading churchman and the leading secular politician in France, Charles cardinal of Lorraine, and Francis duke of Guise.
And where Antoinette laid down guidelines — just as she had done when she advised her own daughter on Scottish affairs when Mary of Guise first went to Scotland — her son, the cardinal, filled in the details.
In January 1554, at increased expense for the Scots, he had Mary established in her own household.
From that time, he was to direct her education, and to try to instil in her an awareness of statecraft and of the political circumstances and problems not only of her adopted country but of her kingdom.
So one of the great figures of mid sixteenth-century France was emphatically reminding Mary of her position as the crucial link between Scotland and France; for that was where her importance would really lie even if she spent most of her life in France, and knowledge of Scotland therefore mattered greatly.
Mary had the chance to learn her trade as something much more than a queen consort from a politician of great skill and finesse.
She listened very dutifully.
She related the cardinal's opinions to her mother.
But as events were to show, the cardinal was unable to transmit the finesse.
If it was being pointed out to her that she had been born to a life of political responsibility and not simply pleasure by one member of the powerful and able house of Guise in France, the message was being reinforced from Scotland by another: her mother, Mary of Guise.
From 1538, Mary, widow of Francis of Orleans, duke of Longueville, and then aged twenty-three, spent her life first as the wife of James V, when she fulfilled her function as queen by producing two sons, only to see both of them die, and then as queen dowager fighting to maintain her daughter's interests.
This kept her in Scotland cut off from the son of her first marriage and the daughter of the second in France, both of whom she clearly loved.
It is one of the greatest examples of the age of a woman who had stern awareness that high birth was indeed a matter of high responsibility.
She was not simply stern.
She enjoyed the pleasures of court life as much as her daughter; and the woman who rejected Henry VIII's proposal by saying that although she was a tall woman she had a little neck, showed that she did not lack wit.
But when events forced her on to the centre of the political stage, she took her role very seriously indeed.
Her letters to her daughter were a constant reminder of the affairs of her kingdom — and of the fact that regents could only do so much.
Mary herself had to sign her act of revocation in 1555, and that was not the only matter for which the queen's signature was necessary.
This was practical detail rather than high policy; and to deal with it, Mary sent over blank sheets signed ‘Marie’.
Nevertheless, it was not unimportant.
Yet as far as we know, these pinpricks to the memory that she was queen of Scots did not seriously upset her ready assumption that her mother would do the job for her.
Mary did refer to Scottish affairs in her letters, but under the influence of the cardinal, and in a manner which visibly lacked the vigorous interest shown in her determination to get rid of her governess.
Meanwhile her mother did get on with the job.
Despite her exclusion from formal power after James V's death, sheer personality had made her a force in political life in the 1540s.
In the 1550s, she was the dominating force.
By 1550, the Scots could stop to draw breath.
Whatever lay ahead, it must have seemed that the worst was over.
The English had withdrawn.
The young queen was safe.
Mary of Guise had got what she wanted, in terms of policy.
Arran had got what he wanted: international  recognition of his importance, in the form of a French duchy, which might enhance his failing prestige at home.
The dowager did her best to satisfy the nobility by trailing a number of them off to France, and getting pensions for them — even if some, like the master of Ruthven, complained about the shabbiness of the pay-off:.
With England discredited, the Protestants were in a much weaker position; from Mary of Guise's point of view, there was now no particular reason to suppose that they would upset the old order.
Indeed, there were those taking steps to ensure that they would not.
Scotland was remarkable in having a counter-Reformation before the Reformation engulfed her.
In 1549, two years after the close of the first session of the Council of Trent — the Council whose stupendous achievements encompassed the comprehensive definition of Catholic doctrine and the unchallengeable assertion of papal power, and which has been described as the creator of the modern Catholic church — John Hamilton, archbishop of St Andrews since 1547, held the first of his own reforming councils.
The second, in 1552, saw the publication of Hamilton's Catechism , a vernacular work setting out the basic tenets of Catholic belief.
It was also able to claim, with confidence, ‘how many frightful heresies have, within the last few years, run riot in many divers parts of the realm, but have now at last been checked by the providence of the all-good and Almighty God, the singular goodwill of princes, and the vigilance and zeal of the prelates for the Catholic faith, and seem almost extinguished.’
The situation was rather more fluid than this suggested; ‘almost’ might have been better expressed as ‘not sufficiently’.
But it was events during the 1550s, rather than the situation at the beginning of the decade, which were to determine that.
Meanwhile, with the queen now in France, and in view of the relative skills of dowager and regent, it was only a matter of time before Arran was eased out of office.
The moment arrived in 1554.
The dowager declared that, on the advice of the partement of Paris, her daughter, being now in her twelfth year, had reached ‘her perfect age’.
Legally this entitled her to choose her own curators — which in this case meant her regent.
Arran accepted the inevitable, and made way for Mary of Guise, in return for various financial inducements for himself and his family, and a discharge securing him from any actions against him for anything he had done during the period of his regency.
Parliament, in April 1554, formalized the transfer of the regency, though carefully asserting the Scottish position, as opposed to the French: Arran was demitting the regency before the queen reached her perfect age.
The new regent was given the opportunity to determine a much  more clear-cut policy than that of the 1540s.
In 1553, the Protestant Edward VI had died.
The attempt by the power behind his throne, Warwick — now duke of Northumberland — to secure the succession for his strongly Protestant daughter-in-law Lady Jane Grey was a dismal failure; and England was now ruled by the Catholic Mary Tudor, then in her late thirties, married to Philip of Spain, and therefore potentially capable of establishing a Catholic dynasty which would make Henry VIII, Somerset and Northumberland look like a temporary aberration.
There was now no obvious ally to whom Scottish Protestants could look.
Isolated, they could be treated as virtually impotent, and therefore tolerated.
But the moderation shown to the Protestants was not matched in the regent's determinedly pro-French policy.
Throughout its history, the Auld Alliance had worked best when French and Scots did not try to live together, and particularly when the French kept out of Scotland.
As early as the 1380s, and as recently as the 1520s, the presence of French troops in Scotland had produced hostility rather than amity.
Now, the French were all too present.
Not only were there French troops, but Frenchmen were infiltrated into the royal household, and even into the higher levels of government.
Bartholomew de Villemore was plucked from Mary's household to become comptroller in 1555; and if the highest secular office, the chancellorship, was held by a Scottish magnate, Huntly, the vice-chancellor, de Rubay, was a Frenchman — and the man closer to the regent.
It was not only the pervasive presence of the French which roused alarm.
As the final item of business in the parliament of 1555, the queen's advocate got up to present her act of revocation to the regent and the three estates, signed with Mary's own hand and sealed with her privy seal at Fontainebleau on 25 April.
He then requested that it be registered in the books of parliament; to which regent and parliament obligingly consented.
Mary was then twelve years old.
No previous Scottish king had ever tried to claim that this was the age when his minority ended.
And indeed, the habit had grown up of issuing acts of revocation well after the minorities were in practice over, at the age of twenty-five; James V was so scrupulous on this point that his was announced in Rouen, where he was on his twenty-fifth birthday.
At less than half that age, Mary declared, in her act, ‘the full administration and ruling to be in our own hands’.
Looking back, it is a ludicrous spectacle.
Aged twelve, living in France and betrothed to the dauphin, Mary was asserting her position as the adult reigning monarch of Scotland.
In 1555 it was not ludicrous; it was horrifying.
Nothing could have been better designed to ram  home to the Scots that monarchy as they understood it was a thing of the past.
The present was a figurehead in France, and at home, a ruthlessly pro-French government headed by her mother.
Mary of Guise had apparently managed to do, in one year, what Henry VIII and Somerset had failed to do in seven.
The problem for the Scots this time, whatever their varying political and religious persuasions, was that there was no-one to whom they could turn as a counter-weight.
They were, for the moment, hamstrung.
Lack of viable opposition enabled the regent to resolve her financial problems by resorting to a radical solution.
She had inherited the substantial deficit of £30.000 Scots (£5000 sterling) from Arran.
She used her own French pension of 20,000 livres (c. £1700 sterling) to pay for her daughter in France, but in addition the Scots had to provide 25,000 livres (£2085 sterling).
She had to pay her French troops.
Her first effort to raise money echoed that of her dead husband.
She turned to the pope; and although she was in a less strong bargaining position than James V, now that there was no Protestant threat from England, she was given a certain amount of clerical taxation in 1556 and 1557.
But in 1556 she instituted a devastating new scheme, a perpetual tax.
Her own country, France, had been accustomed to regular taxation since the fourteenth century; but if she was seeking to invoke this model, she might have remembered that there the nobles were exempt from taxation.
Her new taxes — which included £60,000 Scots (£10,000 sterling) for her daughter's marriage — were collected in the teeth of considerable hostility.
The principle was profoundly unpopular.
The practice looked all too much like an effort to make the Scots pay for the French, and for French interests.
There is no doubt about Mary of Guise's political ability.
She had played a waiting game with great skill in the 1540s.
It therefore looks as though a decade in which her political nerves had always been stretched was succeeded by a dangerous level of confidence when the situation became apparently so much safer; she was no longer walking a tightrope, and she now walked too boldly on the ground.
Whether she realized that the French alliance of 1548 was exceedingly fragile, entered into faute de mieux , or whether she assumed that it had a solidity which almost three centuries might have been expected to give it, is not clear.
Either way, the effect was the same: she pushed her policy with immense and undue vigour.
But it is important to remember what that policy was.
She was a Guise, and a politician of European stature and vision.
She was not simply trying to turn Scotland into a satellite state.
She was trying to forge permanent links between France  and Scotland because only then could the house of Valois survive against the monstrous growth of Hapsburg power, centred on Spain and the Empire, controlling the Netherlands and, in the very year she became regent, clutching England into its maw with the marriage of Philip and Mary.
But for the Scots, it served to show that the unprecedented level of strenuous intervention from France in the 1550s might be as unpalatable as the similar experience in the 1540s from England.
There were some signs of reaction.
Scottish resentment can be seen in the half-heartedness of the act of 1555 concerning the spreading of seditious slanders.
An earlier act of 1424, repeated in 1540, had made the penalty death.
In 1555, it was punishable only ‘according to the quality of the fault in their bodies and goods at the Queen's Grace's pleasure’— that is, there was now an element of doubt expressed about the exaction of the extreme penalty.
But then earlier laws had been concerned with tales about the monarchy, where this one related to the regent and the French.
And there was another act which surely reflects Mary's fears about disorder.
The banning of popular plays is normally associated with the hard-line Calvinist reformers.
But the first parliament of Mary's regency anticipated this, for reasons which were purely political rather than moral, when it utterly banned ‘Robert Hood nor Little John Abbot of Unreason (and) Queens of May’ in both town and countryside.
Robin Hood plays had been performed in the burghs at least since 1492, and the stories were certainly known in Scotland by the early fifteenth century.
Now, in order that the French presence in her daughter's kingdom should not be threatened, not just by English intervention, but by any occasion such as a burgh play when Scottish mobs might get out of hand, Mary of Guise put a stop to a source of enjoyment and fun.
As the act said, even ‘women or others about summer trees singing’ were to be viewed with concern, because they might ‘make perturbation’.
Two years later the regent came up against more visible opposition.
In the summer of 1557, Mary Tudor, under the influence of her husband Philip of Spain, brought England into the war between Spain and France.
Scotland, France's ally, dutifully declared war on England.
Mary of Guise and the highly influential French ambassador in Scotland, Henri, sieur d'Oysel, collected an army of French and Scottish troops, and got it to the borders.
The French managed to move the artillery across the river Tweed, being — as even the hostile Knox admitted —‘in such facts expert’.
The Scots stopped short, went to d'Oysel and told him ‘that in no wise would they invade England’.
This was not, of course, just a Protestant response, although it benefited the Protestants that the great Catholic powers of France and Spain should tear one another apart; their temporary truce in 1556 had been regarded as a significant reversal to the cause of reform, and when the war was renewed one of the leading English preachers, Christopher Goodman, was to urge the English not to fight for Spain, just as Knox urged the Scots not to fight for France.
More generally, it was the first clear rejection by the Scots of French demands in the 1550s.
But such refusals to fight had happened before, in the 1520s.
It was an irritant, no more — especially as Mary of Guise was now moving towards the culmination of her policy, the French marriage.
On 14 December 1557, parliament agreed to send commissioners to France to negotiate the marriage, while making a sideways nod to Châtelherault's shrill demand that this should not prejudice his right as heir presumptive.
Of the nine appointed, three were Protestant: Gilbert earl of Cassillis, lord James Stewart, bastard half-brother of the queen, and John Erskine of Dun.
Their place in a group dominated by the Catholics no doubt reflected the regent's desire for consent from Catholic and protestant alike; and as yet she saw little reason to fear the Protestants, who must still have seemed to her far less of a threat than the strong Huguenot party in France.
The negotiations were successful.
On 24 April 1558 Mary married the dauphin.
The ceremony at Notre-Dame was one of the great royal spectacles of the sixteenth century.
Paris was packed for the occasion.
The wedding procession was of enormous size and enormous splendour, the largesse scattered lavish, the banquet which followed ‘Lucullan’.
The festivities went on for days.
With vast pomp and vaster cost, Scotland was officially linked by a marriage alliance to France; indeed, in terms of Mary's secret agreement, it became part of it.
Not only the glittering figure at the centre of it all, but also her mother and the king of France had, it seemed, every cause for jubilation as well, no doubt , as relief.
What the blustering and bullying of Henry VIII had failed to do in the 1540s, the gentler approach of Henri II had now achieved triumphantly; the Scots had given the French king what they had refused to the English one, control of their queen and, it seemed, control of their country.
In November 1558 they appeared to offer even more, when parliament agreed that the dauphin should be given the crown matrimonial.
It was, above all, a tribute to the formidable political ability of Mary of Guise.
But besides ability, the other essential element in political success is luck; and at the precise moment of ultimate achievement, her luck deserted her, and the hollowness of the victory was revealed.
For  in November 1558, the Catholic Mary Tudor died, to be succeeded by Elizabeth; and whatever Elizabeth was, she was not a Catholic.
While Mary Tudor lived, the Protestants in Scotland had never actually given up, but as long as England as well as France and Spain was Catholic, all they could hope for was survival; and there was no point in preferring an English alliance to a French one.
No wonder, then, that Mary of Guise could deal tolerantly with them; for they had no grounds for opposing her.
In a revealing little episode in May 1556, she quashed the trial of John Knox, summoned by the Catholic hierarchy on a charge of heresy.
This future leader of the Scottish Reformation was actually at that stage far more interested in England, where he had found a haven under the Protestant Edward VI.
He had fled abroad when Mary Tudor succeeded, and had passed the time writing letters of consolation to English Protestants, and, in 1554, a savage attack on the English government, the Admonition to England .
His return to Scotland late in 1555 was reluctant, and seems to have been less concerned with the Protestant cause than a personal one; in Edinburgh he could be reunited with Elizabeth Bowes and her daughter Marjory, whom he had met while a preacher at Berwick, and marry Marjory.
But he did inveigh against those Protestant nobles who placated the regent by going to mass, and he preached, mainly in the Protestant strongholds of Angus and Ayrshire.
Mary of Guise had the sense not to make him a cause célèbre .
Her reward, in the summer of 1556, was a lengthy letter from Knox, encouraging her to embrace the Protestant faith.
He seems to have thought it conciliatory.
By his standards, no doubt it was.
To Mary, reading that if she did not do so, ‘this pre-eminence wherein ye are placed shall be your dejection to torment and pain everlasting’, it looked more like the kind of bullying to which, on his own account, he would later subject her daughter.
Her response was pithy and to the point.
‘Please you, my lord’, she said to James Beaton, archbishop of Glasgow, handing him the letter, ‘to read a pasquil’(lampoon).
Knox's attitude turned to bitter hostility.
In 1558, he worked up his letter into a second edition, three times as long as the first, which he certainly wrote as an outright attack; and his portrayal of the dowager in his History of Scotland is one of hacking savagery.
Meanwhile, the Protestants remained in their position of impotence.
There seemed little alternative, with a woman whose reaction to them was to tolerate — and to laugh.
In the summer of 1557, some of them tried to break the stalemate.
Knox was invited to return; but when he reached Dieppe, he found messages telling him that the time was not ripe.
The blow  was enormous, not least because Knox had been once again reluctant to leave Geneva for Scotland, and had done so only after consultation with his English congregation there, and with John Calvin.
He settled down to compose his First Blast of the Trumpet against the Monstrous Regiment of Women , a long diatribe against rule by women, written in a screeching style far removed from his usual mastery of prose.
He would have done better to have let his temper cool.
Neither Mary Tudor nor Mary of Guise was much affected.
But the Protestant Elizabeth, the queen whom he thought he was flattering by likening her to Deborah (the prophetess who, with the help of the Lord, saved Israel from the Canaanites), was never to forgive him, and this ensured that his role in the years of success for the Scottish Protestants after 1560 was less than it might otherwise have been.
Meanwhile in 1558 he wrote the Appellation to the Nobility and Estates of Scotland , a work which, taken in conjunction with his Letter addressed to the Commonalty of Scotland , shows how far his mind was moving towards a positive theory of the rights of resistance in God's cause.
For that cause, the nobles could resist the crown; if they failed, then it was the duty of the common people to resist them.
It was a far-reaching and radical attack on the powers of the legitimately established authority, not only of those who ruled kingdoms but also of those who ruled localities.
But these were not men who could afford such single-minded commitment.
Yet some did take a step of great courage.
The widespread practice of making local, individual and personal bonds had, as we have seen, been taken over into the world of factional politics in the 1540s.
Now, it was invoked for a religious purpose.
In Edinburgh, on 3 December 1557, the earls of Argyll, Glencairn and Morton, Argyll's son lord Lorne and John Erskine of Dun made a bond whose text dramatically threw down the gauntlet.
These five people promised ‘before the Majesty of God and his congregation to…maintain, set forward and establish the most blessed word of God and his Congregation…and forsake and renounce the congregation of Satan, with all the superstitions, abominations and idolatry thereof…’.
This ‘First Band of the Lords of the Congregation of Christ’ was followed up by four other such bonds between then and 1562, charting not only the growth of the Protestant movement but also the increasing resistance to the regent and the French, which by late 1559 would reach heights undreamed of at the end of 1557.
The First Band itself may have seemed of small significance at the time compared to parliament's apparently much more crucial decision one week after it was signed to go ahead  with the marriage negotiations.
Yet the very fact of taking action was undoubtedly a source of inspiration.
Even Archibald earl of Argyll, nearing the end of a long life noted mainly for a remarkable inability to make decisions, now found ‘boldness’ in him; he ‘reformed many things’, we are told, and, despite the strictures of archbishop Hamilton, he maintained the Protestant preacher John Douglas in his household.
And others did likewise.
Knox's account of the bond and its aftermath compellingly conjures up the new spirit released by that small group in December 1557.
The political situation still gave them no alternative to the regent's French policy.
But 3 December 1557 does mark the move from mere existence to the beginnings of Protestant action within Scotland.
The next action, however, was taken not by the Protestants but by the Catholics; and a very puzzling one it was.
On 28 April 1558, only four days after Mary's marriage, an old man called Walter Myln was burned for heresy at St Andrews.
Myln was a former priest, who had abjured in the early 1540s.
Why he was dragged out in 1558 and transformed from an obscure apostate into one of the very few great martyrs of the Scottish Reformation, remains a mystery.
Despite Knox's fulminations against ‘that cruel tyrant and unmerciful hypocrite’, the archbishop of St Andrews, and the ‘woman born to dissemble and deceive’, Mary of Guise, it was in fact an act quite out of character of both archbishop and regent, neither of whom showed any taste for persecution.
It may be that, even if the final stages of bringing the marriage about had temporarily overshadowed the making of the First Band, the Protestant threat thus created had sufficiently alarmed Mary of Guise and Hamilton into reacting with swift and exemplary violence once Mary was safely married.
It was a very great mistake.
Of course the burning of one old man cannot be described as persecution; it was in no way a parallel to the persecution in England which gave an instinctively kindly woman the name of Bloody Mary.
But knowledge of the English burnings was widespread, and Scottish Protestants could not be sure that something similar might not now happen to them.
It must have been at the very time of the proceedings against Myln that the archbishop of St Andrews received the earl of Argyll's answers to his letter of admonition of 31 March 1558, in which he warned the earl of the dangers of his support for Protestantism.
Argyll's reply included a counter-warning against listening to the counsel of those who would persuade him to ‘blood-letting and burning of poor men, to make your Lordship serve their wicked appetites’.
That shows clearly enough what the Scottish Protestants feared.
And  it was to take only one Scottish burning to achieve what some 275 burnings did in England: not only fear, but a Protestant backlash, ‘a new fervency amongst the whole people; yea, even in the town of St Andrews began the people plainly to damn such unjust cruelty’.
Knox recounts how they piled up a great heap of stones at the place of martyrdom, and no matter that the priests had them removed, and threatened excommunication, they were always replaced, until one night the papists found the permanent solution, taking them away to build into walls.
True, Knox might exaggerate the effect, just as Foxe no doubt inflated the consequences of the English persecution in that Elizabethan best-seller, his Book of Martyrs .
But exaggeration is not invention.
And indeed, where little had happened in the years before December 1557, there was an alarming upsurge of Protestant activity in 1558.
In Dundee, in the spring of that year, the Protestant preachers John Willock and Paul Methven were having considerable success, in effect establishing a public Protestant church in the burgh.
Methven was later to create an embarrassing scandal among the godly, when he was publicly deposed for adultery in 1562 — a sin which did not prevent him finding a niche among the ministry of the Church of England — but in 1558 he was a major asset to the Protestants, preaching not only in Dundee but, during the summer months, in other parts of Angus and in Fife.
Over in the west, Ayr had a Protestant minister, Robert Leggat, under the protection of the burgh council, from May 1558.
The same area saw a direct reversal for the bishops in July, when they had to withdraw their summons to the reforming preachers in the face of strenuous opposition from the local Protestant gentry who complained directly to Mary of Guise; the regent promptly denied knowledge of the summons and proclaimed the doctrine of love of God and neighbour to the Protestants, while instructing the bishops to leave them alone.
In anticipation of the feast of St Giles, patron saint of Edinburgh, the statue of the saint was dumped into the Nor' Loch in the town, and then taken out, presumably dried off; and burnt.
The attempt to hold the annual procession on the feast-day itself, 1 September, with a substitute statue borrowed for the occasion from the Greyfriars, produced a riot; ‘the Grey Friars gaped, the Black Friars blew, the priests panted and fled’— and the Greyfriars lost their statue, its head shattered on an Edinburgh causeway.
But even so, there was not what could be described as an irrevocable Protestant march towards Reformation; the new activity of 1558 took place in a Scotland which was still largely Catholic.
The real point  about the events of 1558 is that it was a missed opportunity for the Catholics, missed because Mary of Guise still temporized, still would not put the weight of the ‘state’ behind that of the church.
In terms of her own policy, she had little choice; she needed the support of leading Protestants as well as leading Catholics to complete the link with France.
To the Protestants, according to Knox, she complained about opposition to her policy from the Catholics and Châtelherault; only if the crown matrimonial was granted would she have sufficient authority, and ‘then devise ye what ye please in matters of religion and they shall be granted’.
To the bishops, she explained that she needed Protestant support to get the crown matrimonial for the dauphin; then would she be in a position to combat heresy.
She might well have done so; it was, after all, a Catholic Scotland which was to be so closely allied with France.
And as things stood in 1558, she could still afford to wait; for the Protestants, whatever their renewed fervour within Scotland, still had no support from outside, and without such support their chances of success remained remote.
What she could not know was that by refusing to deal with the Protestant threat until the crown matrimonial had been obtained, she would throw away the strongest card in her anti-Protestant hand before having a chance to play it.
For on 17 November 1558 — in the same month as the Scottish parliament did grant the crown matrimonial — Mary Tudor died.
The situation changed radically.
There was no longer a Catholic country to the south.
What did lie to the south was not immediately apparent.
For English and Scottish Protestants, Mary Tudor was a disaster, inexplicably visited by God on her kingdom.
Her younger sister and successor Elizabeth was much more of an unknown quantity.
The Protestants could hope but by no means be certain of what she would do, though they could take comfort from her dramatic gesture on Christmas Day 1558, when she ordered the bishop celebrating Mass in her chapel not to elevate the host, walking out when he refused, and her even more spectacular gesture on 25 January 1559 when, at the opening of parliament, she told the abbot and monks of Westminster, processing with tapers burning, ‘Away with these torches!
We can see well enough’.
But she had also issued a proclamation forbidding all preaching and teaching.
And although the Marian exiles were hurrying back to England, there was no evidence that she was in sympathy with their Calvinist brand of Protestantism.
Moreover, foreign policy dictated caution; with France and Scotland in alliance, she could not immediately break with Spain, and for the first four months of her reign the watching world  was asked to believe in her willingness to contemplate marriage with her late sister's husband, Philip II.
Nevertheless, where there had been four interlinked Catholic countries before November 1558, France, Spain, England and Scotland, there were now three; the possibility of advancing the Protestant cause in Scotland with help from England, dead for five years, was once again open.
The Scottish Protestants had their own dramatic gesture to make within a few weeks of Mary Tudor's death.
On 1 January 1559, the ‘Beggars' Summons’ was nailed to the doors of the Scottish friaries, demanding in the name of the ‘Blind, Crooked, Bedridden, Widows, Orphans and all other poor, so visited by the hand of God as may not work’, that the friars should give up their patrimony by Whitsun.
But it was a defiant rather than a triumphant gesture.
Mary Tudor's death had given them hope, but that was far from certain victory.
And even before she died, there were already signs of a new threat, when in October 1558 a truce was made between France and Spain.
The threat turned into reality in April 1559, when Spain and France brought their long struggle in the Italian peninsula to an end by the Treaty of Chateau-Cambrésis.
The peace which they made included England and Scotland — and menaced the Protestants in both.
For by freeing themselves from war, the great Catholic powers were freeing themselves to attack the heretics, and attack they did.
In Spain, what Henry Kamen has called the ‘series of autos de fe which burnt out Protestantism’ began at Valladolid in May 1559, while in France, at exactly the same time, persecution of the Calvinists so much increased that Calvin's greatest follower, Theodore Beza, began to question Calvin's insistence on non-resistance to authority.
If England feared Spain, for the Scottish Protestants Henri II became a very present menace; for through his daughter-in-law Mary he might turn his attention to the Calvinists in Scotland as well as those in France.
They were right to fear.
On 29 June 1559, Henri wrote to the pope, that notorious bombast Paul IV, about ‘the incredible disaster which has since befallen the realm of Scotland to our extreme regret, disgust and displeasure’; the letter stated his ‘confidence in God who is so signally offended at this wretched plague of ruffians’, but God was to be given worldly assistance in the shape of ‘a large and sufficient force of French soldiers, infantry and cavalry’.
Divine favour was not, however, visibly given to the French king and his enterprise.
Death overtook events only one day after the writing of this letter, when on 30 June the king took part in a joust, that ‘peaceful’ demonstration of the military arts which was in fact potentially lethal.
Flaunting to the  last the colours of his mistress Diane de Poitiers, while self-avowedly riding in honour of his queen Catherine de Medici, he was pierced in the eye and throat when the lance of his opponent, Jacques count of Montgomery, splintered on impact with his helm; and on 10 July, in great pain, he died.
An ineffective teenager and his charming teenage wife now occupied the throne of France.
Youth was not a fundamental problem, but lack of ability was; and it drove the focal point of French politics away from the king to the dominant and rival forces of the Guises and the queen mother Catherine.
Yet it was to be under the new regime, for all the difficulties of the power-struggle at home, rather than under the strong rule of Henri II, that the French were to come in force to the aid of Mary of Guise against the Scottish heretics; for the effective rulers of the two countries were now, after all, the two Guise brothers in France and their sister the regent in Scotland.
These heretics had not, however, waited upon events.
On 2 May, Knox had arrived in Scotland.
For the third time this greatest of Scottish Protestant heroes, whose name has lived for four centuries as the architect of Scottish religious life (not to say the strict bleakness of that life), whose statue in Edinburgh gazed balefully down on the meeting between pope and moderator of the General Assembly of the Kirk in 1982, and whose inordinately lofty statue in the Glasgow Necropolis lours at patients in the upper stories of the Royal Infirmary, made a strenuous effort not to return to his native country at all.
Only when, in April, Elizabeth made it clear that he was the one Marian exile who would not be welcomed back to England did he accept the inevitable and come to Scotland.
It is indeed a nice irony that two of the most famous characters in Scottish history, Mary and Knox, were united in their preference for countries other than Scotland, and that it was Elizabeth's eventual, reluctant decision to have Mary executed, and her earlier unrelenting hostility to Knox, which catapulted them both into the realm of Scottish fascination and Scottish legend.
In any event, unlike the autumn of 1557, the time was now certainly ripe for the peculiar inspiration of John Knox, the man who, in the words of the English diplomat Randolph, ‘is able in one hour to put more life into us than five hundred trumpets continually blustering in our ears’, and who would later be described by the same diplomat in 1561, a week after Mary's return to Scotland, as the preacher who ‘thundereth out of the pulpit…he ruleth the roast, and of him all men stand in fear’.
On 11 May 1559 Knox preached his great and wholly inflammatory sermon in St John's Kirk in Perth, producing mob riot  not only in the church itself but also in the Black and Grey Friars and the Carthusian monastery, all of which were sacked.
Knox, like Luther before him, recoiled in horror from low-born violence; the godly commonalty to whom he had appealed in 1558 now became the ‘rascal multitude’.
But his political theory, unlike Luther's, was radical in the extreme, and proved highly dangerous, when combined with his amazing powers of oratory, in the tense and excitable days of 1559 when, as Kirkcaldy of Grange wrote to Sir Henry Percy on 1 July, ‘the manner of our Reformation is this: pulling down friaries, and using the prayer book of the godly King Edward (Edward VI)’.
In these circumstances, the regent had no choice but to act.
She summoned the Protestant preachers to come to Stirling on 10 May, and outlawed them when they refused.
Two weeks later, she responded to the Lords of the Congregation's threat to fight in defence of reform, and summoned her forces to Stirling.
The first act of the leaders of what were now rival armies, at Perth and Stirling, was to arrange a truce, on May 29; almost as quickly, Mary of Guise broke its terms, by having the Mass restored in Perth.
It was an action which drove the earl of Argyll and lord James Stewart firmly into opposition.
Civil war — even if very low-key civil war — had begun, and would last until July 1560, by which time the regent herself would be dead.
Initially the advantage lay with the Lords of the Congregation; by the end of June, they had driven the regent's troops out of Fife, had regained Perth and moved in on Edinburgh, where, on 7 July, Knox was appointed minister.
But in July Mary of Guise was able to fight back more successfully, and at the end of the month the two sides made another truce, by which Edinburgh was to be free to choose its religion, and Catholic observance was not to be reinstated where it had been suppressed.
With their agreement to meet in Stirling on 10 September, the Lords of the Congregation, in military terms at least, appeared quiescent; the first stage of the war was over.
But in the summer of 1559, something potentially much more radical was happening.
One obvious problem about the regent's earlier policy of marrying her daughter to the dauphin is why leading Scottish Protestants like lord James Stewart and John Erskine of Dun had not only accepted this symbolic and political consolidation of the alliance with Catholic France, but had given it positive support, being among those who negotiated it.
The most likely explanation is that they saw it as a way to keep the Catholic-educated Mary out of Scotland, while maintaining their formal loyalty to her, thereby maximizing their opportunity to advance the Protestant cause while minimizing the need  to clash directly with their sovereign; there was, after all, no sign that Mary was particularly interested in the internal affairs of her kingdom, and although it was a gamble, and a risky one, leaving her to continue to enjoy life in France appeared to be the best chance they had.
Now, there are hints that they were moving beyond that position.
A series of very guarded letters written in July and August 1559 between them and Elizabeth's leading minister, William Cecil, shows that they were contemplating at the very least an outright challenge to the regent's authority — a bold enough but not actually unprecedented step — but possibly something more, and infinitely more sensational, the deposition of the queen herself; and at the same time they were proposing a dramatic reversal of foreign relations, in which Scottish friendship would certainly be switched from her traditional ally France to her traditional enemy England, and that even closer ties between Scotland and England might be envisaged.
The hand of that great radical political theorist, John Knox, can certainly be detected in this — literally, for it was he who penned the letters.
But Knox could always afford to be a great deal more cavalier about the dangers of rebellion against established authority than those who, being themselves great lords who ruled over men, knew very well the chaos which could result if the bonds of obedience and loyalty were violently broken.
So what was it that pushed them into a far more extreme position towards Mary than that of 1558?
The initial reason must have been Protestant fears of what Henri II, using his daughter-in-law, might do after the treaty of Chateau-Cambrèsis; the public Protestant call to arms and the private and tentative contact with England were part of the same desperate reaction to a situation which left the Protestants no more time to move slowly, and forced them into overt action against the regent — the representative of legitimate authority — and, perhaps, a covert move against her daughter — the legitimate authority.
Henri's unexpected death changed the political circumstances, but left the need to act unaltered; for the accession of Francis and Mary opened the way for the dominance of Mary's uncles of Guise: the duke, and the cardinal who had already tried to teach Mary a statecraft which left no room for indifference to Scotland.
The letters themselves began with a private approach to Cecil by William Kirkcaldy of Grange; then came one from five Scottish Protestants, Argyll, lord James and others, written on 19 July, and remarkable for its spelling, its rhetorical power, and its refusal to state positively what was wanted.
Both were cautious in the extreme.
Those who composed them were certainly prepared to assert their intention to  advance Protestantism, their desire for ‘perpetual amity’ with England, and their hostility to France.
But they raised the question of authority only in the most ambiguous terms: ‘we have yet made no mention of change in authority nor has it even entered our hearts, but seeing that France and the Queen Regent here, her priests, etc., intend nothing but suppressing Christ's evangel…we are fully purposed to seek the next remedy and withstand their tyranny’.
And so they asked for English counsel and ‘furtherance’.
Cecil's response, which they received on 6 August, was an expression of sympathy — and equally cautious.
As Argyll and lord James said, in their reply of the 13th in which they openly declared it to be the role of the nobles and council ‘to provide that the ancient liberties of the realm be freed from tyranny of strangers (and) to abolish (God assisting us) all manifest idolatry and maintainers’, he had not been ‘so full and plain as we expected’.
What prompted blunter speaking we do not know, but there was to be no lack of plainness in the English memorandum drawn up on the 31st.
This recommended at least perpetual peace between England and Scotland, and even a single monarchy.
The French were to be excluded from offices in Scotland — and Scottish noblemen must reject French pensions.
Châtelherault and the Hamiltons, as heirs to the queen, must have regard to Anglo-Scottish friendship.
And if the queen would not agree to all this, ‘as is likely’, for the ‘greedy and tyrannous affection of France, then it is apparent that Almighty God is pleased to transfer from her the rule of the kingdom for the weale of it’.
The Rough Wooing, when the tyrannous strangers had been the English, was forgotten; what was resurrected from the 1540s was the idea of a united, Protestant Britain.
And if necessary, the Francophile queen would go.
What are we to make of all this?
Surely confusion in the minds of the leading Protestants, pushed down strange paths by the increasing pressure of religious and political tensions, rather than a determination to rush upon revolution.
At most, they had hinted only obliquely at the removal of Mary herself; the phrase ‘to seek the next remedy’ in the letter of 19 July could not be more guarded.
Indeed, the measure of the difficulty they were in can be seen in their own statement of 6 August in defence of their lack of achievement, made on the very day they had been disappointed by Cecil's letter; for Knox was inscribing a letter from Argyll and lord James to Sir James Croft, captain of Berwick, saying that they were ‘sorry to be judged slow, negligent and cold in our proceedings….
You know, sir, how difficult it is to persuade a multitude to revolt of established authority’.
It is the eternal message of men of vision, pushing against the dead weight of conservatism.
And it was of no help to the Scottish Protestants that on 8 August, in the instructions given to that experienced diplomat of the 1540s, Sir Ralph Sadler, now sent north to make a comeback in the Scottish political scene, the English were encouraging the idea of being anti-French and anticipating their outspoken memorandum of the 31st by warbling about the need for government by someone of the blood of Scotland.
Indeed, the casual indifference of this earlier document makes it quite clear what the English were after; France, as the later memorandum said, must not make Scotland a ‘footstool’ to look over England, and whether that be resolved, as the memorial of the 8th put it, by Mary's heir Châtelherault or by her bastard half-brother lord James, should he have designs on the crown, really did not matter.
It was not so easy for the Scottish Protestants.
Their problem was that, for all the clarity of their insistence that God was on their side, their world was a complex, not a simple place.
It was they who were the defenders, not the aggressors, the men pushed by fear of extermination into acts which they knew came dangerously close to that disturbance of the social order which was almost as much to be feared.
They were well aware that the natural secular order of things was rule by the monarch.
But for them, events had been dictated by the regent's French policy, French officials and, during the fighting in 1559, French troops.
Meanwhile, to what could they look for from their monarch?
On 17 July 1559, the answer was a scolding letter from her husband the king of France to lord James, marvelling that he, who ‘has the honour to be so near the Queen's Grace, my wife…should be so forgetful as to make yourself the head…of the tumults and seditions’; only six days later did the queen get round to sending a similarly plaintive message herself.
There could hardly be a better reminder of what they were up against: a regent in Scotland with whom they were now at war, but whose political skills they recognized, and whom they regarded with respect, acting for their sovereign in France who so far failed to rule that she got a foreign monarch to tell them off.
Unlike them, Mary Queen of Scots did not see complexities in the situation; like her grandson Charles I after her, she assumed that the expression of the royal will from a distance was enough to make problems go away.
And the Protestants' only hope of redressing the imbalance of power created by the French lay in turning to the English, even though they well knew that protestations of Anglo-Scottish friendship and desire for union in no way wiped out the instinctive hostility between Scots  and English which ran so deep that half a century later it would still cause grievous problems for the first king of Britain.
Certainly it made nonsense of their appeal for support within Scotland on the grounds of freeing the kingdom from the tyranny of strangers.
Nor was that their only headache.
Whatever ideas of deposing Mary were tentatively circulating in the summer of 1559, it would have been an immensely dangerous step to take.
There were, of course, grounds for taking it; they could well argue the impossibility of continuing to give their loyalty and service to a monarch who was creating a totally new situation by failing in her fundamental duty of ruling her people.
And getting rid of an unwelcome ruler would not actually be novel; it had happened twice in the fifteenth century, to James I and James III.
But this time there would be a complete novelty, and one that would have given the most strongly anti-Marian pause.
For whereas two individual kings had been removed, it had been the experience of their personal rule which had provoked men into lethal opposition.
But the royal house of Stewart itself had not been threatened; in both cases, the king's son had succeeded.
There is no doubt about the strength and prestige of the house of Stewart, and the profound unwillingness of the Scots to challenge it.
In this case, therefore, the problem was horribly compounded by the fact that the queen was as yet childless; and the heir who would succeed was James duke of Châtelherault, head of the unpopular house of Hamilton and discredited former regent.
In May 1559, Mary of Guise had hurled at her opponents the accusation that they ‘meant no religion, but a plain rebellion’.
The first claim was certainly wrong, and hence the second far too stark.
So long as France and Scotland were run by three members of the mighty Guise family, the cardinal and the duke in France and their sister Mary in Scotland, then the only way for the Lords of the Congregation to achieve their religious ends, and prevent Scotland from sinking into provincial status, was to resist the regent.
Only the most cynical of historians can attempt to challenge the religious sincerity of men like Glencairn and Argyll and their associates.
They were not simply rebels.
But anything other than aquiescence with the regent could only tie them into political and ideological knots of Gordian proportions.
We do not know how close they came to attempting to depose Mary.
We do know that, if it had been an idea seriously mooted, they drew back.
This left them in the ludicrous position of having to claim that, out of loyalty to their sovereign lady, they were embattled against their sovereign lady's mother.
In the propaganda warfare of this period which both they and Mary of Guise plunged into with alacrity, Mary  certainly had the stronger case.
The Lords of the Congregation could rightly assert the duty and responsibility of the nobility to act for the good of the commonweal, and indeed experience of minorities over two centuries had in practice underwritten the theoretical position to an unusual extent.
But so long as Mary of Guise's position was upheld by her daughter, no amount of rhetoric could conceal the fact that in attacking the regent they were attacking the queen, and religious sincerity did not get them off the hook of treason; thus, for example, when they seized the coining-irons of the mint in Edinburgh in July, it was an intelligent enough political and military act, but their efforts to justify it on the grounds that they were serving their country by stopping the regent's debasement of the coinage rang all too hollow.
And underneath the lofty claims that they were fulfilling the will of God and freeing the kingdom from oppression and tyranny, and the open attacks on the regent's actions, there were still hints of the desire to come to terms, which reflect their awareness of how shaky the basis of their self-defence was.
These hints had their final expression in an astonishing personal letter written by Knox to Mary on 26 October 1559, claiming that ‘if it be the office of a very friend to give true and faithful counsel to them whom he sees run to destruction for lack of the same, I could not be proven enemy to your Grace but rather a friend unfeigned’— even if moderation was never Knox's strong suit and so, unable to keep up the quiet tone of the letter, he felt impelled to throw in a postscript: ‘God move your heart yet in time to consider that ye fight not against man, but against the eternal God, and against his Son Jesus Christ, the only Prince of the kings of the earth.’
The most remarkable thing about this letter was that Knox thought it worthwhile making his appeal even although five days earlier the Lords of the Congregation had taken decisive action.
On 21 October a Convention summoned to the Tolbooth in Edinburgh accused Mary of Guise of the fundamental failure to take counsel from the nobility of the realm, something which touched on a very sensitive aristocratic nerve, and with reason.
And so in ludicrous language, ‘with one consent and common vote…
In name and authority of our Sovereign Lord and Lady (Francis and Mary),(the Convention) suspends the said commission granted by our said Sovereigns to the said Queen Dowager’.
So Francis and Mary deposed the regent.
The principal catalyst behind this act was the fact that in September the wavering Châtelherault had come to a decision as a result of Cecil's help in arranging the escape of his son Arran from France, and finally agreed  to join the Lords of the Congregation, thus ending the uneasy situation in which the Hamiltons had dithered between two opposing forces.
The significance of the act is that it shows how much further the Lords of the Congregation were now prepared to go.
Its lack of significance is that it made no real difference to the political situation, except for putting the burgh of Edinburgh through a rapid change of councils and giving it the burden of housing the army of the Congregation.
By early November, the Protestant lords had been forced to slip out of Edinburgh, leaving the Catholics in the ascendant and the Mass restored.
The queen dowager might no longer be regent, in Protestant eyes, but she still had her French troops and stalemate continued.
It was to last for some months yet.
But while Francis and Mary fussed about the situation in Edinburgh, setting up an enquiry into what had happened to the burgh council, in February 1560 the Protestant lords did something ideologically much less courageous than their deposition of the regent, but in practical terms infinitely more crucial: they made the Treaty of Berwick with England, and were assured of English help.
At an informal level, they had not wholly lacked it before; £3000 had been sent to them in August 1559, and in January the English Admiral Winter had appeared in the forth, officially searching for pirates but actually cutting the French troops' line of communication between their strongholds in Fife and Leith.
But help was now guaranteed, by a treaty which was the triumph of Cecil's clear policy over Elizabeth's instinctive desire to obfuscate and temporize.
The English queen, like the Scottish Protestants, was caught in an intolerable ideological trap.
English political interests on balance dictated help for the Protestants, even though that in itself meant the risk of stirring up reaction from France and perhaps even Spain.
But for the first time, and not the last, Elizabeth had to agree to support Scottish rebels against their rightful queen; it was a nightmare created in 1559 which was not to end until Mary's death in 1587.
English troops arrived in Scotland at the end of March.
By July, it was all over.
It was not only English intervention which brought this about, for although this undoubtedly tipped the balance, Mary of Guise held Edinburgh castle, and the French appeared almost impregnable in Leith.
But there were two other factors.
In France, a conspiracy of Calvinists and ‘political’ Huguenots against the Guises, which ended with the ‘Tumult of Amboise’in mid March with its hideous reprisals, left the Guises victorious, but it deflected their attention away from Scotland at a critical moment.
They could no longer pour in troops.
Instead, in April and May, they sent Jean, bishop of Valence and Charles  de Rochefoucault, sieur de Randan, by way of London, to treat with the Lords of the Congregation.
Then came the crowning blow for France and for the Catholics in Scotland.
On 11 June, Mary of Guise died of dropsy.
The jubilant Knox wrote about her death in terms which make it clear why charity has not been thought a notable feature of Scottish Calvinism.
In fact, at the death-bed there was an astonishing display of Protestant respect for the regent who had fought so hard for the French alliance and the survival of the Catholic faith.
For with her when she died were those leading Calvinists lord James Stewart and Archibald earl of Argyll.
It is a remarkable demonstration of the attitude of the Scottish aristocracy to authority — no matter the existence of political hostility and religious division — when that authority was effectively exercised.
Mary of Guise was brought up in the charmed circles of the greatest French aristocracy.
She was not brought up to be a major figure in political life, let alone a ruler.
She was pitchforked into it by the early death of her husband James V. But this woman from France made sure that she learned about the country she would control.
She did things which were deeply unpopular to a large section of the political community which she was striving to hold together.
But she shared one crucial thing with the whole of that community, friends and enemies: awareness that the struggle was not just a Scottish matter, but something fought out on the international stage.
Moreover, she had shown that, even if she was only regent and not queen, let alone king, she was, like the Stewart kings themselves, a formidable personality, all too able to impose her policies.
The Frenchwoman who was the major politician of the 1550s was therefore deeply in tune with two centuries of Scottish political tradition.
Only in the last months of her life did it appear that her policy might not be sustained, because of the changed situation in England and France.
In that sense, she died a failure; but she died with the respect, even admiration, not just of her supporters, but of those Protestant lords who had struggled against her.
In the person of Mary of Guise, it had been made abundantly clear that neither a French background nor an assertive Protestant aristocracy was a bar to the exercise of power and the acquisition of respect.
It remained to be seen whether her daughter could follow her example.