

Jury awards Donovan £200,000
By Wendy Holden and Colin Randall
JASON DONOVAN, the singer and actor, won £200,000 libel damages against the magazine The Face yesterday after a High Court judge had urged jurors not to ‘go over the top’ with their award.
Mr Donovan, 23, Australian star of the West End hit musical Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat, brought the action after the magazine published a doctored photograph and article which, he claimed, implied that he was homosexual and a liar and hypocrite for denying it.
With costs unofficially estimated at up to £200,000, the award seemed likely to force the closure of the magazine, which has built a reputation for trendiness and a circulation of 73,000, selling mainly to people in their 20s.
But Mr Donovan's manager, Mr Richard East, said last night that both sides had agreed to hold discussions ‘to achieve a satisfactory outcome for everybody and to enable the magazine to continue to publish’.
Mr Donovan's motive had been to clear his name, not to close the magazine.
The latest in a series of costly libel defeats for newspapers, periodicals and individuals led to renewed calls for legal reform to remove the power of juries to decide the size of libel damages.
In his summing-up, Mr Justice Drake had told jurors to remember that the ‘hurt’ caused to Mr Donovan lasted less than a year and would end with a verdict in his favour.
Contrasting Mr Donovan's distress with that of victims of industrial injury, the judge said: ‘You should have in mind it is not a case where you are awarding damages for someone who has suffered some physical injuries which will be with him for the rest of his days.
‘Bear in mind there are people who suffer lifelong injury which can never be put right.
What does a miner who has irreparable damage to his lungs and lives a miserable life say when he reads of huge awards of damages in libel actions?
‘Just bear that in mind as a thought.
I simply urge you to be reasonable and not go over the top.’
The verdict was announced to cheers and spontaneous applause at the back of the court, where dozens of teenage girls had gathered throughout the five-day trial.
Mr Donovan gave a long sigh of relief.
Afterwards, the actor was swept from the courtroom and along the corridors, closely pursued by screaming fans and on to the court steps, where he said in a prepared statement: ‘This has not been a case about homosexuality and I resent any suggestion that it was.
Everybody should be free to live their lives as they wish.
I am heterosexual.
‘This decision totally vindicates me and clears my name of the slur that I have lied about myself.’
As he spoke, supporters of the Outrage organisation waved banners saying ‘Glad to be gay’ and ‘Queers surf too’.
The organisation said it was ‘astonishing’ that it was still regarded as a slur for a person to be described as gay, and delivered a letter to Mr Donovan calling for his support in their campaign for the ‘enactment of legislation for lesbian and gay equality’.
After reading his statement, Mr Donovan was driven away to rest before his appearance at the London Palladium last night.
Mr Donovan had told the court that he was ‘humiliated and disgusted’ by the article published in the magazine in August, 1991.
The accompanying photograph, a reproduction of a ‘gay outing’ protest posterdesigned to force homosexual celebrities into the open, apparently showed him wearing a tee-shirt bearing the slogan ‘Queer as ****’.
The magazine described Mr Donovan as the boy with bleached hair, although the actor told the court he had never used chemicals on his hair —‘just lemon juice in the sun sometimes’.
He agreed he had once told journalists he was ‘a male tart’ but said this was a reference to his many relationships with women, not men.
He also agreed that he once claimed surfing was better than sex, and had said he could not be gay because he went surfing, which he considered a largely heterosexual sport.
Mr Nick Logan, 45, managing director of the magazine's publishers, Wagadon Ltd, the company in which the Conde Nast group has a stake, and the writer of the article, Mr Ben Summerskill, denied libel.
After the verdict, Mr Logan and the magazine's editor, Ms Sheryl Garratt, 31, appeared close to tears.
The defendants had accepted ‘unreservedly’ that Mr Donovan was not homosexual but maintained that the article was a responsible discussion of ‘outing’, which the magazine opposed.
It had referred to Mr Donovan because he had been targeted as the first victim of the campaign in Britain.
Mr Jonathon Crystal, defence counsel, said there would be an appeal against the amount of damages and was granted a stay of execution.
The defendants in a statement said that they were ‘very unhappy’ with the jury's decision.
Mr Logan and Mr Summerskill faced the prospect of financial ruin but would try to find resources to save the magazine.
‘Jason Donovan has known for a long time that The Face is not rich, and we have repeatedly offered to apologise unreservedly for the article,’ the statement added.
‘The Face never wanted this case to come to court and every effort was made to settle the dispute, without success.’
The statement said the defendants would now complete preparation of the May issue of their magazine in ‘the most difficult circumstances.’
BAFTA judges in vote-fixing row over award
By Jane Thynne, Media Correspondent
AN INVESTIGATION is to be mounted at BAFTA into the award of a prize to the Granada drama Prime Suspect after four of the seven jury members claim to have voted for Channel 4's GBH.
The affair, dubbed Baftagate by members of the British Academy of Film and Television Arts, is taking on the dimensions of a drama itself.
Millions of BBC viewers watched Prime Suspect, starring Helen Mirren, take the award for best drama serial at last month's British ‘Oscars’ ceremony.
But yesterday it emerged that the four judges had written to Mr Tony Byrne, BAFTA president, saying they had voted for GBH, the Alan Bleasdale drama starring Robert Lindsay as leader of a corrupt city council.
The panel was chaired by Miss Irene Shubik, an independent producer.
The seven jurors were Archie Tait, a film executive, Mark Steyn, TV critic of the Evening Standard, Louis Marks, the BBC producer, the writers Ross Devenish and David Reid, and the film executives Herbert Wise and Clive Exton.
According to BAFTA's rules, the panel chairman votes only if there is a tie in the jury of seven — which would have come about if, for example, there had been three votes each for Prime Suspect and GBH and one for one of the other nominees such as the BBC's Clarissa.
The ballot was secret and the votes put in sealed envelopes, which were then handed to Miss Shubik, checked, passed to the assistant director of BAFTA, then on to Mr Byrne.
‘The jury cast their vote by secret ballot and their deliberations were meticulously checked and tripled checked and were absolutely in accordance with the rules,’ Mr Byrne said yesterday.
‘It was a first-past-the-post system and I can personally vouch for the result because I saw with my own eyes a clear majority for Prime Suspect.’
He refused to say whether seven or eight voting slips had been handed to him, and said they were all destroyed soon after.
Mr Steyn, who voted for Prime Suspect, said the jurors handed their votes to Miss Shubik, who checked them and announced a majority of four to three, though she did not say who had won.
‘I got the clear impression the majority was in favour of Prime Suspect,’ he said.
Mr Steyn suggested one Prime Suspect voter may have said they voted for GBH, and then ‘a little lie snowballed’.
He said that Miss Shubik, former producer of Rumpole of The Bailey, was ‘the last person who could be likely to fix anything’.
Both Lynda La Plante, who wrote Prime Suspect, and Alan Bleasdale, author of GBH, were at the Broadcasting Press Guild annual awards yesterday, receiving prizes for their work.
Mr Bleasdale said he was unhappy about Baftagate.
‘I like to think I'm a good loser, but I don't like being cheated out of something that I ought to have won,’ he said.
The investigation will be mounted by the full council of BAFTA at its Piccadilly headquarters on Monday.
Grant threat after ban on concert-goer
By Nigel Bunyan
THE Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Society could lose its annual grant from Wirral Council because a disabled woman was asked to leave a concert.
Miss Ying Chueng's departure followed complaints from a guest conductor, Gunter Herbig, and members of the BBC Philharmonic Orchestra, that her moans of appreciation were spoiling a performance being broadcast live on Radio 3.
Staff at the Philharmonic Hall were embarrassed by the incident, particularly since they operate a ‘full access’ policy for the disabled.
Miss Chueng was, and remains, a regular patron.
Yesterday, two months after the concert, the Labour-controlled council warned that it might not renew the society's grant.
Last year it gave £64,800, one-third of the group's local authority aid.
Councillor Eric Smith, chairman of the leisure services committee, said a report on the incident was being compiled.
Academy investigates row over ‘vote-fixing’
By Jane Thynne, Media Correspondent
AN INVESTIGATION is to be mounted at BAFTA into the award of a prize to the Granada drama Prime Suspect after four of the seven jury members claim to have voted for Channel 4's GBH.
The affair, dubbed Baftagate by members of the British Academy of Film and Television Arts, is taking on the dimensions of a drama itself.
Millions of BBC viewers watched Prime Suspect, starring Helen Mirren, take the award for best drama serial at last month's British ‘Oscars’ ceremony.
But yesterday it emerged that the four judges had written to Mr Tony Byrne, BAFTA president, saying they had voted for GBH, the Alan Bleasdale drama starring Robert Lindsay as leader of a corrupt city council.
The panel was chaired by Miss Irene Shubik, an independent producer.
The seven jurors were Archie Tait, a film executive, Mark Steyn, TV critic of the Evening Standard, Louis Marks, the BBC producer, the writers Ross Devenish and David Reid, and the film executives Herbert Wise and Clive Exton.
According to BAFTA's rules, the chairman of the panel votes only if there is a tie in the jury of seven — which would have come about if, for example, there had been three votes each for Prime Suspect and GBH and one for one of the other nominees such as the BBC's Clarissa.
The ballot was secret and the votes put in sealed envelopes, which were then handed to Miss Shubik, checked, passed to the assistant director of BAFTA, then on to Mr Byrne.
‘The jury cast their vote by secret ballot and their deliberations were meticulously checked and tripled checked and were absolutely in accordance with the rules,’ Mr Byrne said yesterday.
‘It was a first-past-the-post system and I can personally vouch for the result because I saw with my own eyes a clear majority for Prime Suspect.’
He refused to say whether seven or eight voting slips had been handed to him, and said they were all destroyed soon after.
Mr Steyn, who voted for Prime Suspect, said the jurors handed their votes to Miss Shubik, who checked them and announced a clear majority of four to three, though she did not say who had won.
‘I got the clear impression the majority was in favour of Prime Suspect,’ he said.
Mr Steyn suggested one Prime Suspect voter may have said they voted for GBH, and then ‘a little lie snowballed’.
He said that Miss Shubik, former producer of Rumpole of The Bailey, was ‘the last person who could be likely to fix anything’.
Both Lynda La Plante, who wrote Prime Suspect, and Alan Bleasdale, author of GBH, were at the Broadcasting Press Guild annual awards yesterday, receiving prizes for their work.
Mr Bleasdale said he was unhappy about Baftagate.
‘I like to think I'm a good loser, but I don't like being cheated out of something that I ought to have won,’ he said.
The investigation will be mounted by the full council of BAFTA at its Piccadilly headquarters on Monday.
A home movie starring Anthony Hopkins Caroline Shapland sacrificed her holly bush and a tranquil life for months of chaos with a film cast.
James Delingpole found out why
By JAMES DELINGPOLE
THIS TIME last year a crew of 50 descended on Caroline and Roger Shapland's 17th-century Oxfordshire farmhouse, cut down the holly bush at the end of their drive, ripped up their carpets, removed their light switches and took over all but one of their bedrooms.
Surprisingly the Shaplands loved it.
They had allowed their house to be used as a location for Howard's End, Ismail Merchant's and James Ivory's film of E M Forster's novel, which will be released in Britain at the end of this month.
It meant spending two months living in the spare bedroom and the kitchen, the only rooms not used by the crew, while the cast — including Vanessa Redgrave, Emma Thompson, Helena Bonham Carter and, fresh from The Silence of the Lambs, Anthony Hopkins — were filming.
‘We were all very great friends by the time they had left,’ said Mrs Shapland.
‘I don't think Emma Thompson wanted to go.
She fell in love with Nutmeg, our Norfolk terrier, who spent most of the day stealing food from the film's canteen.’
For the first few weeks the cast used the bedrooms as dressing rooms.
‘They stuck their names on the doors.
Anthony Hopkins had our son Harry's room,’ said Mr Shapland.
Because Forster's tale about two clashing families — the stuffy Wilcoxes and the emancipated Schlegels — is set in Edwardian England the house had to be decorated in period style.
The Shaplands' furniture was moved into a neighbouring barn; paper stripped off the walls; a large modern window bricked up; radiators hidden; and light fittings taken down.
The holly bush went to give the cameras a clearer view.
Ten months later, however, the house looks better than when the crew arrived.
‘They were incredibly considerate,’ said Mrs Shapland.
‘Once they had finished filming they spent a week clearing up and putting everything back perfectly.’
They also redecorated free of charge.
The filming did not go unnoticed by the rest of the village near Henley-on-Thames.
Besides the Shaplands' daughter, Emily, who was recruited to work in the art department, local schoolchildren were employed as extras and crowds of spectators gathered to watch from a nearby meadow.
Occasionally the traffic had to be stopped to prevent modern vehicles spoiling the period setting.
‘I suppose some people must have been annoyed, but most tended to stop and watch the filming instead,’ Mrs Shapland said.
According to Mr Kell Gatherer, managing director of London-based scouts Location Work Limited, the pleasures of seeing your house on film can be outweighed by the inconvenience.
‘Besides the early rises you have to deal with several huge trucks for the props, costumes, canteen and equipment.
Then there is the massive power generator which can weight 20 tons or more.
It usually leads to a few cracked paving stones,’ he said.
But there are compensations: the going rate for a decent country house location is about £1,000 a day, and can be considerably more.
Mrs Shapland did not wish to disclose how much she received but was clearly not unhappy.
‘I am sure a lot of people would like to have a film made at their home but then I'm sure a lot of people would loath the disruption,’ she said.
‘But I have to say that we loved every minute of it.’
Snakes that crawl out from under the stone of history
Distasteful behaviour is a trait of mankind, not a national characteristic.
We who have not lived under the eye of the secret police should not be smug, says JOHN KEEGAN
By JOHN KEEGAN
ANEW book is about to remind America of the worst that happened in the Vietnam War.
At My Lai, on March 16, 1968, 105 American soldiers entered the village.
When they left four hours later, 500 of the villagers, children and women as well as men, were dead.
They had been killed by Charlie Company, very few of whose members had refused to obey the orders of Lieutenant William Calley.
There was, of course, a cover-up.
There would probably have been a cover-up in any army, if only to find the time to deal with the malefactors by the army's own rules.
In Vietnam, it went too far.
Soon there was a cover-up of the cover-up, because senior officers by then knew too much.
The truth began to be known only when returned veterans started to piece the story together from hearsay at home and to voice their fears to Congressmen.
When the first version reached the White House, General Alexander Haig wrote to his staff: ‘No one should undertake to tell the President, who is not fully informed of the sordid facts.’
Eventually, many of the sordid facts did come out, in the public trial of Lieutenant Calley.
Many did not, however, and charges were dropped against 30 other officers, most of whom were implicated in the cover-up rather than the massacre itself.
Calley, who had been sentenced to life imprisonment, was eventually paroled after having served only three years.
America quickly forgot My Lai and does not like reminders — which this book will bring.
Yet the full story is by no means to America's discredit.
The crime was brought out and the chief criminal was prosecuted and convicted, all within a space of three years.
The careers of the officers complicit in the cover-up were blighted for ever.
Many Europeans who have lived under regimes where officialdom can do no wrong would regard the aftermath of My Lai as a triumph of democratic practice.
The young veteran Ronald Ridenhour, whose conscience first led him to question former comrades, was racked by horror at discovering the crimes his friends had committed but felt no fear of official reprisal when he wrote to 30 Congressmen.
Seymour Hersh, the journalist who broke the story, obtained most of his facts from the army through its ‘open information’ policy.
This book has been written from the US Army's court-martial records, something which would not have been possible in this country, where such records are closed to the public for 100 years.
The My Lai episode should, therefore, be a model to such peoples as the East Germans and the Romanians, who are just emerging from 50 years of living under the secret police.
But is it?
The episode proves that a democratic regime which lifts the stone in time can live with the light thrown on what is found underneath.
The stone which the East Germans have lifted, however, has revealed so much that is nasty that many East Germans will never again live in comfort with neighbours, workmates, even close relatives.
The Stasi, the secret police, successor to the Gestapo (and probably partly recruited from it, as is the way of things) not only kept files on most East German citizens but also encouraged — or blackmailed — people to fill them by informing.
That is bad enough.
What the East Germans are finding, however, now that they can read what is written, is that friends and neighbours often freely volunteered to inform, often with lies.
It is a classic definition of tyranny that a tyrant feels his regime to be secure only when his subjects start to inform.
Then he knows that they fear him more than dishonour.
What is so disheartening about what has been discovered in the Stasi files, however, is that people informed even when under no pressure to do so.
They informed to curry favour and to build up credit against being informed on themselves, but also out of ambition, spite, jealousy and almost every other nasty motive found in human nature.
MANY East Germans are now wondering whether opening the files has been the cleansing it was supposed to be.
It has swept away the last remnants of the Stasi system, but in the process dirtied millions of Germans and the feelings their fellows have for them.
Should the Germans have been surprised?
They had to look only as far as France to learn how pernicious are the effects of unlocking the archives after a period when the secret police have been keeping open house.
What the trials of such war criminals as Klaus Barbie have revealed is that they really had to do very little work at all.
Barbie had only 400 German secret policemen to cover south-eastern France.
It was quite enough.
They were deluged with what the French call le corbeau, poison-pen letters accusing neighbours, business competitors and colleagues of everything from listening to the BBC to being an active resistant (of whom there were, in fact, very few indeed until the eve of the Liberation).
When the Liberation came, the French dealt with the open collaborators in a brutal few weeks of epuration — a purge in which some innocents suffered.
Bigger figures — industrialists who had made weapons for Germany — were tried later at highly publicised hearings.
The archives, many of which had been assembled by the French police themselves, were kept firmly closed.
It is only since the Barbie trial that the public has begun to get a peep into them.
None — whether informed on, informing or their descendants — likes what they see.
Why should they?
The British may say that if the French have a word for it, then le corbeau must be an old French habit.
There is something in that, as Balzac would witness.
Let us not delude ourselves that an equivalent would not have found its way into English if needed.
Le corbeau tells us about human nature, not national character.
There would be a massive archive somewhere if we had ever lived under the Stasi or the Gestapo.
Perhaps there is such an archive.
Whitehall's obsessive secrecy may have a more humane base than generally allowed, though that seems rather unlikely.
What is certain is that, did it exist and were it to be opened by some ‘cleansing regime’, the happy openness of British life would go for good.
Thank goodness we were never occupied — not so much because of what the occupiers might have done to us, but because of what we would probably have done to each other.
Four Hours at My Lai, by Michael Bilton and Kevin Sim, is being published by Viking early next month.
Letter to the Editor: Scraps of genius
SIR — There are special reasons for keeping Audubon's Birds of America in Edinburgh (Peterborough, April 1).
It was produced in Edinburgh with assistance from our future Regius Professor, William MacGillivray, who recalls an excursion with the idol of American conservationists when he shot all the birds in sight in the middle of the breeding season.
However, the volume referred to is not Audubon's only work in Edinburgh.
Some years ago, when looking for wrapping for specimens in the Scottish National Museum, I found some dirty old papers lying on a bench.
It was disappointing to discover on asking if I could have them to find that the museum had only just got round to registering what appeared to be Audubon's proofs.
They would have been appreciated more in America.
Dr W. R. BOURNE Aberdeen University
Letter to the Editor: Shaw's idea for alphabet best
SIR — The Simplified Spelling Society's new ‘cut speling’(report, March 27) is hardly distinguishable from the bad spelling of most of today's children — and many young graduates.
It is only slightly more consistent.
The society's earlier style of spelling reform was certainly difficult, cumbersome and ludicrous in appearance; but at least it provided consistent digraphs (that is, pairs of letters for single sounds) to replace the traditional ambiguous digraphs sh, th, aw, oo.
The very name of the new ‘dictionry’ would be unacceptable to speakers of American English, who not only pronounce the a in that word but put the stress on it.
Anyway, the main difficulty in spelling the word ‘dictionary’ is not the a but the ti that represents the sound more usually spelt sh for lack of any single letter to represent it.
Besides, this putting together of two letters which also stand for other sounds inevitably causes ambiguities — bishop and mishap — while the letters th actually have two different digraphic uses as well as their separate values, as seen in the sentence ‘Thy thigh is waist-high.’
Since the English language has more than 40 phonemes, and we have only 26 letters with which to spell them, we cannot get away from digraphs altogether.
We can only augment the ABC with new letters in similar style (as in the now outmoded 1960s Initial Teaching Alphabet) or by starting again with a modern, simple, phonetic alphabet.
An augmented roman alphabet, still based on prehistoric cave drawings, would retain the physical defects of many of the existing letters.
There would still be the unnecessary complexity of m and w; such diverse forms as roman, italic, capital and lower-case letters; the lack of relationship between shapes of letters representing similar sounds (v, f) alongside similarities in shape for dissimilar sounds (e, f); the haphazard order of letters in the alphabet (one might at least expect the vowels to be grouped together at the beginning or end); and the need to backtrack to dot i's and cross t's.
Augmented alphabets also involve transition difficulties from the new to the old.
The ITA often caused children difficulty in learning correct spelling afterwards.
Yet no one ever confuses Pitman's shorthand with the ABC.
The progenitor of ‘cut speling’, Mr Upward, admits that ‘it could take a lifetime to win acceptance’.
So it would be no more difficult to introduce an entirely new, scientific alphabet.
If taught to small children as a stepping-stone to the ABC, it could wait a lifetime until everyone had grown up knowing both systems, then the better would simply oust the worst — as the arabic numerals have eventually ousted the roman ones.
This was the solution which Bernard Shaw, who objected to having to spell his surname with four letters instead of two, favoured.
In his public-spirited will, he left his royalties for its promotion.
But in 1957 the law, in its wisdom, declared his bequest invalid.
BARBARA SMOKER Secretary, Shaw Society London SE6 
Peterborough: Shelley revealed as a heartbreaker
EXACTLY 200 years after the birth of Shelley, a secret diary kept by the poet has come to light in a Dorset attic.
The journal, which tells of a teenage romance with his pretty cousin Harriet Grove, is to be published next month.
The pocket book covers the year 1810, when Shelley was a 17-year-old schoolboy at Eton.
There he penned a juvenile Gothic novel, a copy of which he intended to send to his belle.
Accordingly, he jotted down a reminder in his book.
‘Not to forget Harriet XX,’ as he recorded it.
The slim volume was unearthedby Desmond Hawkins, a Hardy scholar, while he was working on a biography of his hero.
It had lain undiscovered for years among the papers of the Grove family (then of Wiltshire, now of Dorset), through which Hawkins was sifting as he researched Hardy's subsequent relationship with Agnes Grove, Harriet's kinswoman.
The diary will be published in Hawkins' book Shelley's First Love, the first exhaustive examination of the poet's early life.
Hawkins believes it will reinforce the growing view that Shelley, not Harriet, was the heartbreaker.
‘Many scholars have suggested that she broke his heart by ending the relationship,’ Hawkins says from his home in Blandford, Dorset.
‘But that is just rubbish.
It was he who finished it.
He later eloped with another girl.’
Confirmation of Harriet's girlish infatuation comes with Hawkins's discovery of a secret pocket at the back of the diary.
It contains a piece of paper scrawled with the initials H.G. and enclosing a lock of brown hair.
It is held together with a cryptic seal showing a human eye, a large X with peck marks round it and the words ‘a return’ written underneath.
As any Boy Scout could tell you, this means: ‘I expect a return.’
The find is causing excitement across the Atlantic.
The American pundit Donald Reiman, editor of The Bodleian Shelley Manuscripts, says it illuminates ‘a very dim corner of Shelley's early life’.
140ft Norman bridge found in castle dig
By Christopher Lockwood
ARCHAEOLOGISTS working at Norwich Castle have discovered what they believe to be one of the most substantial surviving Norman bridges in the country.
The bridge, which spans the moat, is 140 feet long and 30 feet wide.
At its highest point its single arch is 25 feet high, although most of it is now underground because the level of the moat has risen.
Until now, the bridge had been believed to date to the 1820s, when the dilapidated castle was re-clad in fresh stone so that part of its keep could be used as an expanded county prison.
But a team from the Norfolk Archaeological Unit, led by Mr Brian Ayers, has been excavating the bridge at the request of Norwich City Council in order to determine its structural soundness and its history.
Much of the area surrounding the castle is being dug up in connection with the construction of Castle Mall, a £120 million shopping precinct.
This has opened the way for what has become the largest excavation of a medieval castle yet in Britain.
Mr Ayers said yesterday that the excavation had revealed two massive stone abutments, one at each end of the bridge, whose design and diagonal markings were clearly medieval.
‘There has always been a suspicion that the bridge might have been medieval,’ he said.
‘Eighteenth century prints show a medieval bridge leading to the castle.
But since being clad, it has looked just like a 19th-century bridge.’
Its full size had not been appreciated, since most of it was underground.
Until the excavations began, all that was visible of Norwich Castle was a stone keep on a large mound.
Now most of the overall plan of the original castle is being brought to light, including huge 11th century ditches and ramparts, and its monumental main gateway.
Singer cleared
Gordon Waller 46, of Fowey, Cornwall, singer with the 1960's duo Peter and Gordon who had a hit with World Without Love, was cleared at Bodmin yesterday of sending an indecent fax message.
Magistrates were told the case had been discontinued.
Obituary of Paul Henreid
PAUL HENREID, the film actor and director, who has died at Santa Monica, California, aged 84, made his name in Now Voyager (1942) and Casablanca (1943), two of the most polished and popular weepies in the history of American cinema.
In Now Voyager he played the family man caught up in a shipboard romance with a repressed spinster, Bette Davis, who has been prescribed a transatlantic cruise by her psychiatrist.
The most memorable aspect of their doomed love was Henreid's gallant — and erotic — way of lighting her cigarettes, which set a new fashion in flirtation.
He would place two cigarettes in his mouth, light them both, then hand one to the sex-starved spinster, sometimes even going to the length of installing it between her lips.
The gesture, according to Hollywood lore, was born of Henreid's nervous incompetence at lighting Davis's cigarette in the conventional fashion, and was suggested by the director after an unacceptable number of botched ‘takes’.
Whatever its history, in the huge smoke-filled cinemas of the 1940s the effect was electric.
All the stars smoked in those days, but Henreid was the first to turn the habit to such sexual advantage.
Tobacco advertisers immediately latched on to the idea, and plagiarised it for decades to come.
Henreid was well established in the hearts of female filmgoers when, impeccable in a white linen suit, he appeared in Casablanca.
He played Victor Laszlo, the wartime Resistance leader married to Ingrid Bergman, who is forced to accept the help of Humphrey Bogart, the cynical proprietor of the Cafe Americain.
Bogart and Bergman had loved one another years before, and in neutral Casablanca discover that their passion is unabated.
Henreid is reduced to standing elegantly about while Bogart and Bergman cast anguished glances at one another.
His character was, however, memorably impassive — never more so than when the chokingly tearful Miss Bergman purrs, ‘Oh, Victor, please don't go to the underground meeting tonight.’
Henreid went on to direct a handful of Hollywood films.
Best known of these was Dead Ringer (1964, released in Britain as Dead Image), in which Bette Davis gave a superlative performance as twins, one evil, the other angelic.
The son of a Viennese baron, Paul George Julius von Henreid was born on Jan 10 1908 at Trieste, then still part of Austria.
He was educated in Vienna, at the Maria Therese Academy and then at the Institute of Graphic Arts.
He went on to work as a designer and translator for an Austrian publisher, where the manager, Otto Preminger (later a celebrated film director) introduced him to Max Reinhardt.
Reinhardt at once invited him to join his Viennese theatre company, and within a few seasons Henreid had become one of its leading players.
He then appeared in a few Austrian films before fleeing from the Nazis in the late 1930s.
He arrived in Britain, where he soon found supporting roles in the cinema, notably in Victoria the Great (1937), Herbert Wilcox's vehicle for his future wife, Anna Neagle; then as a schoolmaster in Goodbye Mr Chips (1939); and finally in Carol Reed's Night Train to Munich (1940), in which he played a treacherous Gestapo agent with a telling degree of coldness.
Henreid also made occasional stage appearances, most memorably in The Jersey Lily (Gate Theatre, 1940), a dramatic reconstruction of the life and loves of Lily Langtry.
Henreid had made a film in Austria five years earlier on the same subject, and in Basil Bartlett's play he brought considerable urbanity to the role of Prince Louis of Battenberg, opposite Leo Genn's Prince of Wales.
His other British films included An Englishman's Home (1939) and Under Your Hat (1940).
In 1941 he moved to Hollywood and landed his first part in Robert Stevenson's Joan of Paris (1942), a gripping propaganda adventure.
He went on to play a Dutch underground leader in The Conspirators (1944) and a gifted cuckolded cellist in Deception (1946).
When his physical charms began to fade (although his innately aristocratic manners remained unimpaired) Henreid turned to such forgettable swashbuckling epics as The Spanish Main (1945), Thief of Damascus (1952) and The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse (1962), as well as a number of television films.
Other parts included the Irish curate in Devotion (1944), a Hollywood gloss on the Bronte story; Schumann in Song of Love (1947); the arms dealing lover of Gina Lollobrigida in Never So Few (1959); and the artist-doctor in Of Human Bondage (1964).
Art Without Shame Jeff Koons is either an important artist or a con-man.
His unusual marriage was either made in heaven or arranged for the publicity.
Tony Parsons asks the new Warhol: Are you for real?
By TONY PARSONS
WHEN I interviewed Jeff Koons and his wife they were very much in love.
One week later they were preparing for divorce.
Not long after that they were back in each other 's arms.
Every stumble and fall on their path of true love was recorded by the mass media.
Mr and Mrs Koons are the Liz Taylor and Richard Burton of the art world.
Now 37, Jeff Koons long ago made enough money from his art never to need to work again.
But he is as prolific — and as controversial — as ever.
His critics call him a charlatan.
His friends hail him as the last great artist of the 20th century.
What few people seem to accept is that he might be exactly what he appears to be.
‘Art lacks glamour,’ says Koons in his calm, persuasive monotone.
‘Art lacks charisma.
Art is up for grabs.’
His wife smiles at him adoringly, her mouth as red as Snow White's.
As they cross the lobby of the Langham Hilton, Mr and Mrs Koons scarcely warrant a second glance from the assembled tourists, despite Mrs Koons's shocking pink dress, platinum-blonde coiffure and orange eyebrows.
But 24 hours earlier, a flock of shrieking paparazzi had tailed them all over London; because 40-year-old Mrs Koons, nee Ilona Staller, is the former Italian parliamentarian and porn star Cicciolina (variously translated as ‘the dumpling’, ‘the plump one’ and ‘little pinchable one’), while her husband is the most talked-about artist since Andy Warhol.
‘Ilona and I have a clippings service,’ says Koons.
‘They send stories about us from all over the world and they charge $1.25 a clipping.
And it costs up to $8,000 every month.’
But Jeff Koons can afford it.
His 1988 exhibition was staged simultaneously at identical shows in New York, Chicago and Cologne (Koons made 18 pieces in triplicate) and it quickly sold out, grossing $5 million, despite one critic denouncing the work as ‘a recycling of kitsch taste for jaded sophisticates’.
The exhibition consisted of giant ceramic sculptures featuring the likes of a white Michael Jackson cuddling his pet chimp, a girl in a bathtub being surprised by a periscope, and a menagerie of smiling bears, penguins, puppies and pigs.
It was the flotsam and jetsam of every seaside gift shop, the debris of 10 million suburban mantelpieces, but blown up to epic proportions, made mythic and crafted by European artisans to Koons's instructions.
The exhibition was called Banality.
‘I was trying to remove the guilt and shame of the bourgeoisie,’ says Koons.
‘I believe that I have never worked with kitsch.
What they mistake for kitsch is our past.
I try to make art that is open to a large group of people.’
But now the charges against Koons of dubious taste have been joined by accusations of sensationalism and obscenity.
His latest exhibition is Made in Heaven, a Kama Sutra of paintings and sculptures, starring Jeff and his muse Ilona, that mix the trappings of romance — flowers, butterflies, lots of baby pink and bridal white — with what one critic called ‘the most hard-core images in contemporary art’.
When Made in Heaven appeared at New York's Sonnabend Gallery last year, the crowds broke all records for an exhibition in a commercial gallery.
And they were not all smut-seeking window-shoppers.
Prices for Koons's work start at $65,000 (and went up to $250,000 at the Banality show), but there are plenty of takers.
Charles Saatchi has 15 Koonses.
Koons's admirers compare him to Salvador Dali.
Others are less impressed.
‘Jeff Koons has provided one last pathetic gasp of the sort of self-promoting hype and sensationalism that characterised the worst of the '80s,’ raged Michael Kimmelman in the New York Times, while Robert Hughes of Time called Koons ‘the starry-eyed opportunist par excellence’.
KOONS sees himself as a direct descendant of the Baroque —‘Bernini and stuff like that’— a florid exuberance in revolt against all elitism, emotional coldness and stuffed shirts.
He is certainly all that, but I see him as the new Jasper Johns — that great transformer of icons — with sex, shopping and the detritus of the suburbs in place of Johns's targets, beer cans and flags.
Koons's work teaches you to see, or at least to look again.
The marketing of the man should not blind us to the fact that he is a great artist, unafraid of engaging mass culture.
He is also a lot of fun.
Koons himself remains sanguine in the face of all the bitter debate.
‘Ilona and I are the new Adam and Eve,’ he tells me.
Before or after the Fall?
‘After the Fall, but accepting our past without guilt and shame,’ he says, in a soft, hypnotic drone.
‘Eez very beautiful, no?’ smiles Cicciolina.
It is a little after breakfast and the Koons have just walked into their first scandal of the day.
His advertisement for the Hayward Gallery's Doubletake show has just been vetoed by London Underground.
‘I tried to produce something that was very beautiful, very generous and very warm; that showed the family life I have with my wife,’ says Koons, a little hurt.
Entitled At Home with the Koons, it shows a trio of puppies in the foreground while, modestly veiled by the lovable little hounds, the middle regions of Jeff and Ilona are engaged in the intimate act that is known as, well, doggie-fashion.
But a furore like this is bread and butter to the Koons.
He is a media manipulator of genius, so adept at the mechanics of mass communication that he pauses mid-sentence when he sees that my cassette recorder has run out of tape, waiting patiently until I have inserted a new cassette before carrying on with what he was saying from exactly where he stopped.
I have never seen anyone else do that.
Aware of the importance the Koonses place on the media, I show Ilona a copy of The Daily Telegraph.
‘Eez very beautiful,’ she purrs approvingly.
She is in the early stages of pregnancy, her belly gently swelling inside her pink dress, and she tells me with obvious delight that she is expecting a summer bambino.
‘Luna if eet's a girl,’ she says.
‘And Kitsch if it's a boy,’ says Jeff.
‘To me our child is my most important work, a biological sculpture.
We look forward, more than anything, to being able to have a family and a family life.
We look forward to seeing the world anew and to trying to build a life that is as beautiful as possible for our children.
We would like to have five.
You know, the most fertile image I can imagine is Ilona standing next to a Bavarian cow.’
‘Hee-hee-hee!’ laughs Cicciolina.
‘Very beautiful, no?’
Though cynics would see their union as a match made in a PR's wildest dream, there is no doubting that their intentions towards each other are honourable.
But Ilona's alter-ego remains a bone of contention between them.
He accepts her porno past but demands from her a virtuous future.
A few days after lovingly comparing his wife to a Bavarian cow, he issued divorce proceedings because Ilona was playing footsy with the Italian Love party, a coalition of pornographers —‘terrible men, like pimps,’ Koons told me — seeking publicity for their tawdry wares.
They later kissed and made up when Ilona renounced her Love party tendencies.
It was the second time they had broken up and been reconciled.
Jeff's attitude to Cicciolina can be shockingly normal — in a predictable male way.
Ilona Staller moved to Italy when she was 17 and you would imagine that more than 20 years as a star of blue screen and stage — she had an act with a tame snake that caused concern among Italian animal-rights organisations — would have left her a little world-weary.
Even when she was a politician she let potential voters fondle her breasts on the hustings (her politics are a sexually-liberated shade of Green: she is in favour of love hotels and the environment).
But if she can't stop being Cicciolina, it seems unlikely that she will last as Mrs Koons.
In the early days of their engagement, she volunteered to sleep with Saddam Hussein if he would release the hostages.
In a fit of jealousy, Koons broke off their engagement.
But Saddam did not return her calls, the hostages stayed where they were and Jeff and Ilona were married in her native Budapest last summer.
Ilona seems to have won Jeff's heart by embodying an American adolescent boy's fantasy of dirty sex.
But the reason he loves her is the reason she is hard to hold.
The little pinchable one will find it hard to settle down to housewife piety.
Koons is clearly crazy about the woman.
During our interview, he is constantly trying to show her how lovable he is.
I ask him about his days as a commodities broker on Wall Street — Koons spent his days as a struggling artist working on Wall Street rather than starving in a garret — and he directed his answer to Ilona, because the anecdote shows the charming, apple-pie side of his nature.
‘This is great, Ilona,’ he says, leaning forward, ‘because when I was working on Wall Street trying to get someone to risk his money on cotton, I would say, ‘Bob, how can you get hurt by cotton?
Cotton is soft and fluffy!’.’
Mrs Koons smiles dutifully.
ILONA lives in Munich with her husband because US Immigration regards her as an undesirable.
But she is a genuinely sweet, almost child-like woman, constantly saying things like, ‘Ah, zee snow in Munich eez so beautiful.
You like snow?’
Koons says that it is exactly this childlike aspect that makes her vulnerable to the tacky mandarins of the porn industry, whom Koons loathes, despite the mountain of mad flesh in Made in Heaven.
‘I initially made contact with Ilona because I wanted to be a porn star as well as an art star.
For me Ilona is one of the world's great artists.
She has no guilt.
No shame.’
Intimacies soon followed and, because they did not share a common language in those early days, the words of love that they shared over breakfast had to pass through a translator.
‘Our hormonal aspects fit together perfectly,’ says Koons with his beatific grin.
‘We find beauty in the most simple things.’
If he is tormented by demons, he keeps them well hidden.
He has an unshakeable self-confidence, which no doubt dates back to when he sold his first paintings at nine years old, these early Koonses going for hundreds of dollars in Henry J Koons Interiors, his father's furniture store in a small town in Pennsylvania.
‘I was very loved as a child,’ says Koons.
If the ghost of Elvis is in his haircut, then the spirit of Colonel Tom Parker, the King's flamboyant manager, is in his rhetoric.
‘I was always a very good salesman,’ says Koons.
‘I was always the top broker at any firm I worked for on Wall Street and before that I sold memberships at the Museum of Modern Art.
I doubled their membership list.
I enjoy sales.
The market is the greatest critic.’
Made in Heaven will be at London's Anthony D'Offay Gallery in September.
Koons is creating new sculptures for the show, but the work will follow the general thrust of Made in Heaven in New York, which poses two central questions to the unconverted.
Is it pornography?
And is it art?
Koons has no doubt.
‘To me pornography is an activity which alienates one from life,’ he says.
‘And this work does absolutely the opposite.’
One week after our chat Jeff hit Ilona with divorce proceedings and everyone in the art world crowed that they had always known it wouldn't last.
I called Koons at his home in Munich during what turned out to be a temporary separation.
He sounded like a man who was trying to be brave after his marriage had just fallen apart.
There was real sadness in his voice.
It did not surprise me.
Jeff Koons is for real.
Outdoors: Wainwright on the wrong path Philip Pond on a controversy surrounding the reissue of those famous walking guides
By PHILIP POND
TO walkers, Alfred (A. W.) Wainwright is a patron saint.
His footpath guides, first with his own intricate drawings, then with photographs by Derry Brabbs, have enhanced the pleasure of holidaymaker and hardened rambler alike.
But a reissue of his work this week has been less well received.
According to its critics, it could result in walkers getting lost, trespassing, squabbling with farmers and even being injured.
Wainwright, who died last year aged 84, revolutionised footpath guides with his seven-volume Pictorial Guide to the Lakeland Fells, published between 1955 and 1966.
With their handwritten text, intricate maps and exquisite drawings, they were hailed as a work of art.
More than 1½ million copies were sold.
As a result, ‘The Master’ became Britain's best-known walker — and a household name.
Last November Michael Joseph, which, since 1984, has published several recent Wainwright titles, acquired the rights to 45 others from the Westmorland Gazette in Kendal, Cumbria.
Among them were his classic Cumbrian pictorial guides and definitive Pennine Way Companion.
It is these, unaltered apart from changes to the covers and with the approval of Wainwright's widow, Betty, that Michael Joseph has republished this week.
That decision has split walkers.
Some, like the Ramblers' Association, are happy for the guides, which they describe as ‘historic pieces of literature’, to be reprinted as they are.
Even they have reservations, however, emphasising that routes containing inaccurate information should be ‘highlighted’.
Others are outraged.
Opposition is being led by an unusual alliance consisting of the Outdoor Writers' Guild, which counts many leading walkers among its membership, the Country Landowners' Association and the National Farmers' Union, as well as the National Trust, the Countryside Commission and individual walkers.
The guild says Michael Joseph's action is ‘disturbing’, shows ‘indecent haste’ and smacks of ‘commercial opportunism’.
Its chairman, Roly Smith, says that anyone buying one of the titles and expecting a practical, up-to-date guide will be ‘sadly and quite literally misled’.
They were written up to 37 years ago; following them now could result in walkers, ‘getting lost, trespassing or even being injured on over-used, badly eroded and now quite dangerous routes’.
Mark Richards, a walker and a close friend of Wainwright for 20 years, thinks that the author would be turning in his grave.
Within the past month he has tried re-walking some of the most popular of Wainwright's routes.
On Loughrigg Fell, for example, near Grasmere, just one Lakeland fell out of more than 200 detailed with loving care in the guides, he found that every single access point mentioned had changed significantly.
Michael Joseph does include a note, tucked away in small type, stating that, ‘since footpaths, cairns and other waymarks described here may no longer be accurate, walkers are advised to check with an up-to-date Ordnance Survey map when planning a walk’.
But critics say this is inadequate.
One argues that Wainwright's books have become ‘a snare and a delusion’.
Landowners along the routes mentioned have joined ramblers in asking for directions to be revised and ‘clarified’.
Their plea follows reports of walkers getting lost while clutching an old copy of Wainwright; or insisting on crossing private land ‘because the book says so…’
So what is the publisher's response?
Jenny Dereham, editor of the Wainwright series, acknowledges that there have been protests, and says that Michael Joseph will consider a meeting with the objectors to discuss the possibility of republication, with revisions, at some future date.
But she adds: ‘As many people as have written saying we should revise them have written in to say that it's outrageous to think we should even consider revising them…
There are two sides of the story and it's pretty evenly balanced…
I know that Wainwright didn't want the guides revised.’
Nor did he expect them to be republished.
In book three of his Pictorial Guide to the Lakeland Fells, he wrote: ‘Guidebooks that are inaccurate and unreliable are worse than none at all…
Therefore, because it is unlikely that there will ever be revised editions, and because I should just hate to see my name on anything that could not be relied on, the probability is that the books will progressively be withdrawn from publication after a currency of a few years.’
Perhaps most apt of all was the question he posed rhetorically in another of his books.
‘What,’ he wrote, ‘does the editor sitting in his London office know of the Lakeland fells?’
It is a question Michael Joseph is likely to ponder long and hard over the weeks to come.
Outdoors: When a couple of cans of epoxy are not enough Brian Moynahan looks at a contest to find a dinghy that will train and tax the young
By BRIAN MOYNAHAN
THE competition to find a new dinghy to be sailed by young people aged from 11 to 15 was narrowed down this week to two boats.
The final choice — which will be worth thousands of pounds to one manufacturer — will be made by the Royal Yachting Association next month.
A new dinghy class with an official imprimatur can expect a long and lucrative life.
The two-child Cadet is still going as an initial trainer after 45 years.
The equally venerable single-handed Optimist is flourishing.
The RYA brief for the new dinghy is to fill the gap between these two and the larger and more physically demanding 420 class.
The two finalists were picked after an on-the-water assessment last weekend at Rutland Water, where, in dull, cold and unchallenging conditions, eight boats were put through their light-weather paces round the buoys on Europe's largest man-made lake.
The talk at Rutland Water was of the potential market, which could run to between 1,000 and 2,000 boats a year, in Britain and abroad, for many years.
This is a heady prospect, the more so during a recession.
Fourteen boats arrived at Dover before Christmas for the first demonstration.
Half were prototypes, developed by builders at their own expense and risk in response to the brief set by the RYA.
‘I was gobsmacked,’ says Chris Feibusch of Holt Allen, who took an existing French boat, the Equipe, to Dover.
‘There were all these new boats, designed on spec.
It's been a huge investment by dinghy standards.’
Dave Peacock of Rondar Boats reckons that £250,000 was spent getting all the boats to Dover.
Rondar's 370, designed by Stephen Jones specifically for the competition, was one of the two boats that made the final selection.
The other was Chris Benedict's 405.
Of the 14 boats from Dover, eight went through to Rutland Water.
Their future was in the hands of pre-teen and teenage crews as the RYA's Stuart Jardine and Jim Saltonstall, senior racing coach, stalked them round the lake to see how they performed.
‘We're looking for a wide range of points, not all of them compatible,’ said Saltonstall.
‘We want a good, strong boat that is easy to maintain and that isn't too expensive.
Performance has to be exciting enough to make the boat attractive, but it has to be something that lighter and less experienced crews starting off in the class can handle.
‘We want a boat that gives a good grounding in trapeze and spinnaker techniques, in all weather conditions, but that isn't too demanding for youngsters joining the class.
And of course there must be easy capsize recovery.’
It sounds like a typical design-by-committee product, but to the general relief the closest boat to this, the anodyne German Teeny, did not make it past Dover.
The survivors had character.
Perhaps the boat with the most character — even though it did not make the final selection — was the PDQ; an amateur effort that can be built at home from cheap parts.
The mast combines a tapered fishing rod at the top with an aluminium tube that costs a fiver or so from a metals stockist.
It was developed by a syndicate of parents at Weir Wood Sailing Club who wanted a ‘thrills and spills’ machine for their children to progress to from their Optimists.
‘Only the sailmaker and myself are vaguely professional,’ said the PDQ's designer, Roland Whitehead.
‘We do a kit of plans and key parts for £350, or a kit that needs only 40 hours to get to a bare hull for £1,800.
The prototype here was built by a BA pilot.’
Professional builders have mixed feelings about efforts like the PDQ.
‘If you give a Brit a couple of cans of epoxy, some bits of plywood and a garage, he'll come up with a boat,’ says one.
‘You have to admire the ingenuity.
It makes you proud.
Commercially, it's a pain in the arse.’
But the RYA was always more likely to plump for a more conventional design and building set-up, and four boats at Rutland Water looked to be in the frame.
The Marc Laurent-designed Equipe had the advantage of existing in numbers in France and Italy.
Against that, the competition at Rutland Water thought it typically French: too stable and underpowered.
‘It's not wobbly enough for British tastes,’ said one.
The 404, designed by Michael Jackson and built by Parker, is the opposite of that, a fast trapeze centre-boarder suitable for youngsters when on an 80 per cent main, but which could test lightweight crews of any age with a full rig.
‘It's a good beach hotel boat,’ sniffed one rival.
The most admired new design was Chris Benedict's 405, so few can have been surprised that it was one of the RYA's two finalists.
Another powerful boat, it has been designed with an optional asymmetric spinnaker so that the bowsprit is there when the training need arises.
Benedict, a Californian now based in Hertford, has given the 405 low-volume side-tanks to make the boat less likely to invert and easier to right.
Much thought and innovation has gone into the boat: too much, his rivals suggest, for Benedict to be able to stick to his £2,500 price estimate.
‘The 405 is a lovely boat, no question,’ said Dave Peacock of Rondar.
‘But I'd argue that our boat fills the RYA brief the most closely.
‘Skiff types are splendid for Australia, where it blows 25 knots all the time and the water is warm.
You need a more versatile design, more a boat sort of thing, for British conditions.
‘And I can't see 11-year-olds here burning round estuaries with a bloody great bowsprit and an asymmetric spinnaker.’
The Arts: An exotic bloom flowers again Charles Spencer welcomes a revival of Enid Bagnold's The Chalk Garden, a hardy perennial from the 1950s
By CHARLES SPENCER
ENID BAGNOLD's The Chalk Garden is an exotic bloom from the 1950s which miraculously retains its freshness more than 35 years after its premiere.
When it opened at the Haymarket Theatre Royal in 1956 Kenneth Tynan hailed it as perhaps ‘the finest artificial comedy to have flowed from an English (as opposed to an Irish) pen since the death of Congreve’.
But less than a month later, John Osborne's Look Back in Anger arrived at the Royal Court, and elegant, well-made drawing-room plays like this were supposedly consigned to the dustbin of theatrical history.
Yet it is Osborne's drama which now seems strident, sentimental and old-fashioned, while Miss Bagnold's, lovingly revived at the King's Head, Islington, continues to sparkle and delight.
The play takes place in the Sussex home of Mrs St Maugham, an encrusted relic of Edwardian values who has lived her long life ‘without affection’.
She looks after her 16-year-old granddaughter, Laurel, a precocious pyromaniac, who, ‘by some extraordinary carelessness was violated in Hyde Park at the age of 12’.
The apparently heartless elegance of that line gives a fair indication of Miss Bagnold's style.
Her dialogue has a wonderfully polished lustre that recalls Wilde and Firbank.
But this is a play which combines surface brilliance with a surprising depth of feeling.
The mysterious Miss Madrigal, who is employed as Laurel's companion and whose green fingers make the barren chalk garden of the title bloom, brings a real feeling of tragic suffering to the stage.
Much of the interest in the plot lies in the revelation of her past, but there is more to The Chalk Garden than the melodramatic unfolding of dark secrets.
It is, in one of Miss Bagnold's most memorable phrases, a play about, ‘the astonishment of living’, about throwing off the past to find a fresher, fuller life in the present.
To suggest this rich, redemptive theme in a stylish, at times almost camp, comedy (there are moments of pitch black humour at the end which anticipate Joe Orton) is an extraordinary achievement.
The cheerfully ramshackle atmosphere of the King's Head is an unlikely setting for such a finely wrought play, but Mark Rayment's production frequently achieves the required elegance.
As the grandmother (originally played by Edith Evans), Constance Cummings, now in her 80s, recalls a vanished age of acting with her effortless sense of style and superb ability to turn a line to perfection, while Jean Marsh brings a moving sense of both hurt and hope to the role of Miss Madrigal.
There's a superb comic performance from Robert Austin as the hilariously touchy yet deeply sympathetic manservant Maitland, and outstanding work, too, from the 15-year-old Kellie Bright as Laurel, an alarmingly forward yet painfully vulnerable child who announces that her mother ‘is so overloaded with sex that it sparkles’.
Following the Orange Tree's fine revival of Rodney Ackland's The Dark River, this production offers further persuasive evidence that there was far more vitality in the English theatre before the arrival of the angry young men and the Royal Court revolution than is generally acknowledged.
The Arts: Focus on a man past his peak
By David Gritten
WHAT do arts documentary-makers do when they want to profile someone who prefers not to appear on camera?
Last night's Arena (BBC2), which dealt with the great Swiss-born photographer Robert Frank, side-stepped the problem by asking Frank to make an autobiographical film.
Frank's reputation rests primarily on The Americans (1959), a stunning collection of photographs which captured the underbelly of the United States — its poverty, its injustice and the yearnings of its alienated underclass.
The only text was an introductory essay by Beat novelist Jack Kerouac, who wrote: ‘The crazy feeling in America when the sun is hot on the streets and music comes out of a jukebox or a nearby funeral, that's what Robert Frank has captured.’
The Americans was such a tour de force that Frank could not top it.
Indeed, in the year it was published, he forsook photography for film-making.
He has made a score of films since, including his infamous documentary about the Rolling Stones's 1972 tour, which the Stones suppressed because of its depiction of drug use and sex.
It is fair to say that nothing Frank has achieved as a film-maker approaches the heights he scaled with The Americans.
The 50-minute film he made for Arena suggests why: Last Supper — Frank on Frank looks like a parody of the excesses of Sixties avant-garde film-making.
On an empty lot between two Harlem streets, a group of people arrive for an outdoor party to celebrate the new publication of an unnamed author.
Initially they make respectful small-talk about him, but their comments grow increasingly resentful as it becomes apparent he will not show up.
Some events in Last Supper appear roughly improvised.
Yet hefty chunks of dialogue are obviously — and rather archly — staged.
People say things like: ‘You ever notice how all art focuses on people in trouble?’
‘It's time to quote Godard.’
‘The eye should learn to listen before it looks.’
This could have been unintentionally hilarious had it not been so dreary.
In this respect, it has been like Frank's own career since The Americans.
As Tom Wolfe once remarked about Phil Spector, another creative talent who peaked when he was young: what do you do for the rest of your life?
Still, one could not help but feel that with Last Supper Frank had sold himself short.
The virtues of Channel 4's documentary series Short Stories lie in its very title: it treats its subjects pithily.
Last night's film examined a one-day course which helps people overcome their fear of flying.
After lectures from two British Airways pilots and a clinical psychologist, 80 people were taken for a short flight.
An eloquent man called Marcus fretted about bombs, turbulence, being struck by lightning and ageing planes.
‘You're at the mercy of some pilot and God knows what state they're in,’ he added.
But his fears were assuaged, as were those of his mother Sonia, now planning a holiday in Botswana.
A nervous woman called Caryn was less lucky.
She looked strained throughout; afterwards she hugged her husband and wept.
Clearly the course works for some, not others.
Director Gill Brown rightly left it there; nothing else was left to say.
The Arts: Falling under the spel of Grg Brnrd Shw
By Fritz Spiegl
GEORGE Bernard Shaw wanted to simplify English spelling and had such a bee (a spelling-bee?) in his bonnet that he bequeathed his royalties for its promotion.
Occasionally one comes across an odd book that follows some of his recommendations, as he himself did in his plays — Americanisms like ‘favor’ for favour and ‘labor’for labour, or confusions between ‘can't’or ‘won't’and cant or wont, to name only a few.
Most such nonsense has sunk without trace — though the odd bubbles will keep rising to the surface, especially since the invention of educational (as opposed to clinical) dyslexia, when many well-meaning teachers have attempted to devise schemes of their own to help slow learners.
A new manual is being trumpeted (or rather, trmptd) by the Simplified Spelng Society, complt with a prntd 21,000-wrd dischnry.
The vocablry — you get the idea?— was devised by a comity headed by a lectr at Astn Universty (as this paper's Edicayshn Editr reported on March 27) and seems to hav it in for vowls.
One of the advantages, they say, is that ‘Dhe langewj wood be improuvd bie dhe adopshn of nue speling for wurdz’.
Good for the environment, too, as the saving of space would conserve paper and trees!
Why bother?
In these free-and-easy days people are making their own rules already.
I saw a school essay containing the word ‘yrnetn’ for wire netting; and only the other day the Independent Magazine carried an advertisement for Philips Dictation Systems with the interesting sentence: ‘In the time it took Dickens to write A Tale of Two Cities he could of told us a dozen more.’
As expected, a correspondence ensued.
‘Pupils who write could of are applying good phonic principles of writing,’ wrote one trendy clown of an educationist, ‘because they always hear the unstressed ‘have’of ‘could have’reduced in pronunciation’(yes, on radio and TV — and, if you ask me, this asda be bad).
But then the managing director of the advertising agency responsible for the advertisement owned up.
He apologised to readers and to Philips Dictation Systems: ‘Could of was simply a typesetting error that slipped passed the keenest eyes’, he wrote.
My italics.
It would been better for him to keep kwiet.
The Arts: The maestro of heavy mettle Controversy shadows the conductor Daniel Barenboim.
He talks to Douglas Kennedy about politics, cafes, cigars — and Edward Heath
By DOUGLAS KENNEDY
HE HAD just flown the Atlantic and was making a three-hour pit stop in New York before catching a connecting flight to Chicago later that evening.
And when I asked his orchestra's publicist if Daniel Barenboim would really want to be interviewed immediately after such a lengthy spell of high-altitude incarceration, she said: ‘He came in by Concorde, he's just been on a two-week skiing trip with his family in Switzerland — believe me, he'll be just fine.’
Daniel Barenboim looked more than fine when he strode into Carnegie Hall.
The 50-year-old musical director of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra (with whom he appears in London next week) was dressed like a 19th-century mitteleuropa burgher: severe black jacket, double-breasted waistcoat and striped trousers.
He could easily have been a character in a Thomas Mann novel — the great remote maestro venturing down from The Magic Mountain to talk to a visiting writer.
Then again, Daniel Barenboim's life-story reads a bit like one of Mann's celebrated Bildungsromans — for it is the tale of a prodigy of immense talent and ambition who has been repeatedly subjected to Job-like tests of his emotional mettle.
Born in Buenos Aires, he was proclaimed a musical wunderkind when he made his concert debut as a pianist at seven.
Three years later, he emigrated with his parents to Israel, yet became a frequent commuter to the major musical centres of Europe, where he caught the eye of such musical heavyweights as Edwin Fischer, Wilhelm Furtwangler and (most especially) Arthur Rubinstein, who took an immense interest in the young pianist and arranged for him to be represented by his agent, the legendary Sol Hurok.
By 15, Barenboim had made his debut as a pianist in London, Paris and New York.
By his early twenties, his musical curriculum vitae was already breathtaking, as he had recorded the complete Beethoven piano concertos with Klemperer, the two Brahms showpieces with Barbirolli, and the complete cycle of Mozart concertos with the English Chamber Orchestra.
And then there was his white-hot romance with another musical wunderkind, Jacqueline du Pre — the most remarkable cellist of her generation.
It was, on one level, a very public romance — for not only did Barenboim and du Pre make fantastic music together, but also they were married in Jerusalem amid the elation surrounding Israel's victory in the Six-Day War.
But then du Pre was stricken with multiple sclerosis and the fairytale quickly unravelled.
The tragic result forced Barenboim to erect a cordon sanitaire between his public and private lives.
‘Don't ask him about du Pre,’ a New York music journalist warned me.
‘Don't ask him about his new domestic set-up.
[Before du Pre's death in 1987, he had quietly set up a second household in Paris with the former wife of violinist Gideon Kramer.]
And don't be surprised if he's rude to you.
He really can behave like a monster.’
But when I entered the backstage dressing-room in Carnegie Hall, Daniel Barenboim didn't live up to his ‘Proceed With Caution’ reputation.
On the contrary, he greeted me with easy cordiality and asked: ‘What do you think of cigars?’
I said that I used to be partial to them when I smoked.
‘I am very pleased to hear this,’ Barenboim quipped, fishing out a small cigar from a pocket of his waistcoat.
‘This American obsession with smoking is crazy, don't you think?
I mean, during rehearsal breaks with the Chicago Symphony, several members of the orchestra and I actually have to sneak outside in order to light up.
It makes us feel like conspirators.
And why should one feel conspiratorial about indulging in one of life's small pleasures?’
Barenboim also admits to a passion for cafes.
And despite his hectic intercontinental schedule — commuting from his home in Paris to his musical duties in Chicago and Berlin (where he has recently been appointed head of the Berlin Staatsoper)— he always tries to set aside an hour or so every afternoon to sit in a cafe, nursing a coffee (while, of course, veiling himself in a cloud of cigar smoke).
It's a telling detail, this appreciation of cafes, and one which (with his turn-of-the-century clothes and his clipped Viennese psychiatrist accent) hints that Daniel Barenboim is a thoroughly modern maestro with a thoroughly old-fashioned sensibility.
Ask him about contemporary approaches to musical education and he'll quickly point out that, ‘in the old days, a love of music was taught in the home.
And that is because people made music at home.
Even in the Buenos Aires of my childhood — where there were very few professional musicians — friends would get together to play chamber music in each other 's sitting rooms.
It is tragic that this tradition has ended, because the joy of making music is so much greater than the joy of just listening.
And it is not beyond the mental capabilities of anyone with a reasonably well-formed mind to learn how to play an instrument — even badly.’
He also has an old-world impatience with anyone who avoids pursuits of the mind.
He is noted for possessing a ferocious intellectual curiosity — and when I asked him what he was reading while cruising across the Atlantic on Concorde, he said without flinching, Conversations with Isaiah Berlin.
Then he launched into an involved discussion about how cerebral men like Berlin were becoming an endangered species in a world increasingly downgrading erudition.
LISTENING to Barenboim talk on about abstract matters like ‘the sonic neutrality of the piano’, I began to understand why he had such a formidable reputation.
Just as he will not tolerate questions about his private life, so he will also go ballistic if bureacrats attempt to meddle in his creative decisions — something which Pierre Berge (the chairman of Yves Saint Laurent) found out when he became superintendent of Paris's opera houses in 1988 and attempted to take Barenboim on over the conductor's directorship of the new Opera-Bastille.
In the ensuing public row (front-page news for weeks in France), Berge eventually sacked Barenboim, yet the conductor won the backing of the entire international music community for his stand against bureaucratic interference.
‘You would not believe the way French cultural tsars try to meddle in the musical life of the country.
When I was the head of the Orchestre de Paris, they used to send inspectors along to auditions — until I refused to admit them.
Of course, one good thing about the Bastille fiasco is that it shows how seriously culture is taken in France.
But everything is considered political in France.
Even the colour of bread.’
Berge and the entire Mitterrand government were made to look complete fools when, a few weeks later, he was appointed to succeed Sir Georg Solti as head of the Chicago Symphony — arguably the great powerhouse of American orchestras.
It has, from all accounts, been a successful marriage — as clearly shown, in part, by his recent recording of the American composer John Corigliano's brilliant First Symphony (which has just won the 1992 Grammy Award as Classical Record of the Year).
Add to this his new duties at the Berlin Staatsoper and you can see why he is, without question, one of the most powerful musical figures today.
He is a keen observer of political life and quizzed me at great length about the impending British general election.
‘I was always a great admirer of Edward Heath,’ he told me, ‘because of his passion for music.’
‘But he's not the greatest of conductors, is he?’,
I replied.
Daniel Barenboim paused carefully before answering.
Then, flashing a mischievous smile, he said: ‘He sails better than I do.’
Critic's Choice: Comedian Sean Hughes
Interview by JAMES DELINGPOLE
AMERICANS have a weird attitude towards Ireland, which you see in Hear My Song.
It's very nice and very watchable, but a bit twee — like a cinema version of The Waltons.
My more cynical Irish friends were quite distressed by it.
I was particularly unconvinced by the scene where they go haring round the countryside in search of Josef Locke (Ned Beatty) and end up finding him in a pub.
The scene looked like something out of The Munsters with all these Quiet Man caricature Irishmen hanging around.
There haven't been many films that show Dublin as it really is.
Not even The Commitments, which I was in.
I've certainly never seen a horse in Dublin.
The only thing that's really captured the city for me was Dermot Bolger's novel The Journey Home, which used the city as a backdrop for a universal story.
Cape Fear didn't disturb me.
It's not real Scorcese.
As soon as I heard de Niro's accent I laughed.
Ride's new album is excellent.
What bugged me was the way they sampled that line ‘Even a stopped clock tells the right time twice a day’ from the film Withnail and I. It was a shame, since what I liked was the way the album had its own space and logic.
They do interesting things with guitars and they don't really need to pay homage to anyone else.
I'd heard that American Music Club were something wonderful, but when I saw them at the Grand in Clapham recently, I wasn't that impressed.
I loved their support act, The Band of Holy Joy.
For me, their album Positively Spooked, with its twirling, fairground, accordion sound, was the best thing last year.
On the comedy circuit, I'd like to recommend Mark Lamar.
There are some comics who seem to say ‘It's me 20-minute set here.
Please don't heckle me.’
What I like about Mark is that he's not afraid to be funny with the crowd.
He doesn't mind leaving his script and reacting to whatever happens on the night.
Sean Hughes's series, ‘Sean's Show’, begins on Channel 4, April 15.
The Arts: Cats' chorus
By Martin Gayford
The Jazz Singers Vocals by Great Jazz Instrumentalists (Bluebird) Marian McPartland Portrait of; Live at Maybrick Recital Hall; From this Moment on (Concord Jazz)
THE BLUEBIRD album is a collection of singing by men most of whom couldn't, strictly, sing.
One or two, of course, could.
Louis Armstrong has a good claim to being the most influential popular singer of the century.
To his name, one could add that of Jelly Roll Morton — who had splendid, faded baritone, suggesting Humphrey Bogart suddenly breaking into song — Fats Waller, and Jack Teagarden.
Some of the others — Roy Eldridge and Dizzy Gillespie, for example— could not really be said to have voices at all .
But although their vocals were not really intended as more than light relief, many of these players had the knack of making a song more memorable and enjoyable than many a proper singer can — as Eldridge does on Shoe Shin Swing, Gillespie on I'm Beboppin' Too, Hot Lips Page on Take Your Shoes Off Baby.
The performances may sound hoarse, and limited in range; but once you've heard them, you find them running through your mind.
Whether or not they can sing, all these players have a tremendous understanding of how to phrase.
And phrasing, more than any acrobatic vocal skill, is the key to jazz (and popular) singing.
Who is the greatest living British jazz musician?
Personally, rather than any of our sharply-suited young tenor-players, I would nominate a pianist — Marian McPartland.
Perhaps it might be disputed whether, after living in the USA for nearly half a century, Miss McPartland is still British.
But it seems to me that by several cultural tests — a preference, for example, for a nice cup of tea — she is.
Marian McPartland was brought up in south London, offspring of a civil engineer.
After beginning a career in showbusiness, she went to entertain the troops in France, where she met the hard-bitten Chicagoan cornettist Jimmy McPartland.
They married, and she moved to the States, where — in defiance of sexism, and her uncle Cyril, who once accosted her in a New York club with the words, ‘Does your father know what you're doing?’— she became one of the most highly regarded piano players in Manhattan.
That is what she remains.
The above recordings differ in various ways: the first two are reissues from the '70s; the third is a new recording.
At Maybrick Recital Hall is solo, From this Moment on a trio, and Portrait a quartet, with Jerry Dodgion on alto saxophone and flute.
All exhibit her flawless swing and admirably unclassifiable style.
But for those starting a McPartland collection, I would recommend the Portrait, because it best displays the remarkable range of music she likes to tackle — from Irving Berlin and Rodgers and Hart to Chick Corea and Herbie Hancock.
The Arts: All that glitter turned to gold
By Geoffrey Norris
MAXIM Vengerov dazzled everyone who heard his winning playing at the 1990 Carl Flesch Violin Competition in London.
So much so that, when the various category prizes were announced, he all but swept the board.
Jury, audience and critics (including me) were overwhelmingly pro Vengerov, whether he was performing Bach, Beethoven or Paganini.
He is not yet 20, but his technical control, confidence, brilliance and intellectual depth display an outstanding maturity.
Two new discs bring these qualities to the fore.
The orchestral one with the Israel Philharmonic and Zubin Mehta features what might be loosely called ‘display’ pieces.
It needs a special artist to sustain such a programme, and the wonderful thing about Vengerov's playing is that in, say, the Paganini First Concerto, one can sit back and take the accomplishment for granted, acknowledge that he can overcome any Paganinian hurdle, and simply relish the way he actually makes something of the music.
The fine polish of his technique does not disguise the music's refinements: this is playing of the utmost subtlety, strength and thoughtful insight.
Mere showmanship is not in Vengerov's musical vocabulary, and in a piece like the Saint-Saens Havanaise the seductive tone quality, with all its shifts of colouring, is something to be relished.
The feeling is genuine.
And Waxman's Carmen Fantasy takes on a dimension of passion rarely heard in such an undisguised pot-pourri entertainment.
The recital disc with the pianist Alexander Markovich reveals Vengerov as a significant interpreter both of Beethoven and of Brahms.
Again, the playing has that energy, that vocal quality which makes the music speak directly and movingly.
The singing lines, the sense of momentum, of progression towards and relaxation from climaxes is gauged with a natural feel for the musical contours and the poetic expressiveness of both sonatas.
This is playing of the first order.
So is that of Frank Peter Zimmermann, with the Stuttgart Radio Symphony Orchestra under Gianluigi Gelmetti, in the challenging combination of the Berg and Stravinsky concertos.
The Berg, with all its elusive nuances and its stormy outbursts (in the orchestra as well as in the solo part), is graphically outlined here, with the weight and support of palpable involvement in what is going on emotionally in the music's undercurrents.
The Stravinsky, if more detached and calculated a piece, equally engages the senses here in the incisiveness of Zimmermann's playing, his thrust, his fullness of sound, the quiet restraint he shows in the concerto's plaintive moments.
And the Baroque bustle of the finale shows both the soloist and the orhestra on their contrapuntal mettle — sharp, brisk, invigorating.
Samuel Barber's Violin Concerto dwells on the instrument's lyrical potential, something which the Chinese violinist Hu Kun manages to a haunting effect in the first movement and the suspended-animation Andante.
More body to the English String Orchestra (an idiosyncratic name, given all the wind and other instruments which take part) might have helped to throw the piece into clearer focus, but, in the final Presto — a rapid perpetuum mobile — they are at least all precise.
Leonard Bernstein's five-movement Serenade, inspired (if that is the word) by Plato's Symposium, is dreary in the extreme and dispiritingly derivative (sub-Stavinsky, sub-Copland, sub-Ives); and it is vapid to listen to.
Hu Kun is a good violinist, and he should attach himself to better things than this.
Like, for instance, the Elgar or Walton concertos.
They have been recorded by Salvatore Accardo with the London Symphony Orchestra under Richard Hickox.
This coupling might not displace your favoured recording of either concerto, but it is worth attention for Accardo's emphatic proof that you do not necessarily have to be English to interpret English music.
An Italian flair does not go amiss in the Elgar: Accardo's impetuosity gives a new slant to the score, his intensity in the Andante an immediacy.
His approach to the opening of the Walton concerto brings with it an air of disturbed tranquillity, the capricious middle movement and the sweet-sour finale drawing from his experienced violin tone a decisive vigour and meditative tension.
The Arts: BUDGET CD CHOICE
By Brian Hunt
Barber Various works (Vanguard Classics 08 4016 71 — about £6.50) THE MOST familiar music here is the Adagio for Strings.
By turns spiralling slowly upwards and sighing in resignation, it was already a much-loved concert piece before its use in the films The Elephant Man and Platoon gave it even greater popularity.
The rather light and flowing performance it receives here from I Soloisti di Zagreb and conductor Antonio Janigro is not inappropriate, given the movement's origins in a string quartet by Barber.
The same forces do justice to the spikier Serenade for Strings op 1.
Barber's choral music is represented by A Stopwatch and an Ordnance Map (text by Spender) and Let Down the Bars O Death!
(Emily Dickinson).
Both are moving and sincere pieces, finely crafted, and are given well-prepared performances by, respectively, the Robert de Cormier Chorale and the Washington Cathedral Choir.
Then there is the 9½-minute chamber opera, A Hand of Bridge, to a libretto by Menotti.
The four soloists play out their game in recitative over (of all things) a stride piano accompaniment; while, in arioso, they divulge their intimate thoughts (some of them very intimate).
It's a fascinating work, decently sung, accompanied by members of the Symphony of the Air.
This exotically named ensemble, the remnants of Toscanini's NBC SO, sounds distinctly ropey in the Second Essay for Orchestra, and Music for a Scene from Shelley (the conductor is Vladimir Golshmann).
Both pieces deserve much better, though their strength shines through even this dispirited sight-reading.
All in all, then, a pioneering collection of very worthwhile and stimulating music, ideal for guess-the-composer quizzes.
The recordings, made around 1960, have been magnificently remastered.
The Arts: Millionaire blues for Springsteen
By Chris Heath
‘I BOUGHT a bourgeois house in the Hollywood Hills,’ sings Bruce Springsteen in one of the rare light-hearted moments of his two simultaneously released new LPs, ‘with a trunkload of hundred thousand dollar bills.’
At least he sees that it's funny, and in Britain, where Bruce Springsteen is just another pop star, albeit rather a famous and successful one, we will probably laugh along.
But in America what he is mocking is an issue that is being taken rather seriously.
There, Bruce Springsteen is much more than another pop star, he is the central custodian of a set of rock ‘n’ roll values.
Even music fans who haven't dirtied their hands in their lives adore Bruce Springsteen for being America's earnest, sincere, blue-collar rock ‘n’ roll conscience in a tatty, checked shirt.
If he forever growled songs about factories, family values and running wild on a minimum wage they would be happy.
So it is with a creeping dismay that reports have been greeted about the inevitable changes in his way of life.
He married a model-turned-actress, then, instead of living happily ever after, divorced after a very public affair with his backing singer.
He is often seen around Hollywood, driving his jeep or eating meals poolside at swanky hotels.
Is this the person who wrote those songs about the lonely heartache of a boy from New Jersey trying to be a man and live life right?
Yes, of course— if you discount, that is , many millions of dollars and an unimaginable level of celebrity.
His last LP, Tunnel of Love, a touching, low-key meditation on matters of the heart, sidestepped the quandary, but these new LPs find him rather at sea.
Most often he falters by trying to second-guess himself and his audience, and sound like he did 10 years ago.
There's the same familiar chords, beefed-up arrangements and hard luck stories, but not a lot of conviction.
Human Touch is the album he has been working on for several years and Lucky Town a set of songs he quickly wrote and recorded at home recently, and though the tone of the two records doesn't differ that much, the second set of songs are far better.
What has been lost in all this second-guessing is the wanton reckless joy of his finest records.
My favourite 10 seconds of Bruce Springsteen is the irresponsibly euphoric opening holler of 1980's Hungry Heart: ‘Got a wife and kids in Baltimore, Jack /I went out for a ride and I never went back’, but he never lets go like that here.
If these records are too selfconsciously trying to please everybody, to sound like they matter to the person he is now, at least he appears to see the problem.
On one of Lucky Town ‘s best songs, Better Days, he has the wit to sing: ‘It's a sad funny ending to find yourself pretending /a rich man in a poor man's shirt.’
Such problems are far off for Rugby's Spiritualized, though their first LP is the toast of the rock press at the moment: a spacey, dreamy, bubbling mantra of introspection and buried tunes that is quite captivating.
It comes with its own good reviews in the form of sleevenotes which make amusingly extravagant claims, including that it is a record about ‘how you sometimes feel like the sky will peel away like a mask and reveal something more brilliant behind’, which may tell some of you not just a little of how this record sounds, but how it got to sound that way too.
For a brief moment in 1985 the Jesus and Mary Chain were ‘the new Sex Pistols’, whipping up a moral panic with their name, their rowdy feedback drenched music and their sullen behaviour, and recently they grabbed back some of that bad-boy reputation with the Top of the Pops banned top 10 hit Reverence.
Their new LP (their best since their first, Psychocandy) is good for different reasons: because it has the sort of rumbling guitars and invigorating, climbing, bittersweet songs that make you jump out of bed and open up the curtains in the morning.
Annie Lennox's first solo LP Diva (an ironic title, she claims) will comfortably pick up the Eurythmics' many fans, but to me its high-quality designer soul has a sterile scent.
My head tells me it's good; my heart tells me I'd happily never hear it again.
Too much of her usual talk of ‘dreams’ and ‘angels’, and too few signs of either.
I prefer the throwaway disco rapture offered by Rozalla.
She's a singer who has apparently been a star back home in Zimbabwe for some time, but there is little that's African about her delightful state-of-the-art LP of uplifting piano-driven pop-house.
It is joyous dance anthems like her recent hits Everybody's Free (To Feel Good) and Faith (in the Power of Love) that are the true '90s successors to the spirit of all those '60s Motown pop classics.
The best moments from Motown's principal male groups, the four Tops and the Temptations, the ones who were cast as brokenhearts more often than the lovebirds, are re-compiled this week.
Many of these songs — Reach Out I'll Be There, Just My Imagination, It's the Same Old Song, Ain't Too Proud to Beg — are over 25 years old and yet they still send an intoxicating gust of fresh air through the house.
I hope I never find myself agreeing that the old songs are the best songs, but I also hope I never forget how wonderful some of the old songs are.
The Arts: VIDEO CHOICE
By TRISTAN DAVIES
La Cage aux Folles A gay film, certainly; but as far removed from the work of Derek Jarman as one can get without actually leaving this solar system.
With wrists limp and handbags akimbo, South of France nightclub owner Renato (Ugo Tognazzi) and Albin, his star drag act and lover (Michael Serrault), provide an outrageous antidote to earnest and politically correct questions of sexual orientation.
So camp one might as well watch from a tent.
The subtitles are superfluous: it's been on the telly umpteen times and the gestures say it all.
(Warner Home Video, 15, £12.99) The Grifters Anjelica Huston, John Cusack and Annette Bening play three small-time con artists (grifters) who happen to be mother, son and son's girlfriends, respectively.
Adapted from a Jim Thompson novel, this is a tawdry tale of low-life double-cross and bluff, whose strong sexual ambiguity and tense finale are directed with chilling verve by Stephen Frears.
(Palace, 18, £10.99) Rocky V Brain-damaged after beating the Russian drongo Drago and penniless after being K O'd by a bent accountant, Rocky (Sylvester Stallone) has no option: he has to make another film.
Part V ends the Balboa saga back on the streets of Philadelphia, with Rock training a new white contender and falling out with his son (Sage Stallone).
All the predictable grunts, groans and tear-jerking final showdown are in place, which is both very cynical and very reassuring.
(Warner Home Video, PG, £10.99) Whore Theresa Russell is Liz, the Los Angeles hooker who speaks straight to camera about her life and hard times in Ken (no relation) Russell's low-budget sleaze vehicle.
Cheap-thrill seekers will be disappointed: the result is realistically dull and unpleasant.
(Palace, 18, £10.99).
The Arts: Stand-in on the brink
By Robert Henderson
EXACTLY a fortnight after his unscheduled South Bank recital debut, when he was invited at the last minute to take over from the indisposed Krystian Zimerman, the young Argentinian pianist Nelson Goerner was back at the Festival Hall to replace the temperamental Martha Argerich in a Mozart concerto with the Philharmonia and conductor Claus Peter Flor.
To be asked to deputise at the age of 22 for soloists as prestigious as Zimerman and Argerich is in itself evidence of Goerner's rapidly growing reputation in pianistic circles.
And already in similiar circumstances in France last summer he had been presented with the kind of opportunity to prove himself that many young pianists must dream of in vain: he was called on, again at very short notice, to stand in for the even more illustrious Sviatoslav Richter at Richter's own festival at the Grange Meslay near Tours.
The expectations raised by the international acclaim with which his playing was greeted on that occasion were not entirely fulfilled, however, by his performance of Mozart's C minor Concerto K 491, in the Philharmonia's AFG-sponsored concert.
Receiving little help from the clipped dullness of Flor's prosaic conducting, his uneasy fluctuations of tempo in the first movement, and in particular his tendency to rush spasmodically ahead of the beat, suggested a high degree of perhaps understandable nervousness.
In the central larghetto his playing had begun to acquire a more settled, finely sculpted poise, eventually coming fully into its own in an auspicious, perceptively shaped, at once freshly and eloquently pointed finale.
This at last confirmed his qualities as a pianist whose future deserves to be closely watched.
Several other, this time predominantly British, young artists have also been featured alongside more established performers in a weekly series of recitals at St John's, Smith Square.
Under the title ‘Springboard’, their varying talents have been matched with an attractive mixture of classical and contemporary music.
The European premiere of a typically economical yet absorbingly atmospheric quintet Echoes from a Play by Finnish composer Aulis Sallinen was especially memorable, and beautifully played by the Swiss oboeist Thomas Indermuhle with the Gabrieli Quartet, in the first of the two concerts that I heard.
Another quintet, by Dutch composer Tristan Keuris, this time for clarinet and strings in which the Gabrieli was joined by Janet Hilton, was less personally characterised.
But its subtly imaginative, meticulously balanced refinement of instrumental colour and effect became increasingly seductive.
And Keuris's sensitivity to the uniquely expressive flavour of instrumental timbre was corroborated by Duncan Prescott's fluid performance in the following concert of his Canzone for solo clarinet.
Both the musical abilities, and the ambitions, of the pianist Ronan O'Hora in this same programme were clearly overstretched in his limply unidiomatic, weakly structured and sentimentalised playing of Schubert's great B flat Piano Sonata.
Nor did he reveal any keener affinity with Schubert in the rather mechanical, plainly stated accompaniments that he provided for the mezzo Yvonne Howard.
Her striking singing of some of Schubert's most dramatic songs and, with her regular pianist Scott Mitchell, of a dour scena Antoinette Alone based by Scottish composer Martin Dalby on passages from Jean Rhys's novel Wide Sargasso Sea, was the undisputed high point of the two recitals.
The Arts: Prospero with a day-glo banner
By TRISTAN DAVIES
SEVERAL hours into the work of Derek Jarman, I couldn't help but recall a television profile of the film-maker screened earlier this year.
In person, this seemingly mild man is a great deal more watchable and engaging than some of his movies.
He wears boilersuits and lives on the beach at Dungeness; and sitting in his shack surrounded by pebbles, plants and other exotica he could almost have been the model for Peter Greenaway's Prospero.
But then his honesty about being HIV-positive is touchingly real and anything but theatrical.
Jarman has just been honoured by Bafta with the Michael Balcon Award for outstanding achievement and Edward II was released on video last month.
For those brave enough to delve deeper into his works, many of which feature posses of short-haired young men stripped to the waist and invariably fighting a police state, a surprising number are available from the more imaginative video shops.
I say surprising, because some are as digestible as boot polish while others are simply unwatchable.
To be fair, there's no reason why anyone's early home movies should appeal outside home; and Time Zones and In The Shadow of the Sun (ReVision /Jettisoundz, 18 and U, £14.99 each) are no exception.
Sloane Square, one of Time Zones's three shorts, shot on Super 8, and presumably chez Jarman, is no more than an album of his chums.
More irritating still is In The Shadow of the Sun, made in 1972.
Friends and a typewriter are superimposed on to the film of a car journey to Avebury, and background noise is provided, I think, by something called Throbbing Gristle.
It was thus a relief to overhear The Angelic Conversation (ReVision, PG, rental), whose background noise is provided by Dame Judi Dench drooling sonorously over Shakespearean sonnets.
More short-haired young men gaze through leaded windows or carry burdens across alienating landscapes.
The slow-motion effect is hypnotic and the tone is of suffering and yearning.
Jarman does not so much wear his homosexuality on his sleeve as brandish it like a day-glo banner.
Sebastiane (Virgin, 18, rental), with its nude centurions cavorting in the sun, is well-known; but his homo-erotic visual poetry can also be seen in The Last of England (Island Visual Arts, 18, rental), in which a junkie skinhead roams through a land of urban detritus.
In this Jarman sits, Prospero-like, sniffing flowers as if grasping at a memory of happier times.
We see those times in flashback — children playing in a garden in the '50s — and the contrast between innocence and decay is devastatingly sad.
Such poetry is spoilt, however, by sledgehammer politics: ‘Sniffing glue instead of your masonic brandies we fell off the cogs of misfortune…‘
Simplistic politics and performance render Jubilee (ReVision, 18, £14.99 and rental) severely irritating, but three mature later films are incomparably better: War Requiem (Channel 5, PG, rental), based on the poems of Wilfred Owen and Benjamin Britten's choral work; The Garden (Artificial Eye, 15, £15.99 and rental), another intense personal view from Dungeness; and Edward II (Palace, 18, rental), a powerful adaptation of the Marlowe play in which Jarman can't resist a staged clash between riot police and militant gays.
If Jarman comes dangerously close in the last to propagating the politics of ennui, his visual imagery is anything but predictable.
None of these three films is uplifting or reassuring; but then Jarman is an artist who uses his canvas to provoke and disturb.
If he were a plant, he'd be an exotic cactus.
Books: PAPERBACKS
By Caspar Henderson
Rebel Males by Graham McCann (Hamish Hamilton, £10.99)— Montgomery Clift, Marlon Brando and James Dean, the subjects of this literate and readable study, pioneered a new kind of rebel as screen hero: they exuded primeval, ambiguous sexuality, and were not afraid of roles that made them look vulnerable, foolish or insecure.
McCann explores the backgrounds, inner conflicts and rise to stardom of the three, comparing their tormented relation to Hollywood and each other.
His account clarifies what was truly original in them, and also the process by which these supposed iconoclasts became icons, idols of consumption whose machismo is make-up.
Time to Declare by David Owen (Penguin, £7.99)— Had he not fallen out with the Alliance, this passionate rebel male might well have been a key figure in this the general election.
He could have been a contender instead of a ‘dead-player’— the author of an 800-page memoir.
The frank accounts of two early love affairs, adding some notoriety to a political autobiography, make honest and sympathetic reading; but of far greater substance is his analysis of British politics from Wilson to Major.
His views on the NHS, the ‘Social Market’, the reform of our political system and Europe are robust and shaped by a great independence of mind.
The Social Climbers by Chris Darwin and John Amy (Mainstream, £12.99)— A black-tie dinner in a blizzard on the 22,000-foot summit of Peru's highest and most unpronounceable mountain, where the guests almost die of hypothermia, sets a world record, raises money for charity and gets Charles Darwin's great-great-grandson on to a Japanese television show for freaks.
Hilarious on the horribly awful side of mountaineering, this is not a story about snotty rich kids: life is the better for meeting wild-eyed wanderers like these.
A Legacy by Sybille Bedford (Picador, £5.99)— Readers of Jigsaw, her outstanding semi-fictionalised autobiography, will recognise that the legacy is Sybille Bedford's own, and this book, too, is a joy.
Written some 30 years earlier, it centres on the marriage joining a family of Jewish Berlin millionaires to an old Catholic Bavarian dynasty, covering the period from German unification to the first decade of this century, the time of the author's early childhood.
Dialogue springs with life from the page, and the social and political milieu of a vanished age is brilliantly realised.
Bedford is by turns hilarious and ironic in the best sense: compassionate and yet clear-eyed.
Irish Short Stories selected by David Marcus (Sceptre, £6.99)— A collection rich as Guinness and vastly varied in mood and style — from sparkling blarney to dark epic.
Acknowledged masters from James Joyce to William Trevor and other notables such as Edna O'Brien and John McGahern make this a first-rate introduction to Irish literature.
Nevertheless, this selection was made in 1980 and the youngest, Neil Jordan, is now 41.
It is high time for a collection from new voices.
Tandia by Bryce Courtenay (Mandarin, £4.99)— Half-Indian, half-African, beautiful and brilliant, Tandia is a teenager when she is brutally violated by the South African police.
‘In the end hate was going to win.
You had to laugh’— but fear not: she finds true love and the psychopathic policeman dies horribly.
The author cites the spirit of Anthony Sampson's Drum magazine of the '60s, but this book is more like a drum machine — relentless.
Books: Fields of dreams THE FABER BOOK OF SOCCER ed by Ian Hamilton Faber, £14.99
By Graeme Wright
THIS ANTHOLOGY of soccer writing — or, in some cases, writing which incorporates soccer — is rather like those games in which one side is a Rest of the World XI or a Football League XI.
Plenty of talent on display, but the whole does not jell.
It is not the selector's fault; it is more the nature of the beast.
By and large Ian Hamilton has chosen well: there is some good writing, and there is some good reading.
John Arlott on the ageing Tommy Lawton is a gem, his human interest in the man capturing the genius of the player: ‘He strolled on those heavily muscled legs into the right position and, once there, performed deftly and with ridiculous ease the movements necessary to turn or assist the ball…’
Hugh McIlvanney's feeling for his fellow-man shines through, too, although his emotions seem to have been already spent when he wrote his tribute to the late Jock Stein.
And perhaps that is the problem with the book.
Too many of the selections are reflections, rather than despatches from the front.
There is nostalgia, and fantasy — both wonderfully caught in Blake Morrison's evocative ‘Turf Moor, and Other Fields of Dreams’— and there is fiction filled with four-letter words.
But there is not enough adrenalin.
Reflection can be the stuff of cricket writing; it is that sort of game.
Moreover, though cricket followers in the main rarely attend a county match, they do think themselves knowledgeable about cricket by virtue of what they read.
They view it through other men's eyes.
Following football means going to the game.
It is a love affair.
Perhaps that is why there are so few ‘thinking’ books on soccer.
Fans, in general, do not want to read about the sport in retrospect.
They want to talk about it there and then, with passion and prejudice.
J. B. Priestley recognised this in the extract chosen by Mr Hamilton from The Good Companions: ‘…it [Bruddersford United AFC]offered you more than a shilling's-worth of material for talk during the rest of the week, a man who had missed the last home match of t'United had to enter social life on tiptoe in Bruddersford.’
And because Karl Miller writes with the energy of a fan, his angry piece, ‘World Cup 1990: a Diary’, blazes among the modern writing.
Not only that, it made me wonder if it was not time to give the game another chance.
In which case, this may be just the book for all disillusioned fans of yesteryear.
Books: Legendary pushovers in history
By J. Enoch Powell
WHAT WAS ‘London's worst upheaval’ in the 18th century before the Gordon riots of 1780?
Good question for a general knowledge quiz.
I would have got the answer wrong and plumped for the gin riots.
The right answer I obtained out of Sir Ian Gilmour's study of public violence in 18th-century England — a period which he takes literally, namely from 1701 to 1800.
This third and bulky fruit of Sir Ian's otium cum dignitate (’ how to amuse oneself harmlessly when out of office’) has turned out a curious book.
I can imagine the mordant amusement with which Sir Ian watched the poll tax legislation of a government with which he had little sympathy being hissed off the statute book amid public disorder to the alarm of its erstwhile supporters.
Like the rest of us, he knew, or thought he knew, that in the 18th century ‘the riot was probably a more effective curb on the government’ than either the Lords or the House of Commons —‘England's strongest countervailing force’.
How it operated provided an intriguing study to which much detailed work was devoted.
I think I can understand why he chose the 18th century.
We have all been brought up in awe of Sir Robert Walpole, regarding that continuous spell of his in office from 1714 to 1741 as a model of the politician's craft but aware of the paradox that public opinion at last broke through the barriers of a corrupted and corruptible and minuscule electorate to overthrow him.
I have been guilty myself of telling electors, sceptical of their power, about how popular resentment brought down ‘even Walpole’ and forced a reluctant government into an unwanted war.
Sir Ian painstakingly worked over the evidence for this from decade to weary decade — and drew a blank.
In those Whig-dominated years he found that England was preponderantly not Whig but Tory; he found that a corruption-wielding establishment could win elections only in the, numerically preponderant, boroughs and even then only at the cost of an enormously expensive patronage machine.
As for the prevalence of sentiment — Jacobite, Anglican, non-Juring or simply straight Tory — he found that, given a minimum of competence and any serious support from France, the Pretenders should have sent the Hanoverians packing on the heels of James II.
In fact, like most of the legendary pushovers in history, the 18th-century ascendancy of Whiggery, aristocracy and corruption was a ‘damned close-run thing’.
I think that Sir Ian has got it nearer right than popular belief.
For another thing, he has restored the balance of evidence on whether the English — it is only about England that he writes — were brutal and violent people.
Judged on the facts and on comparison with the outside world it was not so.
All the same, I feel he found himself disappointed as well as surprised; for his study had inveigled him into a trap.
He discovered that in order to isolate and demonstrate the importance — or otherwise — of a single factor, he must take more work on board than he had intended: he must attempt a complete English political history from the battle of Sedgemoor (1685) to the Peace of Amiens (1802).
Humph!
That is quite an assignment for any historian in under 500 pages, and it is not Sir Ian's fault if the reader often feels short-changed by being obliged to travel through so large a landscape guided always by the same question: what was the role of ‘popular violence’ in all this?
A whole ‘Part’ of the tome, amounting to over a quarter of the book, consists of an interesting and detailed disquisition upon such manifestations of brutality in the 18th century as public executions, the operations of the press gangs, and the enforcement of the game laws.
What is doubtful is whether the survival of those phenomena and the tardiness with which they were abolished actually reinforced the political influence of mob violence.
If the answer to that query, which is necessarily highly speculative, should be negative, the book could have been considerably lightened.
Such an observation as that ‘election riots were almost as old as the game laws: they too date from the Middle Ages and did not die out until the 1870's’ does not help to settle the matter.
A history of English brutality, for which Sir Ian has collected fascinating material, is only tangentially relevant to the fear of riot as an effective factor in parliamentary govern-ment.
The reader will not, however, begrudge the author's serendipity which, especially at election time, succeeded in extracting for him the following from Smollett's Humphrey Clinker (1771): I know nothing so abject as the behaviour of a man canvassing for a seat in Parliament.
This mean prostration has, I imagine, contributed in a great measure to raise that spirit of insolence among the vulgar which, like the devil, will be very difficult to lay.
The truth is, I look upon both candidates in the same light, and should think myself a traitor to the constitution of my country if I voted for either.
Perhaps, after all, a general election is only the sublimation of a darned good riot.
Books: Alas, no smuggling or whoring
By Moira Shearer
MARY KINGSLEY: IMPERIAL ADVENTURESS by Dea Birkett.
Macmillan, £25 JELLA: A WOMAN AT SEA by Dea Birkett Gollancz, £14.99 D EA BIRKE has achieved the unusual feat of publishing two books simultaneously.
Mary Kingsley, her biography of the eccentric Victorian traveller, has more substance than Jella, in which the author retraces Kingsley's voyage home from West Africa.
But both are slight — 171 pages for Mary, 205 for Jella — and Dea Birkett is essentially a journalist rather than a literary stylist.
What, then, is one to make of the startling price of the slim biography?
The paper and print are reasonable but no more; there is one map and eight pages of photographs, not particularly well reproduced.
As for the misprints —‘…traders rarely had European wives, often living as married to an African women…
’; ‘She had always had always been drawn to ‘my Jews’’.
This is shoddy stuff at any price.
Mary Kingsley was certainly eccentric, not to say weird — a plain Victorian spinster with more of the masculine than feminine in her nature, who said of herself: ‘The fact is I am no more a human being than a gale of wind is.’
Her childhood in the 1860s was lonely and repressed, with an equally lonely, abandoned mother and perpetually absent father.
Dr George Kingsley seems to have been the key to Mary's character — he was an inveterate traveller and his rare moments at home displayed tyrannical dominance and vanity, traits inherited by his daughter who both admired and resented him.
Her adolescence revolved round the books in his library, many about Africa.
The English Mechanic lured her and she carried out explosive experiments with the powder for her father's sporting guns.
While her mother sought solace from a household of dogs and cats, Mary kept a fighting cock in her bedroom.
Perversely, these early years seem more lively than the West African forays which followed.
There were two, in 1893 and ‘95, when she made a daring journey alone with an eight-man African canoe crew, dressed from neck to ankle in Victorian black, with umbrella — an intrepid and comic apparition.
Her problem was to find the reason for her wanderings — was she botanist, naturalist, ethnologist, geologist, or, as Dea Birkett decides, a woman who had to make an impression?
Another problem arose from her contradictory views: she hated missionaries, yet was pro-imperialist; was strongly pro-African rights, yet equally anti-women's suffrage.
Most of her life was spent in England.
She thrived on the publicity she professed to loathe.
There were long lecture tours, streams of letters, articles, political brushes with Joseph Chamberlain and two well-received books which fanned her fame and appetite for recognition.
Unfortunately, she exaggerated and falsified many experiences, claimed journeys and discoveries by others for herself, lied about her age and concealed her relatives of whom she was ashamed.
Thus, with each page, she becomes increasingly unattractive and vainglorious — brains and spirit corrupted by driving ambition.
Jella (meaning ‘small boy’ in Sierra Leone) is good journalese.
It informs and amuses as Dea/Jella, working her passage on the MV Minos, turns into a beer-swigging hearty in the officers' mess.
She is, nevertheless, a privileged female passenger in the single boat-deck cabin beside the captain's quarters.
Looking at the near-sensational claims in the press release — whoring? smuggling?— I see that Mary Kingsley is not alone in being economical with the truth.
Books: Orders for cold meat at dawn
By Duke of Wellington
DURING his lifetime Arthur 1st Duke of Wellington complained that he was much ‘exposed’, to use his word, to portrait painters.
Were he alive today he would undoubtedly have bemoaned the fact that he was the frequent target of what he would have probably called ‘scribblers’.
Lawrence James's The Iron Duke adds yet another to the long list of books written by various authors about the 1st Duke over the last 150 years or so.
This one is well researched, but I question whether it adds much to the sum total of our knowledge about Wellington.
The picture he paints of the young Arthur Wellesley is of a man who is calm, courageous and decisive in the face of the enemy, but austere, remote and somewhat harsh in his personal life and relationships with others.
The author gives much emphasis to those aspects of his character which support this view; but is it a fair one?
There is little or no hint of the compassion and humanity which lay beneath the cool exterior.
Is this the man who took the little orphaned son of the brigand Dhoondiah Waugh into his household after he was found hiding on the battlefield amongst the baggage of his defeated father?
Can this be the Arthur Wellesley who set aside a sum of money to educate two of the slain Tipu Sahib's sons, whose letters of gratitude I still have?
Could we not be told that after Wellesley's magnificent Arabian charger, Diomed, left him by a brother officer killed in a squalid duel, was piked at Assaye he insisted he should be nursed back to fitness and not put down like the other wounded horses?
The inclusion of such relatively unimportant details would have given Wellesley a more human frame during the most formative period of his life in India.
Perhaps the clue to this imbalance lies in the title Mr James has chosen.
It is a myth that the soubriquet ‘The Iron Duke’ refers to Wellington's character.
It was of course a Whig jibe about his resistance to the Reform Bill and an indirect allusion to the iron shutters which Wellington installed at Apsley House to withstand the missiles of pro-Reform Bill mobs in the early 1830s.
During his lifetime he was invariably described as ‘The Great Duke’ or simply ‘The Duke’.
The author warms to his subject when he writes of the Peninsular War.
We read of Wellington's distress at the terrible losses at Badajoz echoed in later years at Waterloo.
We catch remote glimpses of the camaraderie in the Mess of his ‘family’, as he called it, of young officers, many of them ‘sprigs of nobility’ whom he found well equipped to withstand the displeasure of senior officers when they were the bearers of unwelcome orders.
His Spanish ADC, General Alava, however, remembered to his dying day the way his heart sank on hearing his Commander cheerfully giving orders for ‘cold meat at dawn’ before a long day's reconnaissance, or perhaps a day's hunting in Portugal with his ‘family’.
The Peninsular campaign is well described in general terms, but there are some curious omissions and even, regrettably, some mistakes.
No mention is made of the lateral road on the ridge of Busaco which was so carefully restored by Wellington and which played such a vital role in the successful conduct of the battle.
Two important innovations in the British Army — the Royal Wagon Train (the forerunner of the RASC) and a coordinated intelligence system — are well covered; but a third major step, the creation of the divisional system, is not even mentioned.
It is no exaggeration to say that these three introductions were of enormous importance to the future of the Army.
And what about poor Copenhagen, the Duke's favourite charger, described as a mare!
When we come to Waterloo the Great Duke's extraordinary ability to be exactly where he was needed at the crucial moment is well described, as are his outward calm and inspiring courage.
The description of the battle is a stirring account of one of the most important in the history of Europe, one which ensured peace for 50 years.
There are, however, once again, omissions and mistakes.
The importance the Duke attached to the holding of Hougoumont is not sufficiently stressed.
He went so far as to state that had Hougoumont fallen, the battle might well have been lost.
The farm was held originally by the Coldstream Guards (not the 1st Guards) and the 3rd Guards (Scots Guards).
The Flank Companies of the 1st Guards (Grenadiers) certainly later reinforced the Coldstream and 3rd Guards but they were not part of the original garrison.
Mr James's account of the 1st Duke's military career is competent and factual.
He analyses most effectively Wellington's perception of the interaction in a given situation between politics, diplomacy and military expediency; but seldom as a piece of military history does it lift the spirit and stir the heart.
I have visited some of the Indian battlefields and most of the European, accompanied by the writings of Jac Weller and Elizabeth Longford.
Both have given me a remarkable insight into the events they portray.
I cannot pretend that Mr James's book attains the same degree of enlightenment.
Books: Burned deep into the soul
By Dirk Bogarde
BURY, in Lancashire, is a modest town.
A town hall, market square, parish church, a drill hall and a mayor.
The normal trappings of provincial life.
It lies some five miles north of Manchester.
When I knew it, in 1941, I was a newly commissioned, very nervous officer billeted up the road in a cotton-mill-owner's abandoned mansion on a hillside in a suburb called Ramsbottom (locally known as Tupsarse because it was at the ‘end of everything’).
From the terrace of the house, grimed with soot and wind, one looked down into a grey, fogged landscape of endless slate-roofed ‘back-to-backers’ and soaring mills throbbing with trundling looms, glittering with acres of lighted windows (dark in the black-out after 3.30 in the afternoon), and huge chimneys trailing and belching smoke endlessly into the curdled air, which loitered out over the spoiled valleys until, eventually, it was dispersed across the distant moors.
Not a very attractive vista.
I have known better views from happier terraces.
It was sad, cobbled, drab, poor.
However, Bury was near at hand.
The centre of our lives at that time.
It had a cinema, bars, a theatre even; holystoned doorsteps, lace curtains, kindness and incredible warmth for a ‘soldier’.
For Bury was an Army Town; not like Aldershot or Pirbright: just a modest place which had, at one point in its life, slowly bled to death from the loss of its young men in the First World War.
It suffered so brutally from war and killing that even after a second time around, in ‘39, after the havoc of Korea, the cut and thrust of Malaysia and Aden, the carnage of the Falklands and the bizarre media-encouraged sand-deaths in the Gulf — even after all that, the terrible word ‘Gallipoli’ is burned deep into the very fibre of every soul who was born in Bury, or who had family there.
Bury lost a large number of its youth in the Dardanelles.
It was the home-town to the Lancashire Fusiliers who, because of muddles, bickering, ill-planning and ignorance, lost 13,642 men in the Great War — 1,816 of them in the scrub and shale of Gallipoli.
It is little compensation to know that no fewer than six earned themselves the VC; myth has it that they were all won before breakfast.
The death toll and the casualties were far too shocking to be absorbed by Crosses for Valour.
Even six at once.
The young Fusiliers had been patriotically offered up for the politicians' errors; they had even been bullied by the militant women brandishing their white feathers, and they went cheering, singing, promising to come home victoriously to the grime and love of their Lancashire womb.
Today Bury, as I well know, is a very different place.
The mills are all but gone, the chimneys felled; the air is clean, the town is green with trees and wide spaces; it is proper, neat, contained; cobbles, clogs and polluted drizzle from the thundering cotton-mills have long since been abolished.
You might think all is serene and calm, which on the surface it is.
But the wounds made in those distant days of 1914–18 are too deep to be stitched and re-skinned by the arrogance of today.
The pain still lurks, because the town itself is, frankly, too small for agony to be forgotten; far too many families were affected by the slaughter in Gallipoli.
In this elegant, compassionate, deeply researched book, the tremendously caring Geoffrey Moorhouse sets before us the facts and figures, the jingoism, pride, pain, as well as the hideous smugness, the cock-ups, the arrogance, and the disasters made by ‘those who know better’.
And who seldom, if ever, have to ‘go’.
The myths are here as well, for anything as brave as this, as unutterably sad and devastating, has to breed myth.
Both good and bad.
Legends, too, play a part.
Finally it all becomes a kind of folk drama: Moorhouse gives us the truth word by word.
Not all of it is palatable.
I suppose the most damaging and erroneous of the myths is the belief, and disdain, held in Australia and New Zealand that the Mother Country sent weedy wrecks to fight alongside hefty, bronzed, open-air Gods of Nature, or, even worse, sat about ‘drinking tea’.
The valiant Colonials, on the other hand, shed their blood, bitterly but willingly, to keep Mother England secure: all those miles away.
Nonsense, of course.
But it has stuck.
It is worth looking carefully at the lettering cut deep into stone in Canberra's vast war memorial: Australia, 8,709; New Zealand, 2,701; India, 7,597; France, 9,874; Britain, 21,255.
Turkey, the enemy, lost rather more than anyone with a grand slam of 86,692.
However much we bicker, shout and protest, however much we all doubt and shake knowing heads, the body-counts are never in doubt.
The Great War and those more recent conflicts were put together and ‘paid-for’ on behalf of politicians who could not make up their minds or bring the problems to the debating-table; who preferred the shouting and smearing, the innuendo and hate for their opponents' parties, to the welfare and the good of their people.
Geoffrey Moorhouse uses Bury as his pivot: he explores it fact by fact, family by family; this little town in the moors bore a hideous amount of the slaughter in the Dardanelles, no matter what your Australian neighbour may tell you as he leans on the bar and his legend.
Mr Moorhouse is a Faberge journalist on the one hand, and a brilliant and caring historian on the other.
He has written here a spinningly glorious book.
You will not be dumb with military history, exhausted by facts and figures, wearied by the detail of long-forgotten battles.
There is plenty of strategy here, but more heart and pain than you could possibly have room for.
I know now, although I think I knew at the time, why one was so cared for by the ordinary people of Bury in 1941.
It is an Army Town and we were its children, destined, if unlucky, to go the way that nearly 2,000 of its children did years before and would do again.
While we were among them, they would see to it that we were cherished.
And we were, until embarkation.
Books: A day with no argument is like an egg without salt
By Paul Bailey
IT SEEMS appropriate to begin this review of Angela Carter's last book with an anecdote from which the necessary expletive will be deleted.
In 1988, at a particularly lively, contentious and near-violent writers' conference in Budapest, Angela and I listened one quiet afternoon to the omnipresent Susan Sontag as she revealed that she had devoured (her cliche) the great classics of English literature soon after discarding her diapers.
We went on listening as she informed us that she had progressed from the easy-peasies such as Keats and Dickens to the Russian heavy brigade.
At the age of 11, she was immersed in Tolstoy and Dostoevsky.
Angela, who had been sniffing throughout Sontag's boastful litany, leaned across to me and whispered: ‘Wouldn't you f*****g know?’
Like Nothing Sacred, her previous collection of essays, Expletives Deleted is bracingly disrespectful.
Angela Carter's constant target is English good taste, as exemplified in middle-brow, middle-class fiction.
She alerts the reader in her introduction to what she finds offensive in these genteel concoctions of tea and adultery:…if a comic charlady obtrudes upon the action of a real novel, I will fling the novel against the wall amidst a flood of obscenities because the presence of such a character as a comic charlady tells me more than I wish to know about the way her creator sees the world.
It is a world that ought to have vanished, and has largely done so, yet it persists in certain tired imaginations.
The forelock-touching peasant is still around in print, and always good for a condescending laugh.
Discussing — dissecting rather — Paul Theroux's My Secret History, Angela Carter exposes another, international stereotype.
Of the hero/narrator, Andre, she observes: ‘…he is maturing into one of those young men, familiar in fiction, whose very presence impels women to remove their clothing…
’ That ‘familiar in fiction’is deadly, suggesting as it does that the author has stopped looking at life and has purloined his Andre from the picaresque, in which rogues are invariably charming and whose advances are never rejected.
No amount of stylishness can disguise the banality of a writer's conception, she asserts, or — as in Theroux's case — something much more questionable.
Does he approve of Andre Parent whose ‘career usefully demonstrates the interconnectedness of sexism and racism’?
She hopes he does not.
As her brilliant last novel, Wise Children, demonstrates, Angela Carter liked ‘heroic vulgarity’, a quality she detects in Michael Moorcock's Mother London.
The history of the working class has ‘survived by word of mouth, in stories and anecdotes’, she declares, rightly, and it is the novelists who honour that history whom she admires.
Moorcock's people are amusing on their own terms, in their own right, and not just set down as figures of fun.
He respects the oral tradition, and earns her respect in consequence: ‘Not for Moorcock the painful, infrequent excretion of dry little novels like so many rabbit pellets; his is the grand, messy flux itself…’
Grand and messy, too, are the novels, neither dry nor little, of Christina Stead, whom Angela Carter acknowledges as a writer of ‘sure and unmistakable stature’.
The two essays on Stead are among the best here, since they fulfil the reviewer's prime duty — they make you want to read the books as soon as possible, in the light of the genuine enthusiasm they convey.
She is not blind to Stead's faults as a storyteller: indeed she actually revels in them as an indication of Stead's generosity of vision.
What is familiar in Christina Stead's books is not familiar from other fiction, but from life, which also has ways of bringing about the unfamiliar.
Carter praises her for transcending the naturalistic, however — for taking off from it and creating something original.
‘A day without an argument is like an egg without salt’: that fighting sentence from the introduction sets the tone.
Angela Carter is not one of those balanced critics, renowned for their disinterested fairness.
Not a bit of it.
She is at the barricades, defending all sorts of unrespectable ideas.
She can be exhilaratingly dismissive, as when she lauds Hanif Kureishi for not writing like Penelope Fitzgerald.
She is opinionated, and can confidently predict that William Burroughs, whose books have me aching with boredom, will be read a hundred years from now.
Well, that is one argument neither of us can win.
The Angela Carter I knew and admired in her final years is a real presence in this book.
She is there in the tone of voice: ‘My corner shop sells wrapped, sliced white loaves that, at a pinch, could poultice a wound.’
She is there when she says: ‘I love to think how Joan Didion would hate Grace Paley’, because Paley is the good writer, in touch with life, that the posing Didion is not.
She is there in the honesty of her perceptions, which are not secondhand, not filched from others.
It is impossible to be indifferent towards her, and she prefers it that way in her criticism, as she preferred it in life.
Angela died just as she was beginning to be more widely accepted.
I cannot imagine her, though, as a pillar of the literary Establishment, for all that she enjoyed recognition.
She was a genuine radical, not ashamed of being called a socialist, who would never, but never, have said yes to the offer of an honour.
She knew that a CBE would have meant that she could have styled herself Commander Carter, which is a lovely joke — but one to be resisted.
Like Dora Chance in Wise Children, she enjoyed the view from the wrong side of the tracks.
She was, and is, more than a breath of fresh air in contemporary letters.
She is a bloody hurricane when she is in the mood.
Books: Mice-children of Auschwitz
By Hilary Spurling
ANYONE brought up on Rupert Bear will feel at home with Maus's small, friendly and engaging hero, Vladek Spiegelman.
He has a triangular version of Rupert's stylised muzzle with the same pricked ears and bright black-button eyes.
He even wears checked trousers and a natty sports jacket, as he describes to his son Art how, in 1944, he survived 10 months in Auschwitz, dodging from one hair's-breadth escape to the next, outwitting his enemies by the skin of his teeth, emerging miraculously intact at the end of each cliff-hanging episode of this astounding strip cartoon.
Vladek, like Rupert, is the epitome of pluck: jaunty, stouthearted and as resourceful as he is intrepid.
He darts up ladders, down tunnels, holes up in hiding places cunningly constructed underneath a coal bunker or inside a gigantic heap of shoes.
He tricks his Auschwitz guards just as, in the first instalment of this story published in 1986, he regularly hopped on to trams reserved for German officers in the Polish town where he was virtually the sole surviving Jew.
At one point in Maus II, Vladek's wife Anja plays a murderous game of hide-and-seek, chased up and down the bunk beds of a vast, empty Auschwitz barracks by a guard reduced in close-up to a pair of vicious piggy eyes above a snarling snout (Poles are pigs in a world where Jews are mice efficiently exterminated by German cats).
One of the strangest things about the two Maus books is the way they subvert the comforting conventions of the adventure strip so that its familiar clear-cut division between heroes and villains, its technical short cuts and moral simplifications somehow make it easier, not more difficult, for the reader to grasp that these things actually happened.
It is not simply that Spiegelman reduces unimaginable statistics and intolerable realities to concrete and manageable proportions.
It is rather that he realigns fantasy and fact by using a set of ready-made and entirely artificial rules governing talking animals to explore the workings of a no less unnatural, controlled and rigidly inhuman system.
His emphasis is on the practical strategies and nippy footwork essential for survival.
The speed and urgency of cartoon action leave no time for reflection.
On the rare occasions when one of these mice stops to contemplate the future, it is nearly always a mother hugging her child, staring directly out of the frame with baleful black-ringed eyes in an otherwise expressionless triangular white face.
In Maus I, a friend of Vladek hands her baby over to strangers for protection.
His own wife parts reluctantly from their only child.
His sister-in-law kills hers, along with its two small cousins, before swallowing poison herself sooner than surrender to the gas ovens.
The mice-children in these episodes wear sailor suits, or short pants with bibs and braces over little stripy jumpers.
Uneasy English readers will recognise shades of Kanga and Roo in a Central European version of Milne's cuddly English world with its sentimental and protective instincts turned inside out.
In the Auschwitz of Maus II, there are no children left.
Newly arrived prisoners are stripped, shaved and showered, revealing skinny, shivering, vulnerable men's bodies beneath their mouses' heads.
There are only the most macabre nursery overtones to these mice waiting — naked or in striped concentration camp pyjamas — to be shot, starved, clubbed or gassed.
Spiegelman freezes individuals in pain or death by drawing one black triangle for the gaping mouth inside the larger white triangle of an upturned muzzle.
Four young girls are hanged for smuggling dynamite to blow up an Auschwitz crematorium.
One of Spiegelman's boldest frames shows their bodies dangling among trees at one side of a wood that also holds, on the far side, the Spiegelman family car in which Vladek, 40 years on, recounts the girls' story to his son.
The book is full of jolts and cracks in time like this one.
The most gruesome anecdotes are interrupted by ‘phone calls, shopping expeditions, hospital appointments, the everyday encroachments of forgetfulness and failing health.
Vladek in old age has lost the resilient bounce, if not the courage and obstinacy of his youth.
He is governed by increasingly obsessive precautionary rituals: scrimping, scrounging, hoarding stale food and the fag ends of cereal packets.
The embarrassing scenes he makes in New York's suburban streets and supermarkets seem at times more real than the enormities of his nightmare past.
Maus's cartoon cross-cutting underlines, perhaps more vividly than any other medium could do, the truth of Vladek's saying, when asked why the Jews offered so little resistance to the Germans: ‘They couldn't believe even what's in front of their eyes…‘
The Jews’ problem at the time is, of course, still ours.
This is a riveting but by no means an easy book to read.
Even Art finds himself overcome at times by incredulity or revulsion, especially in the section of this second volume, where he confronts problems posed by the first's inordinate success in 1986.
One peculiarly disturbing double-spread shows the best-selling author surrounded by agents dickering over subsidiary rights, translations, movie deals and lucrative licensing contracts.
Interviewers and cameramen with slavering lips and wolfish grins (all Americans are dogs) press forward over a film set piled high with gaunt striped-pyjama'd corpses.
Art recoils, growing steadily smaller, tetchier and more tentative, shrinking like a 20th-century Alice, except that, where she retained her imperial dignity unimpaired, he regresses to a tearful fractious child dwarfed by the conflicting pressures of a fragmented adult world.
Spiegelman might be said to bring out this infantile helplessness (’ Mostly I felt like crying’) in all his readers alongside their most sophisticated imaginative and emotional responses.
For, as Raymond Briggs once said, in Maus the cartoon book holds its own for the first time against all-comers as a literary medium.
Books: Sleepy crime
By T J Binyon
SET IN Philadelphia between 1961 and 1986, Pete Dexter's latest novel has for its background a struggle for power between the corrupt Irish union leaders and the Italians who run organised crime.
But this background is a shadowy one.
Dexter's interest lies not in gang warfare, but in the character of Peter Flood.
Although he is one of the Irish gang, Flood will not enter fully into union business, yet nor will he sever himself from it.
He carries with him from childhood an unconscious guilt for his little sister's death in a freak accident, a death which sets off a series of revenge killings.
Masochistically subjecting himself to punishment in a gymnasium, incurring injury by hurling himself from windows or roofs, he achieves final atonement through an Italian hitman's bullet.
If this book were a thriller, as the dust-jacket claims, it would be unfair to reveal the ending.
But it is not, and the author does just this on his first page.
In some ways Brotherly Love is similar to Dexter's excellent previous novel, Paris Trout.
In both, the characters drift somnambulistically through life, unconsciously impelled by emotions of which not only they, but also the author, can give little or no account.
This method works supremely well in Paris Trout, where it is contrasted with the sharply defined small town in a southern state that is the setting.
Here it fails; everything is muted, all perceptions misty.
The cover, with its blurred images in shades of grey, conveys well the general tone.
Only rarely — in the gymnasium, at a night-club, perhaps — does Philadelphia take on a physical presence.
And since we see events solely through Flood's eye we drift with him.
Dexter compounds the effect by writing in the present tense, depriving the narration of even the possibility of temporal causality (and making it read like a 290-page stage direction).
Books: ANTHONY LOOCH'S BODICE-RIPPER GUIDE
By ANTHONY LOOCH
The Original Sin by Marius Gabriel (Century, £14.99)— Under his real name, the prolific Mills & Boon author ‘Madeleine Ker’ makes a stunning debut in raunchy, mega-gloss women's fiction with this dynamic saga.
It portrays, with the terrible clarity of a Goya etching, incest, kidnapping, incandescent love, drug addiction and the horrors of the Spanish Civil War.
Crimson by Shirley Conran (Sidgwick, £14.99)— A top-flight romantic novelist and her three granddaughters are duped by a handsome Lothario who gains control of their financial affairs and seduces two of them.
They are unaware of his compulsive gambling, psychopathic persona and unorthodox sexual proclivities.
Entertaining, but the high finance can be skimmed.
Living Doll by Trudi Pacter (HarperCollins, £14.99)— Ambitious Liz from Southend and Vanessa, a Sloane Ranger, become fashion models and close friends in 1960s Swinging London.
Vanessa settles in New York and ends up a hooker.
Liz marries David, an English newspaper heir.
In the power-dressed 1980s, Vanessa's daughter comes to stay with Liz and falls for her husband.
Essex girl makes good but life remains bumpy.
A Mild Suicide by Christina Koning (Lime Tree, £13.99)— Two students have an adulterous affair in 1970s Edinburgh.
Saul, a visiting American postgraduate, gets involved with brainy Catherine, who has a weakness for one-night stands with working-class youths.
An intellectual ripper, which veers between poetry and pretentiousness.
Children of Darkness by Danielle Thomas (Macmillan, £14.99)— Marred by overblown writing, this first novel by Wilbur Smith's wife effectively conveys some of South Africa's problems.
Unhappily-married Cape Town journalist Toni Balser finds true love against a backdrop of gruesome township violence.
Such Devoted Sisters by Eileen Goudge (Michael Joseph, £14.99)— In 1950s Hollywood, starlet Dolly betrays to McCarthyite purgers her selfish and more successful actress sister Eve.
Years later family history repeats itself with Eve's daughters, by which time Dolly has forsaken the screen and gone into the fancy confectionery trade.
One learns an awful lot about chocolates.
Books: Curdling hero-worship FICTION: a faintly mad Irish family; an awkwardly virginal mathematician; early Miller; 290 pages of stage direction
By Patrick Gale
IT IS a broadly accepted truism that all novelists harbour in their system a novel about growing up.
Call it a rites-of-passage novel, a coming-of-age novel or a coming-out novel, it is usually a writer's way of exploring how the early years can irritate to life the otherwise dormant sensitivities that produce the itch to write fiction.
The axiom is that these novels are the first to be written.
Wiser writers, like Frank Ronan, leave them for their third or fourth.
The painfully sensitive narrator of The Better Angel grows up to be a farmer, not a novelist, but there is still the sense that he tells his tale as an act of compulsive, faintly therapeutic, honesty.
The setting is the land around Wexford, which Ronan evokes with the pleasingly unpoetic frankness of a native.
John G. is a shy, virginal youth who still shares a room with his widowed father.
In the three years covered by the book he loses his virginity, his father and, briefly, his mind.
His sad, excruciatingly well-behaved adolescence is inextricable from the progress of a doomed friendship with an eccentric schoolmate, Smallgods.
With the onset of responsible adulthood, hero-worship curdles to sour disappointment.
Ronan's portrayal of a faintly mad Irish family is just barbed enough to stay on the tougher side of sentimental, his narrative of a friendship's slow demise uncomfortably convincing.
THE SECOND novel from the physicist-poet Jonathan Treitel is another coming-of-age work.
The eponymous narrator of Emma Smart is a child-prodigy mathematician, now an awkwardly virginal 21, who learns maturing things about the unpredictable world beyond the cloisters of pure maths during a sabbatical in Manhattan.
Through the agency of a handsome admirer from her Cambridge days, she is increasingly drawn into the sphere of a dying emigre genius, gobbets of whose tersely enigmatic fiction are interspersed with her narrative.
Emma is the kind of fictitious Englishwoman who always refers to herself as ‘one’ and views the world with social and intellectual hauteur.
Her tone is, intentionally, intensely irritating and any hopes that it will soften to chastened humanity through spiritual education are vain.
This is a shame.
Treitel plays stimulating games with ideas of mathematical, biographical and fictional truth, but encloses them in a relentlessly ‘comic’ matter of the most put-downable kind.
DRINKING is no newer a theme than the quest for truth or the pursuit of friendship, but the startling originality of Stephen Amidon's Thirst at least lends it a fresh sheen.
A young American actor, Daniel, is called out of self-imposed English exile by the sudden death of his alcoholic father, who was flying to England to effect a reunion.
Compelled by duty and curiosity, Daniel flies to a remote Arizona suburb to return the body to the stepmother and half-brother he has never met.
With a sharp ear for dialogue and an eye for the engagingly surreal, Amidon charts this trio's uneasy passage through bereavement to self-discovery against a quirky thriller concerning drought and illegal shenanigans in the water sales business.
This haunting black comedy touches and menaces in equal parts.
JUST when you thought it was safe to go back in the lending library, another Henry Miller novel is unearthed.
Crazy Cock — originally rejoicing in the blissfully embarrassing title Lovely Lesbians — is an early work, and it shows.
The narrative drive is erratic and its path often confused.
Drawing on the trauma Miller suffered when his wife enjoyed a lesbian affair with a failed artist, it tells of the trauma a writer suffers when his wife…
Miller's imagery is heavy-handed in its efforts to startle, along the lines of ‘he had his words copulate with one another to bring forth empires, scarabs, holy water, the lice of dreams and the dream of wounds’.
His outbursts of bilious misogyny are about as shocking as a small boy shouting ‘Bum!’
The only redeeming feature is historical, since the novel is now a fascinating evocation of Greenwich Village's long-vanished Bohemia.
All very well, as one's great aunt might say, for those who like that sort of thing.
Books: The vessel is undermanned
By TOM POCOCK
IF ALGERNON Swinburne had been an able seaman he might have referred to the sea as ‘the oggin’ but certainly not as ‘the great sweet mother’, which he did.
Similarly, any seafarer would surely distrust its description by one Albert Wetjen as ‘a beautiful, warm-eyed woman with magic hands and a whispered voice, with a warm heart and a sad smile’.
Such anthropomorphising of the salty liquid that swills about the surface of the planet is prominent in an anthology of writing about the sea under the parameters Jonathan Raban has set himself as editor.
He writes that he was determined to exclude ‘voyages, naval battles, shipboard life, fishing’ and most of what one expects in nautical yarns.
This must be why his collection is, despite the inclusion of some beautiful and thrilling descriptive writing, less readable than those predecessors for which one reaches when tucked up in bed on a stormy night.
For the ocean may provide dramatic scenery but it does not, in itself, belong centre-stage.
What he leaves himself amounts to a prize-giving for English composition with the sea as the subject.
Once the first prize has been won by Conrad, J, and praise for some good work by such as Belloc, H, and Masefield, J, all the prose about glassy calms and heaving swells makes heavy weather.
To include the whole table of Beaufort's wind scale, as if it were some artless literary masterpiece, is irritating and a trifle precious.
Indeed, the sea can be a dull subject when not seen as the setting for human activity and emotion.
In this sense, Mr Raban's vessel is undermanned.
It is known that the sea is cruel, but it is also humourless, so few laughs are prompted by this book and after some glum pages it is easy to crave even the schoolboy humour of Stephen Leacock's skit, Soaked in Seaweed.
An exception to this solemnity comes when Mr Raban breaks his own rule and allows stowaways on board.
What a relief then to read Charles Dickens's description of the miseries of feeling seasick without actually being sick.
In a different mood, Edgar Allan Poe's The Descent into the Maelstrom grips the throat by being not so much about a giant whirlpool but human fear, again breaking the editor's rule.
Although Mr Raban has been described as ‘the finest writer afloat since Conrad’, he modestly forbears to include his own work.
But he does offer in introduction a long and original dissertation on his subject in literature.
Human regard for the sea has varied from the taking of it for granted as a tiresome obstacle to trade and exploration, to romanticising it in what so many writers are pleased to call its moods.
British writers, he believes, responded to the element as the dangerous and challenging wilderness that surrounded them, whereas the Americans, having their own wilderness inland, were less in awe.
A similar thesis could be devoted to nautical anthologies.
This one is less entertaining than, for example, John Coote's recent The Faber Book of the Sea and the reason is clear.
Captain Coote's sea pieces were fully manned and he told us about his contributing authors, unlike Mr Raban, who gives us only their dates and sometimes a mention in the introduction.
A quarter of his chosen writers were unknown to this reviewer, who wondered whether some of them had ever experienced what they described with such wind-whipped adjectives.
Just as the sea, on its own, can be uncomfortably tedious, or just uncomfortable, so it tends to fashion strong, often amusing, character in those who spend their working lives upon it.
Descriptions of sea water tend, however lavishly written, to blow themselves out and end up in the doldrums.
SATURDAY NIGHT AND SUNDAY MORNING
The hottest spot in the West End Serena Allott spends a weekend at Soho Fire Station, London's busiest
By SERENA ALLOT
THE GROUND covered by Soho Fire Station is only one mile square, but it is a very crowded square mile.
All theatre-land is there, as well as the Savoy, the Ritz, the National Gallery, Covent Garden, Leicester Square, some of the smartest shops and sleaziest nightclubs in London.
Not surprising, then, that Soho's fire-fighters are said to be the busiest in the world.
‘We love coming to work on Friday and Saturday because that's when it's going to happen,’ says Station Officer Richard Haig.
Sub-Officer Roger Kendall chips in: ‘We're always hoping something will happen — I don't mean that to sound macabre.’
‘But it's a lot easier to handle fire-fighters when they're busy,’ continues Haig.
‘When they're given a chance to do what they joined the fire brigade for.’
Haig and Kendall are members of the Red Watch at Soho.
The watch — consisting of between 10 and 15 men — works two day shifts from 9am to 6pm, followed by two night shifts from 6pm to 9am, followed by four days off.
‘The blokes prefer the night watch — they don't get mucked about so much,’ says Senior Hand Ted Temple, who has served at Soho for more than 20 years.
Haig and Kendall look anxious and quickly explain that at night the watch is self-contained: they work uninterrupted by calls from headquarters.
‘When we arrive at six, the first thing that happens is roll-call to make sure that everyone is here,’ says Kendall.
‘And they get told their riding positions,’ says Haig who, as Station Officer, is the only one who takes the same position on the fire engine each time it goes out.
Although there are specialist positions — Temple, for instance, is a turntable ladder operator — most of the men take turns in manning the pump, sitting in the watch room or cooking the supper.
‘After roll call we check all the equipment to make sure everything is in place and ready for use,’ says Kendall.
‘And every rider checks his breathing apparatus.’
‘After that,’ says Haig, ‘we normally have a cup of tea for 15 minutes, and then we do multi-gym training.’
Forty-five minutes in the gym is technically compulsory, but it all depends what is happening.
Gym is followed by a training session.
‘Training is drill, maintenance or lectures,’ says Haig.
‘Before I came here I worked in Cumbria and Dorset.
I'd start my shift and think ‘What am I going to do with the boys tonight?’
I'd have to plan way in advance.
Here the problem is finding the time to get things done.’
In theory training lasts until ‘grub-up’ at 8.30pm.
The fire-fighter on mess duty will have collected money from his mates, bought the food and cooked it.
The food's quality is not improved by the fact that the watch is rarely there to eat on time.
Last Saturday they were thinking of eating when, at 9.25, the alarm went.
All four men made for the door.
Twenty seconds is, apparently, a good ‘get-out’ time.
As they reached the fire engines they were handed a print-out detailing the call: a road traffic accident in Trafalgar Square reported by a member of the public.
Haig and Kendall scrambled into their kit as they mounted the engine.
The station doors opened and the sirens started screaming.
Smith, on mess duty, did not go; nor did Temple, who only rides the engine with the turntable ladder.
One of just 16 such engines among London's 114 stations, it is on call all over London.
We started climbing towards the mess when, at 9.35, the alarm went again.
Temple was off.
Five minutes later the first team was back.
The call had been made in good faith: a car had looked as though it might turn over, but in the event it had not.
Haig and Kendall seemed almost to droop as the adrenalin drained out of them.
They had missed another call while out, and they had heard that Whitechapel had been sealed off.
‘We might hear at any moment that it's a bomb,’ said Haig.
Road traffic accidents are among fire-fighters' special services, which include rescuing people who are locked out or stuck in lifts, industrial accidents, people falling under trains or threatening to leap off buildings, and chemical leaks.
These, with automatic fire-alarms going off inexplicably, account for a far higher percentage of calls than do fires.
But fire can happen at any moment: the Red Watch was called to the King's Cross Underground station fire.
Their then Station Officer, Colin Townley, died there.
Kendall had been at King's Cross.
Did that night haunt him?
‘In the years when Ted joined you'd sit round having your supper and talk about it.
Then it was gone.’
‘A certain black humour comes out,’ says Haig.
‘It's a way of getting it out of your system.’
And they go on to explain that they keep tabs on the injured who they rescue until they either leave hospital or die.
Temple returns.
Whitechapel had been re-opened, but his had been a malicious call —‘a mickey’.
These are common: the night after King's Cross a hoax caller reported a fire on an Underground escalator.
The worst thing, Haig says, is that while following up these hoaxes they often miss genuine calls.
By 10.10 the men have still not eaten, although by this stage they should have ‘stood down’ for an hour and been more than half-way through the second training session.
At 10.30 the men can stand down and do what they like — study, read, watch television — until midnight when, if all is quiet, they turn in.
Last Saturday night was quiet.
By midnight they had answered two further calls: another ‘mickey’ and a call of good intent which turned out to be an automatic fire alarm.
The beds in the dormitory pull down from the wall and have hard plastic mattresses.
Each man is issued with a sleeping bag.
Sleep is fitful.
Every sound jerks them awake: when the alarm goes everyone has to get up.
New recruits, unable to switch off at home, report leaping out of bed and climbing into their wardrobes.
At 6.40am the men are woken; by seven they are up.
They clean the machines, have breakfast and get ready to go home.
Neither Haig nor Kendall plans to sleep before their second night shift begins at 6pm.
Only one call — an automatic fire alarm at King's Cross — disturbed their sleep last Saturday.
But that, they stressed, is very unusual.
Fifteen calls, most of them after midnight, would be more typical.
Their record is 32.
‘People come to Soho because it's busy,’ says Haig.
‘I absolutely love this job.
It's the busiest station in the world and once you've been here it's difficult to leave.’
‘This is the place to be,’ adds Kendall.
‘It's the best job in the world.’