

River polluted
Nearly 300 litres of diesel oil were spilled into a tributary of the River Tamar in Plymouth yesterday after vandals released the fuel from a tank in a timber yard.
Morning sickness good for mothers
By Roger Highfield Science Editor
BOUTS of nausea and vomiting that accompany the first months of pregnancy may be good news for the mother, according to two new theories on the cause of morning sickness.
One argues that morning sickness helps the mother avoid exposing the developing child to toxins and the other that it is a side-effect of a hormonal power struggle between foetus and mother.
The sickness peaks when the foetus is going though a rapid stage of development of limbs and organs, making it highly sensitive to toxins.
Ms Margie Profet, a research associate at the University of California, believes the accompanying aversion to certain foods, tastes and smells may help the mother to avoid more toxic foods.
Her findings are about to be published by Oxford University Press in a book called The Adapted Mind.
Natural toxins are contained in most foods: for instance, vegetables use them to fight off pests and bacteria produce them in meat.
‘Humans have defences against these toxins,’ she said; embryo may be sensitive to small doses a healthy woman could tolerate.
To help a pregnant woman avoid certain foods, Ms Profet notes that, during the early stages, women's sense of smell becomes more acute, food lingers longer in their stomachs and the brain centre that triggers vomiting also becomes more sensitive.
The toxic protection mechanism dovetails with the fact that the pregnancy is three times more likely to miscarry if the mother does not feel sick, an observation supported by the second theory.
New laws and more paperwork are forcing some people to stop being foster parents, the National Foster Care Association said yesterday.
Natural parents often had access guaranteed under a court order and foster parents had to be committed to support for ‘parental responsibility’, which could cause difficulties, said Miss Marion Lowe, association director.
Relations could become strained over day-to-day decisions such as what clothes to buy for a child, for example.
Partridges take flight from fallow farm land
By David Brown, Agriculture Correspondent
SCIENTISTS have launched an investigation into the fate of partridges which appear to have been harmed by the increasing amount of land being set aside by farmers and allowed to lie fallow.
Farmers involved in set-aside have reported a drop in partridges breeding on land which previously enjoyed healthy populations of the birds when it was used to grow wheat and barley.
The reports have puzzled and confounded some experts.
They had expected game-birds to benefit from an increased food supply of insects as farmers stopped spraying pesticides to protect their cereal crops.
Now the Game Conservancy Trust at Fordingbridge, Hampshire, is appealing for farmers involved in set-aside schemes to take part in a research project starting this year to assess the impact on the partridge population.
Up to 30 farms are being sought initially before scientists choose one which can be subjected to a systematic research programme in which partridges will be fitted with electronic tracking devices.
Dr Simon Dowell, partridge biologist at the Game Conservancy, said yesterday: ‘Wild gamebirds are currently under enormous pressures.
‘Set-aside could be a unique opportunity for improving farmland for wild game, but unfortunately the present proposals may not be realising their full potential for gamebirds and other wildlife,’ he added.
Scientists call for wise use of water
By Christine McGourty, Technology Correspondent
MORE water should be recycled and better use made of rainwater to help alleviate shortages, says a report by the Centre for the Exploitation of Science and Technology.
‘We've always assumed that the country has enough water but the shortages of the last three or four years have shown this is not the case,’ said Dr Neil Johnston, author of the report.
Because the quality of water was good and the price relatively low, it had not been used ‘as wisely as it might have been’.
Restrictions on water use have been imposed this month in areas of the south and east of the country, which is experiencing the worst drought this century.
To meet demands for higher quality and relieve permanent shortages in some parts, the industry should conserve and recycle more water, said the report.
Although technology to reduce pollution could make a significant contribution to the problem, the industry showed ‘minimal’ commitment to innovation, research and development, it said.
And at £9 million annually, the Department of Trade and Industry's budget for encouraging the development and uptake of environmental technology by industry — to reduce water pollution — was too low.
More investment was needed in ‘clean technology’ research as well as with more collaboration between companies.
But instead of concentrating on treating waste, research was needed into fundamentally cleaner processes that conserved water and reduced waste.
Despite this, the quality of Britain's water was ‘as good, if not better, than that of most other European countries’, said Dr Johnston.
‘Britain is not the dirty man of Europe.’
This ‘myth’ had created an ‘inferiority complex’among Britain's water suppliers that was discouraging investment in new, clean technology.
Pentland Crown has its chips with retailers
By Our Agriculture Correspondent
A potato variety which can survive Britain's increasingly dry weather better than most has lost its status as a priority crop for farmers because the supermarkets have turned against it.
Retailers say Pentland Crown, the Scottish-bred variety which increased farmers' yields by up to 20 per cent when it was introduced 30 years ago, bruises too easily and goes black.
From next year the potato will be removed from the recommended list of the National Institute of Agricultural Botany in Cambridge.
Pentland Crown accounts for only two per cent of the commercial market, but is still popular with gardeners because of its hardiness and resistance to disease.
Way of the World: Farming notes
By AUBERON WAUGH
MANY will take it as a further surrender to Common Market bureaucracy that an inspectorate will soon be established to regulate the smell of farm manure.
In fact, with the development of deep-litter hen houses and intensive pig culture, some such controls are necessary.
The smell released by a pig or chicken farm is indescribable, and can affect 10 square miles of countryside around.
One may doubt whether modern farming has any useful purpose nowadays when everybody is on a diet.
It mostly seems to involve producing food for animals to eat, whose excrement is then collected to assist the growth of more food for animals.
Small children can sometimes be persuaded to eat cow cake in the same way that old people will eat cat food, but the chief result of all this farming was to produce huge food mountains which we could then refuse to give to the Third World, or to the socialists of Eastern Europe, in order to teach them the error of their ways.
However, there is a new plan to turn land over to wind farming.
It involves nothing more than putting up 80-foot masts all over the land.
A 1,500-acre grouse moor will generate enough electricity in this way to power a town of 6,000 people.
The farmer receives a rent of £15,000 a year and is relieved of the need to do any work for it.
All the food we need will be provided by monster underground funguses producing a regular crop of mushrooms without human assistance.
The masts may seem unsightly to those unused to them, but I am sure it is simply a matter of getting accustomed.
Cows were thought very unsightly when they were first introduced.
Nowadays, we all swoon with pleasure at the sight of a cow.
In The Country: Outdoors: It's mink that gets the blame Michael J. Woods feels that the declining vole faces more than one enemy
By MICHAEL J WOODS
THE PLOP of the fleeing water vole, followed by an underwater smoke-screen of silt, was once a familiar indicator of the presence of these mammals on our waterways.
No longer.
According to Rob Strachan, who has recently completed the field work for a Water Vole Survey of Britain, funded by the Vincent Wildlife Trust, only 30 per cent of the sites where water voles were found before 1939 still have them today.
At the turn of the century, Kenneth Grahame could confidently give the water vole a leading role in The Wind in the Willows: almost everyone knew this small rodent from almost daily acquaintance.
Even 20 years ago, Rob Strachan recalls, the vole was much more common.
There were rivers he visited as a child where he could sit and watch water voles every day.
He cannot do that now.
The water vole is about the same size as a brown rat, but with blunter features, smaller ears, a furry tail and a more gingery coat.
Almost entirely herbivorous, it excavates a maze of galleries in the banks of waterways and ponds.
There are entrances at different levels, including some below the normal waterline for use in emergencies.
In times of flood the water vole moves upwards through its various tunnels until, in extreme conditions, it is forced to leave its underground refuge and resort to thick cover on the bank.
The vole prefers slow-moving rivers, pools and marshy areas with some deep water whose level changes little, but there have been great changes to Britain's wetlands during the past 40 years as a result of agricultural intensification.
Modern farming techniques have diminished the number and quality of the wetlands which remain.
During the same period, the North American mink has escaped or been released from fur farms and has spread almost nationwide.
Gordon Woodroffe, a zoologist who has studied the water voles of the North York Moors, does not consider that the mink is the total rogue it is held out to be in some quarters, but it certainly appears to have caused the vole's extinction on the Moors.
He actually witnessed the death of the last animal in his study group.
It was wearing a radio collar at the time.
As Woodroffe recounts, he was watching it from the opposite bank of the narrow stream and was so close that he was worried the vole would hear his receiver pulsing loudly.
As he watched, a mink pounced on the vole and, although the vole dived from the bank for safety at the last minute, the mink had grabbed it almost before it hit the water.
Dr Johnny Birks has been studying mink for many years and he admits with some reluctance that this extremely successful marten may have contributed to the vole's decline.
The North American mink, he says, has fitted into the niche which would otherwise have been occupied by the European mink had it ever reached Britain.
He is convinced, though, that the water vole would have withstood the pressures on it brought about by the mink had the vole's habitat been less degraded.
He is not surprised by accounts like Gordon Woodroffe's, for upland streams are certainly not prime areas for the water vole.
But where the habitat remains of high quality — Tregaron Bog in Wales or Stodmarsh in Kent — mink and voles co-exist in good numbers.
Strachan and Birks agree that water vole numbers were in significant decline before the arrival of the mink — which can overcome the water vole's traditional defences by following it into water and even, in the case of smaller mink, into its tunnels.
Circumstantial evidence suggests that this animal is a significant problem for water voles.
Strachan's work shows that, when field signs of mink increase, those of voles diminish.
It is always easy to blame an individual species, says Birks.
An alien carnivore is the perfect answer.
But we have to look past the mink to find the underlying reasons for the vole's disappearance.
Without doing so, we could miss vital factors of detriment both to water voles and other wetland wildlife.
Rob Strachan stresses that the water vole survey is the first of its kind.
It is only the baseline from which a repeat exercise can be carried out, in seven to 10 years' time.
Meanwhile, Strachan views the water vole as an indicator of wetland habitat quality, and he looks forward with little optimism.
The vole, he says, appears to be coming perilously close to being endangered; and this means that Britain's wetlands are going the same way.
In The Country: FARMER'S DIARY
Out of town, out of mind
By R W F POOLE
FOX DUMPING is the latest bit of ‘animal welfare’ stupidity.
The fox has taken to urban life with great success.
Foxes are great scavengers and the overflowing dustbins of our deprived society provide excellent pickings.
The thriving vulpine population is seen by various urban authorities as a problem.
For some time there have been rumours that the urbs have been solving the problem by having their foxes caught and surreptitiously turned loose in remote rural areas.
A report in the Liverpool Daily Post quoted a Birmingham City Council member as saying that it was necessary to control fox numbers ‘on public health grounds’.
Foxes were ‘humanely snared’(a contradiction in terms) and handed over to ‘various voluntary welfare organisations’; they were then ‘transported we know not where’.
The council's environmental health department subsequently stated that ‘the trapping and transport of foxes within the city is not known to this department’.
It is obvious (or should be) that an influx of hungry, semi-strangled and homeless urban foxes into a rural area will make a thorough mess of the local ecosystem.
This is especially so in the remote sheep-farming areas of Wales, which seem to be particularly favoured as fox-dumping grounds.
It must be stressed that, so far, the evidence of sneaky fox transportation is circumstantial.
It includes hunts coming across groups of foxes sitting about in fields — hardly typical vulpine behaviour.
These foxes appear disorientated and pay no heed to the hounds, which makes their learning curve a short one.
There are other reports of foxes collecting round farmhouses to scavenge.
These foxes seem to have no instinct to hunt and have little fear of man.
Farmers do not welcome these incomers.
Inspection of the corpses has shown that the animals were in poor condition.
Some of the wretched creatures had been castrated: no doubt for welfare and public health reasons.
Evidence seemed to harden somewhat when a Glamorgan farmer went to the aid of a ditched van one dark night.
The grateful driver told the farmer that his cargo consisted of 47 foxes which were being transported from the Midlands to be let loose in Wales by order of the RSPCA.
An RSPCA spokesman denied all knowledge of the van, its mission and its contents.
Asked if he knew anything of fox dumping, he said: ‘Obviously we are nothing to do with it’.
This is a seedy business.
Well-meaning ignorance is one of the biggest causes of animal suffering in this country: Heaven preserve us all from welfarenatics.
AN OLD gentleman once told me that the two things that caused the greatest rural rows were the Church and fox-hunting.
It has to be said that fox-hunters are not the least quarrelsome of Her Majesty's subjects, but they are as mewling, puking, bairns when compared with church persons.
I well remember attending an ecumenical garden party, minding my own business and trying to juggle a cup of weak tea and a sinewy rock cake.
Down the garden came our C of E rector.
At the bottom of the garden his brethren of the cloth were submitting his character to a sustained and vicious mauling.
So much for Christian charity, I thought; but then it does not do to mix God and religion.
This point was well illustrated in a Church row that once broke over the head of a certain man.
This man lived a reasonably blameless life on an isolated steading on the boundary of two parishes.
For some reason both the adjoining clerical incumbents wished to call his soul their own; or it may have been his jumble that they wanted.
They bombarded him with letters, each cleric pointing out the justice of his claims and listing the iniquities of his brother in Christ.
Our man got fed up with this nonsense.
Careful study of the map showed him that his house was in neither parish; it was within the boundary of a parish in which he and a lot of black-face sheep were the only inhabitants.
He declared UDI.
In a letter to the bishop he stated that he intended to appoint himself lay reader for the parish, to stick to the King James Bible and the Cranmer Prayer Book and to preach to himself (and the sheep) High Tory sermons; so please would His Grace tell the neighbours to go stick their heads in their fonts.
There was no reply from the bishop, but he didn't hear another squeak from the turbulent priests either.
In The Country: NATURE NOTE
By Robert Burton
THE STOCK dove must be one of our most overlooked larger birds.
It is easily dismissed as ‘just another pigeon’ but it is smaller than its close relative the wood-pigeon.
The two species sometimes associate in the fields, and their behaviour is similar, so a special watch must be kept for the stock dove.
It lacks the wood-pigeon's white bars on wings and neck.
Look, instead, for black edges to otherwise pale wings when the stock dove is in flight.
Its gruff double coo, with the second note clipped and emphatic, also reveals its identity.
At one time confined to the south and east of the country, the stock dove spread as arable farming expanded in the 19th century; but the introduction of organo-chlorine seed dressings in the 1960s was a disaster.
The stock dove almost disappeared from some areas, but, like other species that were hard-hit at the same time, it has since made a good recovery.
It is now, however, less abundant in intensively farmed countryside because herbicides have robbed it of weed seeds to eat, and the old farm buildings and ancient hollow trees where it nested have frequently disappeared.
There is some mystery about the origin of the stock dove's name, but it probably came from the habit of nesting in the stocks or trunks of trees.
Although tree holes are the most common nesting place, stock doves have been found nesting in rabbit holes and they occasionally take over the abandoned nests of wood-pigeons.
In The Country: The boys from the black stuff Sara Jackson sees how charcoal burners are surviving as a symbol of traditional methods of woodland conservation
By SARA JACKSON
IN A WOOD in South Ockendon, Essex, on the very outskirts of London, two brothers spend their days cutting dead timber, loading it into a steel kiln and setting it alight.
The brothers, Ray and Alan Mitchell, are charcoal burners.
Theirs was once a common line of business, but now there are only about two dozen professional burners left in the country.
Ray and Alan, who took it up only two years ago, use a method practised for 150 years.
As ex-plumbers they are unlikely candidates for resurrecting ancient woodland traditions, yet they are part of a growing drive to do just that.
The Mitchells set up Eden Woodland Products in 1990, after the builder they were contracted to went bust in the 1988 crash.
They wanted a new start and found one in the form of nearby Hangman's Wood, owned by the Marley Paving company.
‘After the storm of 1987 it was just devastated,’ says Alan.
‘We thought: there's got to be something we can do with all that wood.’
Now they produce barbecue charcoal from it.
It's a growing market.
In 1987 Britain imported 20,000 tons, and by 1990, 90,000 tons.
Hangman's Wood suffered so severely from the gales because, like much of our woodlands, it had been neglected for decades.
Yet until the 1950s most had been managed as coppice since Norman times.
It provided grazing land, timber, fruits and fuel, while remaining an undamaged wildlife habitat.
Coppice management involves dividing a woodland into compartments, or coupes, which are cut on a rotation of five to 25 years.
The small ‘underwood’ trees (or coppice) are chopped back to stumps, producing shoots cut for sticks and brushwood.
A portion of ‘standards’, such as oaks, are cut for timber at the same time, but saplings are left to replace them.
Grazing should be prohibited in the newly-cut coupe for about seven years to allow the establishment of new seedlings.
The wood therefore is constantly regenerated, yet also yields a steady supply of timber and grazing.
The Mitchells were granted permission to burn charcoal from coppiced timber at Hangman's Wood if they returned it to this state of management.
They have cleared their first coupe and, aided by the Woodland Grant Scheme, will replant next spring, replacing weed species — such as sycamore — with oak, cherry and ash.
‘Last spring, bluebells grew in this cleared area for the first time in years,’ Alan said.
‘They couldn't get through the undergrowth before.’
The Mitchells coppice their woodland to earn a living.
But other organisations supporting traditional woodland management have more far-reaching objectives in mind.
The idea is a simple one; begin working our dwindling woodland again and we could be providing the best argument for preserving it.
These organisations include the Woodland Trust, and Thames Chase: the Community Forest in whose area Hangman's Wood lies.
Community Forests, funded by the Forestry and Countryside Commissions, were set up in 1990 on the outskirts of major cities.
They encourage landowners and businesses to plant on their own land.
But the woodland they create will be managed as it was in the past.
The principle behind this effort to resurrect the countryside is ecnomic viability.
Landowners are more likely to plant and maintain woodland if it provides income.
So far, local companies have been the most responsive.
Rhone Poulenc at Dagenham is financing the planting of 2,000 trees at nearby Eastbrook School.
Two thousand trees on a two-acre site is a lot — too many to survive as fully mature trees — but this excessive planting keeps the programme economically viable.
After 20 years or so thinning can begin; the excess trees are used as timber and the remainder form a naturally spaced woodland.
But it is the farmers who are the hardest to interest (although all planting is grant-aided).
For companies the benefits of co-operation are clear.
It is good public relations.
‘The mineral companies especially will find future planning permission easier if they put the land back to good use,’ says Max Hislop, a community forester.
Hislop believes that, as crop subsidies fall, farmers will see woodland creation as a practical alternative.
Meanwhile, recession hasn't helped the programme.
‘We'd have so much more planted,’ says Hislop.
‘But when companies are laying off workers, they can't then be seen to donate money to charity.
It's very difficult.’
It's very difficult too for Ray and Alan Mitchell.
The UK imports 95 per cent of its charcoal, mostly from rainforests.
Charcoal consumption from these sources is not environmentally acceptable.
But the price is.
To produce their charcoal, Ray and Alan cut the wood, load the kiln, empty it into sacks after the burn and then re-bag it for retail sale.
They also drive around trying to market it.
Last year their turnover was £6,000.
None of this was profit.
They subsidise their income by doing odd jobs for Marley Paving.
‘We can't compete on price with Third World countries,’ says Ray, ‘because it's so labour-intensive.
Wholesalers buy imported charcoal at around £1.80 a bag, add 130 per cent and sell it on.
We sell these bags at £2.49 and have added only 15 per cent profit.’
But the brothers have faith in the product's future.
They believe it will sell because, if consumers are boycotting tropical hardwoods stocked by DIY stores, there is no reason why they should condone burning them on the barbecue.
As a sign of their optimism they have begun producing artist's charcoal from willow.
The concept behind planting and working woodland deserves to survive current hardships.
After all, if the Normans hadn't thought long-term and picked up their trowels 1,000 years ago, there would be no New Forest today.
It is ironic that it has taken until the dawn of the 21st century to realise that the best methods of utilising — and hence preserving — our woodlands are those employed a millennium ago.