

‘Grasses’ listed on secret files
by Valerie Elliott
THE FIRST national index of ‘grasses’ is to be compiled by the National Criminal Intelligence Service which went into operation last week.
Ministers have told police chiefs they want a tighter control on informants following the bungled Special Branch operation at Brixton jail which was uncovered after the escape of IRA suspects Nessan Quinlivan and Pearse McCauley last summer.
There is particular concern that an informant may try to set police officer against police officer and force against force.
Each force is to be asked to disclose the names of its informants.
Then the identity and details of any information passed on will be logged on secure computer files in a numbers code.
Setting up the service provides for the first time a national intelligence-gathering operation on organised crime and criminals.
In August, the intelligence service will be fully staffed with a team of 400 police and Customs officers.
However the FBI-style agency will not conduct its own investigations or prosecutions, although many Whitehall insiders believe this could eventually happen.
Last week, Tony Mullett, the director-general, launched the agency officially ‘on stream’.
He took control of the national drugs intelligence unit, the national soccer intelligence unit and seven regional criminal intelligence offices.
He also took over some national functions handled now by the Metropolitan Police — Interpol, the paedophile index, public sector corruption, counterfeit currency, data on product contamination, kidnap and extortion and the research unit of the stolen vehicle squad.
Mr Mullett and his deputy, Simon Crawshaw, a former deputy assistant commissioner at Scotland Yard, hope to provide sufficient intelligence on major criminals to lead to prosecutions.
But they might find it difficult to take a back seat and Whitehall believes that criminal intelligence will evolve into a top detective agency with an operational arm.
It may not yet be the FBI but, just as in the movies where the American flag stands behind the FBI chief's desk, Mr Mullett has already propped the Union flag against the wall.
GPs seek support to end 24-hour care
By VICTORIA MACDONALD
FAMILY doctors are to launch a campaign to win public sympathy in their fight to opt out of providing round-the-clock patient care, writes Victoria Macdonald.
GPs feel the public does not understand the problems of being on 24-hour call, including the danger of making wrong decisions through fatigue.
This weekend doctors will receive the results of a poll for the BMA showing 73 per cent of GPs wanted to opt out of the commitment.
Last night Dr Anthony Stanton, GPs' spokesman, said: ‘Many fail to realise a GP works an average 72-hour week.
Of that, one night a week and one weekend a month is normally spent on call.’
Case of high anxiety over Harvard's ‘kinky shrink’
by Hugh Davies in New York
THE CASE of an alleged ‘kinky shrink’ at Harvard has put America's oldest university into a flat spin.
At the same time, the world of psychiatry is on edge over what happened to a lonely student on the couch of his female therapist.
Against a backdrop of lurid publicity, the university is delving into the truth of the affair, anxious to protect its reputation in the face of some startling claims.
The student is dead.
Paul Lozano, 28, in his fourth year at Harvard Medical School, took a huge cocaine overdose which was officially ruled as accidental.
His family is convinced he committed suicide.
Lozano, son of Mexican immigrants in El Paso, Texas, apparently felt out of place at Harvard.
Court papers say he was deeply depressed.
Last week the campus at Cambridge, Massachusetts, was in uproar as relatives launched a medical malpractice and wrongful death legal action, claiming that his therapist for four years, Dr Margaret Bean-Bayog, 20 years his senior, drove him to his death after a sado-masochistic seduction.
The doctor has been sent on leave from her post as an assistant professor of psychiatry at Harvard.
The state medical registration board charged her with failing to conform to accepted standards of medical practice and passed the case to the state Division of Administrative Law Appeals for a formal hearing.
The panel ruled that she had engaged in ‘sub-standard care’.
According to the suit, she initiated a ‘vicious cycle of regressing this young man back to a three-year-old child’.
She is alleged to have convinced him that she was his mother and then forced him to have sex with her.
The dead man's sister, Pilar, said that shortly before his death she found in his apartment reams of sex notes from Dr Bean-Bayog, including hundreds of handwritten letters.
The doctor retorted that he broke into her office and stole them from files.
She said the lengthy sexual fantasies were simply transcriptions of her dreams.
The documents, now evidence in the case, include flash cards with orders to the student to ‘run over every day until you know them all by heart and are starting to believe them’.
One card read: ‘I'm your Mom and I love you and you love me very, very much.
Say that 10 times.’
Another said: ‘I love spending time with you.
I'm going to miss you, so many things about you, the closeness and the need and the phenomenal sex and being so appreciated.’
A letter said: ‘If you want me to be powerless, helpless and totally dependent on you, I want to be that.
I abandon myself to you…
I even want you to abuse and degrade me.
Do absolutely anything you want to me, no matter how forbidden.’
Another read: ‘I adore you.
I am your slave.
I do not exist except to serve you and give you pleasure.
I am surprised you keep me tied up.
I wonder if you don't realise how much I am in your power without that.’
The sister said that her brother consulted the psychiatrist after feeling depressed, homesick and lonely.
‘I could feel a change in his behaviour immediately.
He was becoming very dependent on her.’
He began ‘speaking like a six-year-old — even walking like a little boy’.
The sister claimed that he told her, shortly before his death, that he had a sexual relationship with the doctor.
In a statement through her lawyer, the psychiatrist said she had developed a unique therapy: the role of ‘a benevolent mother who would not abuse him’.
She gave him a stuffed bear and some children's books.
The infant props and motherly play-acting were to ‘calm him down when he was out of control’.
He was a chronic liar and had delusions of sexual conquest involving her and another psychiatrist.
Dr Bean-Bayog said the charge that she had a sexual relationship with Lozano was ‘outlandish’.
He was a homicidal and delusional sociopath, she said.
The family said he was brainwashed.
Adding to the mix of charges is an affidavit from a psychotherapist, Amy Stromson, who also treated Lozano.
She insisted that he told her he felt ‘ashamed, embarrassed and dirty’ about the ‘kinky’relationship, and had continued it only ‘because he wasn't paying her much’.
Stromson said: ‘Paul also told me that Dr Bean-Bayog shared her erotic fantasies with him and asked him to act them out with her — and that they did.’
She alleged that the doctor had told her at a seminar that she desired Lozano.
She had spoken of her ‘erotic sexual feelings and sexual attraction’ to him.
DISCREDITED THERAPY THAT OPENS DOOR TO ABUSE
By VICTORIA MACDONALD
REGRESSION therapy became popular in the 1960s and early '70s but was later largely discredited, mainly because it is so open to abuse, writes Victoria Macdonald.
It surfaced last year during the trial of Frank Beck, former head of a Leicestershire children's home, who used it to abuse young people in his care both sexually and physically.
The court was told that teenagers were made to suck dummies and wear nappies, were bathed like babies and told to regress to the time they were last happy.
Witnesses said that when Beck assaulted them he said this was what they wanted.
Regression therapy is based on the belief that re-living a traumatic event, experienced earlier in life but hidden deep in one's subconscious, can repair the emotional damage.
Subjects are taken back to childhood by being put in nappies, bottle-fed and alternately shouted at and hugged, which leaves them feeling helpless and vulnerable.
Some therapists have extended this to such controversial techniques as ‘re-parenting’, in which patients are urged to reject their parents and adopt the therapists.
While it is acknowledged that to delve into one's subconscious can be helpful in working out psychological problems, it can be damaging if done in isolation.
Schools fear opt-out axe by Labour
by Fran Abrams Education Correspondent
MORE than 100 grant-maintained schools could close if Labour wins the election, leaders of the opt-out movement have claimed.
Many more of the 226 schools that have taken control of their own affairs in the past three years fear victimisation if they are returned to hostile local authorities.
Labour says that although it would hand the opted-out schools back to the authorities that used to control them, it would protect them against discrimination.
But Bob Balchin, chairman of the Grant Maintained Schools Foundation, which oversees the schools, said the move would be the end of the road for as many as half of them.
‘It is like Nero throwing Christians to the lions and then promising them a grievance procedure,’ he said.
Tim Eggar, the Minister of State for Education, echoed Mr Balchin's views.
‘Local authorities will find ways of closing them despite their popularity, and they will have the power to do it because there will not be anything to protect the schools.
It will be spite and envy,’ he said.
At least 40 schools opted out because they were threatened with closure, and most believe they would be shown little mercy.
Almost as many again would be returned to local authorities bitterly opposed to opting out.
A further 45 grant-maintained schools are grammar schools and would be affected by Labour's plans to end 11-plus testing.
Many of them are in old, dilapidated buildings, and it is likely that some authorities would take the opportunity to reduce surplus places by closing them.
Mr Balchin said: ‘Memories are very long in local authorities and offence has been taken.
The Labour Party has been making noises which suggest that things would be made easier for these schools, but I believe its welcome back would be a stab in the back for most of them.’
Local authorities of all political hues have opposed schools' moves to opt out, and many head teachers believe they could no longer work with them.
Disputes over opting out have ended in the High Court on several occasions.
One of the most fierce battles has surrounded Stratford School, in Newham, east London, where the head teacher, Mrs Anne Snelling, is in dispute with a group of her governors.
Tony Scivetti, a parent governor who supports Mrs Snelling, said Newham had already spelled out its intention to close the school at the earliest opportunity.
‘I believe they will make moves to close the school within months, using the argument that it is in chaos.’
Head teachers and governors attending the third grant maintained schools conference in London last week feared it could be their last.
Among them was Roger Perks, head teacher of Taverstock School in Birmingham, one of the authorities most strongly opposed to opting out.
He has already faced fierce criticism from his local Labour candidate after he told parents that the school would close if the party won the election.
Others pointed out the huge benefits they had gained since becoming grant maintained.
Some have received large capital grants to improve their buildings, while others have been able to put to good use the money which would normally be spent on local authority overheads.
Mrs Maureen Howie, head teacher of La Retraite School, in Lambeth, south London, said: ‘The real disappointment for us would be that such a move would be made without looking very carefully at what grant maintained schools have achieved, and at what the pilot movement has done for children.’
Jack Straw, Labour's education spokesman, described the claims as nonsense.
‘Mr Balchin is using grant maintained schools as a Conservative front organisation, and that is a very dangerous game to play,’ he said.
Labour has promised a system of independent public inquiries which will look into all proposed school closures, and it believes this will protect schools threatened because of their decision to opt out.
Justice put in the dock over miscarriages
by Christopher Elliott
BILLY ROY DANIELS was convicted in January 1990 of ‘being knowingly concerned in the importation of cannabis’ from Spain.
He was jailed for 13 years after Customs officers found three- quarters of a ton of the drug in the back of his lorry at Dover.
He maintains that he did not know it was there.
He is lucky.
His case has been taken up by Justice, the all- party law reform group.
It receives representations each year from some 500 prisoners claiming miscarriages of justice but is able to look at 50 cases in depth.
Successful high-profile appeals of the Guildford Four, Birmingham Six, the Maguire family and the Tottenham Three have traumatised the criminal justice system and led to a Royal Commission, but they have not stopped the complaints.
Last Monday, the National Association of Probation Officers published details of 22 offenders at Long Lartin prison, Worcestershire, over whose convictions there were ‘lurking doubts and inconsistencies’.
In its submission to the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice, the association claimed as many as 700 prisoners could be innocent.
The probation officers' view has added to concern about lawyers and police and the system they serve.
Peter Ashman, legal secretary of Justice, said: ‘The profession is more willing to admit miscarriages of justice than it once was.
When you talked to judges in the Sixties, they might have told you they didn't happen at all or would be willing to concede that a miscarriage might take place once every 10 years.’
Daniels, the lorry driver, has already appealed successfully against his sentence, having it reduced by three years, but his appeal against conviction was turned down.
Justice intends to persevere.
In June 1989 the East Londoner had taken a load to Barcelona, where depot staff loaded his trailer with a mixed consignment to be taken back to London.
He drove to a Customs depot where it was sealed by Spanish Customs officers.
He then drove to Namur in Belgium, where he changed cab units after a breakdown.
He came home as a passenger in the tractor of another driver who brought his trailer home.
He left the trailer at Dover and returned home.
When it was opened by Customs officers a crate containing cannabis with a street value of £2.5 million was found in the back.
Daniels has denied all knowledge of the crate and the drugs.
The case turns on whether he could or should have seen the case in the back of the lorry when he was lacing it up.
Justice hopes he will be one of the three or four people a year who are freed by their efforts.
The number of representations to the Home Office is running at 700 to 800 a year, but only about five of those cases are referred to the Court of Appeal.