

Election ‘92: Smith determined to protect pound
By Antonia Feuchtwanger
INTEREST rates would have to rise if necessary to protect the pound, Mr John Smith Shadow Chancellor, indicated yesterday on BBC TV's Money Programme.
But he was not expecting the economy and the Government's finances to be in a much worse state than that set out on March 10 in the Chancellor's Budget report.
‘If I am told that the economy is much worse than the Government has said…there's something wrong with the way things are run in this country.
I expect [the Chancellor]to tell the truth.’
‘These figures are only a few weeks old.
They were released by the Chancellor to the House of Commons.’
However, Mr Smith said later that previous Budget statements had borne ‘so little resemblance to the depressing reality’ of Britain's economic condition that they resembled some of Mr Lamont's economic forecasts.
‘I will do whatever is necessary to preserve the value of the pound,’ Mr Smith said, reaffirming his commitment to the European Exchange Rate Mechanism.
‘Of course we would like to see lower interest rates,’ he said, acknowledging the burden on people paying mortagages.
‘But we have to take account of our obligations under the ERM.’
Mr Smith did not say how he would meet manifesto commitments without extra borrowing or taxes if growth were not as strong as the Chancellor had forecast.
He said he would not remove an alleged anomaly which could allow self-employed people to avoid the effect of Labour's proposed abolition of the upper earnings limit on National Insurance contributions.
The programme featured a group of workers at Bobtail, a small textile company in Nottinghamshire, all of whom were paid less than Labour's proposed minimum wage of £3.40 an hour.
They believe that the minimum wage could threaten their jobs.
‘If we had £3.40, we would have to put our prices up to the customer and they would not buy,’ said Wendy Heath, a machinist.
The programme showed a children's nightdress which is sold in the shops for £1.10.
About 35p of this went on wages.
Labour's minimum wage proposal would add 10p to the price.
First Price, a retailer selling the nightdress, said it would look at buying from abroad instead if this happened.
Mr Stuart Greenwood, finance director of the kitchen furniture maker Spring Ram, said that Labour's proposed increase of capital allowances from 25 per cent to 40 per cent would make no impact on his company's investment plans.
Mr Gordon Brown, Shadow Trade Secretary, denied that the introduction of a national minimum wage would lead to job losses.
In response to figures suggesting that 250,000 people might benefit from the minimum wage but 100,000 might lose their jobs, he said ‘I do not accept your figures.’
Election ‘92: Economists fear interest rate rise
By Anne Segall, Economics Correspondent
INTEREST rates could rise and the outlook for inflation would deteriorate if the Conservatives lose office, according to a detailed economic analysis published today by the Ernst & Young ITEM Club, a forecasting group that uses the Treasury model.
Its estimates show that interest rates may have to be raised to 12 per cent as a result of exchange market pressure if Labour comes to power.
It believes that this ‘crisis’ level of interest rates may only may last only a short while but that a ‘risk premium’may remain throughout the life of a Labour government, with adverse implications for growth.
The market reaction to Labour, the minimum wage and a loss of £10.25 billion of privatisation receipts ‘are all adverse for the outlook’, the ITEM Club analysis claims.
It comes ahead of inflation figures on Friday which are expected to show a substantial drop from 4.1 per cent to 3.8 per cent in the headline rate, as recent cuts in mortgage costs work their way through.
Election uncertainties have delayed the upturn in the economy, but the ITEM Club believes ‘the ingredients for recovery are in place’.
It says that slow growth will give an incoming government little scope either to cut taxes or increase spending over the life of the next Parliament.
It also states that while Labour might achieve a modest reduction in unemployment through its job training schemes, it would be at the expense of higher inflation and a weaker current account, and would still leave unemployment stuck at just under three million for two years.
The ITEM Club report concludes that any boost to growth or employment resulting from Labour policies would be short-lived and would be undermined in the medium term by the negative effects, including higher inflation and a worsening trade position.
Interest rates would have to be higher and there is a risk that a Labour government facing ‘difficult choices’ would be tempted to devalue sterling, as feared by financial markets.
Despite Labour's plans to raise taxes by £6.8 billion in a full year, the analysis says it would be unable to fund its election spending promises beyond initial moves to raise pensions and child benefit and a modest recovery programme.
The report makes no judgment on Labour's tax plans.
However, it argues that VAT increases will be required whichever party is in power if public borrowing is to be reduced.
Implicit in this analysis is the view that Labour would have little scope for raising additional revenue by further increases in income tax directed at the better-off.
Membership of the European exchange rate mechanism is seen as the main constraint on all parties, holding back growth and thus reducing the scope for popular moves to cut taxes or increase public spending.
City: Profit rise in store at Tesco
DESPITE the recession, supermarket group Tesco is expected to ring up another 28 p.c. profits rise tomorrow when it unveils its full-year results.
Interest earned on the proceeds of last year's £572m rights issue will account for a sizeable slice.
Stockbroker UBS Phillips & Drew, looking for £530m against £417m pre-tax, says 1991–92 was not an easy year for the group but believes the current year will be better, given a lower wage award and more stabilised sales.
Fashion retailer Next will also provide another indication of high street trading on Tuesday.
Following last year's huge loss, the company is expected to unveil profits of about £9m, building on a recovery under way at the halfway stage.
With increased spending on advertising and a tough domestic market, Highland Distilleries will do well to match last year's £15.1m interim and shareholders will have little to complain about, especially if the dividend rises in line with market expectations to 1.55p.
Building and civil engineering group Costain intended maintaining its dividend total for 1991 at 12¼p when calling on shareholders for £79m last April.
But, with the group expected to follow George Wimpey and John Laing in making substantial provisions, it could end up £25m to £30m in the red.
The market believes the 43/4p interim paid in November is the only dividend shareholders will collect for 1991.
City: Sons take Mrs Maxwell's money
By Richard Northedge
KEVIN Maxwell has asked his mother, Elizabeth, for financial help after accountants calculated the late publisher's son's net wealth at just £212,000.
His assets were estimated to be worth £1.96m, but he had £1.75m of loans.
Mrs Maxwell provided him with £500,000 after the death of her husband Robert because her son was in trouble, she says in an affidavit signed for liquidators of the private Maxwell companies.
She also offered to pay Kevin's £430,000 mortgage and provided £400,000 for his brother Ian.
‘Towards the end of November and beginning of December 1991, I became aware from my children, including Kevin, and from newspaper and television reports, that serious accusations were being made against Kevin involving the misappropriation of many millions of pounds,’ she says.
The affidavit adds: ‘On about December 11, Kevin asked me to help him.
That was very unlike him.
I cannot recall an occasion when he asked me for help before.
He asked me for £100,000 to help him pay legal fees.
I therefore immediately sent Ff1m [about £100,000].’
‘On December 16, I had a long talk with Kevin and Ian.
They asked me for more money.
They asked me for £400,000 each.
They told me they needed the money for legal fees.
They were both very anxious and I had no choice.
The sums of money were enormous and I told them that there would be no more money once it had been spent.’
On December 23, as an early Christmas present, Mrs Maxwell transferred the £400,000 — signing the transfer in her maiden name, E. Meynard.
She continued: ‘I am 70 years old but I felt I must make this sacrifice for them, even though the constraints on me in the future are very great.’
Kevin Maxwell's own statement of affairs shows that he values his Chelsea house at £750,000 though he has a £430,000 mortgage from City bankers Brown Shipley.
He also owns a chateau in the Lot region of France valued at £250,000 but mortgaged for £200,000.
The contents of Mr Maxwell Chelsea home are valued at £160,000, although half belong to his wife Pandora, while the French furniture is valued at £10,000.
Other personal possessions include a £2,500 horse and a £25,000 Morgan car.
His £44,000 of quoted shares comprise mainly £40,000 of British Petroleum and only 2,345 in the failed Maxwell Communication Corporation.
His main investment other than the house is £650,000 of shares in the unquoted Maxwell Aviation International Group.
But, besides the house mortgages, Mr Maxwell has a Dm1.65m (£580,000) currency loan from Brown Shipley plus an $800,000 (£460,000) American loan.
Mr Maxwell, in an affidavit of his own, confirms he has received payments from his mother but adds: ‘I feel I have a moral obligation to repay as and when my resources permit.’
City: OFT looks at industrial gas spot market option
By Roland Gribben
THE creation of a spot market for industrial gas to help cope with the volumes coming on to the market as a result of the reduction in the British Gas business has been raised by the Office of Fair Trading.
A paper produced by officials lists a number of options about how to cope with the influx of gas and says ‘long-term players’ are needed to provide ‘genuine self-sustaining competition’.
The paper asks: ‘Can they just be traders on some sort of spot market or ought the release to be limited to those intending to sell to the final consumer?
There seems, on the face of it, no reason why there should not be an aftermarket in release allocations.’
The office is attempting to establish the best way to encourage more competition in the industrial market following the agreement with British Gas.
The privatised company has agreed to reduce its share from 95 p.c. to 40 p.c. over the next three years.
A number of issues are raised in the paper, but one of the companies which has been at the receiving end and has been canvassed for views, says: ‘Part of the document looks as if it has been drafted by British Gas.’
The paper asks whether bigger customers, including buying groups and consortia, should be able to buy for their own use and sell any surplus and suggests some sort of ‘credibility test’ should be imposed on companies.
It also suggests a significant minimum figure, possibly 10m therms, should be fixed for purchases and puts forward pricing proposals based on weighted average cost.
City: Control chief Virani to quit
By Karen Cooper
NAZMU Virani is to step down as chairman and chief executive of Control Securities, after his arrest last Tuesday on charges connected with the failed Bank of Credit & Commerce International.
A statement will be issued tomorrow outlining Mr Virani's position and the state of affairs at the property and brewing group, which is seeking to have trading in its shares unfrozen.
They were suspended last October.
Sydney Robin, a former deputy chairman at Great Universal Stores and a director at packaging group Lin Pac, will take over as chairman and the search for a new chief executive will begin.
Mr Robin is one of three non-executives at Control.
The others are John Bellak, chairman of Severn Trent, and Edward Smith, a director of Waterglade International.
Sources close to the company said Mr Virani was relinquishing his roles ‘willingly’ and there was ‘no question’of him being ousted.
He will remain on the board.
He was remanded in custody last Tuesday and will make a fresh bail application tomorrow.
He is accused of conspiring with Mohammed Haque, a BCCI manager, to mislead the bank's auditor Price Waterhouse in 1984–85 with documents alleging that companies connected to him owed the bank £2.2m.
City: Crown to refund Seelig's legal costs
THE legal costs of merchant banker Roger Seelig and Cazenove partner David Mayhew, incurred defending charges from the abortive ‘Guinness Three’ trial, are to be refunded by the Government.
But Lord Spens, fellow defendant with Mr Seelig in the second Guinness trial, will not recoup any costs.
Lord Spens, awarded legal aid after his own funds ran out in 1990, said yesterday, on hearing of Mr Seelig's prospects of retrieving some funds: ‘Good luck to him.
I think his success in getting them was part of the reason I did not get them.’
The third trial, the last arising from the Guinness affair, was abandoned by the Serious Fraud Office in February before reaching court.
In such cases, it is customary for the Crown to bear all reasonable costs run up by defendants.
For Mr Seelig, also a defendant in the second Guinness trial, abandoned without verdict because of his deteriorating health, the costs issue is blurred.
No costs were awarded in the second Guinness trial.
Mr Seelig took £400,000 of legal advice before the two trials were separated, but, in the second, he conducted his own defence.
Mr Mayhew's costs, well into seven figures, were funded by Cazenove, which now stands a good chance of recouping them from tax-payers.
City: Finland forced into austerity measures
FINLAND'S government yesterday announced an emergency economic austerity package to stem an outflow of investment capital from the country that is threatening to force a major devaluation and bring down the centre-right administration.
The plan, whose passage through parliament remains highly uncertain, came after two days of hectic government activity and almost permanent crisis meetings following a currency outflow of £1.5 billion on Friday alone.
Prime Minister Esko Aho said yesterday the government planned to cut about 10 billion Finnish marks out of the 1993 budget by reducing state spending.
In another move yesterday which further highlighted the government's problems, Sirkka Hamalainen was appointed the new president of the Bank of Finland.
Mr Hamalainen's appointment came after the previous Bank of Finland President, Rolf Kullberg, tendered his resignation with effect from June.
City: Consortium formed for farming risks
A CONSORTIUM of 48 syndicates at Lloyd's of London has been formed to insure farmers against problems with their crops.
It will also cover horticulture and forestry.
The group will be one of the largest of the new consortia now emerging in Lloyd's and will insure up to $10m for each risk, with a ceiling of $25m for catastrophes in one zone.
The group is expecting customers to be banks, processors and others linked to farming as well as‘agro-industrial multinationals’, co-operatives and commodity boards.
City: ITN in share talks with US networks
INDEPENDENT Television News has had ‘tentative’ discussions with American television networks interested in buying shares in the news service as part of ownership changes required by the 1990 Broadcasting Act.
ITN has recruited American investment bank Lehman Brothers to steer it through the restructuring.
Lehman has already raised the possibility of a capital injection by issuing new shares to outside investors.
The business is owned by the regional independent television companies.
They have until 1994 to sell 51 p.c. of their shares to external shareholders.
An ITN spokesman confirmed yesterday that initial discussions had been held with American networks and European and British organisations.
Networks such as CBS, ABC and Ted Turner's Cable News Network are among rumoured candidates.
‘But none have gone beyond expressions of potential interest,’ he said.
The Government has set a 20 p.c. limit on foreign stakes.
Some ITV operators, among them Granada, LWT, TVS and TSW, are considering selling or reducing their stakes in ITN.
City: Waste Management set to float at 600p
By Marc Popiolek
DESPITE a cool response from British institutions, shares in Waste Management International will be priced at between 590p and 600p tomorrow, after heavy subscription by American and European investors to the £2.2 billion flotation.
The price of 600p, or a fraction under, will represent a successful conclusion to the plan by Chicago-based parent Waste Management Inc to launch its overseas arm Waste Management International as a separate entity with a listing in London.
The pathfinder prospectus, published on March 19, indicated only that the issue would be pitched between 530p and 645p.
At 590p or more, lead sponsor Merrill Lynch will have achieved a price in the upper half of that range.
Pricing arrangements are set to be finalised in New York tonight and announced in London tomorrow morning.
Provisional dealings in the shares start at 2.30pm tomorrow, and unconditional dealings on April 15.
Despite the efforts of stockbroker Cazenove, responsible for placing the London tranche of the issue, British investors have been lukewarm, no doubt partly because of pre-election nerves.
The British tranche was none the less fully subscribed, but shares on sale in Europe were oversubscribed and those offered in New York could have been sold four times over.
Waste Management International made profits of £96.4m before taxation in 1991 and, based on historic earnings, the multiple at the flotation price is 33.
In the near term, it does not intend to pay any dividends, instead ploughing all profits back.
Following the share sale, it will be in an extremely strong financial position, with no borrowings.
In this country, through a partnership with Wessex Water, it owns the former Wimpey waste business.
City: Raise the stakes in the sport of sheiks
By JOHN KAY
HORSE racing may be the sport of kings, or more recently sheiks, but it is also a business — and it is remarkably unprofitable.
There are few other industries in which, over a long period of time, revenues have covered less than half of costs.
There are also almost no other industries in which participation is such fun.
The one fact explains the other.
Racing costs about £250m a year to run.
What racegoers contribute, and what sponsors pay in order to link their name with races and provide champagne to clients, is only about £70m.
Thus, racecourses (mostly) lose money, trainers (largely) lose money and racehorse owners (almost invariably) lose money.
Much of the difference between costs and revenues is made up by the losses of owners.
Owning a racehorse will leave you no change from £200 a week.
Most of that is the cost of training, but you will have to add insurance, vet's fees and the capital loss on almost any racehorse.
Prize money in Britain covers only about one quarter of these costs, which is why some owners are looking at the larger prizes available in other countries.
Despite these losses, the number of horses in training increased steadily through the 1980s.
If owning a horse (or part of a horse — only a minority of owners own a whole horse) has been a lousy investment, racehorse ownership is also a form of conspicuous consumption and the 1980s were good years for that.
But the 1990s are not and, since 1989, the number of new horses being trained to race has been falling steadily.
Yet the strangest aspect of racing as a business is it supports another unconnected, but much larger, business.
It costs £250m to put on racing; punters bet £4 billion every year on the results.
You do not have to ask permission, or pay, to bet on what someone else is doing.
You can back one party or another to win the election, or bet on men arriving from outer space, without having to make any contribution to the costs of the election campaign or the necessary expenses of the men from outer space.
So a £4 billion industry can use the product of a £250m one and need pay nothing for the privilege.
It need pay nothing, but, in reality, off-course betting has paid an annual levy to racing since it was legalised in 1960.
Since then, the levy has grown, but government tax on betting has grown even faster.
The levy has yielded between £30m and £40m to racing, while betting tax now nets the government rather more than £300m from racing.
But off-course betting is in long-term decline.
Put your head around the door of a betting shop and you will see why.
The problem is partly the result of regulation that prevents betting shops being made attractive, lest they persuade anyone to go in.
Control of betting in the United Kingdom is based on the principle of unstimulated demand and the environment of the shops is indeed one of unstimulated demand.
The punters are typically those C2 social groups whom, we are told, the Conservatives must retain if they are to do well on Thursday.
So gambling is very sensitive to the economic cycle.
When times are good, people spend relatively more on gambling; when they are bad, gambling expenditure is one of the first things to be cut back.
The finances of the betting industry have been under pressure as well.
Of the major chains, only Ladbrokes is in secure long-term ownership.
Coral, another diversification error by Bass the brewer, is up for sale and William Hill is part of the troubled Brent Walker empire.
The other large force in bookmaking is the Tote, a bizarre organisation run by Lord Wyatt and which enjoys a monopoly of pool betting on racing.
For many years, this monopoly has remained under-exploited.
The Tote was the only legal means of off-course betting for decades but off-course betting did not thrive until Ladbrokes was allowed in on the act.
More recently, the Tote has used its modest profits to acquire a chain of still more modestly profitable betting shops.
The Tote's status is an arcane legal matter (akin to that of TSB before its flotation) and no-one knows who owns it or its assets.
The declining fortunes of both racing and bookmaking came into direct collision when they tried to determine an appropriate levy for the next fiscal year.
The bookmakers offered less, racing demanded more and the government-appointed members of the Levy Board, which distributes the money, failed to persuade the two parties to split the difference.
An unusual fairy godmother — the Treasury — came to the rescue with a ¼ p.c. reduction in betting duty which enabled both sides to get something out of the negotiations and allowed the Home Secretary to please everyone, something which home secretaries rarely find an opportunity to do.
But it is not wise to rely on fairy godmothers reappearing.
Britain needs fewer but brighter racecourses, each with a range of facilities that will attract customers for 300 days a year, not 10.
It needs prize money that is internationally competitive and the people most likely to provide that prize money are bookmakers and their customers.
The betting industry needs to shake off its dowdy appearance and attract customers who will still be customers in the 21st century.
There is already a long list of great British industries — from shipbuilding to motorcycles — which have slid into terminal decline.
Racing has a last chance to make sure it is not one of them.
John Kay is professor at the London Business School's Centre of Business Strategy.
City: New Chancellor floats in with the pound
By CHRISTOPHER FILDES
LEVITATING briskly through the front door of 11 Downing Street, parallel to the letter-box, the new Chancellor of the Exchequer made his position clear.
It was, he said, horizontal.
So was the economy, but he would soon teach it to rise above itself.
The British electorate — we have rolled forward to Friday — has opted for change and made a job of it, sweeping the Natural Law Party into power.
Meditation, levitation and the teachings of the Maharishi have been the party's best-known policies until now.
In the billiard room at Mentmore, however, an economic think-tank was secretly plotting reform.
Now the government has shown its hand.
I am going (said the Chancellor) to Paris for the weekend.
I am setting out to save the economy and the British people from the jaws of debt.
None of the better-known political parties even mentioned the need throughout the election campaign and none offered a remedy, which is doubtless why they were all voted out.
They all stood open-mouthed by the same discredited policy, imported wholesale from Germany.
The pound, they said, would stay tied to the mark, whatever that might cost.
The cost has been high interest rates — above German rates and 6 p.c. or 7 p.c. above our own inflation rate — at a time of deep recession.
Debt and dear money got us into it and, until we break debt's grip, we shall never get out of it.
Our party is determined to let the nation's money obey the natural law, starting with the law of supply and demand.
If we stopped trying to rig the market in money and instead let it change hands between willing borrowers and willing lenders, its price would certainly tumble and might just about halve.
So let us make a start.
In Paris tomorrow, I am meeting my French and Italian opposite numbers, whoever they turn out to be just now.
We are all in the same boat.
Germany's needs are not ours and the treatment prescribed for German troubles is killing the rest of us.
I had thought that we might agree on expelling Germany from the European monetary system, but, at Treasury meditation this morning, I was guided by the Guru Budd to a better idea.
I shall invite them to join us in putting the pound, franc and lira into a new currency bloc.
This would move up or (at the moment) down against the mark.
Others would be free to join.
This collective approach would help us to get where we want without having too much trouble with sterling.
One way or another, though, we must have the scope to lighten our self-imposed burden of debt.
In the world's largest economies, that is taken for granted.
The Bank of Japan has just cut its own rate and American rates are at their lowest for decades.
I wish I could say the same for ours and, soon, I shall.
Cheaper money will open the way out of recession.
Recovery will bolster the revenues — from personal tax, from business tax, from the indirect taxes we pay in the shops — which so fatally collapsed under my luckless predecessor.
Yet I must not be understood to rely on any so-called growth dividend.
Unlike the Sun Alliance last week, I must earn my dividend first and pay it afterwards.
I do not have Sun Alliance's reserves.
Instead, I have inherited a yawning deficit.
My predecessor planned to borrow the thick end of £100 billion in the next three years.
Indeed, all parties except ours seemed reconciled to this collapse of the public finances, though some had proposals for making it worse.
Governments should not need to learn what so many people and companies have had to learn — the dangers of trying to borrow your way out of trouble.
If you have to borrow, there is everything to be said for doing it cheaply.
Once again, no party except ours seems to have grasped this simple point or made any proposal to act on it.
The lower interest rates now arriving will in themselves save the Exchequer many billions of pounds and save the taxpayer many pence on the rate of income tax.
None the less, I shall have to cut back on public expenditure, which has for years been outgrowing our capacity to pay for it.
The quickest way to do this is to rub out dotted lines on a map.
Denis Healey once saved a fortune by rubbing out plans for an imaginary airport in the Thames estuary.
I expect to rub out the new rail link under London, the national centre for wind-power, the cross-Channel terminus at King's Cross and the Little Podlington by-pass.
That need not cause mass suicide among the contractors, or imply that none of these projects will be built.
The point is that I shall not borrow to pay for them — others can do that.
They will not appear on my balance-sheet.
It is time to introduce the Treasury to the delights of off-balance-sheet financing.
The Channel tunnel shows the way.
As a public sector project, it was regularly cancelled, most recently by Mr Healey.
It has now been built at no cost to the state beyond a concession.
I shall offer more concessions.
One will be for a fast and reliable commuter line across Kent, which could incidentally carry cross-Channel traffic.
Another will be for the by-pass-a toll-road, of course.
More ambitiously, I shall vest the M1, the M6 and the West coast main line in a consortium to own and improve both routes, drawing cash from tolls and fares.
The public sector itself, like any prudent business, will continue to sell assets which it no longer needs.
I expect to find rich pickings in the Ministry of Defence, with its townships, its airfields, its office blocks, its country houses, its sailors' hostel in South Kensington and its acreage of land which would make up an English county.
I should, of course, do myself no favour by dumping property on the market in its present wretched state.
Property owners, who have now been involuntarily joined by the banks, will need a tonic first, but I shall have already provided it — for what better tonic could that market have than cheaper money?
Private and public finances will both be restored to health.
Those are the cornerstones of my policy.
Another time I shall talk about taxes, which, as we said in our election broadcast a week ago, we plan to reduce by being careful with your money — another good idea that no-one else had thought of.
As our slogan says, only a new seed can yield a new crop.
Now, though, I must float off to Paris.
Change must come and the need is urgent.
Not even the Natural Law Party can leave the British economy with no visible means of support.
City: Saudi £1.5bn order lifts BAe
BRITISH Aerospace shares are set to rise today following the long-awaited confirmation of more defence contracts from Saudi Arabia.
The weekend announcement that the Saudis are providing a further £1½ billion for orders tied to the vast Al Yamamah programme provided welcome relief for the company and the Government.
Analysts were cautious about interpreting the announcement as the full Saudi go-ahead for the next tranche of orders covering a further 48 Tornado fighter-bombers, 60 Hawk trainer-fighters and a huge new airbase.
But Chris Avery, of stockbrokers Smith New Court, said: ‘It is a tangible, positive step forward and takes us well down the path of Al Yamamah two becoming a reality rather than a hope for bonanza.’
The Prime Minister has been pressing the Saudis to provide a pre-election boost by increasing the Al Yamamah commitment through an inter-governmental agreement.
So far, the Saudi government has invested £10 billion through an oil-for-arms linked payment arrangement for a contract that is protecting 30,000 defence jobs in Britain.
BAe said in last year's rights issue document that the contract would provide business worth about £2 billion a year through to the end of the century.
The existing tranche of the programme involves supplying 72 Tornado aircraft, 30 Hawk trainers, three minesweepers along with extensive spares and support from 3,000 BAe people in Saudi Arabia.
Dick Evans, the BAe chief executive who has been leading the negotiations, said yesterday that he was now looking forward to further discussions with the Saudi authorities about their specific requirements and priorities.
City: Small firms ‘at crossroads’
SMALL businesses are in danger of being frozen out of the pre-election debate, the Forum of Private Business, one of the sector's most active lobbyists, says today.
The complaint, made in a letter from chief executive Stan Mendham to party leaders, is accompanied by the findings of the forum's latest trade survey showing that 28 p.c. of businesses were ‘growing their way out of recession’ in the third quarter, compared with 33 p.c. in the final quarter last year.
Mr Mendham says: ‘Small firms are at a critical crossroads, with cashflow drying up and less willingness by the banks to lend.
The least they can expect is some direction from the political parties prior to the election.’
Top concerns, listed in the letter, are low turnover, tax burdens and cashflow, including late payment of debt and bank finance.
City: Vacancies for top jobs up a third
DEMAND for senior executives to fill top positions in British industry jumped sharply in the first quarter, according to a survey of the unadvertised executive jobs market by outplacement agency InterExec.
Vacancies for chief executives and managing directors have risen by more than one-third in the last year, while senior managerial vacancies have increased by 17.4 p.c.
City: Midland funds
THE first four of the Midland Bank's enterprise funds are about to go ahead.
These funds are designed to put capital into small businesses in different parts of the country.
Two are expected to be launched in May and two in June, with the Yorkshire fund in the lead.
They follow an initiative by the Prince of Wales, through Business in the Community, which found that the less capital a company needed to raise, the harder it was to do so on commercial terms.
The enterprise funds will meet this need, relying on local knowledge and backing.
City: Inflation hope
GERMAN inflation, now at 4.7 p.c. in the western part of the country, is expected to peak at below 5 p.c. before easing over the course of the year, Bundesbank council member Otmar Issing said yesterday.
However, recent increases in new credit and the amount of money circulating in the economy mean the Bundesbank will be unable to cut interest rates in the near future, he said.
City: Women blocked
WOMEN in the corporate world are being held back by unsuitable methods of management training, according to research by Lancaster University Management School.
City: Czech aim
CZECHOSLOVAKIA aims to cut inflation to 12 p.c. by the end of the year.
City: Water aid
THE British Water Industries Group took further steps last week to co-operate with authorities in eastern Germany with the aim of bringing water supply and waste treatment in the east up to West Europe's standards.
City: Whitbread plan
BREWING and retail group Whitbread may link with a European brewer as a means of loosening its ties with Whitbread Investment Company.
THE QUESTOR COLUMN
Edited by Marc Popiolek
THE stockbrokers' opinions summarised here are their views on some of the market's most widely-held shares.
The opinions are their own and not The Daily Telegraph, though Questor Selection is our view.
Questor Column: BRITISH GAS
BUY says Girozentrale Gilbert Eliott at 252p (now 243p).
The change in year end from March to December caused considerable confusion.
But since the figures Gas has reached a satisfactory agreement with the Office of Fair Trading.
Meanwhile, it announced a special 6p dividend payment covering the change in the year end.
Between now and early October, shareholders can earn an annualised yield of about 11½ p.c.
Questor Column: PEARSON
HOLD says Nomura at 755p (now 755p).
A strong balance sheet and attractive business mix must be set against the absence of any recovery in its major markets.
Pearson will suffer in 1992 from a UK pensions contribution (the first for some years) and lower profits from oil services.
Questor Column: LUCAS
BUY says Nomura Research at 112p (now 110p).
Lucas has steamed ahead with its investment programme and continues to prepare for a running start to recovery.
The risk is that recovery will be delayed.
But the yield of 8.3 p.c. and possible predatory interest are sufficient to support the shares.
Questor Column: ANGLIAN WATER
BUY says County NatWest at 318p (now 312p).
Anglian has a reputation for careful handling of the regulatory bodies, Ofwat in particular.
It is nevertheless beginning to demonstrate a willingness to fight its corner should things get tough either after the election or at the periodic review of price limits in three years time.
The broker forecasts dividends of 19p to March 1992, rising to 20.7p in the present year.
Questor Column: NORTH WEST WATER
HOLD says County NatWest at 329p (now 332p).
The utility continues to make satisfactory progress to reposition itself for the periodic price review.
Encouragingly the past couple of months have seen an upturn in measured revenues.
In 1992–93 a fifth of revenues will be unregulated.
Questor Column: B P
BUY says Kleinwort Benson at 243p (now 242½p).
BP has excellent potential but given uncertainty over first-half earnings any recovery will have to wait until the second half.
In the meantime, the yield of more than 9 p.c. provides support, although bouts of nerves are likely ahead of each set of figures.
Questor Column: ROLLS-ROYCE
BUY says Nikko Securities at 154p (now 153p).
The shares are the recovery play in the sector, with the guarantee of future spares sales providing reassurance for the faint-hearted.
The broker forecasts 1992 pre-tax profits of £125m and earnings of 8.9p, rising to £195m and 16.2p the following year.
Questor Column: GUINNESS
BUY on a Labour win or a hung parliament says Panmure Gordon at 580p (now 540p) and HOLD on a Conservative win.
Under the Tories, cyclical recovery situations will benefit.
If they lose, devaluation is a possibility and international companies will be attractive when share prices stabilise.
Questor Column: THE QUESTOR SELECTION
THE Questor Selection offers readers a choice of shares suitable for inclusion in long-term portfolios, with execution — only broker services provided through our arrangements with ShareLink — although it is usually not worth dealing in sums below £1,000.
To buy recommended shares, call 021 233 9666 between 8.30am and 6pm on weekdays or 10am and 4pm at weekends.
Commission is charged at 1½ p.c. on transactions of up to £2,500, with a £20 minimum and 3/4 p.c. on the next £2,500.
The only additional charge is the ½ p.c. stamp duty.
Questor Column: Trend in top 10 is patchy
TWO weeks ago this column recommended taking profits on Tesco and NFC.
With hindsight, it would have better still to lock in a few more gains.
Pre-election nerves in the City last week left the performance of the remaining 10 Questor Selection shares looking distinctly patchy.
The shares were all chosen with long-term considerations uppermost.
However, there is no point investing for the long term at the risk of being caned in the short term.
Markets have had a bad few weeks, but if the City gets upset about the outcome of the election, or the currency markets react strongly, there could be more pain in store.
The 10 Selection shares are all robust concerns, nine out of 10 (the exception being Scottish Hydro-Electric) deriving large chunks of their earnings abroad.
They should not be in the first rank of share prices to be marked down, but would nevertheless be most unlikely to buck the market trend.
Investors who would be badly upset by a further fall of perhaps a tenth in the value of their holdings, if the market turns sour, should consider weeding out a couple more of their holdings.
The risk in this course of action is of missing out on a rally if the City is comfortable with the election result.
Supposing, against the odds, the Tories scrape home, or cobble together a working majority, the day-after rally could be spectacular.
On balance, the best policy ahead of such a closely-fought election is to hang on and hope for the best.
City Diary: Tailor-made role for Weatherill
RETIRING House of Commons Speaker Bernard Weatherill is wasting no time in heading for the world of business.
He is to become president of the Savile Row tailor which bears his name.
Weatherill, 71, sold out of his family's firm in 1970 when he decided to further his career in politics but will return once the election is over.
His main role will be as ambassador for Weatherill's in America, where the firm hopes to find a new market.
In the past two years, Weatherill's sales have fallen by two-thirds and managing director Hugh Holland has cut prices by at least 15 p.c. to try to boost business.
The former speaker, who will start his new duties during a lecture tour of America this summer, will start on a commission basis, but, if his efforts are successful, he may be offered a stake in a formal American venture.
City Diary: Sales vroom up north
THE North-South divide may not exist as we thought.
Sunderland motor dealer Reg Vardy says that in the past month it has sold £1.1m worth of luxury cars to local businessmen.
These include seven new Jaguars at an average £30,000 each, four new and used Ferraris at £50,000 to £120,000 each, two Rolls Royces and two Bentleys at prices ranging from £30,000 to £116,000, and an Aston Martin Virage for £120,000.
‘It has been very quiet up here for the last two years, but suddenly we have had a surge,’ says a Vardy spokesman.
‘It happened just before the end of the tax-year, because everyone is worried about tax going up from 40 to 50 p.c. if Labour gets in.’
City Diary: Fisons on the ivory trail
INVESTORS still willing to give Fisons the benefit of the doubt should look at the pharmaceuticals group's annual report for 1991, in which the most striking themes are elephants and flowers.
It boasts the development of scientific ‘fingerprinting’ techniques which trace the origin of illegal ivory — hardly a money spinner — and a stunt involving a quarter of a million bedding plants used to reproduce Van Gogh's Sunflowers on a hillside in Scotland.
In fairness to the company, I should add that former chairman John Kerridge, who retired on health grounds in February, saw his pay reduced from £441,553 to £343,356.
City Diary: Nevile ahead in the name game
PRIVATE client stockbroker Adams & Nevile is hopeful that the Conservatives will remain in government following the Tory manifesto promise of a ‘millenium fund’ to promote British national pride.
Last January, Adams & Nevile set up its Millenium International Fund and has no intention of giving away the name.
‘If the Conservatives set up this fund, there is bound to be some confusion with ours,’ says director Christopher Nevile.
‘It is unlikely that we would sue the government — in fact, we might even pick up a few extra funds on the back of theirs.
But we would probably sell them the name if they come up with a reasonable offer.’
City Diary: Disappearing tax…
FEW lending institutions have much in common with the Labour party but they are united in one respect: both are worried about people disappearing from the electoral register through poll tax evasion.
The received wisdom is that such people are more likely to be Labour supporters, but their ‘disappearance’ also makes it harder to lend them money.
Infolink, the leading consumer credit reference agency, says the problem is now so widespread that its existing service — which is largely based on the register — is no longer comprehensive.
The company has had to go back to its pre-poll tax database, known as the Historic Voters Roll.
Disenfranchised voters are believed to number at least 100,000 — though why the lenders want their business is anybody's guess.
City Diary:
BUSINESSMEN in Shanghai lined up at the weekend for the city's first auction of lucky telephone numbers since the 1949 revolution.
The telephone bureau put 400 lucky numbers up for auction and the stampede among the notoriously superstitious Chinese pushed average bids to $10,000 and beyond.
The right numbers are believed to influence the fortunes of their owners.
City Diary: The heat is off at Barclays
ACCORDING to one customer of Barclays Bank in Guildford, managers have been following freezing clients around with fan heaters, explaining: ‘It's because the heating is controlled by a central computer.’
A Barclays spokesman scoffs at the idea but later admits: ‘It seems the heating in some branches is controlled remotely.
The system usually works very well.’
The temperature controls of some Barclays branches are controlled from central computers in London and Coventry.
The bank has been experimenting with it for seven years, but, this year, 100 branches will come on stream.
‘I can only assume there was a problem on the day,’ says the spokesman, of Guildford's difficulties.
‘We are not switching off heating to freeze staff and customers to death.’
European Business: Bankruptcy convention plans
THE European Community has revived negotiations on a bankruptcy convention after the spate of international corporate failures, but few British practitioners believe the differences between Continental and Anglo-Saxon practices can be overcome before the introduction of the single market in 1993.
Experience does not suggest a quick solution, as talks first began on an EC bankruptcy convention back in 1978.
But the lack of international regulations is derided by many practitioners.
Under the present system, if an Englishman becomes bankrupt but owns a chateau in France, his trustee in bankruptcy must either ask the English courts to request their French counterparts to recognise the bankruptcy or seek a separate bankruptcy order in France.
This lengthy and expensive process is particularly unsuitable when the trustee suspects the assets may be sold off by the bankrupt or grabbed by local creditors.
Problems can also arise with companies with, for example, assets in transit in Italy, which are then seized by local creditors rather than retained for the benefit of the creditors as a whole.
The established procedure for overseas subsidiaries of British companies in liquidation is to put them into liquidation separately in their own jurisdiction.
But the system breaks down when a company has only branches in other countries, whose assets are often seized by the local authorities.
This was a particular problem with the collapse of Bank of Credit and Commerce International, which had branches in 60 countries.
European Business: Five sides to Russia
COMPANIES wanting to break into the vast Russian consumer market have been told to cater for five distinct groups with very different tastes: Kuptsi, Cossacks, Students, Businessmen and Russian Souls.
The Kuptsi, the traditional economic backbone, conservative and self reliant with their roots in agrarian pre-revolutionary Russia ‘want a better life but a better Russian life’, says a study produced by DMB&B, the advertising agency after 18 months of research of the market.
Cabbage soup, boiled potatoes and pickled cabbage washed down with vodka represent their staple diet.
‘Pepsi would not be an adequate substitute for vodka,’ say the researchers.
Cossacks, the self-appointed protectors of Russian society, are publicly hostile critics of western consumer brands but ‘in reality they enjoy the status derived from them.’
Students take a broader view and aspire to western brands as ‘'part of the future better life’ but do not have the money to make the transition.
Businessmen are motivated by personal gain and ‘pursue it energetically’ and include the car mechanic as well as the ambitious executive.
‘Russian Souls’ are ‘unsure, doubting, vulnerable, continually on the look out for deception’and are frightened by choice.
ROLAND GRIBBEN
European Business: French get the whiff of Australian grapeshot
By KAREN COOPER AND SONIA PURNELL
COULD French wine, long the traditional favourite among drinkers, be losing its premier status?
The industry, left with huge stocks after three excellent years, has succumbed to a financial malaise amid declining demand for its pricier brands.
At the same time, France is facing greater competition than ever before from other wine-producers such as Australia, New Zealand, California, Bulgaria, Chile and now South Africa and Czechoslovakia.
Exports of Australian wines to Britain — French wine's second biggest export market after Germany — have more than tripled and those from California more than doubled since 1987.
France's total wine exports declined for the first time in a decade last year.
By value, they fell by ½ p.c. to Ffr22.9 billion (£2.4 billion) and by volume by 1.3 p.c. to 12.2m hectolitres or a still impressive 1.6 billion bottles.
All this is forcing restructuring and rationalisation on to the French industry, particularly in regions such as Burgundy, Beaujolais and Bordeaux whose wines are traditionally mid-market and above.
Wine-makers are having to improve quality and efficiency or diversify.
Shipments to recession-gripped Britain were 6 p.c. lower last year at 2¼m hectolitres.
While this does not entirely reflect consumption — because wine sellers often stock up — it nevertheless provides a rough indication of trade demand.
The downturn was most marked with wines from the Beaujolais and Burgundy regions and with champagne — shipments of this declined by a third last year.
The Wine & Spirit Association, the importers' trade body, claims that signs that French wine was losing volume and market share in Britain emerged suddenly in 1990 after years of rapid growth.
French wine is suffering most from competition across the vital middle premium bracket — bottles retailing at £5 and above.
Drinkers can now choose between a French Chablis at £7 in the shops, or an Australian wine made from the same grapes, although inevitably with a slightly different character, at £5.
The French cite several explanations for the downturn but the most important, they say, was the severe frost which devastated the Loire and Bordeaux regions last year.
Prices of appellation d'origine controlee wines rose to what some would say were over-ambitious levels but lack of demand has forced them down again by a tenth or more in Britain with even bigger discounts available in French supermarkets.
Recession has sapped demand throughout Europe and America at a time when stocks were already high after the good years of 1988–90.
Sales in Japan, however, have held up well.
Hard times have created more drinkers concerned with value rather than brand.
While ‘trading up’ to premium brands has persisted, there is a discernible trend downwards to cheaper wines.
The Bulgarians and Chileans — both seen as good value for money — have benefited from this, although the French point to the strong showing last year of their vin de pays, usually priced in the £2–£4 range.
In fact, Mike Connolly, of Sainsbury, said the French had slightly increased their share of the supermarket group's sales at the cheaper end, although other retailers had a different experience.
Jean-Marie Demange, the French embassy's agricultural attache in London, admits the Australians, in particular, are having a very ‘important impact’ on French wines.
Chez Gerard, a London restaurant which prides itself on its Frenchness and its wine list, is just one now considering offering non-French wines for the first time, including some from the Antipodes.
European Business: Tabs on white goods
EVERY retailer, big or small, selling electrical and gas appliances, will be obliged to ‘energy label’ the items they sell under a European Commission proposal.
Europe wants shops to give information on the efficiency of all white goods, televisions and hi-fis, computers, ovens, lights and other household appliances down to the smallest toaster.
The Commission says this would create savings for manufacturers as they will no longer have to supply labels, costing 70p each, in every community language.
But the move to shift legal responsibility for correct labelling on to the shopkeeper has shocked trade organisations.
The Federation of European Wholesale and International Trade Associations is calling for all references to traders' responsibility to be removed.
European Business: Hard look at strong drink
SCOTCH whisky and other spirits producers may be caught by a new Commission proposal to force them to reveal the ingredients of alcoholic drinks on bottles.
It is one of three measures contained in the draft Quantative Ingredient Labelling for Characteristic Ingredients Directive (QUID).
Pasta will no longer be just pasta, but pasta made with specific wheats.
Then there are still doubts over the future of the custard cream biscuit — whose name suggests to Brussels bureaucrats ingredients which it does not contain.
April Fool's Day marked the entry into force of yet another food labelling law, the nutritional value directive.
Manufacturers have 18 months to comply with its rules.
Profile: The off-the-shelf retailer PROFILE
Taking on a franchise can make or break a redundant executive
By PATIENCE WHEATCROFT
WHAT does a redundant bank manager do?
The answer in Geoffrey Cowdrill's case was the same one that occurs to numerous middle-aged executives who find themselves with a bit of capital and a lack of inspiration: he invested in a franchise.
‘I had little hope of re-employment, and so it seemed to me that the only thing to do was to set up in business,’ he explains.
There was only one obstacle to this independence, ‘I was devoid of ideas,’ he admits.
So, like hundreds of others, he put his faith in a franchise.
Bank managers tend to be far from impetuous in putting their own money at risk and Mr Cowdrill was suitably cautious before investing his cash.
Now, as the proud proprietor of an Athena store, he has every confidence that he made a wise decision.
But not every franchise provides a safely padded route to security.
Even the best constructed franchise package cannot guarantee success and some have proved to be an expensive pathway to financial disaster.
The Body & Face Place franchise operation, for instance, has turned into a crematorium for the business ambitions of many franchisees.
Sue Carroll opened her Body & Face Place shop in Mold, North Wales, in October 1989.
She is currently in the process of closing it down at considerable personal loss.
It has been ‘very disappointing’, she says in a brave, and painful, understatement of her involvement with the business that tried to recreate Anita Roddick's success.
A less-resigned Body & Face Place franchisee fumes about people ‘who have lost everything’ because they invested in that ill-starred venture.
It is a complicated saga which is still unravelling, with the former parent company, Alan Paul, now in liquidation.
The remains of the Body & Face Place chain have been bought by the people who operate another franchise business, Snappy Snaps, but few of the original Body & Face Place franchisees have chosen to transfer to the new owner.
There has been much muttering among the aggrieved franchisees about the possibility of legal action.
They grumble that the company's membership of the British Franchise Association gave it a ring of confidence in which investors put their faith.
This was misplaced, they claim, for the franchisors failed to deliver stock, failed to provide the requisite level of back-up and consistently over-estimated the level of sales that franchisees might expect.
What most will also admit, once their anger has subsided, is that they put too much faith in the franchisor's ambitious figures.
‘They made turnover projections that no one would have managed to meet,’ reflects Sue Carroll.
She knows that now because of the uncomfortable gap between her budgeted sales and her turnover.
Sadly, her overheads reflected the former.
This was the equation that spelt disaster for so many of the Body & Face Place franchisees.
Few had any experience of the industry they were investing in.
They did not realise that the obligations they were taking on left them with no leeway to cope with worsening market conditions.
One franchisee, who now faces a loss of £300,000 having invested in not one but three Body & Face Places, has learned from the experience.
He now warns any potential franchisee to listen to the people who know: ‘Talk to as many franchisees as you can; don't just listen to the franchisor's side of the story,’ he says.
Simple as it may seem, he also advises: ‘Do your own profit and loss projections, building in some room for difficulties.
And make sure that you get financial forecasts from at least two independent financial advisers.’
All elementary precaution, you might think, but when it comes to franchises people tend to let emotion influence their judgment.
Often they decide they like the idea of running one particular business and they look no further.
Thus Geoffrey Cowdrill, after spending 22 years with the TSB, decided to invest his future in an Athena franchise without investigating any of the other packages on offer.
‘We've always been Athena customers,’ he grins, in explanation of this enthusiasm.
He did take the precaution of going to two different financiers with his projections, but, when Barclays were uncomfortable with the figures, he was happy to settle for NatWest's more accommodating attitude.
The bank provided him with £40,000 which, coupled with his redundancy money, provided the £70,000 he needed to get started.
He only opened his shop last month, on Friday the 13th, which, he is sure, will prove to have been his lucky day.
Already he is delighted with the back-up he has had from a professionally run franchisor.
Athena is part of the Pentos Group which also owns Ryman and the Dillons bookshop chain and it has a substantial organisation which goes into play to support new franchisees.
Having decided that they would accept Mr Cowdrill as a franchisee, Athena took responsibility for finding him a suitable site, in a prime position in Sutton Coldfield.
They then provided a design and fitting-out service.
The company also insisted that he learnt a bit about the business he would soon be running, sending him to work in the busy Birmingham store for a month.
‘It was all unpaid,’ he points out, ‘but very useful.
I was amazed by what went on behind the scenes.’
Better to learn that sort of thing before the scenes, and what goes on behind them, are all your responsiblity.
Only £7,500 of his investment was the franchise fee that goes straight to Athena.
Now he pays the group a royalty on his sales, some of which come direct from the franchisor and some from approved suppliers.
There has been plenty of advice on what to stock and, as he is still learning about what Sutton Coldfield customers may want, he has been happy to listen.
He has also gratefully accepted Athena's help in recruiting staff and handed over his payroll for the company to process.
His aim is a turnover of £240,000 in the first year.
‘And I hope that we shall be paying the taxman quite soon,’ he beams.
Business Monitor: Victory on VAT for typesetter
A SMALL London business is claiming a precedent after winning a value added tax tribunal case against Customs & Excise over penalty payments tied to late payments.
The tribunal upheld the appeal by Ado Typesetting against a 5 p.c. surcharge imposed by Customs last August because a £14,055 VAT payment was 19 days late.
Customs say no decision has been made yet on whether to appeal.
Don Anderson, managing director, argued that the financial pressures produced by the failure of one of his biggest customers meant the company was unable to pay on time not because of‘culpable default’ but as a result of ‘unforseeable and inescapable misfortune.’
The company, faced with a bad debt of £40,000, took drastic action to accommodate the blow to cash flow.
The workforce took salary cuts, the three directors work without salary for three months and one skilled employee was made redundant.
‘It was the greatest struggle despite all these economy measures to scrape together the VAT payable by July 31,’ said the judgment.
The result was there was very little money left ‘in the kitty’ to meet the bill but even so the payment was just two weeks late.
‘I have no doubt that it was this misfortune that caused the appellant's financial difficulties, one huge bad debt and the loss of regular valuable business,’ said the judgment.
Mr Anderson told the tribunal he could not apply for bad debt relief until 12 months after the debt had arisen while Customs had penalised him for paying the VAT ‘a mere 16 days late.’
He says: ‘I feel I have established a precedent for arguing that if there is a genuine reason why one hasn't got the cash to pay the tax the surcharge should be waived.
This excuse is specifically excluded in the booklet published by Customs & Excise.’
Mr Anderson has been using the case to support his argument for a change in the law to allow suppliers to recover goods supplied to a customer who goes out of business before paying for them.
He says: ‘With so many companies going bust every week and defaulting on chains of suppliers who, in turn, are put in jeopardy of collapse it is urgent that the law be changed.’
Business Monitor: Fraudsters blamed for firm's debts
By Patience Wheatcroft
A MANCHESTER-based gamesmaker is blaming an international loans fraud for its failure to pay creditors.
Brandmakers, whose Addams Family board game, based on the hit film, is heading for top toy shops' shelves, is facing a financial crisis.
Steve Hagger, a director, says the mounting list of creditors can be blamed on the fact Brandmakers was victim of a fraud being perpetrated on companies in search of cash to help them ride the recession.
‘Hundreds of companies have been duped this way,’ said a detective with the Northumbria Fraud Squad, which is investigating the Brandmakers' case.
‘A number of victims have already gone into liquidation,’ he added.
Brandmakers, whose ambitions were profiled here last week, has grown rapidly to a turnover of about £1.7m.
But, despite a substantial investment by 3i, which still has a 22 p.c. stake, it was short of the working capital to fund such rapid expansion.
That made it a perfect victim for the advance loans' fraud.
The essence of the fraud is the offer of cheap finance: brokers all over the country are now offering companies in need the chance to borrow at 8.75 p.c.
But getting that money is expensive.
The brokers want introduction fees.
Then there is a fee for preparing paperwork.
Eventually, there is a payment to be made when the would-be borrower receives an offer letter.
The promised money fails to appear because, says the broker, of some failing in the would-be borrower.
According to Mr Hagger the company has lost many thousands of pounds because it paid for a loan that was not forthcoming.
Creditors are not impressed by this explanation for their unpaid bills.
Suppliers are angry about what they discern as a consistent pattern of Brandmakers refusing to pay bills because, the company says, goods delivered have fallen below the required standard.
‘How can they say that about a transport contract?’ demands one creditor.
Creditors are also unhappy about the way the business has ceased trading under one of its names.
Mr Hagger says that some disputes over products are justified but says that the business is very late in paying some genuine creditors.
The explanation, he says, is the fraud that has wrecked Brandmakers' financing plans.
Mr Hagger and his partner, Dave Jennings, had been talking to a Birmingham broker about raising several million pounds of working capital.
The money on offer was cheap —’ and normal financiers will not back the games business’, says Mr Hagger.
The recession has exacerbated this problem to such an extent that the Metropolitan Police has a Fraud Squad division detailed to look at the issue.
Brandmakers is facing winding-up petitions from angry creditors.
The business has responded by stopping trading in one subsidiary and shuffling its activities among other companies, but Mr Hagger says that there are genuine creditors who need to be paid and must be paid if his business is to survive.
Business Monitor: Solid Weir raises order level
SOMEONE forgot to tell Lord Weir, chairman of Weir Group, one of Scotland's leading engineers, that the country is in recession.
While most engineers struggle to keep their heads above water, Weir's latest results were more than buoyant — up 26 p.c. to £34m, with new orders more than a third higher at £474m and turnover ahead a third at £424m.
Weir makes pumps, valves, desalination and sewage handling equipment and is set to continue growth on the back of the major capital investment planned for worldwide water, oil and gas industries.
It is a rare example of a Scottish company that went to the edge in the early 1980s (Lord Tombs of Rolls-Royce was brought in as a company doctor to turn it around) and emerge stronger on the other side as well as maintaining Scottish roots.
‘We have been lucky that we managed to convert the right strategy into the right results,’ says Lord Weir.
A strategy based on specialisation and tight cost controls dating back to the rescue period has provided the basis for the turnaround under chief executive Ron Garrick.
Weir got out of commodity, or off-the-shelf, engineering goods, which it had been making almost since it was founded by the family in 1871, seeing them as too sensitive to changes to domestic demand and expensive to produce compared with international competitors.
Weir put its energies into high value-added, or what Lord Weir calls ‘brain-based’, applications, with big design, research and development input, capitalising on the relatively cheap price put on scientific and development expertise in this country.
Almost by accident, says Lord Weir, activities were split equally across five sectors: power, oil and gas, water and sewage, naval and marine, and general and industrial — each with a broad spread of international markets.
The company has also been growing by acquisition, with the purchase earlier this year of the American pumpmaker Peabody Floway using £12m of its £46m cash.
Investment in design and manufacturing technology was £11m in 1991 and new machining centres have increased productivity by more than half in some areas of the Glasgow operation.
Weir employs 2,000 making pumps and is Scotland's largest manufacturer.
More than 60 p.c. of production from Glasgow is exported.
Business Monitor: Phoenix from Clyde ashes
THE men at work on the vast steel chemical tanker standing alone among the deserted wharfs of the Clyde are among the last remnants of Scotland's proud shipbuilding history.
Even taking into account a recent £200m order for another four chemical carriers to guarantee work for Kvaerner Govan's 1,650 permanent workers to 1995, the last commercial shipyard in Glasgow remains a shadow of the Scottish industry that used to employ 70,000 on the Clyde alone.
The big Victorian offices and panelled boardrooms once occupied by executives from British Shipbuilders, the state-owned company, are now mostly empty, populated by only a few tough and profit-driven executives from the Norwegian owners.
The yard was bought by Kvaerner, one of Norway's largest shipbuilding and engineering conglomerates, for a token £7m in 1988, by a government anxious to end the state links with shipbuilding.
Otherwise it would probably have been closed.
It was a bargain, and attractive to the Norwegians because labour costs are a third less in Britain than in most other European shipbuilding countries.
There is also development potential for at least half the 70 acres of prime waterfront, which is in Kvaerner's books at ‘several times’ what was paid.
‘We have no certain plans to sell but we are certainly open to offers,’ says Steinar Draegebo, managing director.
In four years Kvaerner has all but turned the business round after investing £30m in a new fabrication shed, welding technology, training and working hard at producing a culture change.
Layers of management have been stripped out and restrictive labour practices dating back to the Red Clyde era have disappeared.
Absenteeism is down from 28 p.c. to 6 p.c.
Kvaerner Govan is now a small and efficient satellite of its parent across the North Sea, concentrating on specialist chemical, refrigerated and gas tankers, which do not generate so much competition from Korean and Japanese yards.
However, the yard will not make a profit until 1994 when government subsidies are due to end.
It should break even this year.
‘We are here because we believe in long-term ship-building.
We believe it will be a lucrative market from the mid-1990s onwards,’ says Mr Draegebo.
Business Monitor: Management backing the Union Andrew Griffiths looks north of the border and towards what the future might hold for Scotland
By ANDREW GRIFFITHS
SCOTTISH businessmen are worried and with good reason.
Recession may have arrived late north of the border but economic slowdown and the election has pushed devolution or independence to the top of the business agenda and produced an anguished reaction.
The most direct came last week in a survey conducted by academics for stockbrokers Bell Lawrie White among the business community.
It showed that two-thirds of the top 48 Scottish-based businesses would consider moving south if there were radical changes to the state of the union.
True or bluff?
Lord Weir, chairman of the Glasgow-based engineer Weir Group, has become one of the main spokesmen of the movement against change, voicing claims that any move from the status quo would lead to an expensive bureaucracy, a higher tax burden and interference in the economy on a grand scale.
‘People are putting about totally spurious figures to justify the economic case for independence.
The facts are highly unfavourable.’
The widely-held fears stem from the reasonable assumption that an independent or a devolved Scotland would be incapable of existing without considerable handouts from Whitehall and would have an administration with more than a left-wing tinge.
Nicolas McAndrew, managing director of fund manager Murray Johnstone, envisages a brain-drain because of higher personal taxation.
Financial institutions, he feels, would be deserted by their private clients while companies would lose international work on sheer emotional grounds.
‘It would be a disaster.
Devolution is a one-way house to independence and isolation,’ he claims.
Until last year Scotland seemed to have escaped the worst of the recession.
It was last into the downturn.
House prices have fallen less and job losses have been a fraction of those in the rest of Britain.
‘Scotland was riding along fairly well and there were hopes it would be able to come through.
But in the last quarter of last year we ran into an economic cliff,’ says Alastair Balfour, of Scotland's leading business publication, Scottish Business Insider.
Had the recession been staved off for longer, support for the Scottish Nationalists — now at 31 p.c. in the polls and only seven points behind Labour — might not have been as strong.
Opinion polls suggest that, as in Britain as a whole, it is the economy, employment and living standards rather than strong nationalist feelings that are the key factors likely to decide the outcome of the Election.
Now such respected independent institutions as the Fraser of Allander Institute are forecasting that recovery will not arrive until the second half of the year.
Such verdicts add to the intensity of the debate over whether Scotland might be better off on its own.
Although the unemployment rate at 9.2 p.c. is, for the first time, on a par with the average in Britain, no serious observer expects it to remain so once the economy as a whole picks up.
In a survey last week, Scotland's engineering and electronics companies, while reporting a modest upturn in orders and confidence, warned that job-shedding was likely to continue.
Furthermore, the all-time record of nearly 1,100 limited companies going bust and the 7,700 personal sequestrations or bankruptcies recorded by Trade Indemnity last year, do not paint the complete picture, say economists.
Companies will be still going under and jobs lost as the economy improves.
But Scotland, with an economic base now concentrated on light rather than heavy industry, and services and decision-making centres far away from Edinburgh and Glasgow, cannot hope to be spared the effects of recession.
British Steel's closure of the Ravenscraig steel plant in Motherwell this September means the loss of one of the heavy industry landmarks and fuels national sentiment.
Few major companies have their headquarters in Scotland.
Of the 300 electronics plants in ‘Silicon Glen’ an overwhelming number are foreign-owned; the potential for future losses in the competitive computer industry is great.
The business community is not united in its opposition to moves for greater self-government.
A ‘Business Says Yes’ group has been formed, claiming widespread support from small and medium-sized business for strong powers for a Scottish assembly, although critics claim its membership is tiny.
The Federation of Small Businesses has estimated that its mainly self-employed and small-shopkeeping membership would split evenly between independence and the existing constitutional arrangements.
Even the Confederation of British Industry, while publicly taking no sides, has conceded that change is inevitable, with its chairman Alastair MacCallum accepting that ‘the present mechanisms of government could be improved’.
Whether companies would carry out their threat to emigrate is debatable, with the huge costs that it would entail.
Lord Weir dismisses the question of cost as ‘totally speculative’.
But in these circumstances, what does Scotland's economy being run from Edinburgh have to offer business?
Nationalist sympathisers such as Robin Angus of stockbroker County NatWest WoodMac, say it could bring new opportunities through the creation of a more flexible tax structure.
Much would depend on how the oil revenue is split.
The government's North Sea oil take is depressed at present but will be on a rising trend as production begins to rise again to its 1985 peak and could account for more than a third of public spending.
But even on the Scottish Nationalists own forecasts — which depends on claiming all the revenues — the Scottish would still only be able to pay for existing public services by a tiny margin, pointing to a requirement for increased taxes for any additional administration.
Supporters of devolution point to the differences inherent in the administration of Scotland which would assist a more independently-run nation.
It already has a self-serving Scottish Office, unique among government departments with its responsibility for a range of public services.
A report by the London School of Economics suggested that the formation last year of Scottish Enterprise, a body linked to 13 local enterprise bodies with responsibility for investment and training, was likely to have a greater influence on the economy than the Training and Enterprise Councils.
Industry would have a healthy supply of well-qualified graduates from Scottish universities proud of their good academic record, but whether they would show more allegiance to a independent Scotland is unclear.
Financial institutions already favour their own to a greater extent despite the claims that the Edinburgh based Charlotte Square ‘mafia’ does not invest in Scotland.
In fact about 8 p.c. of the value of all management buy-outs supported by venture capitalists last year were in Scotland, matching the country's contribution to GDP.
Some have a lower minimum investment level for fledgling Scottish businesses.
On the minus side, the economy is small, unbalanced and concentrated in a few sectors, particularly electronics, financial services, textiles, whisky and oil.
Measured by turnover, almost half the business activity of Scotland's top 200 companies is accounted for by 22 companies in the financial sector.
Following the decline of the traditional industries of shipbuilding, steel and enginering, manufacturing is relatively weak, with two-thirds of employment now dependent on service sectors.
Alistair Balfour says: ‘The trouble is nobody actually knows what would happen.
Some people think devolution will only work if it will advantage business with reduced taxation.’
The Bell Lawrie White report concludes that, whatever the constitutional framework, Scotland can only prosper by maintaining its links with England, Wales and the rest of Europe.
Regional Railways: Ticketing the local train to take an ever The ghost of Dr Beeching has been cast out on the provincial railways.
New rolling stock, reopened lines and stations and more passengers testify to the extent of the exorcism.
William Underhill reports
By WILLIAM UNDERHILL
TO PROPHESY the rebirth of local railways sounds like pious hopefulness; to declare that the process is already under way invites outright scorn.
Privatisation threatens if the Tories return to power; their new-found enthusiasm for rail has still to find clear expression in funding priorities; and commuter grousing continues unabated.
Gordon Pettitt, however, is convinced of his own analysis.
And after 43 years in the industry the managing director of Regional Railways speaks with authority.
His new-created fiefdom, a product of British Rail's radical restructuring of 1982, covers BR's entire passenger business apart from Inter City and Network SouthEast.
Its record provides hard evidence to support his picture of a service in rude health rather than decline.
The past decade has seen the opening or re-opening of more than 100 miles of track and 127 stations.
Some 1,400 new vehicles have been added to the fleet to replace much older stock, and by next year the average age of vehicles will be down to seven years.
The achievements are especially gratifying for a sector at first regarded as British Rail's provincial Cinderella, obscure and ill-equipped.
Moreover, the investment has paid off handsomely in terms of increased use.
Popular inter-urban lines, as between Glasgow and Edinburgh or across the Pennines, have seen growth rates of up to 40 per cent.
‘It's been an enormous change.
We have been running totally new services.
We are running smaller but faster trains,’ says Pettitt.
The latest round of re-organisation, launched in 1990 but only completed this month, should provide a framework and spur for further improvement.
Regional Railways, a new body based in Birmingham, has inherited all the property and diffuse responsibilities of the old Provincial passenger sector.
The changes go far beyond rechristening and a new logo.
The emphasis for the future is heavily on decentralisation in the hopes that a devolved management can be more efficient and responsive to local needs.
Control is divided among five separate profit centres across the country (see map on Page xx).
Each will provide, where appropriate, services in Regional Railways' three areas of operation — urban, inter-urban and rural.
Pettitt sees urban services in particular offering vast scope for expansion as city fathers wake up to the dangers from the car population explosion.
Only better public transport, according to the new consensus, can save the city centres from the threat of gridlock.
The railways provide one obvious solution.
As a result, Regional Railways is now holding discussions with every local authority with a population of more than 250,000 from Aberdeen to Plymouth.
‘The business carried by our urban railways could double or treble within three to four years,’ Pettitt believes.
‘While there may be a lack of clarity about a total railway system in the United Kingdom, local authorities are increasingly planning to use railways for purely pragmatic reasons.’
Conventional railways may of course provide only a partial answer to congestion-busting, and Regional Railways is happy to co-operate with the promoters of the proliferating light rail schemes.
Indeed, it is already deeply involved in the planning of light rail projects in Nottingham, Cardiff and elsewhere through line-sharing and other deals.
The partnership with local government is nothing new.
The successes of the 1980s were based on close links with individual Passenger Transport Executives which bring together the local authorities of seven major conurbations.
PTE grants in fact provide a hefty chunk of Regional Railways' revenue, and within each area the executive can stipulate exactly the services it wants.
Coincidentally, Regional Railways is seeking expansion opportunities of its own, teaming up with developers to provide rail links at out-of-town shopping centres, leisure centres or nearby airports.
Last year Network SouthEast and Regional Railways came together to link Stansted airport to the national network.
Next year it will complete a similar project for Manchester airport.
Money, however, is tight.
Regional Railways' fare revenue last year topped £300 million; a further £650 million comes from PTE grants and the government.
As Gordon Pettitt admits, there is still much scope for improvement.
The signalling system is outdated, customer information is inadequate, and many of the business's 1,478 stations need renovation.
Some problems do not lend themselves to financial solutions.
For example, Regional Railways still bears the responsibility for a clutch of rural services, lifelines for local communities but offering little scope for expansion or profitability.
The Esk Valley or Cambrian Coast lines, for example, play a crucial role in school transport.
The Government takes up the financial burden through the Public Service Obligation grant, but economies are still expected.
Staff morale has been badly affected by past reorganisation and by the poor ‘leaves on the line’ and ‘wrong-kind-of-snow’publicity.
‘The issue has to be tackled head on.
That is why we are putting enormous effort into team briefing and getting out staff to feel involved in the railway,’ says Gordon Pettitt.
So will this be the last re-organisation?
‘We are running a business,’ says Pettitt, ‘and in any business you have to be aware of change in the market place.’
‘I foresee this being successful, but no business can ever say ‘This is the last change.’‘
Regional Railways: Thriving under the feet of elephants Quentin Cowdry profiles a giant-slaying small firm which is making big tracks in the business of building real-life train sets
By QUENTIN COWDRY
COMPLACENCY is almost a sacking offence at Hunslet Transportation Projects, the Birmingham-based firm which in June 1990 startled railway experts by winning a contract to supply 37 electric passenger trains to Regional Railways.
It was a remarkable achievement for a company created just over a year earlier and which had had to pitch against some of the world's largest train-builders, including GEC Alsthom, Siemens, and BREL, the dominant British manufacturer.
Seventeen months later the firm, which employs barely 100 people, carried off another giant-slaying trick by landing a £38 million trains order for the Malaysian railway KTM in the face of competition from BREL and a leading Japanese manufacturer.
In both contract races Hunslet benefited greatly from its low overheads.
But running between the feet of elephants, as the company colourfully describes its market position, is a dangerous business, particularly when the trend in the train-building industry is towards the creation of larger international suppliers.
Management at Hunslet is acutely aware of the risks of operating in a sector acutely vulnerable to too much or too little government interference.
Its order book is now approaching £150 million.
‘Our aim is to provide excellence in the design, project management and assembly of smaller railway rolling stock contracts,’ says Peter Johnson, one of the firm's directors.
Essentially the company is a project management operation.
A core team of technicans and engineers, all with backgrounds in the rail industry, design rolling stock to the most exacting specifications and then oversees construction using components from various countries.
The original intention was to hive off assembly operations to sub-contractors.
But a reorganisation last year within Telfos Holdings, Hunslet's parent company, presented the firm with an unmissable opportunity to acquire a 100,000 sq ft factory at Telfos's headquarters in Leeds.
The Regional Railways order made waves not only because it went to a newcomer in train-building.
The design chosen was the most innovative of those submitted — a train made from an aluminium bodyshell and driven by a novel A.C. motor which saves some of the energy created when trains brake and feeds its back to the overhead power supply.
Hunslet claims its trains, based on three cars with a driver's cab at either end, will use 30 per cent less energy than similar electric models.
The capital cost of Hunslet's traction equipment, supplied by a Netherlands firm, is higher than that of many D.C. varieties, but Regional Railways accepted the argument that it would work out cheaper long-term because of its economic use of energy and low maintenance.
Designed to run on heavily-used urban networks, the trains, designated Class 323, can seat 289 passengers.
They are to be used in West Yorkshire and the Birmingham and Manchester areas to replace ageing diesel and electric rolling stock.
Regional Railways has been assured that they will knock 16 minutes off the journey between Redditch and Lichfield in the West Midlands.
The first results of the order — said to be worth about £81 million — are due on the network this summer.
Peter Johnson says: ‘We're hoping that our pollution-free and energy-efficient units will mark the start of a new generation of sophisticated electric trains which will eventually run all over the Regional Railways network.’
Hunslet is also breaking new ground with its Malaysian contract.
The trains it has designed will be the first electric rolling stock to run on Malaysia's rail system.
Ganz Hunslet, Hungary's largest train-builder (Telfos Holdings was one of the first British firms to take a majority stake in a major East European company following the collapse of Communism), is building the bodyshells and bogies, but final assembly will take place in Malaysia.
Regional Railways: ‘Best thing that's happened to the valley in years’ Lynne Edmunds hears how the Welsh have bucked the trend by stoking up regeneration of their train services
By LYNNE EDMUNDS
WALES holds the record among the regions for the number of organisations actively involving themselves in getting new lines opened, new stations added and services improved.
Local councils like Mid-Glamorgan have been presenting plans to British Rail for close on two decades.
Organisations involved in boosting the economy range from the Welsh Office to the Welsh Development Agency, the Wales Tourist Board and the Development Board for Rural Wales.
Against the national trend, 67 stations have opened or re-opened in Wales in recent years.
Three South Wales Valley lines have re-opened.
Thanks to the European Development Fund, as well as local authority financial backing, a fourth re-opens this October.
The Maesteg line, closed since 1970, is costing £3.3 million.
It is not only the valleys, with their unemployed industrial population having to commute towards Cardiff to find work, who are being better served.
Until recently the Cambrian line, which runs through mid-Wales, was dismissed as doomed.
Now, benefiting from £1.3 million in investment, it has a speedier service thanks to a modern radio signalling system and, from next month, new rolling stock.
Winter Sunday services are viable again.
The £500,000 contributed by the Wales Tourist Board to make this possible is the biggest percentage contribution to any Welsh scheme.
The lion's share of the rest came from local authority sources.
‘Even when there is not an immediate project in view, we have regular regional meetings with the district and county councils, with a lot of initiative also coming from the Welsh Office and the Development Boards for Rural Wales,’ says Mark Causebrook, director for Regional Railways (Central Area).
‘It is this partnership that has reversed closure plans…even Shropshire county council and the Shrewsbury district council contributed finance, since the line serves shoppers and commuters into its one English station at Shrewsbury.’
A £1.3 million project under consideration would reduce journey times, a target of council planners.
‘They view themselves as strategic transport authorities seeing what congestion problems can be solved by rail,’ says Causebrook.
One result of this approach is the new Aberystwyth-Chester-Birmingham service, with seven Class 158 trains (£1 million, 90mph units) a day, opening up central Wales and helping the drive for new jobs there.
West Wales, a totally tourist-traffic target area, will be opened up by the end of the year with 158 rolling stock added to the single-car Class 153 trains already introduced.
By 1993, 15 of the 153 trains will operate in Wales as part of a £9 million investment planned to keep remote lines viable.
John Davies, Regional Railways' manager for Wales, explains: ‘Although we seek partnership opportunities, any success is based on getting people to trust us and believe we are interested in the long-term future of the railways here.’
The 40 Class 158 units, part of the £70 million re-equipping programme allocated up until the end of this year, are to him ‘the ultimate gesture to show we will keep good faith with the councils and other investors.’
Plans for new services and stations ‘must be schemes that can be grant-aided and must cover their own costs, including running costs.
To date, new services have all been on lines owned by Rail Freight — so they currently pay infrastructure costs which would otherwise fall to county councils.’
Where the question is whether or not to open a new station, ‘we balance the risks of lengthening the journey time against potential new traffic.’
For new services, there is a formal contract with the local authority.
The partnership does not always go as planned; South Glamorgan county council has had to buy a train to keep a loss-making suburban line going.
While Mid-Glamorgan county council's £2 million investment in the Cardiff-Aberdare Valley line has traffic exceeding expectations, it is having to buy three trains to get the Maesteg line re-opened, bringing its input to £3 million.
The effect on local morale of re-opening lines has been felt by civil engineers working in Maesteg and down-line on renovating platforms and embankments.
People come up to them daily and thank them for helping with ‘the best thing that's happened to the valley in decades.’
Business Technology: End of the text menu
By Monica Horten
A MARKETING battle begins this week between industry goliath IBM and its smaller opponent Microsoft.
Today, lorries will roll out of Microsoft's factories for the worldwide distribution of its Windows 3.1 program.
Tomorrow, IBM is launching OS/2 2.0, the new version of its OS/2 operating software for personal computers.
OS/2 was the cause of a rift between the two rivals in 1991.
It was intended to replace the older DOS operating system with a more sophisticated system that would let people use several programs at once.
IBM and Microsoft developed OS/2 together, as they had previously done with DOS, but sales did not go well — the latest claim from IBM is one million copies sold.
On the other hand, Microsoft's own Windows 3 program, developed separately, has sold 10 million copies since its 1990 release.
Windows software also lets people use several programs at once, and runs on any PC which has the DOS operating system.
Microsoft chose to drop its OS/2 development and concentrate on Windows, leaving IBM to continue on its own.
Both companies claim the new versions make personal computers easier to use with icons — graphic representations of objects — on the screen to let people visualise what they are doing.
You click on to the icons with a mouse to go from the word processor to a spreadsheet or to send a fax.
This is simpler than using the old text menus.
Windows 3.1 also lets you find a file, without having to remember which package you were using when you last worked on it.
But no matter how good the makers claim it is, the customers will decide with their wallets which one is better.
Windows 3.1 is £99 a copy, OS/2 2.0 is £157, but IBM is doing a promotion price of £90.
So marketing techniques will prove crucial.
IBM's OS/2 launch manager Pat James says she is addressing the high street sales outlets, such as Dixons and the computer superstore in Croydon.
However, IBM has only just started manufacturing OS/2 2.0 for British distribution.
James said that some copies will be at this week's Which Computer Show in Birmingham.
Microsoft's David Smith said that Windows 3.1 would go into stores this week; 15 lorries will carry the 100,000 advance order copies into Britain from the factory in Eire.
In America, 15 jumbo jets are being hired to take 200,000 of the one million advance copies ordered worldwide.
Business Technology: Writs begin to fly in the battle of the 32-bits
By Leon Clifford
A WHIFF of competition sent shares in United States chip maker Intel tumbling at the end of March, wiping more than a fifth off the value of what is arguably Silicon Valley's most important firm.
Last week Cyrix, a small, four-year-old Texas company, became the latest challenger to Intel's technological dominance of the $50 billion-a-year worldwide personal computer (PC) industry.
Joining semiconductor firms AMD and Chips & Technologies (C & T), it plans to market versions of Intel microprocessor chips — the brains behind IBM-style PCs.
However, Intel has slapped writs on Cyrix, C & T and a firm called ULSI, and it recently won a case against Atmel, another chip maker hoping to break into the PC microprocessor market.
‘We will not sit back and let others help themselves to our intellectual property,’ Andy Grove, Intel's combative chief executive, said.
Intel invented the guts of modern computers during the late Sixties when it developed the DRAM memory chip, the SRAM memory chip and the microprocessor.
Since then, through links with IBM, it has created a virtual monopoly over the $3 billion-plus annual market for high-end PC microprocessors with its 386 and 486 32-bit chips.
But last March AMD stole a tenth of this market within months of launching its version of the 386, and now claims almost a third.
Market research firm Dataquest puts the company's 386 sales at around $250 million for 1991.
‘We've gone after the areas where we have out performed Intel and we're aiming at high-volume products such as laptops and palmtops,’ Dave Brand, AMD's British managing director, said.
Now Cyrix has opened a second front with plans to sell a clone of the more powerful 486 for a fraction of the price, just $119 compared with around $550 for Intel's latest version.
And AMD will chip in with its own 486, also later this year, Brand said.
‘If this ends Intel's monopoly and forces prices down, then its good news for PC manufacturers and for consumers,’ computer industry analyst Howard Meredith, of market research firm Romtec, said.
Mike Glennon of Dataquest, said: ‘By going after the 486 market, Cyrix may have spotted a crack in Intel's defences.’
He added that Intel has been encouraging its customers to shift from the 386 to the more powerful and more profitable 486 to counter competition from AMD.
But what really worries Intel chiefs, and is depressing its share price, is a rumour that Texas Instruments is to join SGS-Thomson Microelectronics in making and selling the Cyrix 486 under licence.
Both companies are reputable chip makers with the technology, manufacturing capacity and marketing muscle to take on Intel.
‘They will provide serious competition,’ Glennon said, ‘prices will almost certainly fall.’
Intel profits last year rose almost a third to $819 million after tax on sales of $4.78 billion, up a fifth on 1990.
Intel's Grove has repeatedly declared his determination to defend his company's dominant position in the PC chip market by every available method.
PC makers are being wooed by aggressive price cutting and a raft of new variations on Intel's existing products, while PC buyers are being targeted with an unprecedented $250 million advertising campaign.
Meanwhile, Intel is pouring a massive $1 billion a year into honing its technological edge, split roughly equally between building state-of-the-art chip factories and research and development, according to Grove.
Intel is also accelerating development of more powerful processors.
Last month it doubled the speed of its 486 chip and later this year the company is expected to introduce the next generation processor, the 586.
At the same time, Intel is turning to the courts.
Intel has already fought a bitter, hugely expensive five-year legal battle with AMD.
The arbitrator in the AMD case announced his ruling in February, leaving both companies claiming victory.
Given the pace of microchip development, legal action over the 486 may take too long.
Leon Clifford writes for Electronics Weekly.
Business Technology: Techno-sale
THE SALE of state-owned British Technology Group to a consortium led by its management and staff has been completed.
Ian Harvey, BTG's chief executive, said the company hoped to exploit more technology from America and Europe, but he promised to strengthen its service to British academic researchers.
Business Technology: Eastern promise
THE BioIndustry Association is holding a seminar in London on April 28 to highlight the opportunities in the Japanese market for British companies.