

Short sight can be cured for £4,000
By Roger Highfield Science Editor
SHORT-SIGHTED patients have thrown away their ‘bottle-top’ glasses after having lenses implanted into the eye.
A trial of lens implantation on 40 patients with extreme short sight was reported yesterday to the UK Intra-ocular Implant Society by Mr Peter Choyce, a private opthalmic surgeon in London.
Thick lenses restrict a myopic patient's field of view.
Instead, Mr Choyce implants a delicate lens between the lens of the eye and the cornea.
Though the operation costs £2,000 per eye, it can give the patient normal sight, said Mr Choyce.
‘The results are marvellous.’
One of the 40 patients was Mr Simon Kerridge, 26.
His stepfather, Mr Roger Cager, said yesterday that after the operation Simon had been able to pass a medical to train to be a policeman.
Mr Choyce adopted the technique from work first carried out by Georges Baikonn in France.
For less severe cases of short sight, laser surgery and radial keratotomy, when the cornea is cut, can be used to correct the defect.
Coach study seeks cause of sickness
By Christine McGourty Technology Correspondent
COACH travellers are to be the subject of a study to find out what causes motion sickness among passengers in road vehicles.
Instruments will monitor the speed and motion of the coaches while surveys provide information on passengers' age, sex and health as well as where they were sitting and how sick they were, if at all.
The two-year study is being carried out by Prof Michael Griffin and colleagues at Southampton University's Institute of Sound and Vibration Research.
Prof Griffin said motion sickness was a widespread and ‘often humiliating’ problem that had been neglected by scientists.
Travel sickness is known to be the result of repetitive movements on the organ of balance in the inner-ear, but very little is known about the types of movements responsible and the types of people who suffer most.
A previous study involving ferry passengers showed that it was the up and down movement of the ferry, not the side to side motion, that caused motion sickness.
This used to be a bubbling mill stream
By ROBERT BEDLOW
THE sign that reads ‘Bathing and Fishing Prohibited’ in the River Ver is redundant, writes Robert Bedlow.
Ten of the Ver's 15 miles have not seen water for more than five years.
There is cracked mud where water once rushed through the mill race on the Ver, near St Albans, Herts.
Several hours of rain yesterday did nothing to alter the picture.
Beyond the bridge at Shafford Mill, with its redundant depth gauge, is a dam for a trout pool that is now an empty bowl.
It is the legacy of the worst drought since 1745 and increasing water extraction by the Three Valleys Water Company seeking to meet demand from industry and homes.
Beyond the mill race, what once used to be a pool, with depths of 10 feet of water, a glistening of rainwater on the dried bed enticed two swans to think they were back in business.
The rain softened the surface and showed the imprint of their short stay as they swooped down to the mirage of what had been their habitat.
Mr Graham White, of the Hertfordshire and Middlesex Wildlife Trust, said: ‘It will take at least a year or 18 months of continuous rain to bring this river back to what it once was, and persuade the swans to stay.’
Which Computer?:
Inside IBM's ‘be kind to the user’ testbed Putting in real time with real people is now the rage, says Paul Bray
By PAUL BRAY
IF HEINZ announced that it uses people to test the taste of its baked beans, who'd be surprised?
You'd hardly expect it to rely on a laboratory analysis of the ingredients to assess the flavour.
Yet software house Microsoft recently caused quite a stir in computer circles by announcing that it is using real people, working for real companies, to test its software products.
Instead of frantically adding new features, which only a handful of customers may ever use, it is now concentrating on making tasks easier and faster to perform.
It is part of a drive towards ‘ability’ in computer systems, a belated acknowledgement that designers should address not just what the system should do but also who will use it, how frequently, what tasks they must perform, what environment it will be used in (eg quiet or noisy, light or dark), and what the critical success factors are (eg speed or accuracy).
In the PC world, the usability debate has been hijacked by the purveyors of graphical user interfaces, such as Microsoft's own Windows.
These have proved a boon to many occasional users of complex applications, and by making different applications function in similar ways can considerably reduce re-training time.
But they can be slow to use, and many experienced users prefer the keyboard shortcuts they provide rather than the laborious use of mouse and pull-down menus.
And the ability to open several applications at once can confuse the inexperienced.
Tom Stewart, director of usability consultants System Concepts, says: ‘Graphical interfaces are a big help, but they're not the whole answer.
You can confuse people even more thoroughly with windows.
Oodles of icons are worse than useless.’
The real key to success is tailoring the system to fit the end users.
They, not just their managers, should be involved in the design or purchasing process, and consulted about their tasks.
Peter Barford, manager of IBM's usability consultancy, runs a £25 million testing centre at Greenford, Middlesex, where clients can install their systems, complete with furniture, fittings and users, in an observation room.
Video and one-way mirrors allow designers to see how their systems stand up in practice.
A typical's week's testing, involving five half-day tests and five half-day analysis sessions, can pinpoint up to 250 usability problems.
By far the most common are with on-line help and information provision.
‘There's a tendency just to put the manuals on-line,’ says Barford.
One user was Trusthouse Forte's motel arm, Forte Travelodge.
The hotel business has a high staff turnover and thus a need for constant training.
So before Forte Travelodge installed a new booking system it set up a trial in a mock-up of its operations centre.
After a week, 62 usability problems were identified, including slow navigation through the system, poor screen formats, uncomfortable furniture and incomplete documentation.
* Free information on usability is available from the Department of Trade and Industry's Usability Now! programme, on 0509 264083.
Which Computer?:
Why not upgrade your Escort PC for a Sierra?
PC prices are cheaper today than they have ever been, and are unlikely to rise again.
In addition, says Paul Bray, the makers are being forced to concentrate on ever-better specifications
By PAUL BRAY
PERSONAL computers are cheap, and getting cheaper.
The best advice to buyers is: wait as long as you can.
Like the video recorder and the pocket calculator, the PC has become a commodity item.
Prices have fallen steeply in the last year, and while this year's drop will not be so dramatic, prices will continue to fall.
It is unlikely that they will ever rise again.
Instead, manufacturers are encouraging us to buy faster machines with more storage capacity and better displays.
It is the equivalent of respecifying a car fleet from Ford Escorts to Sierras for the same price.
The recession has allowed smaller, light footed direct-marketing companies like Dell and Elonex to steal market share and brand loyalty from overpriced IBM and Compaq.
Old style hardware manufacturers have suffered.
Companies as diverse as IBM and Amstrad have reported the first full-year losses in their histories.
In Europe, mainframe maker Bull and PC specialist Olivetti have turned in disastrous figures.
Even the Japanese are not immune, with Fujitsu and Toshiba both reporting profits slashed by more than half.
However, the effect has been cathartic rather than catastrophic.
Surprisingly few big names have gone under, which may prove what many long suspected: that their products were over-priced in the first place.
Not even IBM, the world's largest computer company by far, is immune.
It has hived off its peripherals business as an independent company, Lexmark, got out of desktop applications software altogether, restructured the rest of the company into semi-autonomous divisions, and shed thousands of staff.
More significantly, for the long term future of the industry, it has launched into a series of alliances, including a development partership with long-time rival Apple, with chip maker Motorola thrown in for good measure, and former IBM allies Intel and Microsoft left out in the cold.
It promises a hardware and software design which is equally suitable for small portable computers and large multi-user systems.
If it succeeds, it could turn the personal computer business upside down, by delivering what the PC always promised but has never quite achieved: the ability to work where and how you please, no matter what computer you are using or how limited your knowledge.
This palmtop-to-datacentre idea is echoed by Digital's recently announced Alpha design, intended as a replacement for its best-selling VAX and PDP minicomputer lines.
Such scalability is also at the heart of Sun Microsystems' Sparc design, steadily gaining favour with manufacturers which formerly concentrated on PCs.
Whichever design wins, it is certain that personal computers will continue to shrink, while retaining almost full compatibility with desktop and larger systems.
Meanwhile, in their desperation to sell something, manufacturers are muscling into the ‘systems integration’ business.
Companies like Bull and Digital will quite happily provide services, such as network and communications management, for systems which do not involve their hardware at all.
In part, this is an acknowledgment of the greater importance of software and services, which turn the inanimate beige boxes into something useful.
Software is where the money is to be made.
Microsoft and Novell have seen profits soar by more than 50 per cent, and on the strength of his shareholding, Microsoft chairman Bill Gates is now the richest man in America.
In the software market, too, attitudes are changing.
Instead of applications saturated with functions which most users will never need, Microsoft, Lotus and their rivals are starting to produce products which are easy to learn and use.
Information can be automatically kept up to date, and will allow individuals to co-operate on projects instead of beavering away in isolation.
As more and more PCs are networked together, such group productivity software is set to be the success story of the 1990s.
More radical is the move towards ‘object orientation,’ which focuses on the thing being worked on instead of the application package, on the document, for example, instead of the word processor.
Networking has also led to the rise of ‘client-server’ designs, where ‘client’terminals, such as PCs, are fed the answers to questions by ‘server’data-stores.
The server does all the work of finding the information, so in theory the user can ask any question and get an answer.
So next time Circle K re-equips, instead of an Escort for the price of a Granada, it may get plane for the price of a bicycle.
Moreover, the plane may be clever enough to make the trip and transact the business by itself.
Which Computer?:
Dealing with makers Direct selling leads the way to lower prices, Paul Bray reports
By PAUL BRAY
TRADITIONALLY, business PCs were sold by dealers, middle men between the manufacturer and the end user.
Only they could provide the extra products and services — software, peripheral hardware, maintenance, consultancy — which turned the dumb lump of beige metal into something useful.
Now things are changing.
Selling direct, by mail order and on the telephone, is cost effective, which means low prices for recession-strapped customers.
Many companies have developed technical skills in-house, and no longer rely on dealer backup.
The result has been an explosion in direct sales.
In 1990, 12 per cent of business PCs were sold direct.
Last year it was 23 per cent, and this year it is expected to reach 34 per cent .
Convenience store chain Circle K is looking to replace hundreds of aging IBM PCs, used for in-store stock control.
Eighteen months ago, says business logistics director Alex Shepherd, the company would only have considered big names like IBM and Hewlett Packard.
Now, he says, ‘we've got various PC skills in-house, so we're not too worried about buying from a less well-known manufacturer.
And if we buy direct we think we can get a better deal.’
The increasing use of local area networks, where the PC is little more than an access terminal and important data is stored on a central file server, is also changing buying habits.
Accountants Price Waterhouse, replacing its minicomputer systems with PC networks, chose direct-sold Dell PCs for the network terminals, but ultra-reliable dealer-supplied Hewlett Packards as file servers.
‘Our strategy is to use the cheapest workstations we can find,’ says Rodney Armitage, head of management services, ‘because if you lose one you've only lost one person.
‘But we chose the highest quality file servers, because if one of those goes down you lose the whole network.’
When a company relies on PCs for its entire business, however, the direct route is not to be recommended.
Rhinegold Publishing, which uses PCs to produce all its magazines and directories, buys all its hardware and software through a dealer.
‘If you're not technical, it's very impotant to buy through someone who has a vested interest in supporting you,’ says managing director Tony Gamble.
‘If we buy direct, we cut our support.’
Which Computer?:
The poor system Cinderellas get ready for a ball Glyn Moody seeks out the power to succeed the old MS DOS
By GLYN MOODY
OPERATING systems are the Cinderellas of computing.
Like their fairy-tale sister, they do all the boring but crucial jobs — looking after the keyboard and screen, filing and retrieving data — but get few thanks for it.
All that is about to change.
The operating systems are going to the ball.
The old Microsoft Disk Operating System — MS DOS — now used by some 80 million PCs, is too limited for the complex tasks demanded of computers today.
In particular, it cannot handle the amounts of memory required for current programs.
The new generation of machines built around ever-more powerful chips are ready for a vastly more powerful operating system.
The question is, which?
It will be a good few months — possibly more like a year — before Windows NT, the operating system with a Window face, comes along.
When it does, it will probably be huge and hungry — current prototypes need about 8 Mbytes to run.
In the meantime, IBM will have come out with its OS/2 2.0, the second version of an operating system it launched in 1987 after jointly developing it with Microsoft.
It seems that once upon a time OS/2 was going to be the real version of Windows, but Microsoft changed its mind and decided to go it alone.
As a result, there promises to be a battle royal between IBM and Microsoft and their respective products.
Then there is Unix, of course, the operating system of choice for minicomputer systems the world over.
Certainly Unix has many attractive features: it is powerful, well understood, and you can get it with fancy Windows-type graphical user interfaces.
The problem is standards: there are hundreds of varieties of Unix, each subtly different from the others.
Users and software houses hate this.
In an attempt to bring some order to this crazy world, two consortiums have been formed.
One is Unix International, driven by AT&T — the inventor of Unix — and Sun, the workstation manufacturer and supplier of the top Unix environment Solaris.
Against them are ranged just about everyone else with a flavour of Unix — including IBM, which has AIX — in a group called the Open Software Foundation.
IBM is further hedging its bets through its recent start-up company called Taligent, jointly owned by Apple.
The fact that two former arch-rivals are getting together to produce their own high-powered operating system — codenamed Pink — shows how serious they regard the threat of Microsoft's Windows.
So who will win?
IBM is claiming that OS/2 is now what Windows NT will be at some future time, which may be true.
But here Microsoft has been cunning.
It has just announced special tools which will allow developers to write products for the unlaunched Windows NT which can run immediately on the new Windows 3.1.
This trick seems likely to ensure plenty of immediate development work on applications and so plenty of products for NT when it arrives.
IBM will doubtless throw much of its considerable muscle behind OS/2 — but increasingly it looks as if OS/2 will become something of a specialised product, used for heavyweight purposes like running database servers.
Important, but hardly the mass-market product IBM must be hoping for.
Glyn Moody is publisher of Windows User.
Which Computer?:
Picking up a PC at the supermarket
By PAUL BRAY
‘ENTER a computer superstore in the U.S.,’ says Martin Nielson, chief executive of the Business Superstore Ltd, ‘and you walk into a forest of high steel.
Many of the stores are dark, and you're almost inundated by the warehouse concept.’
Enter Nielson's new Superstore on the A40 in West London and you could be in MFI or Do-It-All.
This is no accident.
Britain's small businessmen, who are the store's intended customers, are not ready for the American concept, Nielson believes.
Some are already experienced computer buyers.
But many sidle in, hiding behind a shopping list of the equipment they think they need (often drawn up by a friend) or picked at random from a magazine).
Nielson does not want to scare them off with a mountain of assorted technology.
Instead, the main display, which has pride of place in the store, is formed of discreet cubicles equipped with desktop and portable PCs, from IBM, Toshiba, Compaq and Apple.
Here, computer-illiterate small-time capitalists can commit gaffes, like holding the mouse upside down, without being seen.
They can also try out a wide range of software and printers.
The store's fifth PC supplier, Amstrad, is conspicuous by its absence from this display.
Instead, Amstrad PCs and PCWs are tucked away at the back with the printers and answering machines.
Asked the reason, Nielson is elusive.
‘You can't give prominence to everything,’ he says.
‘While we're thrilled with our relationship with Amstrad, it's in a different category in many people's eyes.’
Feigning ignorance of PCs, I posed as a prospective customer running a part-time business from home.
The young IBM salesman (he works for IBM, not the store, although his name badge does not say so) is more forthcoming on Amstrad.
‘Well, you get what you pay for, don't you?’
He tries to interest me in a PS/2 Model 55.
Even at 40 per cent off the list price it still costs £1,500, plus VAT -a bit over the top for me.
I enquire about the cheaper PS/1 (a snip at £699, plus VAT, complete with starter software).
Yes, he says, that's a good buy, too, though it's displayed round the back with the Amstrads.
However, he concludes sportingly: ‘If it were me, I'd buy an Apple Macintosh.’
His older colleague, a veteran IBM-er, notes that the store's big challenge will be to provide enough information to the inexperienced buyer without expending too much time and effort.
There is an information centre, but its three staff will be stretched on a busy day, when Nielson expects more than 1,000 customers to pass through the store.
Unlike its only U.K. rival, Croydon's PC World, the Business Superstore sells a whole range of office products, from computers, to furniture and stationery.
Which Computer?:
Technology that can liberate the handicapped Paul Bray on the range of keyboard devices that provide a new lease of life
By PAUL BRAY
RECENTLY Jonathon Khairule won a maths challenge competition in his home town of Oldham, an achievement any 11-year-old would be proud of.
Yet Jonathon has athetoid cerebral palsy and can neither walk nor talk.
His main means of communicating with the rest of the world is a laptop computer with a speech synthesiser.
Without technology like this, Jonathon and thousands like him would be debarred from even the simplest form of human interaction.
‘We're doing a road safety quiz this afternoon,’ said Mel Farrar, the head of his special school.
‘He wouldn't be able to participate in that without his laptop.’
There is now a wide variety of special hardware and software for handicapped people, much of it designed to work with the BBC, Archimedes and IBM PC-compatible computers commonly used in schools, though it is equally applicable to adults.
Tracker balls, either production models or specially adapted versions, can be much easier to control than a mouse.
For people with trouble controlling their hand movements, special key guards allow them to press only the key they want.
Switches operated by hand, foot, head or even sucking and blowing allow people with limited movement to select keys or options from a screen with a scanning cursor.
They can also control speech synthesis software.
Special software abounds, most of it costing less than £30.
It ranges from ‘sticky keys’— which allow one-finger users to hold down keys like [Shift]and [Control]— to displaying large-print characters for the partially-sighted.
However, it is not just the severely disabled who can benefit from computers.
David Axford has ME (myalgic encephalomyelitis).
He can walk and his speech is not affected, but he suffers from poor concentration and intermittent double vision.
The Amstrad PCW he bought for writing letters when handwriting became too difficult has given him a new interest in life.
He now runs a helpline for disabled PCW users and helps assess their computing needs.
He has also used computers in therapy with the mentally ill, and finds that learning basic PC packages, such as word processing, databases and spreadsheets, gives a great boost to their self-esteem.
Children with learning difficulties can gain similar benefits, says Martin Littler, director of Northwest SEMERC, an advice and distribution service funded by local authorities.
‘A lot of education is about success.
If you consistently meet failure, you tend to avoid it.’
There is a wealth of cheap software written especially for education, but standard application packages can be just as beneficial.
Word processing and desktop publishing allow children with spelling and handwriting problems to produce high-quality results and allow them to correct work without having to rewrite it.
It can cost £2,000-£3,000 to kit out a disabled person with all the equipment needed to communicate.
For workplaces, the Department of Employment's Disablement Advisory Service provides grants for equipment.
However, the disabled person has to secure the job first.
Schoolchildren are entitled to special equipment, but only if it is expressly provided for in their formal statement of needs.
Disablement Advisory Service: 0742 739190; Northwest SEMERC: 061 627 4469; Aids to Communication in Education: 0865 63508; Computer Centre for Disabled People: 071 911 5000; David Axford's helpline: 0428 656438 (6-7pm only).
Computer Peripherals: Don't waste your time talking — change something Computers are Frankenstein's monsters.
Paul Healy finds manufacturers adapting them so that users can play Frankenstein and tinker with the bolt through the neck
By PAUL HEALY
PEOPLE talk to their computers.
It's an eccentric British animistic tradition, ascribing personality to ironmongery.
We talk.
But do they listen?
Sadly no.
The ‘human’ machine is not a well balanced adult; it is terrifyingly brilliant at reading, ‘riting, and ‘rithmetic, but dysfunctionally uncreative, unoriginal, profoundly deaf, and at all times dependent on us.
To improve matters our electronic Frankenstein monster needs better peripherals for expression, and internals for ‘add-ins’ to aid its comprehension.
Historically the industry has been better at peripherals than add-ins, but it contends that the elements are now in place for redressing the balance.
Its answer is modular computers, or machines with elements which users can replace to improve them.
Manufacturers queue up to claim their machines are upgradeable; but some stand out as truly modular.
Compaq, Hewlett-Packard, Tandon, Acer, Zeos and AST have ranges especially designed to encourage customers to upgrade rather than replace.
Enthusiasts point to the inherent capacity in all PCs for more performance to be plugged in.
Lift the lid off any computer and you'll be struck as much by what seems to have been left out as by what was put in.
There are the obvious slots for plugging in more circuit boards, sometimes as many as eight; there are sockets for adding more main memory, sockets for adding more video memory, and a socket for co-processor to help with complicated maths; and there are bays next to the disk drive lying vacant waiting for CD-ROM drives, bigger hard disks or whatever.
But by a quirk of technology and accounting practice, business has been more prepared to replace ageing computer equipment than upgrade it.
Old-style Eighties' computers, sold with high margin and short lifespan, have long ago been cost-depreciated to zero by corporations.
And when accountant agrees with technologist that the hardware is worthless, the computer industry waits in the wings with the next generation wonderbox.
The contention is that today the margins have been squeezed out of PC sales.
A £1,000 computer, several orders of magnitude more powerful than machines which cost £3,000 even five years ago, has very little profit built in for the supplier.
Ten per cent is a typical mark-up, while industry watchers Romtec believing the trend towards supermarket shopping for hardware will drive this down to stabilise at 4-5 per cent(ie £40 on a £1,000 sale).
As a consequence, sales pressure has shifted from the ironmongery towards the software, supplies and services that go with it.
Not only has the quality improved, but the frenzy with which we threw away 4-bit, 8-bit, and 16-bit computers has now reached a plateau at 32-bits.
It is a technology encompassing on the IBM-compatible side 386SX, 386SL, 386SLC, 386DX, 486SX, 486DX and (when it arrives, 586), and on the Macintosh side 68030 and 68040 microprocessors.
Arguably if you need more power later on you should only have to replace the chip, not the whole machine.
The same ought to hold true for a disk drive or whatever, as long as the chassis into which it plugs remains the same.
This then is Modular Computing.
Tom Hood, manager for distributed systems at the Royal Bank of Scotland, has bought the concept.
Prior to the launch of Compaq's DeskPro/M series he upgraded from 286s to 386SX computers by shuffling the older machines on to secretaries' desks.
Now he believes in keeping the box anchored and changing the technology inside.
‘We very rarely upgraded machines before, perhaps added more memory, or reallocated old machines as a word processor,’ he claims.
The bank depreciates its PCs over five years, giving the IT department greater incentive to reallocate rather than junk older PCs, perhaps pointing to the role of the accountant in determining a modular policy.
Hood has standardised on modular 386DXs, which might be upgraded to a 486DX by a single board swap.
‘It was comforting that you had something you could upgrade to a 486 if you needed to.
We knew Compaq would be around and it would be a technically healthy upgrade not a guddle.’
(Guddle (Scots): to fish with the hands by groping under the stones or banks of a stream.
Hence a mess, confusion, muddle).
The implication that some upgrades may be unhealthy points up the various approaches manufacturers have taken.
AST and Acer prefer a simple chip replacement, Compaq favours a full board swap, and Tandon the exchange of an enclosed module.
IBM with its new SLC chip wants you to plug a miniature circuit board into the socket which once held your 386SX processor.
None is inherently better than another, but the variance indicates a keenness from most that to upgrade you must buy from them.
Proprietary technology is alive and well.
Computer Peripherals: Now you can let the CD-ROM do the walking
By GEORGE BLACK
CD-ROM systems have made it much easier for anyone with minimal computer literacy to get at information of all types.
A single disk can contain 650 megabytes of data, equal to 200,000 typed A4 pages or 1,500 floppy disks.
The data can be accessed by a dedicated machine or an ordinary personal computer with an inbuilt CD-ROM drive.
The business had a big boost when an international standard (IS09660) was agreed for disk formats in 1987.
Since then the use of these systems has spread amazingly.
It is now possible to get on CD-ROM everything from the Yellow Pages to a civil engineering database.
In 1990 there were probably around 12,000 CD-ROM drives sold in the U.K. This doubled last year and could rise to over 30,000 this year.
Prices have fallen from £700 per drive to under £300 in the past two years and could fall to perhaps £100, forced down by competition from Asian producers.
Personal computer manufacturers have not waited for new standards but have begun to build CD-ROM drives into their products.
Paddy Roache, general manager of Philips Interactive Media Systems, says people will soon come to regard a CD-ROM drive as a standard part of a personal computer.
In the past year the number of catalogued CD-ROM titles has more than doubled to more than 2,000 and looks likely to continue to grow just as fast.
Around a quarter of CD-ROMs are used for games.
In recent months many software vendors which used to concentrate on producing for the Commodore, Amiga and Atari have started to supply versions for the IMB-PC and its clones as well.
The CD-ROM will challenge the floppy disk as the best way to distribute software.
Another important development will be compact disks that can not only be read but also written to, so the user can make his own amendments to the data.
These could also turn into another mass market before long.
Compact disks that can store high quality images will change the market even more radically.
Kodak's new Photo-CDs, jointly developed with Philips and due on the market in June, will be able to reproduce 35mm colour film from an ordinary camera.
A disk will take up to 100 photos, which can be displayed on a television by a Photo-CD player or on a computer screen by a machine with a CD-ROM XA standard drive.
The disks will have a very high resolution.
Kodak's European regional manager Mike Camplin estimates the reproduction cost per image on an Apple Macintosh using Apple's QuickTime software at about 40p.
Colour films can also be re-touched, edited and introduced into personal computer programs.
This will emable 35mm film to be used together with video, sound and animation in many sorts of software.The Photo-CD technology has already been licensed to Fuji and Agfa.
Philips CD-I (Compact Disk Interactive) system, due to be launched in the U.K. later this year, will also be able to take Photo-CDs.
Sony, Pioneer and Toshiba are also going to make Photo-CD compatible CD-ROM drives.
Tony Mclaren, chief executive of Hertfordshire systems development firm VideoLogic, says: ‘Photo-CD is going to cause an absolute revolution.
People have been talking about the need for a ‘killer application’ and this is it.’
Computer Peripherals: Smuggling in the computer as a CD player George Black takes a looks at multimedia, which may be the ace that leads the industry out of slump
By GEORGE BLACK
THE COMPUTER industry is pinning its hopes of a revival on the emergence of multi-media technology.
The combination of computing with graphics, video, animation and sound could create a huge new demand for hardware and software by the mid-Nineties and rescue the industry from its profound slump of the past two years.
Multimedia is essentially a by-product of CD-ROM (Compact Disk Read Only Memory), invented in 1985 by Philips and Sony.
CD-ROM transferred the technology of audio compact disks to information systems.
It enables moving pictures as well as text and graphics to be stored on compact disks.
Unlike its parent CD-ROM, multimedia has suffered from not having clear standards.
In this area, market forces are likely to decide between the various competing standards before official bodies make up their minds.
Creating multimedia applications will be so much more difficult than transferring data to CD-ROM, that the number of programs will not escalate in the same way.
Estimates of the development cost vary greatly, but the high cost is certainly a principal factor in holding back the market.
Multimedia is often associated with flexible software, sometimes called hypertext, which lets the user go off and browse in directions of his own choice in search of ill-defined information.
A well-known example is the micro gallery at the National Gallery's new Sainsbury Wing, where visitors can see high quality reproductions of the pictures, learn more about them and plan a route through the rooms.
Many applications of the technology are starting to emerge, divided between computer games, educational programs and professional uses.
Engineers and architects will be able to walk their clients through their proposed designs to demonstrate them much more effectively.
Multimedia is bringing together companies from diverse sectors, including the computer business, publishing, broadcasting and consumer electronics, making them new collaborators or competitors.
One of the biggest battles is between Philips and Commodore in the entertainment sector.
Commodore's CDTV multimedia system, based on its Amiga machine and priced at around £500, has sold some 15,000 units in the U.K. since its launch last year, and the company claims it is just beginning to take off.
Spokesman Andrew Ball says it is ‘smuggling the computer into people's homes disguised as a CD player.’
Philips introduced its first multimedia personal computers this month at Cebit, the information technology offshoot of the Hanover Fair.
The machines combine 60 megabyte CD-ROM information disks with the ability to play audio disks.
With them, Philips is bundling five CD-ROM disks covering travel and business information, a dictionary and encyclopedia, music and games.
The price is likely to be around £1,400.
Computer-based training is expected to be the biggest professional market for multimedia in the near future.
Big companies have long seen the advantages of training by computer but have thought technology immature.
Now all that is set to change.
The spread of multimedia is bound to create a huge demand for peripheral equipment of all sorts.
For input, the devices will mainly be disks and video and still frame video cameras; for output, colour printers, scanners and copiers, singly or combined.
Digital cameras and digital video cameras began to appear last year.
Logitech's FotoMan digital camera stores 32 digitized photos in random access memory instead of on film.
Canon's Ion digital video camera is being marketed as an IBM-PC kit at £1,000 and will soon be an Apple Macintosh kit.
Digital picture quality is said to be still no match for conventional photographic film but the big advantage is immediacy.
For instance, ‘frame-grabbing’ enables action pictures from a conference to be placed into a newsletter, which can then be put through a copier and distributed to delegates.
Digital cameras will become more popular as the quality of image improves and the price falls, but it will probably be well into the next century before they become firmly established.
Colour printers have spread rapidly in the last five years as their price has fallen.
High resolution images on the computer screen can now be reproduced by printer far more accurately.
Colour printing is moving rapidly from being a novelty to being the required method of output.
At the same time multimedia may well make other sorts of products and services obsolete.
Presentations with overhead projection or slides may soon look old-fashioned.
Desktop full colour publishing will remove the need for many organisations to use outside suppliers.