

Car sales slide mars cheer over economy
By Roland Gribben, Business Editor
INDICATIONS that the economy is moving out of recession were provided by a clutch of reports and surveys yesterday pointing to improvements in consumer and business confidence and rising credit.
The motor industry bucked the trend with figures showing that the halving of car tax in the Budget failed to stimulate sales last month.
They were down 15 per cent on March last year.
Car-makers are pessimistic about an upturn this year and are expressing concern about the effect of a Labour government's economic policy on the industry.
A slow improvement in retail sales was underlined by figures showing an increase in credit business.
The Central Statistical Office said outstanding credit in February rose for the first time in six months.
The increase was only £13 million, but with City analysts predicting a further fall the turnaround was seen as another sign of improving consumer confidence.
The Government has been relying heavily on a pick-up in consumer spending to provide the basis for recovery but worries about job security and unemployment have encouraged saving rather than spending.
A survey by Gallup and Business Strategies, an economic consultancy, suggested that the tide may be turning, with consumer confidence last month at its highest level for two years, although the authors said there was no sign of the ‘feel-good’ factor in replies to questions.
Confidence is highest in the South, and with less concern about unemployment and inflation the survey says consumers are now showing more signs of spending.
Business optimism has risen since the Budget, according to a survey by Dun & Bradstreet, the business information company, based on replies from 1,900 managing directors.
All sectors except construction are forecasting improved sales, order books and exports.
The stock market reflected the more optimistic mood, with the FTSE-100 index closing up 18.2 at 2,400.9.
However, dealers said election uncertainties were continuing to unnerve the market.
Take unpaid leave, top accountants urge juniors
By Sonia Purnell
YOUNG accountants at top City firms, recruited in the late 1980s boom when one in 10 graduates trained as an accountant, are being encouraged to take unpaid leave or extended holidays because the recession has left them with no work to do.
Junior accountants at Price Waterhouse, one of the big six firms, have been told that now is the time to take their once-in-a-lifetime world tour or perhaps a summer stint as a yacht deckhand and that applications for extended unpaid leave ‘will be looked on favourably’.
Price Waterhouse has lifted the previous limit of a fortnight on the amount of unpaid leave in any one year and now staff can apply to take as much unpaid leave as they wish.
A spokeswoman said: ‘Although some staff have been allowed to take unpaid leave before, there has been a change in emphasis.
‘But employees can only apply to take the leave in unbusy times for their department and we don't know yet what the take-up is going to be.’
One newly-qualified accountant, who is considering a trip to the Far East for a few months, said winter was traditionally a busy time for accountants because companies are preparing for their financial year-ends but the last few months had been very quiet.
‘We've been sitting around twiddling our thumbs for some of the time and people have been sloping off early,’ he said.
‘We worry about being seen doing nothing.
If that's what winter was like, I don't know what there will be to do in the summer.’
Yesterday, Price Waterhouse circulated a memorandum to some junior accountants offering ‘increased opportunities’ to work on charitable audits, normally unglamorous work of a low priority because firms charge only a nominal fee.
Another young accountant said: ‘They must want to keep us as busy as possible.
‘Usually charitable audits are years behind because there's no time to do them,’ he added.
Some accountants are reluctant to take unpaid leave because they fear they will not have a job to come back to if, as seems to many likely, there is another wave of redundancies.
A survey published yesterday by the London Society of Chartered Accountants revealed that most of the 250 accountancy firms in London are less optimistic about the outlook than they were only four months ago.
Price Waterhouse has already made about 320 redundant since the start of the recession.
Other big firms, some of which are also informally relaxing their rules on unpaid leave for juniors, have also been making large-scale job cuts.
Touche Ross made 200 redundant last year, Ernst and Young has shed 260 since 1990, Coopers and Lybrand Deloitte cut 200 jobs a year ago and has been steadily losing jobs ever since and Peat Marwick McLintock has cut 300.
Of the big six, only Arthur Andersen says it has not made any redundancies and accountants emerged in one survey as the professional group most likely to have their houses repossessed.
Mr Bruce Page, of accountancy recruitment specialists Llambias Douglas, said: ‘All the big firms are suffering equally — just some are better at handling the public relations side of it.’
Although the big firms have benefited from lucrative and intensive insolvency work with collapses such as Maxwell Communication Corporation (Price Waterhouse), Bank of Credit and Commerce International (Touche Ross) and Polly Peck (Coopers and Lybrand Deloitte and Touche Ross), this has not proved sufficient to keep everyone in work.
Ernst and Young has cut its annual graduate recruitment by 110 to 540 over the last two years but generally the big firms, some with workforces of over 7,000, have been slow to react to the downturn.
Both the redundancies and widespread criticism of the accountancy profession after the recent series of huge corporate collapses has put off some would-be accountants.
But although increases in pay have tailed off, Mr Page said: ‘Professional firms are not as aggressive as they could be on cutting salaries.
‘They seem reluctant to take dramatic measures,’ he added.
Mirror pays pensions
By Sonia Purnell
ABOUT 12,000 past and present employees of Mirror Group Newspapers are to receive their pensions in full under a deal negotiated with the workforce.
Mirror Group has agreed to use up to £300 million of its profits over the next 10 to 20 years so that the pension fund, plundered by Mr Robert Maxwell, will be able to meet all its liabilities.
Although the company had already agreed to continue paying existing pensioners, it had not made any commitment for past and present employees retiring now and in the future.
But City law firm Berwin Leighton, acting for the National Union of Journalists and the Graphical Paper and Media Union, said yesterday that all fund members could now expect full payment.
A new fund would be set up with pensioners and staff making up half the trustees.
Head east, young man, and search for the silver lining With top City firms forced to ask some of their young accountants to take unpaid leave, CHRISTOPHER FILDES advises a nephew on profitable ways of utilising his time off
By CHRISTOPHER FILDES
My dear George YOU WILL not thank me for congratulating you on a lucky escape.
It must be a shock to find that, after all your effort and in spite of your qualifications, Price Waterhouse does not have any work for you.
All the same, I must tell you that my heart sank when I thought of you getting ready to serve a life sentence of accounting in that ghastly tower block at London Bridge station.
Life must hold something better.
I see that you are being urged to take a long, unpaid holiday.
Or, if you insist on hanging around the office, they will set you to work on the accounts of charities.
This, though you may not have realised it, is a punishment posting.
Charities have little money to spend on fees, so nobody wants to be seen looking after them.
How different from Price Waterhouse's best-known client, the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
Of course I hope you will travel.
Now is the time.
That gap year between school and college was all very well, and I know you enjoyed beachcombing in Thailand, and even your spell in the bush, teaching Hottentots.
All the same, the gap year is a crazy British system, which sets you free to travel when you have so much else to learn, and then leaves you pinned to your desk for ever after.
Now you have skills that can travel with you.
Don't just see the world, see how it works, do some work yourself.
Your cousin Henry has set off for Alma Ata in ex-Soviet Kazakhstan, hoping to finance himself by selling articles to The Spectator, where he has asked me to use my influence.
Your study of cash flow will have shown you what is wrong with Henry's plan.
From your point of view, the ex-Soviet non-Union is now the world leader in creative accounting, and you could work there for London's own Euro-institution, the Bank for Reconstruction and Development — but I think you would get more value from Hong Kong.
As our General Election rises to its soggy climax, you ought to compare the success of an economy where they believe that the best government is the least government.
Taking the argument to its conclusion, Hong Kong has delegated this necessary but tedious function to a small group of expat Brits, so that everybody else can get on with making money.
It is the world's most open economy.
In Europe and America we may try to keep its goods out with tariffs and quotas, but Hong Kong does not retaliate.
The policy is: let 'em all come — including, of course, the world's shoppers.
Hong Kong's imports include inflation, but that comes from tying the currency's value to the American dollar — a most un-Hong-Kong-like thing to do.
They ought to leave it to the markets.
So should we, but that is another story.
This may be no bad time to tell the Inland Revenue that you have gone away.
Your firm has a potted guide to the rules about residence and domicile — pick up a copy as you leave.
A few years at work in a friendly tax climate might give you the chance to build up capital, and to keep it somewhere out of harm's way.
I am not sure that your contemporaries at home will be so lucky.
For the same reason, I fear that an accountant's expert knowledge of tax havens may once again be a saleable commodity.
Now could be your chance to acquire it.
Alderney has charm.
Gibraltar has less, and attracts a rougher class of tax avoider, but there is business to be done.
The latest haven is to be found in the Cook Islands, deep in the South Pacific, where companies are falling over themselves to register.
You might, of course, approach the problem from the other end, by working for an outfit where the tax-man's writ does not run.
You need an international institution.
In London, the Euro-bank's staff pay no tax on their salaries, and should be entitled (though you would need to check this) to duty-free Scotch.
You could then sell it on — as is standard form in such institutions — to the thirsty and over-taxed natives.
Elsewhere, you could try for the Long Range Weather Forecasting Agency (bring your own piece of seaweed) or the World Bank in Washington, but the growth industries of tax-free living must be in Europe.
Jacques Delors wants his budget increased by 30 per cent, and some of that could have your name on it.
After Maastricht, he expects to raise cohesion funds, to be spent in Europe's remote corners and bring us all into one happy family.
You could get a job auditing the use of these funds in southern Italy, but I think you would be safer and richer as the man who gives them out.
Allow yourself time for home thoughts from abroad.
What has happened to your firm and the rest of the Big Six, that they should be training accountants and then turning them away?
Have they — good heavens — got their sums wrong?
It is true that the recession has been putting their customers out of business, but accountants will always be kept busy picking up the pieces, or explaining in long reports why other accountancy firms got it wrong and are liable for a fortune in damages.
I think the trouble is elephantiasis.
The big firms swelled up and joined up and spent their money on rubber plants for the office and new offices for the rubber plants — and, most of all, on themselves.
As at Lloyd's of London, they thought that the good days would always be with them and adjusted their pay, and their fees, to suit.
I hope that when you come back, you will set up your own small specialist firm — I can think of examples — and run the elephants off their feet.
By that time, we shall have a better idea of what this country wants its accountants to do.
We may live (as we have done before) in a regulated economy, shaped by an intervening government, with high taxes and well-meant incentives.
Accountants would always be kept busy showing the rest of us how to work the system.
First test: make sure that your advice is tax-deductible.
Or we might live in an open economy.
We might even, once the government gets its own accounts in order, have lower taxes and fewer breaks.
Bad news for tax specialists, good news for the rest of us — including you, George.
You should aspire to being a specialist in the central nervous systems of business, which is what its accounts should depict.
That really is worthwhile.
Or go into business yourself.
When you get to Hong Kong, order some more shirts for Your affectionate uncle Christopher
Leading Article: Perilous prescription
THERE is only one policy that can bring sustained recovery to the British economy: a sharp cut in interest rates.
Alas, no party is in a position to deliver what is so desperately needed.
Even if the Tories manage to confound the pollsters and return to power for another term, there is scant chance of significantly lower rates over the coming months.
The ballooning PSBR has put pressure on the capital markets, and has sown doubts among investors about the long-term health of our public finances.
Until they see clear signs of a return to fiscal rectitude, they are likely to insist upon a high return on capital as the price for keeping their money in Britain.
At the same time, there is little chance of a cut in German interest rates to take pressure off sterling in the ERM.
The news from Germany is getting worse, not better.
With its inflation still rising, the country on the verge of a perilous wage-price spiral and public finances deeply in the red, the Bundesbank has made it clear that it will keep the German economy locked in a vice of high interest rates for as long as it takes to squeeze out inflation.
This has grave consequences for Britain.
It is becoming hard to avoid the conclusion that the Government made an error of judgment when it decided to take Britain into the ERM in October 1990, just as Germany was entering an economic crisis.
But although there may be little that another Tory government could do to lower interest rates, Labour would undoubtedly make matters worse.
A Gallup poll of businessmen has revealed that they expect interest rates to be 1.6 per cent higher under Labour.
The markets have already pushed up rates by about half a point in anticipation of a Tory defeat.
If Labour wins on Thursday, it is likely that the markets will test the mettle of Mr Smith.
He might have to raise rates drastically, to convince sceptics at home and abroad that Labour means to uphold sterling's parity in the ERM.
This is the price that the British economy will have to pay just to take a look at a Kinnock government.
Thereafter Labour's spending plans, which could send the PSBR over the £40 billion mark, will impose an enduring interest rate premium.
So will Labour's plans to impose added costs on business, if they cause an exodus of investment capital.
The British public has two days left to wake up to the gravity of the threat.
This is a debt-driven recession.
It has turned into the longest slump since the 1930s because real interest rates have remained punitively high, squeezing millions of home-owners who over-reached themselves in the housing boom.
The current real rates of seven per cent amount to economic crucifixion at this stage of the cycle.
Not until they come down will people begin to crawl out from under their loads of debt.
Labour has failed to understand this.
Its National Recovery Programme, a document of unreconstructed Keynesianism, provides the wrong cure — higher government spending — while fatally ignoring the negative effect that this may have on interest rates.
Its taxes will hit those with the heaviest exposure to debt, creating the risk of property meltdown in the South of England.
Labour's prescription for the British economy would be risible, if it were not so dangerous.
Letter to the Editor: Hidden costs of minimum wage
SIR — There has been a great play made of the impact of the minimum wage factor in the Social Chapter, but I have waited in vain for any reference to the other and more far reaching elements.
These include:
The 13th month rule by which an extra month's pay is given as a bonus on the last working day before Christmas.
Three weeks' extra salary which is given on the day before a holiday was taken.
After 20 years' service the almost total entitlement to remain on full pay, albeit suspended from duty, until the age of 65.
This is not a full list, but only those more important features that I remember — items which would no doubt delight Labour and the unions, but spell the death of profitability for many British firms.
I would add only that the cost of insurance in Belgium, where I was general manager of a major insurance company for nine years, is much higher than in Britain, and the rate of inflation has now steadied after a major explosion when these factors were introduced.
The Government has had to stop indexing their pensions for some years now.
I only wonder why nobody has given us the small print of the Social Chapter that Labour and the Liberal Democrats want so badly.
PETER MAGNUS Coln St Aldwyns, Glos
Letter to the Editor: Position closed
ROBIN Leigh-Pemberton, Governor of the Bank of England, is among those who at one time have felt the tug of proportional representation, which Paddy Ashdown is saying he will demand in return for his support in a hung parliament.
In 1981, when Leigh-Pemberton was chairman of National Westminster Bank, he was a vice-president of the non-party City Committee for Electoral Reform.
The committee held a banquet at the City's Guildhall to discuss constitutional reform and to honour Roy (now Lord) Jenkins, who is committed to PR.
Leigh-Pemberton said yesterday that PR was a subject that ‘quite interested’ him at the time, but that he now has ‘no particular views’.
The Liberal Democrats are the only party to offer the Bank the carrot of political independence, and might have hoped for more of an endorsement from Threadneedle Street.
But ‘the Governor just does not engage in politics’, says a spokesman fastidiously.
OVERHEARD by a Hornsey reader at Walthamstow dog track: ‘That geezer can do anything with food.
We had this beef that he had laminated in red wine.’
City: Managers optimistic, accountants doubtful
CONFLICTING views about economic prospects emerged in two surveys published yesterday.
A post-Budget survey shows business confidence is back to its highest level since the fourth quarter of 1989, but another, based on the views of London-based accountants, said there was no positive signs of an upturn and warns of more redundancies in the profession.
The optimistic survey, carried out by Dun & Bradstreet, the business information company, was based on the views of more than 1,900 managing directors.
Confidence has improved about the outlook for new orders and sales, the report says.
But the job outlook remains weak and the squeeze on profits persists, while there is continuing optimism about the export outlook and signs that companies are preparing to rebuild stocks.
All sectors, with the exception of construction, are forecasting improvements in sales, order books and exports, with optimists outnumbering pessimists by a significant margin.
Confidence in London and the South East has improved markedly, while the Eastern region is the most optimistic in terms of the sales outlook.
But a report from the London Society of Chartered Accountants says that firms among the 250 quizzed are even less optimistic than they were four months ago about the general business outlook.
The report warns that more job losses are in prospect among small as well as large firms.
Clients are paying more slowly and over 40 p.c. of firms expect the situation to worsen.
Companies say the export outlook has stabilised, according to a survey carried out by Trade Indemnity, the credit insurance specialist with Export Times.
Almost 70 p.c. out of 141 exporters canvassed say they are optimistic about prospects over the next 12 months, while only 5 p.c. are pessimistic.
City: Call to free MCC papers rejected
By Matthew Doull
THE judge in the Department of Trade's bear-raiding case against stockbroker Peter Marks dismissed a defence application to have secret government papers released yesterday.
Lawyers for Mr Marks, who is accused of mounting a bear raid on Maxwell Communication Corporation in late 1990, had argued that the documents would shed light on the relationship between American investment bank Goldman Sachs and MCC.
Anthony Scrivener QC, for the defence, had told the judge that Goldman had such an interest in protecting the MCC share price that it had a motive to ‘create a story’ about his client mounting a bear raid.
Andrew Collins QC, for the prosecution, said the papers, which include correspondence between a minister and senior civil servants, were immune from disclosure on the grounds of public interest, and that they did not contain any material relevant to the case anyway.
After spending the weekend reading them, Judge Hordern QC dismissed the application without elaborating on his decision.
City: Debt figures hint at new confidence
By Anne Segall
CONSUMER confidence and spending were improving ahead of the decision by John Major to call an election, suggesting that the economy might have started to pull out of recession but for worries about the election outcome.
According to new figures from the Central Statistical Office, consumers increased their debts by £13m in February having paid off £505m worth of debt over the previous six months.
City analysts had expected a further £50m worth of debt repayment during the month.
They believe the revival in borrowing revealed yesterday underpins other evidence of a gradual return of confidence.
The revival in borrowing was concentrated on credit cards, suggesting that consumers are stepping up purchases of everyday items but are still reluctant to take on debt to finance household durables and cars.
There was a rise of £85m in credit card debt in February after a £23m rise in January while the amount oustanding on hire purchase continued to shrink.
Consumers paid off £308m of hire purchase debt in the three months to February.
Peter Spencer, chief UK economist at stockbroker Shearson Lehman Brothers, said a Conservative win would bring lower interest rates, a gradual return in confidence to the High Street and a pick-up in the housing market, making him ‘pretty sanguine about the economy’.
On Labour victory recovery would be ‘set back’, but fears about the impact of a Labour victory were exaggerated, he said.
Concern in the City has focused on the potential damage to the housing market of higher interest rates and of higher taxes on home owners under Labour.
Keith Wade, an economist at Schroders, the merchant bank, warned of ‘a new threat’ to an already depressed housing market should Labour win.
He points out that the ratio of housing debt to income is historically high, while Labour's plans would hit the average mortgage holder in the South.
Richard Conquest, chief economist at Daiwa Institute of Research, described Labour's tax plans, as ‘an unprecedented fiscal assault upon higher income taxpayers’.
They would precipitate ‘a severe reaction’, through their impact on confidence and house values.
‘The critical point here is that this will not only affect high income earners but all people owning property.
There will a domino effect sparing nobody.’
City: Delta salvo for Pan Am
DELTA Air Lines has issued a counter-claim against a suit brought by Pan American alleging it refused to carry out its obligations to fund a reorganisation of Pan Am.
Delta says it was the ‘destructive acts’ of the creditors' committee and its advisers that prevented the reorganisation, and that it provided $115m finance and blames the committee for its losses.
City: Gloom as Budget car tax cut fails to revive sales
By Roland Gribben
CAR demand failed to respond to the Budget boost last month and, with election uncertainty now affecting business, manufacturers are pessimistic about the outlook and are cutting sales forecasts.
March sales at 143,115 were 15.2 p.c. down on the same period a year ago, with Rover showing an alarming 45 p.c. slide.
The overall first quarter total of 406,211 was 11 p.c. lower, according to figures produced by the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders yesterday.
They had hoped the halving of car tax from 10 p.c. to 5 p.c., coupled with top-up incentives, would provide a fillip to sales — but with buyers remaining wary, they have pushed back recovery hopes until later in the year.
Ford is budgeting for only a slight improvement on last year's 1.6m market and has abandoned hopes of sales reaching 1.74m, while Peugeot Talbot is projecting a standstill.
‘We still don't see any sign of an upturn at all,’ said a Peugeot executive.
There was continued sniping about the March performance, with Rover, whose market share was down to less than 10 p.c., claiming sales would have been down by 20 p.c. were it not for Ford ‘buying market share’.
Ford, which ended March with a 25 p.c. market share after setting its sights on 30 p.c., denied there had been a last-minute rush and said a dealer incentive programme had helped its performance.
Rivals pointed to the 35 p.c. to 44 p.c. market share chalked up by Ford in the closing days of March to support their arguments.
But the industry consensus yesterday was that the outlook remained gloomy amid worries that a Labour government's economic policies could further depress sales.
A spokesman for Ford said: ‘We had hoped that lower interest rates and the Budget would help, but we reckon now that sales will be only slightly above last year's levels.’
It had been hoped that the Budget could boost sales by about 70,000, but manufacturers are now pinning hopes on an improvement on the traditional registration rush in August.
Company fleet buyers are said to have been holding back, pondering the result of a value added tax case that removed obstacles in the way of offering cash rather than the car perk.
Importers accounted for 57.2 p.c. of sales last month compared with 54.6 p.c. a year earlier.
Vauxhall's market share slipped to under 15 p.c. last month while Peugeot Talbot, helped by promotions, was running Rover a close third in the market with a market share of 8.5 p.c.
Rover has launched a Metro special offer this month and is hoping for an improvement.
The top 10 sellers last month were: Ford Escort, 12,063; Ford Fiesta, 11,494; Vauxhall Cavalier, 8,946; Ford Sierra, 8,114; Vauxhall Astra, 6,939; Peugeot 405, 4,647; Rover 200, series 4,419; Nissan Micra, 3,907; Volkswagen Golf, 3,423; Volvo 400, 3,244.
City: Hillsdown changes at the top
FOOD group Hillsdown has announced a restructuring of its top management which sees Charles Bowen taking over the helm at Maple Leaf Foods, Hillsdown's largest subsidiary and the largest food manufacturer in Canada.
Mr Bowen replaces David Newton who has returned to Britain to become group chief operating officer.
Reflecting rapid changes in the European food markets, Hillsdown is reshaping its Continental management structure, bringing Bart Constandse back from Holland to join the main board.
The board will be strengthened in June with the arrival of new finance director Simon Moffat, currently finance director of Kwik Save.
The restructuring was announced as Hillsdown published its annual report which shows that the salary of chairman Sir Harry Solomon fell £9,000 to £297,000 last year.
City: Survey shows return to looser purse strings
WITH increasing signs that people are preparing to spend rather than save in the run-up to the election, consumer confidence is at its highest level since July 1990, according to a report from Business Strategies, the economic consultancy, and Gallup, the polling organisation, yesterday.
The survey shows that on some issues consumer confidence in the early part of last month was the highest for two years.
But with continuing uncertainty about economic prospects, the results suggest consumer sentiment stabilising after the recovery from last year's sharp decline.
Charles Burton, joint managing director of Business Strategies, said: ‘Although the results are better and imply a small improvement we can't say consumers are feeling good or less ill.’
Government figures suggest a modest recovery in consumer spending, although it is mainly concentrated on ‘cheap’ items.
Worries about inflation and unemployment have eased, particularly in the South.
Consumers in the South West, East Anglia and South East are least worried about the two issues.
The South is also the most optimistic about economic prospects over the next year, although there is no evidence of a significant upturn in spending, while savings are ‘becoming less attractive’ because of lower interest rates and the feeling that the worst of the recession and increase in jobless is over.
City: Germans spring to aid Finland's troubled markka
By Mary Brasier
THE German Bundesbank and Scandinavian central banks came to the rescue of the Finnish currency yesterday with monetary support to stem an outflow of funds estimated at more than £1 billion late last week.
Finland also attempted to shore up the markka with the appointment of a new woman central bank governor, Sirkka Haemaelaeinen, described by one banker as a ‘market orientated tough egg’.
Mrs Haemaelaeinen, whose appointment was brought forward from July after her predecessor quarrelled with the government and resigned during the weekend, said plans to cut public spending by 10 billion markka (£1.3 billion) and a new division of responsibilities between the government and the central bank, would help stabilise the currency.
In an unusual move, the Bundesbank agreed to join with Scandinavian central banks to support the Finnish currency.
The move, which the Germans refused to discuss, reversed the outflow of funds and led to a fall in Finnish interest rates as the market opened yesterday.
The one-month interbank rate which had leapt from under 17 p.c. to 25 p.c. returned to 18 p.c.
Mrs Haemaelaeinen, who has been a member of the Finnish central bank board and is credited with putting together a rescue package for commercial banks earlier this year, is highly regarded as a banker with integrity.
Her lack of political connections could be an advantage in scandal-hit Finnish politics.
It is the second time in recent months that the Finnish currency has been hit by a crisis of confidence.
The government devalued last year but has remained under pressure for its failure to cut the budget deficit.
Expectations of a further devaluation triggered the run on the currency.
City: Gooda money ‘should not be drawn down’
MONEY should not be drawn down from members of the Gooda Walker syndicates at Lloyd's of London ‘in the face of breach of trust allegations and maybe fraud’ in Syndicate 290, said Michael Burton QC in court yesterday.
He is appearing in the legal action for more than 800 Lloyd's members who are trying to freeze their assets to prevent loss-making syndicates from calling in deposits at Lloyd's.
An affidavit from Kenneth Randall investigating Gooda Walker showed there had been ‘deliberate deception’, Mr Burton added.
The action was started last week by solicitor Michael Freeman and, on Thursday, Lloyd's submitted Mr Randall's preliminary findings which showed reinsurance arrangements had been changed in 1988 by syndicate 290 but the facts were concealed from the auditors.
Mr Burton said the Lloyd's traditional attitude of pay now and sue later does not apply when an agency ‘is on notice of breach of trust or fraud’.
The case had started in camera, excluding even most of the plaintiffs, but yesterday it was open to the public, despite a protest from the Lloyd's lawyers.
Mr Justice Saville said the Commercial Court was a part of the Queen's Bench and he would not exclude observers unless he was given a good reason to do so.
City: Rating cut for Japan's top banks
NINE leading Japanese banks had the ratings on their debt downgraded yesterday on worries about falling property prices and the slowing Japanese economy.
IBCA, a London-based credit rating agency, downgraded Tokai, Bank of Tokyo, Hokkaido Takushoku, Nippon Credit, Mitsubishi Trust & Banking, Sumitomo, Mitsui, Yasuda Trust & Banking and Toyo Trust & Banking.
These are the latest in a series of downgradings of Japanese banks by leading rating agencies.
Explaining the move, IBCA said that the banks' underlying operating profits were on a sharply improving trend which is helping offset asset quality problems.
But it pointed to fears that asset quality would deterioriate further in view of the continued weakness of the property market and the slowdown in economic growth.
Another worry is the fall in the Tokyo stock market which, given the banks' large equity holdings, could put pressure on their capital ratios.
IBCA believes that at current stock market levels many Japanese banks would not meet the 8 p.c. capital adequacy requirement.
City: Unit trust giants in major link
TWO of Britain's biggest unit trust groups, Henderson Unit Trust Management and Gartmore Investment Management, are launching a joint company to handle the administration of their funds.
Called Administration Partnership, it will be responsible for 184,000 unitholders with total funds under management of £3 billion.
It is intended that the company will eventually offer the administration service to other unit trust managers.
City: GEC heads east
A CONSORTIUM led by GEC Alsthom, the Anglo-French turbo-generating manufacturing, has won an order worth more than £550m for a 1,310-megawatt coal-fired power station in Guangdong province, China.
Partners are Slipform Engineering and ABB Combustion Engineering.
City: Plaxton sales
PLAXTON, the struggling Henlys motor distribution group, is selling Coleman Milne, its Bolton-based hearse manufacturer, and Mellor Coachcraft in Rochdale to a management team for a total of £2.7m.
City: Random moves
PUBLISHER Random Century has sold its reference division, including the Hutchinson Encyclopedia brands, to a management buy-out.
City: Chepstow ahead
CHEPSTOW Racecourse increased profits from £47,500 to £63,900 last year on turnover up slightly at £1.6m.
Earnings per share were 8.43p, against 8.28p.
City: China fund plan
BARCLAYS Bank is to launch a fund to invest in China, seeking to raise $40m from individual and institutional investors.
It will be based in Jersey and invested in the Shenzhen and Shanghai stock markets, as well as in Hong Kong and Taiwan.
The a minimum investment will be $1,500.
City: IWP purchase
IWP International has bought DHL Products, the Bradford-based manufacturer of hair care products and body creams, for I£2.16m (£2m).
IWP is a holdings company with interests in the United Kingdom, Holland and the Republic of Ireland.
City: Shipping safety
SHORT-TERM political and commercial judgments can lead to commercial advantage but threaten a long-term commitment to shipping safety and quality, said Lloyd's Register chairman Sir Roderick MacLeod in the 1991 report published yesterday.
City: Cooper Clarke up
BOLTON-BASED building products distributor Cooper Clarke returned to the black with a £126,000 profit in the eight months to end-December, compared with a £274,000 loss in the previous year to end-April.
Turnover was £13.2m, against £20.8m, and earnings per share were 0.8p, against losses of 2.01p.
There is no dividend.
City: JLI expansion
FRESH from last month's £2m acquisition of Golden Twin packed nuts, food group JLI has bought TG Smith, a processor and packer of nuts and dried fruits, for £1.6m in cash.
In the 10 months to end-January Smith made a £200,000 profit on turnover of £14.5m.
City: Leaving Coalite
PETER Stefanini, managing director of Anglo United subsidiary Coalite Chemicals, is leaving to take up a directorship at Croda International.
City: Diploma deal
DIPLOMA, the electronics and building components group, is buying 90 p.c. of Anachem, a Luton-based distributor of liquid chromatography systems to the pharmaceutical and research sectors, for £10.4m in cash.
Anachem made a £2.2m pre-tax profit on turnover of £11.8m in the year to end-September, and had £2.5m of net cash at the end of March.
City: Entry of the escudo depresses the pound
By Mary Brasier
FOREIGN exchange dealers who were imagining what John Smith as Chancellor might do to the value of the pound if Labour wins the election, were yesterday ambushed instead by one Antonio Cavaco Silva, prime minister of Portugal.
The Portuguese escudo joined the European exchange rate mechanism on Friday and yesterday shot to pole position, hitting the top of its 6 p.c. band, and heaping pressure on the pound which remains the weak man of Euro currencies.
Mr Cavaco Silva tried put the brakes on his currency by cutting key interest rates by 1 p.c. to just under 18 p.c. and by selling escudos but the pound ended the day less than 1 p.c. away from its floor of 241.5 against the Portuguese currency, despite successful British efforts over the weekend to force Portugal to join at a higher rate than the Lisbon government had planned on Friday.
Sterling faces a week of turbulence, buffeted not only by the uncertainty of the British election campaign but also by its partners in the ERM.
This is the first election fought since Britain joined the ERM.
The straitjacket of membership and the obligation to keep the currency within 6 p.c. of its central rate increases the danger of a sterling crisis in the next few weeks.
However, ERM fans point to the limited volatility of currency markets compared with, say, shares during the election campaign because of the floor under sterling.
Membership also provides extra ammunition to defend the pound if currency markets take fright at the election result.
If investors dump sterling, the Bank of England can buy pounds, head off an increase in interest rates and convince the markets there will be no devaluation of the currency.
Its first line of defence will be to tap $40 billion of reserves.
After that, it can turn to the Continent for help even through the three-times-daily contacts with other central banks via a telephone hotline.
The European Monetary Co-operation Fund provides support funds for up to three months.
The final safety net, available but rarely used is a nine-month monetary support arrangement.
The number of occasions when the Bank has had to intervene in the last 18 months to prop up sterling inside the ERM has been small.
‘That is no accident, it is simply because the market does not test the currency,’ said one observer.
An uncertain outcome to the election and pressure from Britain's currency partners will be a stiff test for the pound.
Sterling is even closer to its intervention level against the peseta than the escudo and market rumours of a lira devaluation mean that the Italians, the Portuguese and the Spanish pose a more immediate threat to the pound than the identity of the next British Chancellor.
City: Whitbread warns of £47m provision
By Karen Cooper
WHITBREAD, the brewer and retailer, yesterday warned that mounting bad debts in its economically-troubled heartland of southern England will force it to make provisions totalling about £47m in the full-year to the end of February.
Its shares dropped 5 p.c. on news that the problems, which stem from a big push in the late 1980s for free-trade business, have worsened significantly since chief executive Peter Jarvis expressed concern at the interims last year.
An in-depth review of 6,000 of the group's 11,000 free-trade loans found that on top of £10m to be provided against beer profits, a further £37m was needed to cover it against potential problems on 2,000 accounts.
The total provisions represent nearly 19 p.c. of the brewer's £250m loan book.
It said the extra charge, to be taken as exceptional, would lower its full-year profit due in May by about £25m.
Provisions in 1990 were only £8m.
Whitbread generates half of its free trade sales in the South.
Pubs, clubs and leisure outlets in that region have been hit hardest by the recession, which has lowered the value of properties and depressed beer volumes.
Mr Jarvis said the problem loans tended to be those to leaseholds and leisure-type outlets at the ‘fashion’ end of the business.
‘We have tried to examine our down-side and taken a very prudent view of the problems we might get in the future,’ he said.
In a surprise move, Whitbread also said it would halt its development of Pizza Hut in France, Belgium and Holland.
It plans to sell its franchises in those countries but continue to operate in partnership with Pepsico in Britain.
Mr Jarvis, who spent £40m expanding the chain on the Continent in recent years, said the decision followed Whitbread's inability to negotiate a new exit clause in the franchise agreement which would have given it more protection.
City: Boesky's $1m suit against his wife
By Jonathan Confino in New York
CONVICTED Wall Street speculator Ivan Boesky, who once commanded a $1 billion war chest, is suing his wife for $1m a year in alimony to bolster his sagging finances.
Mr Boesky, who served 22 months in jail and paid a $100m fine to settle insider trading charges, told a court his request for $20,000 a week was ‘embarrassing and painful’ and he was ‘humbled to come before this court’for ‘interim financial support.’
In a bid to keep the action secret, the case has been called Anonymous I v Anonymous II.
Mr Boesky, whose activities came to epitomise the greed of the 1980s, last year claimed he was ‘virtually wiped out.’
He currently divides his time between a flat in Paris and a house on the Cote D'Azur.
The court action follows a move by his wife Seema earlier this year to dissolve the marriage.
Mrs Boesky, who was left a fortune by her father Ben Silverstein, who owned a string of properties including Hollywood's Beverly Hills Hotel, has also been seeking the repossession of her husband's property in Honolulu.
According to court papers passed to the New York Post, Mr Boesky argued: ‘I should not be forced…to incur further debt while [Seema]redecorates the marital estate and her penthouse apartment…and has personal expenses of almost $42,000 a month.’
Mr Boesky, who agreed to co-operate with prosecutors following his arrest in 1986, was largely responsible for the conviction of former junk bond king Michael Milken, currently appealing against a 10-year jail term.
City: Hutchison assault on weak telecoms areas
By Roland Gribben
HUTCHISON Telecom yesterday made its entry into two depressed sectors of the telecommunications market and said its main assault on the mobile phones market is almost two years off.
The company, 65 p.c. -owned by Hutchison Whampoa of Hong Kong, announced the launch of Rabbit, its telepoint network business and a satellite-based paging operation.
Hutchison, with British Aerospace (30 p.c.) and Barclays (5 p.c.) as junior partners, plans to invest £850m in the market.
The bulk of that is for the next generation of mobile phones — the personal communications network — to get 30 p.c. of that market.
David Steadman, managing director, said the company expects to start making trading profits by 1997 and achieve positive cash flow a year later.
He said there had been no talks with the new Mercury-US West consortium about establishing a joint transmission network for the new mobile phones network.
Hutchison plans to roll out its mobile service nationally, either late next year or early in 1994.
Mercury and US West are planning to limit their foray to inside the M25 until they can produce profits.
Mr Steadman believes Hutchison can resurrect the telepoint market despite the failure of rivals.
Telepoint phones can make only outgoing calls but Hutchison feels its £50m investment in setting up over 12,000 base stations to transmit calls will overcome earlier problems.
The company has invested £10m in producing a rival to British Telecom in the paging market.
Hutchison estimates the number of pagers could grow by 450,000 by 1995 from the present 670,000.
City: ‘Too soon’ for Arrow case
FOUR remaining City figures facing trial over the Blue Arrow affair were told yesterday by trial judge Mr Justice McKinnon that it was ‘far, far too soon’ to discuss a timetable.
Outside the courtroom, one of the defendants, Elizabeth Brimelow, a former director and head of compliance of County NatWest, said: ‘Only a judge could say it is too soon two-and-a-half years after you were arrested.’
The defendants face a single charge of conspiring to defraud after allegedly misleading the market over the result of the flopped Blue Arrow £837m issue in September 1987.
The other defendants are Timothy Brown, director and head of sales in the equities division of stockbroker UBS Phillips & Drew Securities, Paul Smallwood, director of the UK equities division of the broker, and Charles Villiers, former chief executive of NatWest Investment Bank, chairman of merchant bank County NatWest.
Their companies were advisers to the employment agency's cash call.
The case was listed as ‘for mention’ at an Old Bailey court but the judge apologised and said that defendants appeared before him because of an administrative error.
City: German sights on 8pc rate
By Mary Brasier
GERMAN interest rates will fall below 8 p.c. this year, according to the head of the country's second largest bank.
Wolfgang Roller, chairman of Dresdner Bank, said yesterday he expected long-term rates to fall by nearly two points and inflation to average 4 p.c. as the German economy recovers.
Mr Roller's optimistic assessment of an upturn follows a winter of discontent in Germany when wage demands rocketed and employers warned of a flight of investment and manufacturing overseas.
Dresdner announced a 23 p.c. jump in operating profits for 1991 to Dm25 billion (£880m) although net profits fell by more than 29 p.c. after higher provisions against bad debts particularly in eastern Germany and the old Soviet Union.
Mr Roller said Dresdner's operating profit would have been higher but for increased write-offs in its securities operations.
The bank had increased provisions on Dm12 billion of loans to customers in the east including Dm3 billion of unguaranteed credits to public authorities.
Mr Roller warned that loans to the former Soviet Union were more frail than expected and urged the West not to rush into short-term solutions.
He criticised the G7 nations' move to extend interest payments by 90 days.
The West should not expect outstanding interest to be paid off before 1993.
City: Fortnum profits alert
FORTNUM & Mason, the Piccadilly store which has so far shrugged off the effects of recession, yesterday warned that it will be difficult to maintain profits in the 12 months to July.
It is trading ahead of this time last year, when sales were hit by the Gulf war, but exports are slowing.
In the year to January, sales were down 6 p.c. but this was offset by a 47 p.c. jump in exports leaving group sales slightly up at £24.9m.
Profits edged up £59,000 to £2.12m before tax.
The company, 86 p.c. -owned by family interests of chairman Garry Weston, also chairman of Sunblest baking giant Associated British Foods, is changing its year-end to July and paying a second interim dividend of 86p, compared with last year's final of 84p.
City Comment: Smith will make inflation a necessary evil
IF LABOUR wins on Thursday, it will be time to start praying for inflation, currency devaluation and all those other horrors associated with past Labour governments.
John Smith's devotion to the cause of exchange rate stability is not the symbol of virtue which many mistake it for.
On the contrary, it spells disaster for those under fire from his high tax, high spending programme.
Any government planning such a large-scale redistribution of income as that contemplated by Mr Smith should create an environment in which those hit stand a chance of making the adjustment without being driven into bankruptcy.
The four-fold hike in oil prices in 1973 would have devastated the world economy had inflation not come to the rescue of western consumers by reducing the real burden of dearer oil.
In much the same way, a good dose of inflation is needed now to facilitate the adjustment to higher taxes.
Middle-income earners are struggling under mountainous debts with little relief available.
They will simply not be able to cope with the increased tax burden planned by Mr Smith.
Even Denis Healey knew that he could make the pips squeak only after the mortgage has been paid.
In the 1970s, mortgage relief was available at the highest marginal tax rate up to £25,000 — the equivalent of £200,000 today — and school-fees could be paid by any number of schemes, such as grandparents covenanting part of their income.
Soaring inflation meanwhile reduced the real cost of servicing a mortgage.
Nigel Lawson and Norman Lamont changed all that.
They wanted taxes to be low, simple and compulsory.
Tax-rates were cut, reliefs reduced or abolished and the £30,000 ceiling for mortgage relief has been frozen while relief is now restricted to the basic rate.
It all made good sense at the time, but it has turned the middle-classes into sitting ducks, waiting to be plucked by Mr Smith.
Accountants Coopers & Lybrand yesterday spelled out just how inflationary Labour's tax plans could be if employers try to preserve their top staff's living standards.
The cost of a £75,000 net pay package would rise from today's £130,600 to £177,000.
Coopers believes there will be an exodus from Britain of multinational companies unwilling to foot Labour's tax bill.
The main beneficiaries from Labour may be the Germans and the Dutch.
City Comment: Bidding stops at Auction Mart
AFTER 65 years, the gavel is to fall at the London Auction Mart for the final time.
The property saleroom is going into liquidation.
People sell at auction in booms when there is a strong pool of able buyers — but even more so during recession when there is a steady supply of sellers desperate for immediate cash or receivers and mortgagees trying to cut their losses.
With commercial property companies crying out to liquidate their assets and residential lenders offloading repossessed homes, these are boom days for auctioneers.
That has been the downfall of the Auction Mart however.
At one time, estate agents were entering sufficient lots for it to hold 100 sales a year in the City or in the New Connaught Rooms.
Now the rate has halved because each of those estate agents has so many properties to sell that they are organising their own crowded sales.
The mart will thus wind up and return £8 a share to its owners — a perverse victim of its own success.
City Comment: The chill wind from Lisbon
BRITAIN'S debate on entering the exchange rate mechanism centred on the problems of tracking the German mark.
Yesterday we discovered that it is Portugal which dictates the pace now.
The escudo has now joined sterling in the European exchange rate mechanism.
A worried Bank of England used the weekend to negotiate for the Portuguese currency to start at a higher level than that planned on Friday, but it clearly was not high enough for the pound.
Even though both currencies are allowed to fluctuate within the wide 6 p.c. bands not available to other monetary units, the escudo shot right to the ceiling of its band — pushing sterling close to its floor.
With the threat of a Labour government by the end of the week, sterling does not need shocks like that.
The strain on the pound only adds to the pressure on interest levels.
If mortgage rates rise, homeowners should look to blame Lisbon rather than Halifax.
City Comment: Unhappy blend of soccer and the City
THE best battle at Stamford Bridge is not on the London football pitch, but for the turf itself.
The Chelsea ground where John Major and David Mellor spent their Saturdays in quieter times is the prize in a tussle which is already into extra-time and looks like heading for a replay.
As in so many competitions however, the cash alternative is more attractive than the star prize — and at Chelsea the alternative is nearly £23m.
The Stamford Bridge ground is owned by Cabra Estates though played on by Chelsea Football Club.
Cabra is now enforcing the club's option to buy — at a £22.8m price determined by arbitrators.
That was the 1988 development value but the state of London's housing market means that it is probably worth only half that today — and Chelsea is naturally reluctant to pay.
After successive delays, aided by the law courts, the new deadline for payment is Thursday.
Chelsea chairman Ken Bates has thus devised a two-pronged strategy to beat Cabra.
First, he has devised a way of buying the ground at less than half price.
Chelsea would offer £30m for Cabra's 83 p.c. owned subsidiary which owns both Stamford Bridge and Fulham's Craven Cottage.
That gives Cabra £25m — which it would use to repay loans from the subsidiary and to buy back the Fulham ground for future development.
Net cost: about £10m.
Secondly, Mr Bates has bought 27 p.c. of the property company and demanded a shareholders' meeting to replace Cabra chairman John Duggan and co-director Andrew MacKay (currently attempting to remain Tory MP for East Berkshire) with Chelsea representatives.
Stockboker Ellis & Partners used Saturday's programme to offer fans a low-cost chance to buy Cabra shares until April 16 — just in time for the Cabra meeting.
If proof was needed that soccer and the City do not mix, this messy situation is it.
Cabra's share price, down from 120p to 7¼p, values the company at less than a third of the anticipated £23m.
City Diary: Flannel in fashion at Laura Ashley
JIM Maxmin, Laura Ashley's ebullient new American chief executive, may be just the sort of new blood the company needs, but his transatlantic marketing speak sits uncomfortably with the brand's image.
Do Laura Ashley customers really want a corporate ‘mission statement’ on everything they buy?
They may ‘share and embrace the values’, but do they want to ‘establish a life-long relationship’ with Maxmin and his team?
The prospect may be particularly alarming to men, as Laura Ashley is now working on ‘more male-friendly’ designs (home furnishings, not dresses).
But Maxmin is unrepentant, and says the programme of is apparently going very well.
‘We want to love these people to death,’ he gushes.
City Diary: High-flier with feet on the ground
AMERICAN retailer Sam Walton, who drove a battered pick-up truck to work all his life despite owning a fortune estimated at $24 billion, has died of cancer aged 74.
Walton created Wal-Mart and developed it into the nation's largest stores chain with annual sales of $44 billion, but always maintained a down-to-earth approach.
After the 1987 stock market crash, during which his Wal-Mart stake plummeted $1 billion in value, Walton's only comment was: ‘It was paper when we started, and it's paper afterward.’
City Diary: A double Pig's Nose with ice…
INVERGORDON Distillers yesterday added two brands to its scotch whicky repertoire — sheep Dip Malt and Pig's Nose Blended.
The brands, owned by the Sheep Dip Whisky Company, are not flavoured by either sheep dip or pig's nose but have a promising cult following among farmers.
‘Several thousand cases are sold each year,’ says an Invergordon spokesman, ‘but most of the sales are in Britain.
To be quite honest, they have barely scratched the surface anywhere overseas.’
The new target markets are Australia, New Zealand and South Africa whose farmers, Invergordon believes, will appreciate the names.
City Diary: And a pint of Black Sheep
ON A similar theme, North Yorkshire brewer Paul Theakston says his new Black Sheep Brewery should start production this summer, having raised £850,000 through a share issue.
He says the issue — one of the last under the Business Expansion Scheme — was fully subscribed.
Theakston was manager of T&R Theakston — most famed among beer drinkers for its Old Peculier ale — before it was taken over by Scottish & Newcastle four years ago.
‘I can now concentrate on getting back into commercial brewing and doing what I know best — making fine, traditional Yorkshire ales,’ says Theakston, who has set up his new business next door to T&R Theakston and expects to be making 12,500 barrels a year by 1995.
He aims initially to sell the beer within a 50-mile radius of the brewery.
City Diary:
ROGER Rance, owner of a turf supplier in Hemel Hempstead, has resorted to shock tactics to drum up business with the slogan Sod It heading his local newspaper advertisements.
‘Some ladies who ring up are a bit shy of actually saying the word,’ says Rance.
City Diary: A VIP journey never to forget
LIMOUSINES are out of fashion in New Delhi.
Instead, the newest method of transporting visiting VIPs to and from official engagements is by elephant.
Complete with keeper, the pachyderms are supplied by a local company, Dial-an-Elephant.
The cost ranges from £35 to £450 a day depending on the event and the intricacy of designs painted on the elephant's forehead, trunk and ears.
One satisfied customer, Christine Mahoney, of the Australian Embassy, took a departing colleague to the airport by elephant as a special farewell.
‘It was memorable,’ she says.
‘I can't say it was the most comfortable way to travel — but it is something different.’
City: Severfield-Reeve falls to pass final dividend
SEVERFIELD-Reeve, the North Yorkshire-based structural steelwork group, is passing its final dividend after profits plunged from £1.9m to £530,000 last year.
Shareholders are left with just the 1p interim dividend.
Turnover fell 20 p.c. to £16.9m and operating margins were squeezed from 11½ p.c. to 6½ p.c. as price competition intensified in the depressed construction sector.
Earnings per share fell from 11.9p to 4.2p.The company took a £200,000 exceptional charge for bad debts on a contract for a firm that went into receivership in November.
Chairman John Reeve said Severfield has taken out credit insurance to offset future bad debt problems.
Mr Reeve said the structural steelwork sector ‘cannot sustain the present idiotic level of pricing which has come about by panic tendering,’ and that the industry's current overcapacity wil be corrected this year.
City: Psion pocket profits lift price
By Matthew Doull
SHARES in Psion leapt from 116p to 135p yesterday after the unlisted securities market-quoted computer maker announced a strong first quarter recovery in sales and profits on the back of its new Series 3 pocket computers.
Although Psion also unveiled a bigger-than-expected £2.2m loss for last year, against a £546,000 profit in 1990, news that Series 3 sales had grown from 4,000 units in January to 14,000 last month spurred the shares.
Launched in September after a four-year development programme, the new computer weighs 265 grams and is described by Psion chairman David Potter as ‘the Walkman of the computer world’.
Its applications include word processing, and it may eventually supersede Psion's seven-year-old Organiser range of electronic notebooks, which has been losing momentum as the market for such gadgets has matured.
Mr Potter said the cost of developing the Series 3 totalled £5.2m, which was written off as incurred, and Psion is ‘poised to reap the benefits of this investment’.
The loss per share was 8.1p, against earnings of 1.2p, but Psion is maintaining its 2.4p total dividend with a 1.4p final on May 29, and predicts ‘resumed growth and good profitability’ this year.
City: Dewhirst jumps to £4.1m
DEWHIRST, the clothing and toiletries maker that relies on Marks & Spencer for more than 80 p.c. of its sales, increased profits from £3m to £4.1m last year on turnover up 7 p.c. at £130m.
Chairman Tim Dewhirst said last October's £14m acquisition of Slimma, an M&S womenswear supplier, had gone ‘extremely well’ and the group was now a major presence in women's, men's and children's clothing.
Despite the deal, partly funded by a £7.7m rights issue, Dewhirst ended the year with a £1m rise in net cash to £3.8m.
Earnings per share grew from 2.1p to 2.7p and a 0.43p final dividend, payable on July 1, raises the total from 0.64p to 0.72p.
Finance director Scott Beattie said operating margins improved 1 p.c. despite helped a reorganisation plan put in place 18 months ago that included 400 job cuts.
Mr Dewhirst said he was very optimistic, but cautioned that a Labour government would mean more job losses.
If a minimum wage were introduced, Dewhirst would relocate much of its manufacturing to the Far East at the cost of thousands of British jobs, he said, adding that at least a quarter of the jobs in the industry would be lost.
City: Quarto rises to £4.09m
PROFITS at Quarto, the book publishing, production and packaging group, improved from £4.06m to £4.09m last year, despite a £4m fall in sales to £35m.
Chairman Laurence Orbach said it was ‘the first occasion that we experienced poor conditions in the majority of our markets.’
The fall in turnover reflected last year's closure of the loss-making magazine division, which helped improve operating margins.
He attributed the group's resilience to the fact that it had stuck to its specialist glossy ‘how-to’ books and continued to ‘eschew the topical and the trendy’.
Mr Orbach said the company was ‘beginning to hear the first sounds of improved trading conditions from some customers,’ which could mean growth in 1992.
Earnings per share edged from 17.9p to a record 18p, and a 3.64p final dividend is payable on June 5 to raise the total from 47/8p to 5¼p.
City: Aviva slithers back into red
TEXAN oil and gas exploration minnow Aviva Petroleum sank back into the red last year with an $8.7m loss, against 1990's $537,000 profit, on revenue down from $12.2m to $9.3m.
Substantially lower gas prices, as well as unfavourable currency movements and the elimination of both investment income and tax benefits from past losses conspired to leave Aviva with losses per share of $1.67, agaist earnings of 10 cents last year.
Questor Column: Laura Ashley back from brink
Edited by Marc Popiolek
THE extraordinary thing about Laura Ashley is not that it has been dragged back from the financial brink; it is that it was ever pushed there in the first place.
It took a rare combination of management failure, over-ambition and bad luck to bring such a business to its knees.
By accident as much as design the Ashleys created a remarkable international brand, tapping a worldwide nostalgia for the English country cottage look.
Sales boomed during the mid-1980s, against the trend towards ‘power-dressing’ and, bizarre though it might seem, the formula sold as well in Korea as in Kensington.
The grim catalogue of management mistakes is well known — from the stubborn commitment to in-house manufacturing to the hopeless complexity of its distribution system.
While management attention was diverted into new projects it also missed obvious opportunities: the company took decades to figure out that it could sell work-wear as well as party dresses.
Yet the appeal of the brand appears undimmed.
That, above all, underpins the confidence of new chief executive Jim Maxmin.
Yesterday's figures suggest that the corner has been turned.
The pre-tax outcome for the year to January was still a hefty £9.1m loss — down from a restated £11½m deficit — and the £10m drop in the interest bill owes much to the £30m equity injection from Japan's Aeon Group.
But operating profits improved in the second half and the company can take some credit for the reduction in gearing to just 5 p.c.
There is a nominal 0.1p dividend.
Though there is a lot of restructuring work still to do, last year's £11.8m of exceptional costs will not be repeated.
These cover the new distribution deal with Federal Express as well as further stock write-downs in the United States.
Despite savage cost cutting, America remains a headache, but profits in Britain and Australia are ahead this year with strong growth continuing in Europe.
The shares are still looking a long way ahead.
Profits could reach £10m this year — implying a multiple of almost 30 at 93p — and even that might prove over-optimistic under a Labour government.
But, love or loathe the frocks, it is hard to deny the potential.
Questor Column: Highland shares over the top
AFTER more than a decade of rising profits, Highland Distilleries saw its growth record interrupted in the six months to February.
Profits eased back from £15.1m to £14.7m before taxation in the first half as turnover stagnated at £98.8m.
Unlike industry rivals such as Guinness, Highland has only a relatively small export business — about a third of its sales.
The average for its competitors is nearer 80 p.c.
As a result of this home-market bias, Highland was affected by economic recession in Britain.
Industry volumes fell 7 p.c. here and sales of bottled whisky by 12 p.c.
The profits contribution from the Famous Grouse brand held steady, but sales of new and mature whisky to other distillers for blending purposes fell, as the industry reduced supply in line with the fall in demand, and this is where the damage to profits took place.
Highland cut its own output of new whisky for blending by a quarter.
Although the output reductions are a worry in themselves, they do at least suggest that the industry is not about to start laying down a large supply of surplus whisky that could upset prices in the future.
The infamous whisky loch of the late 1970s affected prices until well into the 1980s.
Highland has made strenuous efforts, through cross-shareholdings and a trading link with Remy Cointreau, to improve international distribution, and this is gradually paying off.
But in the short term there is no reason to suppose profits are about to start making strong headway.
Brokers have cut their expectations for the full year from £30m to £28m, suggesting earnings of just under 15p.
The shares fell 11 to 259p yesterday, cutting the multiple to 17.
An interim inched up by 5 p.c. to 1.45p, payable on June 1, takes the yield to 2.9 p.c.
With the Remy link precluding a takeover bid, and the outlook for profits dull, the shares are on the high side.
Questor Column: T&S Stores lack ‘buy’ appeal
WHAT T&S Stores lacks in glamour, it makes up for in low-ticket reliability.
The owner of chains of tobacconists, newsagents and convenience stores, its success depends on large numbers of small purchases.
Fags and mags are not the kind of things people give up lightly, and so recession has not really been a problem for T&S.
Sales rose 11 p.c. to £314m in 1991 and profits grew at the same rate, to £13.4m before taxation.
The tobacconist shops fared worst, hit by the fall in shopper-numbers on high streets.
But the Dillons newsagents, benefiting from improved distribution, achieved strong profits growth, as did the ‘C’ stores convenience chain, where T&S is directing the bulk of its investment funds.
Earnings per share rose by 15 p.c. to 15.7p and the final dividend of 3¼p, up from 3p, is payable on May 29.
Chairman Kevin Threlfall wants to continue expanding and improving the quality of the 583-strong store portfolio.
‘It all depends on the site in this business,’ he said.
Only a handful of T&S outlets have been affected by Sunday-trading supermarkets, he said.
The year has started well, with sales up 12 p.c. from 6 p.c. more stores.
The shares, off 6 to 193p yesterday, trade on a multiple of 12 and yield 3.8 p.c.
The record is good but there is no compelling reason to buy.
City: Broker on the black list
By Ian Cowie
ONE firm of stockbrokers accounted for a sixth of complaints and inquiries to the Complaints Bureau of the Securities and Futures Authority and the London Stock Exchange last year.
The body's complaints commissioner Keith Woodley identified the firm in his annual report as Diameter Stockbrokers of Guildford, Surrey.
It went into liquidation last summer after 209 complaints about its cut-price execution-only services.
‘Attempts were made to conciliate between Diameter and their clients but in many cases the bureau suffered the same frustrations experienced by the complainant,’ he said.
‘Cash or stock were owed to the client and problems could be attributed to inadequacies in the member's administrative procedures.’
Diameter has since been declared in default by the Investors Compensation Scheme, thus preparing the way for compensation.
Overall, the number of complaints and inquiries fell by nearly 10 p.c. to 1,206 but the number of complaints was ‘slightly above the 1990 level’.
Most related to delays in settlement and receipt of share certificates.
The Market: Optimistic start to new account
By Karen Cooper
IF the more positive tone yesterday was any indication, investors have either come to grips with their fears of a hung parliament-Labour victory or are ignoring the polls altogether.
An upbeat message emerged from economist Mark Brown at stockbroker UBS Phillips & Drew who said his firm had switched from seller to buyer of domestic equities at these levels.
He believes that at below 2400 points the downside of a hung parliament is limited and that there remains upside in the chance that the Conservatives ‘could still sneak in’.
His confidence is also based on the fact that overseas investors, particularly in the Far East, are underweighted in British stocks and looking to buy.
Coming on the heels of last week's selling — some would call it over-selling — the endorsement provided a welcome boost to trading at the start of the new three-week account.
The expected bout of corrective buying was helped by good demand for the June FT-SE 100 Index futures contract, which closed 15 higher at 2,428.
The main feature of the day was the oil sector, benefiting from higher oil prices.
Brent Crude for May delivery was up 42c to $18.80 a barrel, while West Texas Intermediate May delivery rose 45c to $20.22 — the highest level seen since mid-December.
BP and Shell shares overcame a profit downgrading from County NatWest and moved ahead, although the gain was largely to realign with Friday's rises on Wall Street.
BP turnover was again heavy at 21m shares.
The buying is said to be largely from America, where investors are beginning to take a more optimistic view of their economy while showing concern about renewed Middle East tension.
One oil analyst described investor sentiment as a ‘two-way pull between the Americans who are trying to be optimistic and the British who have been selling to them’.
BP was up 12 to 254½p; Shell gained 16 to 457p, despite going ex-dividend; Lasmo, also ex-dividend, was up 8 to 198p and Enterprise Oil rose 19 to 396p.
With a number of stocks going ex-dividend, market-makers estimated the combined effect of this to be a 6½ point knock to the Footsie.
But despite this negative influence, the market's leading indicator opened only 5 points lower and had swung into the black by mid-morning.
The rest of the day saw a fairly effortless steady climb to finish 18.2 points higher at 2,400.9.
Volume was only 411m shares, considerably quieter than last week when turnover was bloated by ‘bed and breakfast’ deals before the end of the tax year.
Gilts had a ‘deadly dull’ session, according to one trader, with most action in the short end of the market.
The benchmark long-dated Treasury 113/4 p.c., 2003-07, was down 132 to £111116 while short gilts were ⅛ better.
Stocks going ex-dividend included shipping group P&O, down 27 to 386p, Redland, down 8 to 473p, Bowater, down 20 to 683p, Unilever, down 6 to 898p, Reckitt & Coleman, down 10 to 609p, and Sun Alliance down 12 to 229p.
Financial Times publisher Pearson was among them but snubbed the downward trend with the help of continuing good feelings in the market about BSkyB, in which it has a stake.
The shares rose 20 to 775p.
The surge in British Aerospace provided one of the catalysts for the market's morning reversal.
Investors were heartened by news that Saudi Arabia has set the second phase of the Al-Yamamah arms deal in train by making a £1½ billion down-payment, ending months of uncertainty over the contract's future.
The shares were up 16 to 315p.
News from Whitbread that it will make extra provisions of £37m, alongside another £10m considered ‘normal’, to cover bad debts on free-trade loans in the hard-hit south of England knocked 19½p off the already weakened shares to 358½p.
Market sentiment has been against the brewer this year, mainly due to concern about its slow progress in selling off 1,200 pubs before the government's November deadline.
It soon expects to announce 10 deals to lease its remaining pubs, free of any beer supply agreements, to brewers and pub operators.
It is thought that Brent Walker's Pubmaster and Devenish may be among the buyers.
The bad-debt provisions are expected to knock £25m off profits for the year ending February.
County NatWest's has cut its forecast to £229m after the exceptionals and property profits.
Insurance brokers, particularly smaller ones connected to Lloyd's of London, were weaker on what BZW analyst David Hudson describes as an ‘agglomeration’ of bad news, including the incessant bad news on Lloyd's.
Uncertainty was sparked last week when concerns emerged about Steel Burrill Jones' possible loss of an American account.
Steel went ex-dividend and lost 11 to 239p while Bradstock shed 7 to 138p and Lowndes Lambert fell 10 to 297p.
Legal & General was up 6 to 325p on a recommendation from Kleinwort Benson, CU gained 7 to 411p and GA rose 3 to 390p.
Saatchi & Saatchi, down 3/4 to 143/4p, recorded the day's biggest volume as 32m shares in the advertising giant changed hands.
Stockbroker Warburg placed a line of 12m shares at 14p, said to have gone to institutions.
Shares in personal computer maker Psion jumped 19 to 135p after the company held its dividend, despite 1991 losses and issued an upbeat statement about trading prospects.
Commercial Property: UK aid for Czech fuel monopoly
INTERNATIONAL property consultants, Weatherall Green & Smith, and financial and business advisers, Arthur Andersen have completed the valuation of more than 200 petrol filling stations for Benzina, the Czechoslovakian republics's petrol and diesel retailing monopoly.
This will enable Benzina, the republic and the federal governments to decide terms for the sale of a third of the Benzina petrol stations to the major oil companies.
Arthur Andersen was requested by Benzina management to provide assistance in determining the value of the petrol filling stations.
Graham Walker, a partner in Arthur Andersen's London office, invited Weatherall Green and Smith to provide valuation advice.
A team of six from Weatherall's London office have visited the sites, and provided detailed reports on location, facilities, likely capital expenditure requirements and site attractiveness.
Commercial Property: Cleveland pays £3.6m for industrial sites
CLEVELAND Trust has purchased three industrial estates with a total area of more than 200,000 sq.ft.
South Park industrial estate and Queensway estate in Scunthorpe and Hellaby industrial estate at Rotherham were bought for £3.6m from English Industrial Estates the Government funded property company.
The Queensway with a total floor area of 50,000 sq.ft is let to three tenants, the largest Falcon Cycles, a subsidiary of the Casket group, occupying 40,000 sq.ft.
South Park comprising 95,694 sq.ft has 10 tenants in buildings between 6,000 and 7,000 sq.ft each.
The Hellaby estate in Rotherham with an area of 56,000 sq.ft is occupied by seven tenants, the largest being UK Consumer Electronic, a subsidiary of Granada Group, occupying 15,000 sq.ft in three units.
The buildings on all the estates are of modern construction, designed and built to a standard acceptable to institutional purchasers.
The Cleveland Trust is based in Stamford, Lincolnshire, and run by Nicholas Ridley and David Heynes.
The company operates as investors in industrial property particularly in Northern England, purchasing income producing investments, let on institutional leases at low base rents.
According to Director Nicholas Ridley: ‘Our aim is to purchase well let industrial investments, let in unit sizes of 2,500 to 8,000 sq.ft at low base rents, typically £2 to £3 a foot.
‘Such properties are most likely to be located in the Midlands, North of England, Scotland and South Wales.
‘Such investments outside the over-heated markets in the South East show us good initial yield and will provide increased growth as the recession lifts,’ Mr Ridley said.
Commercial Property: Hyams legacy saves MEPC in hard times
DESPITE the massive losses incurred by lack of tenants at its Alban Gate development straddling London Wall in the City, MEPC is unlikely to be forced into talks with its bankers.
When the going gets tougher the management can simply sell off some of the property of its partly-owned Oldham Estate subsidiary.
The much-criticised policy of Harry Hyams, who built Oldham into one of the most profitable property companies, of only letting to tenants of ‘undoubted’ covenant has been fully vindicated.
Properties in the Oldham portfolio exactly meet today's investment criteria of institutions.
Without Oldham, MEPC would be in trouble.
No doubt the directors, led by Sir Christopher Benson, would claim it is their management since taking control in 1987 that has made it so valuable.
But then they would have to tell shareholders why only half of the consolidated profits of MEPC comes from the 700 properties it has assembled — with the other half provided by the 20 or so Oldham properties.
However, they keep quiet about Oldham's contribution to the consolidated accounts by not issuing the Oldham balance sheet until after the annual meeting of MEPC.
If it released the figures before it would be obvious to everyone that Mr Hyams' management philosophy had been superior to that of MEPC's.
A comparison of both companies' 1991 accounts, show a fifth of the fixed assets, a fifth of the net assets and a third of net rental income stem from the Oldham buildings.
Shareholders might wonder why the directors built up a holding of 700 properties when all it needed was another 20 properties of the investment calibre of Oldham's.
But then, of course, Oldham Estate was unique.
The consolidated accounts of MEPC show at the September 1991 year-end, group cash balances were down from £265m to £139m and no longer covered the total capital commitments of £189m.
Creditors due to be paid within a year were up from £261m to £337m, while the gross interest payable was £158m against £130m — and that after capitalising £39.6m of interest.
MEPC raised its dividend for 1991, but some analysts believe that, without sales from the Oldham portfolio, it will be forced to cut the dividend for the current year.
If properties let on long leases to tenants of the highest covenant are sold for cashflow or balance sheet enhancement the substance of the group will have been sacrificed for short-term advantage.
Commercial Property: Orderly disposals mark the way back
IN JANUARY, some in the City forecast that by the end of last month there would be failures among large, quoted property companies.
But as the same people said that at every quarter day for the past year nobody took much notice.
Events of the past week have shown it is not likely to be among the major companies that total collapses will occur.
Their debts are so large that they will be allowed to stumble on at least until the market shows signs of real improvement — maybe several years away.
It is not realised that in the seventies property crash only three major quoted property companies failed, Guardian Properties, Town & Commercial and Amalgamated Investment & Property.
A number of large private property companies also went, including the Lyon Group and Wilstar, William Stern's property company.
But a great many more, both public and private were brought to their knees and many well known names eventually disappeared through acquisition or merger.
Now it looks as if history may be repeated.
Debts of major companies such as Olympia & York and Heron, and even minnows such as Speyhawk, are too large for the banks to pull the rug.
But it is certain companies asking bankers to restructure loans will never return to former carefree days.
There is, however, a fundamental difference between present market conditions and those of the seventies.
Then, the biggest pension funds and insurance companies bought actively from property companies in the open market.
Several of the major companies, such as British Land, Capital & Counties, MEPC and even Land Securities, were forced to sell some of their best properties to survive.
Between 1974 and 1978 institutions spent £5 billion buying from overstretched companies.
Why did they buy at that time?
After all, the property companies were all forced sellers, they needed to sell to survive.
If the pension funds and insurance companies had waited they could have picked up the same properties at a far lower price.
The reason is clear — they believed property was the best investment to meet their rapidly inflating liabilities — and that was even in the dark days of 1975.
There is the difference.
Today few fund managers have such implicit faith in property as an inflation-proof investment.
What we are likely to see in companies seeking support from their bankers is a change in management.
It seems unlikely that the entrepreneurial skills of most managements will be needed in the foreseeable future and in most cases they will not find it comfortable to remain while bankers are calling the tune.
Whether the companies are the private Olympia & York, Heron or Speyhawk the name of the game from now is an orderly disposal of properties.
There will be no more fun, at least until the bankers have got their money back.