

Brightness is too famous to be free
By Toby Moore and John Kampfner
BRIGHTNESS, the beluga whale which escaped from Russian researchers in the Black Sea, faces a dark future as a tourist attraction in a floating cage.
Now the mammal is back in captivity, Russian officials plan to cash in on his international fame by building ‘a floating oceanarium’ and towing him around the Mediterranean tourist resorts.
The Russian plan, probably inspired by the offer of £200,000 from British conservation groups to buy Brightness and his beluga comrade, Gorgeous, who is still free, prompted a furious reaction from British campaigners who fought for more than a month to have the beluga airlifted from Turkish waters to the Arctic.
The Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society said it was ‘beyond belief and humanity’ to subject a wide-ranging sea mammal to life in a mobile swimming pool.
The fear is that Brightness is now too famous and too valuable to be set free.
The beluga was last seen by millions of television viewers being manhandled in a Russian canvas straitjacket outside the Turkish port of Samsun.
Dr Boris Zhurid, director of the Aquamarine Dolphinarium in Sebastopol, said yesterday that the floating oceanarium, once completed, would comprise a tug with three swimming pools to carry a variety of sea animals.
‘We hope to reach Britain one day,’ said Dr Zhurid.
He can expect a rough welcome.
The minimum international standards for dolphinariums insist on the mammals having a pool at least 10 metres deep, 30 metres wide and 150 metres long.
Mr Sean Whyte, director of the Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society, said the Russian plan was outrageous and unbelievable.
‘Towing a whale around in a tiny cage when it is used to roaming the oceans defies belief and serves no purpose in welfare or education terms,’ he said.
Mr Whyte plans to visit the research base at Laspi Bay, in the Crimea 20 miles east of Sebastopol, where Brightness was expected to arrive last night, to ask the Russians to drop their plan.
‘This is perfectly sensible to the Russians because they've had a trade in travelling shows with dolphins for some time.
We know of one in Vietnam where they're literally towed around in tanks.’
Mr James Barnet, house surgeon at Whipsnade zoo, said the level of stress being towed would inflict made the idea utterly impracticable.
‘This is actually beyond comprehension,’ he said.
‘The Black Sea at 24C in the summer is twice what belugas are used to in the Arctic.
The Mediterranean is even hotter and more polluted.’
Meanwhile, the largest indoor oceanarium in the world, the John G Shedd in Chicago, which is keen to begin captive breeding of belugas, has applied to the American authorities for an import licence for Brightness.
The Shedd is widely regarded as the most advanced oceanarium in the world.
Its two belugas and four Pacific dolphins enjoy three million gallons of sea water in 170,000 square feet pool.
It is expected to contact the St Petersburg Institute for Research and Development of Biotechnical Systems, the whale's owners, to offer a home to Brightness which, in commercial terms, is worth about £100,000, excluding a premium for his fame.
The huge international interest in Brightness which followed his escape to freedom in Turkish waters, has turned him into a valuable commodity.
Despite great pressure to allow a rescue plan to airlift him back to a natural habitat in cold Arctic waters, the Turkish authorities decided to let Russian experts take charge of him.
Dr Zhurid said Brightness and Gorgeous, the other beluga, would be looked after by the Moscow-based Institute of Evolution and Animal Morphology.
Scientists catch aphids on the hop
By David Brown, Agriculture Correspondent
KILLER insects have been enlisted to help Britain's beer drinkers, scientists said yesterday.
Armies of lacewings, green flying insects with delicate wings and voracious appetites for other beasties, are being unleashed to consume billions of tiny aphids which devour the hops used in brewing.
The main targets are damson-hop aphids, related to the common greenfly and about half the size of a grain of rice, which have developed immunity to pesticides.
Yesterday, Dr Colin Campbell, of Horticulture Research International's experimental station at East Malling, Kent, said his team had found a way of predicting the migration patterns of harmful aphids and could lay on ambushes to kill them when they arrived.
Three species of lacewing were being studied.
One was effective and readily available from commercial breeders.
A second was even better and could be made readily available from commercial growers.
A third had such a huge appetite for aphids that ‘we can't stuff enough into them’, he said.
He added that at present there were problems of breeding the ‘super killers’ in captivity, but he hoped that these would be overcome.
The work in protecting Britain's hop crop is part of the research programme of Horticulture Research International, a recently privatised group of scientists which still has support from the Ministry of Agriculture and the Agricultural and Food Research Council.
Prof Chris Payne, HRI's chief executive, said: ‘The work is part of our twin goals of achieving environmentally sustainable horticultural production and adding value for the UK grower.
‘We are trying to minimise pollution and improve quality by keeping the use of pesticides at a minimum.’
He welcomed a recent Government announcement that an extra £25 million would be made available to help his organisation to restructure itself over the next three years.
He said one of the aims was to encourage the horticultural industry to fund much of the research from its own resources.