

Baker raises fear of ‘pact with devil’
By GEORGE JONES
THE SPECTRE of proportional representation paving the way to power for extremist minorities, including fascists, was raised by Mr Baker, the Home Secretary, last night.
Pointing to the increased vote for the fascist Republican Party in the Baden Wurtemburg regional election in Germany on Sunday, he said introduction of proportional representation in Britain, coupled with less rigorous controls over immigrants and bogus asylum-seekers, could unleash extremists.
‘Proportional representation has helped the fascists to march again in Europe.
It is a terrible warning to us about what could happen if we threw away our system of first past the post elections.
‘That is what Mr Ashdown wants to do.
It is what Mr Kinnock is prepared to do as the price for power.
If PR turned out to have the same results in Britain, it would be a pact with the devil.’
Immigration has so far played a relatively minor part in the election campaign, and Mr Baker's decision to raise it now will be seen as a further attempt by the Tories to prevent their support slipping, particularly among skilled workers and their families.
Mr Baker strongly criticised a call from Mr Ashdown for up to 4.5 million Hong Kong Chinese who might want to flee from a Communist regime after 1997 to be given the right to come to Britain.
Mr Ashdown said on the BBC's Election Call: ‘It remains our view that we should honour the rights of passport holders in Hong Kong.’
He believed Britain could absorb a ‘significant influx’ although he dismissed as nonsense the suggestion that all would want to come.
He accused the Government of handing Hong Kong's 4.5 million citizens lock, stock and barrel to a Communist regime.
Mr Baker commented: ‘Mr Ashdown's statement shows a reckless disregard for the realities of immigration control which are crucial in helping to preserve harmonious race relations in Britain.’
The Home Secretary's remarks on PR, made to party workers in Stroud, are the most strident so far used by a senior Conservative against electoral reform, which is the condition set by the Liberal Democrats for their support in a hung Parliament.
Last week, Mr Kinnock said an incoming Labour Government would set up a formal inquiry into PR.
Mr Baker said that, in Baden Wurtemburg, fascists received 11 per cent of the vote.
Previously they had received one per cent.
The growth in support was due to the flood of migrants and would-be asylum seekers.
In Britain, such a vote would not have given the fascists power.
‘But in Germany, which has PR, that 11 per cent will catapult the fascists into a powerful role in the state parliament’.
Mr Baker said many of the 45,000 people who applied for refugee status in Britain last year were bogus.
Good race relations depended on tough immigration and asylum laws.
‘Mr Kinnock and Mr Ashdown are preparing for Britain a deadly political cocktail.
‘The ingredients are Labour and Liberal unconcern about increasing levels of economic migrants and asylum seekers entering Britain, coupled with the introduction of a political system which would unleash extremists who fed upon public concern about this issue,’ said Mr Baker.
Commenting on Mr Baker's speech, Mr Ashdown said last night: ‘They'll try anything.
I don't think I've heard such panicky scare-mongering in all my life.’
Interviewed later on BBC Newsnight he refused to accept that the German election results invalidated the case for introducing PR in Britain.
He said the choice lay between an election system like PR which allowed an extremist party one MP for six per cent of the vote, or one which allowed an extremist party to take full power with just over 30 per cent.
When the interviewer, Mr Jeremy Paxman, said he could not be serious Mr Ashdown replied: ‘I am making very a serious comparison.
It happened in Italy in the 1960s when the Communist Party had between 38 and 40 per cent for the entire decade.
If they had our electoral system they would have been the government.’
Nine people were arrested last night after disturbances involving members of a crowd of 550 demonstrators outside a British National Party rally in east London.
A police constable was injured as bottles and other missiles were thrown at 300 British National Party supporters as they arrived for the rally in York Hall, Bethnal Green.
Iraqi jets ‘will break ceasefire’
By Peter Almond Defence Correspondent
IRAQ threatened yesterday to send fighters to patrol its border with Iran, but British and American officials said that would violate the terms of the Gulf war ceasefire and put the aircraft at risk of being shot down by the allies.
A Pentagon official said: ‘It puts us in a position between Iran and Iraq where we don't want to be.
On the one hand we don't want to say to Iraq you can't defend yourself against Iran, but on the other we don't trust the Iraqis not to turn those aircraft on us.’
‘We have U-2 [high altitude reconnaissance]flights flying for the UN over Iraq frequently.
You get an Iraqi fighter up there locked on to one of our planes and you're going to have a problem.’
US pilots are believed to have orders to ‘shoot first and ask questions afterwards’ if they are targeted by Iraqi jets.
An RAF spokesman declined to discuss rules of engagement of its six Jaguars at Incirlik, Turkey.
Biggest poll shows hung parliament
By George Jones, Political Editor
WITH TWO days of campaigning left in the closest election for 20 years, the biggest opinion poll of the campaign indicated last night that Labour was on course to become the largest single party in a hung parliament.
An ICM poll of 10,000 people put Labour 2.5 points ahead on 38.7 per cent, with the Conservatives on 36.2, the Liberal Democrats on 20.4 and others on 4.7.
The poll, for the Press Association, is the largest and most comprehensive survey of the campaign.
It shows a seven per cent swing from the Conservatives to Labour overall, and in some areas the swing is as high as 10.5 per cent.
It reveals a dramatic fall in Tory support in many areas, especially in the South East (11 per cent), West Midlands (10), the North-East (9), and the East Midlands (8).
ICM interviewed 10,460 adults nationwide in 330 constituencies — half of the total — between March 31 and April 3.
The margin of error is plus or minus one per cent.
If reflected on polling day, it would make Labour the largest single party, about 20 seats short of an overall majority, but with Mr Kinnock almost certain to enter Downing Street at the head of a minority government.
A Harris poll for today's Daily Express gives Labour a one point lead, on 38 per cent, with the Tories on 37 and the Liberal Democrats on 21.
The polls came after another day dominated by the prospect of a hung parliament.
Both Labour and the Conservatives ruled out a post-election pact with the Liberal Democrats, while Mr Ashdown appeared to soften his threat to vote down the legislative programme of a minority Government.
Mr Major led a concerted attempt to win back Liberal Democrat waverers by warning that proportional representation — a key Liberal Democrat demand for their support in a hung parliament — would lead to the ‘nightmare of perpetually weak Government’.
Mr Hurd, Foreign Secretary, dismissed claims by Mr Ashdown that in a pact or coalition he would be able to prevent Labour introducing its proposed higher tax rates on middle managers.
‘They won't stop Labour's worst excesses or their disastrous economic plans,’ Mr Hurd said.
‘To expect the Liberals to control Labour would be like asking Dad's Army to restrain the Mongol Hordes.’
The Foreign Secretary also predicted that a hung parliament would lead to another election within a year.
October is already being earmarked by the political parties as the likely month.
Mr Kinnock, reaffirming his confidence that Labour was on course for an overall majority, dismissed reports that Mr Ashdown was seeking four Cabinet places in a coalition with Labour.
He said none would be offered.
At his news conference, Mr Ashdown refused to be drawn on how many Cabinet seats he would seek in the event of a hung parliament.
‘I have made it quite clear from the beginning that a partnership government has to be a partnership at all levels,’ he said.
He insisted the polls indicated that the voters did not want either the Tories or Labour to win outright.
Addressing party workers in Richmond, south-west London, a key Liberal Democrat target seat, he urged floating voters not to be frightened about voting Liberal Democrat by scare stories from Labour or the Tories.
He said: ‘Our opponents will distort our policies and misrepresent our words.
They will try to frighten voters back to the two old parties.
We will not be diverted by their tactics.’
The three latest surveys — the third, by Audience Selection gave Labour 38 per cent, the Tories 35 and the Liberal Democrats 23 — give Mr Ashdown the support of more than 20 per cent of the electorate and suggest that his party is continuing to take support almost equally from Labour and the Conservatives, writes Anthony King.
On an average of last night's three polls, the Daily Telegraph's computer projection gives Labour 310 seats in the new House of Commons, the Tories 294 and the Liberal Democrats 23.
On those figures, neither the Liberal Democrats or any other single party would be able to sustain Labour or the Conservatives in office.
Labour would hope to rely on the combined votes of the Liberal Democrats, the Scottish National Party and Plaid Cymru.
Major's face cut by egg thrown from close range
By Robert Hardman
PRIME Ministerial blood was drawn for the first time in the election campaign yesterday when Mr Major was hit by an egg thrown from close range.
It connected with such force that it cut Mr Major's right cheek, splattered his glasses and dribbled down his dark blue suit.
The attack happened outside Sainsbury's in Eastleigh, Hants.
Police immediately arrested a young man and pinned him to a trolley, stifling his shouts about unemployment.
‘That's what we're fighting against,’ said the Prime Minister.
‘So just fight harder.
This sort of thing won't stop me.’
Shortly afterwards, dressed in a grey suit at a local Conservative Club, he remained defiant.
‘It's not right for politicians to offer a sanitised campaign cut off from the people they're asking to elect them,’ he said.
It was the fourth time during the campaign that Mr Major had faced ordeal by egg.
Last Friday in Meopham, Kent, several were thrown at him but missed.
Four people were arrested.
In Bath last Wednesday, one hit him on the back of the neck and a woman was arrested.
At least one egg was thrown in Luton, Beds, on March 28.
He was not hit.
John McIntyre, of Burnaby Road, Portsmouth, a Portsmouth Polytechnic student, is to appear before Eastleigh magistrates on April 22 charged under the Public Order Act in connection with yesterday's incident.
Musician strangled his ‘devil’ girlfriend
By John Steele Courts Correspondent
A WOMAN student was strangled and dumped in a field by her mentally ill musician boyfriend who thought she was the devil, Mr Victor Temple, prosecuting, said at the Old Bailey yesterday.
Sarah Turner, 21, was killed at a National Trust beauty spot in Surrey by schizophrenic Adam Daniel O'Shea, 24.
O'Shea, an oboe player who had also made albums for a west London record label, admitted the manslaughter of Miss Turner and was sent indefinitely to a secure mental hospital.
His plea of not guilty to murder on the grounds of diminished responsibility was accepted.
The body of Miss Turner, who was due to start a graphic arts course last autumn, was found in a field at Leith Hill, near Dorking, in August.
O'Shea, of Shepherd's Bush, west London, who had been her boyfriend for several months, admitted to police he strangled her with electrical flex.
His radio pager was found in the field near her body.
On his arrest, O'Shea claimed: ‘I had to kill her because somehow my body has been infected.
She did it, you know, to me.’
Mr Temple said O'Shea later made a series of ‘bizarre’ comments, including that ‘after I died on the Cross my soul was sold, I believe, for a lot of money and I served the devil in Hell.
‘I killed her in the field because I believed she was the devil.’
Their relationship had been coming to an end and Miss Turner's parents had arranged for her to go on a holiday to America to deter her from seeing him.
Jealous former husband ‘arranged acid attack’
By Paul Stokes
A JILTED Iranian hired his ‘minder’ to disfigure his former English wife in an attempt to stop her remarrying, Exeter Crown Court was told yesterday.
Bahram Heidari, owner of a takeaway food shop, allegedly got Andrew Bourne to make an acid attack on Mrs Michelle Bowers.
Mr Francis Gilbert, prosecuting, said Bourne struck as Mrs Bowers was getting into her car at Seaton, Devon.
He claimed Bourne, 26, threw caustic soda liquid into her face causing temporary blindness and serious burns.
Mrs Bowers, 30, who still bears some scars from the attack last March, told the court: ‘It felt like my face was physically moving all over the place and burning.’
The liquid ‘was in my nose and mouth and ears and eyes.
I could not see.
I could not open my eyes.
I just started to scream’.
Customers from a nearby public house washed her face and bathed her eyes after the attack.
Mrs Bowers, of Scalwell Close, Seaton, has since made an almost complete recovery.
Mr Gilbert told how she had divorced her husband after he had an affair with another woman.
The couple's separation was ‘bitter and unhappy’.
The prosecutor said her former husband ‘was trying to destroy her happiness and the prospects of her remarrying’.
Bourne, who worked as a driver and minder to for Heidari, was said to have admitted after his arrest that he had thrown the liquid into Michelle's face, but had thought it was ‘soapy water’.
Bourne, of Maidenhead Road, Bristol, denies causing grievous bodily harm with intent.
The hearing was adjourned until today.
Man saw hit-run driver kill wife and two girls
By Paul Stokes
A MAN saw his wife and two daughters killed when a teenage motorist ignored a red traffic light, a jury heard yesterday.
Mr Stephen Hurkett was waiting on the central reservation just behind his wife Lorraine, 26, and daughters Sharon, four, and Lisa, two, when they were hit by a car driven by Martin Flook, 19, Bristol Crown Court was told.
As the mother and two girls, holding hands, crossed Highwood Road, Patchway, Bristol, they were struck by a brown Vauxhall driven by Flook, who sped away, said Mr Michael Hubbard, QC, prosecuting.
‘It was perfectly safe for them to cross,’ said Mr Hubbard, ‘but they did not take account of this car which came hurtling along through these red lights.
‘There is no doubt, the prosecution suggests, that this young defendant must have realised what had happened, but witnesses saw him accelerate away.’
Mrs Hurkett and Sharon died instantly while Lisa died in hospital four days later.
Mr Hurkett, who was with the couple's eldest daughter Emma, seven, saw his wife thrown over the car roof.
The builder, of Pretoria Road, Patchway, said seconds earlier he saw a brown car coming fast through the lights and shouted a warning.
He was slightly behind on the reservation with Emma and he saw his wife and children land in the road.
Mr Hurkett said: ‘I ran to them and saw the car being driven down the road.
The driver did not stop.
I did not know what to do next.
I just wanted to help my family.’
Mr Hubbard said two people in a blue Ford Escort car had pulled alongside Flook and threatened him before the accident.
‘The passenger had his head out of the window and shouted abuse to the effect of ‘I'll get you this time’.’
Flook was arrested after he told his mother he had been in an accident and she contacted the police.
Mrs Glynis Flook, a nurse, said: ‘He said someone was following him.
He was too distressed to say anything.
He was in a panic and crying.
‘I called a taxi and went home and passed the accident on the way, but I didn't realise it was the one he meant.
He said he hadn't called the police yet.’
Pc Michael Williams said the dispute with a passenger in the Ford, Ian Coombes, had concerned a former girlfriend.
Flook allegedly told police: ‘I didn't want him to attack me again.
I was very frightened.
I wanted to get away from the scene as quickly as I could.’
Flook, of Worthing Road, Patchway, denies three counts of causing death by reckless driving on June 29, 1991.
The hearing was adjourned until today.
Doctors urge checks for over 20s
By David Fletcher
EVERYONE over the age of 20 should have a regular blood pressure check to reduce the incidence of heart disease and sudden heart attacks, heart specialists said yesterday.
They stressed that at present no test is available which will predict accurately anyone at risk of a heart attack.
But raised blood pressure is an early warning sign and is one of the simplest and cheapest checks that can be done.
Dr Dan Tunstall Pedoe, consultant cardiologist at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, and chairman of the British Association of Sport and Medicine, said heart disease could be present in people who appeared extremely fit.
He said: ‘There is no doubt the incidence of heart disease can be reduced by paying attention to the known risk factors.
But if the genes are stacked high up against you, lifestyle changes may not be enough protection.’
Although predominantly a disease of older men and rare in people under 30, he said heart disease was by no means unknown in people of Mr Souness's age.
BT told to pull the plug on chatlines
By Roland Gribben, Business Editor
BRITISH Telecom was ordered to pull the plug on chatline services last night after the failure of a last minute legal challenge.
Sir Bryan Carsberg, director general of Telecommunications, gave the order because operators had not raised £660,000 for a compensation fund to pay those whose phones had been used without permission.
He revoked the code of practice covering chatline services.
BT and Mercury Communications cannot now provide premium rate chatlines.
The late challenge was mounted by Let's Talk (UK) Ltd, of Manchester, but Mr Justice Schiemann refused the company permission to challenge Sir Bryan's decision in court.
The court heard that the deficiency in the compensation fund could reach £1 million.
The judge said it had sunk below a sensible level.
And he said there were no grounds for overturning Sir Bryan's ‘sensible’ decision until the fund was increased.
Earlier Sir Bryan's office had been forced to withdraw an announcement about the shutdown decision because of the legal challenge, but he later issued the formal order to British Telecom to pull the plug.
BT has pledged to make sure any outstanding compensation claims will be met in full.
The Independent Telephone Chatline Association said last night that hundreds of job would be lost because of the shutdown.
Psst, want to buy a MiG fighter?
By Paul Stokes
A BRITISH seaside resort's Rotary club found itself way out of its depth when it extended the hand of friendship to a visiting Russian delegation.
In place of the usual small talk came million-dollar questions such as: ‘Do you want to buy a MiG jet fighter?’, and ‘How about a T55 tank or two?’
The price of the Cold War peace dividend proved too high for the Rotarians of the Babbacombe and St Marychurch Club in Torquay, Devon.
Its members, hoteliers, estate agents and other small businessmen, had been expecting a group of 19 ‘ordinary’ Russians.
Instead they received a delegation of government officials, scientists, economists and businessmen.
One Rotarian was asked: ‘Could you help my company finance a new 150 million dollar hotel in Moscow?’
Mr Bert Havill, an electrician and the club's international chairman who had arranged the visit through the Russian embassy in London, said: ‘Quite frankly, they were just not what we were expecting.
‘We asked for ordinary Russians, but the embassy must have misunderstood and sent us some of the country's creme de la creme.
‘The only one who could not make it was a nuclear physicist!’
‘They were all very serious.
Two of them brought documentation with them to prove they could sell arms.
Others talked about high finance all the time.’
Vasily Gloukhov, an engineering director with the Russian delegation, admitted: ‘Yes we can sell arms, but of course it has to be done through proper channels.’
He said that despite the Rotary Club being made up mainly of shopkeepers and small businessmen, they had been ‘very helpful’ in putting them in touch with Rotary contacts in London.
One request granted to the Russian delegates was a special visit after a Devon cream tea at Torquay's five-star Imperial Hotel.
Mr Gloukhov told their hosts: ‘We want to go to one of your garden centres so that we can take home seeds for flowers and vegetables.’
Election ‘92: Labour ‘will strangle recovery’
By George Jones Political Editor
THE Conservatives sought to put the economy back at the centre of the election debate yesterday by claiming that Labour's alternative Budget would ‘strangle’ recovery.
Mr David Mellor, Treasury Chief Secretary, claimed that if Labour went ahead with the tax increases proposed by Mr John Smith, the shadow Chancellor, money would be taken out of the economy just when extra spending was needed to boost demand.
He also predicted that a Labour government would have to increase interest rates by at least two per cent to defend sterling ‘if the international community decides it doesn't trust Labout and moves out of sterling’.
That would push up mortgage interest rates and have a catastrophic effect on the prospects for recovery, Mr Mellor said.
Mr Kinnock said on Channel 4 News last night that it would be wrong to raise taxes more than Labour planned in current financial circumstances as it ‘would be deflationary and push us deeper into recession’.
Election ‘92: Egg ordeals of the PM's campaign
YESTERDAY'S incident in Southampton was the fourth time during the campaign that Mr Major has been subjected to ordeal by egg.
The others were at: April 3, Meopham: Several eggs were thrown at the Prime Minister, all of which missed.
Two men and two women were arrested and released on police bail.
April 1, Bath: Mr Major was struck by a single egg, which hit him on the shoulder and neck.
Another egg struck Mr Christopher Patten, chairman of the Conservative Party and MP for Bath.
A woman was arrested and charges are being considered.
March 28, Luton: At least one egg was thrown at the Prime Minister.
It missed and police are seeking a man for assaulting a Tory party worker.
Other incidents of violence during the campaign include an attack on Mr Christopher Chope, the roads minister, who was punched in the face as he canvassed in his Southampton Itchen, and the punching of Mr Owen Paterson, the Conservative candidate in Wrexham.
Assault charges have been laid in both cases.
Election ‘92: Thatcher remarkable, says Major
By Anthony Looch
MRS THATCHER had been a remarkable Prime Minister and history would judge her years in office ‘very kindly’, Mr Major told David Dimbleby on the BBC Panorama programme last night.
Appearing in his last big television interview before the election, the Prime Minister appeared relaxed and confident of winning an overall majority.
He maintained his refusal to comment on the polls, and remained adamant he would never do deals on proportional representation.
Of his own political position, Mr Major said: ‘I stand in the mainstream of the Conservative Party.
I have an absolute loathing of inflation, I want to extend choice and opportunity and want Britain to have a very proud and assured place in the world.
‘I doubt whether I could have indicated it more clearly than by the importance I placed on foreign affairs in the last year.
People can see what I have done in the past 16 months and can form their own opinions about whether I have made the right judgments for the future of this country.’
Election ‘92: Protestants fear policy shift
By Philip Johnston and Chris Ryder
THE Protestant voters of Northern Ireland will watch the election with some apprehension in the knowledge that a Labour victory would bring significant changes in policy.
Labour is committed to continuing the political initiative begun by Mr Peter Brooke, Northern Ireland Secretary.
If it wins, its man — possibly Mr Brooke's Labour shadow Mr Kevin McNamara — will arrive at Stormont Castle carrying ministerial red boxes containing his predecessor's negotiating position for the next round of talks.
But other things would change: Labour is committed to abolishing the plastic baton round used by the security forces to control riots.
Strip-searching would be ended.
The Prevention of Terrorism Act would not be renewed.
Strong measures against ‘the injustice, discrimination and deprivation which are the material and political causes of sectarianism’ have been spoken of in previous policy documents.
Above all, Labour in the long term wants to see ‘a united Ireland achieved by consensus and without violence’.
Mr Kinnock is not obliged to include Mr McNamara in his first Cabinet but it is widely expected in the province that the Liverpool-born Roman Catholic would assume the portfolio that he has shadowed for more than five years.
How the return of a Labour government would affect the political calculations in Northern Ireland is difficult to foresee.
Given Labour's espousal of the goal of a united Ireland, albeit by the consent of the people, it is hard to believe any accommodation could be reached with the Ulster Unionists.
A poll at the weekend showed that seven out of 10 Protestants would want the Ulster Unionists to side with the Tories if no party wins an overall majority.
A deal with Labour was preferred by only eight per cent.
There would be suspicions among Unionists of a Labour government's agenda and a feeling that the Nationalist SDLP would be given too much influence.
Any attempt to dismantle the PTA or outlaw the plastic bullet could lead to a confrontation with police and Army chiefs.
Labour's plans to establish home rule for Scotland will also strengthen the Unionists' push for decentralised power, cutting across the Anglo-Irish treaty.
In its manifesto, the Ulster Unionist Party said: ‘We cannot accept as stable any system of governance which could not equally be applied to any other regional entity within the UK.’
Labour would face strong pressure from the Unionists to give Northern Ireland what it is giving to Scotland, where there is also a separatist minority.
In the event of a hung parliament with the Tories as the largest party, the Unionists could find themselves in a powerful bargaining position.
The Ulster Unionist Party, led by Mr James Molyneaux, has been careful to rule out a formal coalition and will decide on an ‘issue by issue’ basis whether to support a minority government.
There are likely to be 12 or 13 Unionist MPs in the Commons after the election, nine of them in Mr Molyneaux's party and three in Mr Ian Paisley's DUP.
The SDLP, which can expect three or possibly four MPs if Mr Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein leader is beaten in West Belfast, would side with Labour.
A minority Conservative government would need at least 315 seats for the Unionists to be able to deliver a working majority to Mr Major.
Gerry Adams is trailing the Social, Democratic and Labour Party candidate by more than eight points in West Belfast, according to an Irish News poll.
Election ‘92: Hens laid low by Radio 4 election pall
By Jenny Rees
EGG production could not have been better in the new EC-regulation, stress-free perchery barn of Mr Tony Wilson-Brown on his Lincolnshire farm, when his 2,700 brown hens listened to Radio 4 for 13 hours a day.
The hens were relaxed and contented, and their eggs won a Ministry of Agriculture quality award.
Then the election campaign began and production fell by five per cent as they listened to politicians for hour after hour.
It was only when Mr Wilson-Brown, 39, and his wife, Pat, decided that the hens, like themselves, were fed up with politicians and switched to pop music on Radio 1 that the problem was solved.
Mr Wilson-Brown, who opened the first computerised perchery barn with piped radio three months ago, said yesterday: ‘We were concerned when production fell and realised that this was because the hens did not like the endless election news, comment and argument.
‘Hens are very intelligent and we believe their reaction was much like ours.
But since we have switched to Radio 1, they have perked up again and production has gone up by four per cent.’
Once the election is over, the Hisex Brown hybrid hens will switch back to Radio 4.
Mr Wilson-Brown said: ‘Radio 1 is not perfect because some of the breakfast-time quizzes prove to be unsettling, as the hens do not like the sound effects.
‘They also do not like programmes with a lot of laughter or applause.’
Laying hens found radio comforting, he said.
‘When they become alarmed they go very quiet, waiting for something to happen so that they can run in the opposite direction.
When the radio is playing, they think to themselves that nothing serious can be wrong because the background noise is still there and it reassures them.’
While the election has badly dented ratings for television news and current affairs programmes, it has improved Radio 4 audiences, according to BBC figures.
Election Call, the daily phone-in, has attracted audiences of more than a million, compared with between 300,000 and 700,000 who normally tune in at that time.
World At One and PM increased their ratings in the first week of the campaign and Today maintained its 1.3 million audience.
Election ‘92: Smith squeezes faithful into schedule Jenny Shields follows the man who would be Chancellor
By JENNY SHIELDS
JOHN SMITH peered into the vat of red lipstick and chortled at its name.
‘Decadent Plum?
Yes, I like the sound of that, it has an atmosphere of sin.’
The man who would be Chancellor, and polished performer of the small screen, was on the stump in his own constituency and having fun.
In obligatory white lab coat and cotton cap he was touring the Boots factory in Airdrie.
Close behind his PA, the formidable Helen Liddell, kept her mobile phone clamped to her ear and an anxious eye on her watch.
But the aspiring tenant of 11 Downing Street was a picture of affability and interested concern as he examined toiletries and chatted to the young women on the production line.
With more than 700 employees, the company is the single largest private-sector employer in the Monklands East constituency and Mr Smith is a well-known face on the factory floor.
Such is the demand for the Rt Hon John Smith, QC, on the national stage that visits to his constituency during the campaign have been fewer than he would have liked.
But on his last full campaigning day in Monklands East, a depressed part of west central Scotland badly hit by the collapse of traditional industries, he was making time for the locals he has represented — with a boundary change — since 1970.
While Smith is elsewhere Tom Clarke, the Labour candidate in neighbouring Monklands West, who has an equally comfortable majority, obligingly ‘keeps an eye’ on things.
In Airdrie open-air market, Mr Smith jostled among ample women shopping for cheap shell-suits and something for tea, cannily thickening his rather clipped Edinburgh accent before plunging into the adoring throng.
Shaking hands, accepting the odd bear-hug, encouraging the vote, the man who many Tories concede is Labour's best asset was in safe territory.
A scrawny nationalist in tattered jeans tried to grill him on independence for the benefit of the cameras and a woman in Capaldi's fish caravan threatened to slap him round the face with one of her fish if he broke any election promises.
But most shoppers were delighted to see him.
Late afternoon and after a brief nap at home in Edinburgh, Frank McBride, the indefatigable chauffeur who will have driven Mr Smith more than 10,000 miles by the end of the campaign, brought his master to Stirling.
Looking pink and refreshed after a short break, Mr Smith strode into the pokey committee rooms to a rabble-rousing welcome.
Small girls in Sunday-best frocks demanded autographs and their party-worker mums posed for photographs alongside Mr Smith and Kate Phillips — the candidate charged with toppling Michael Forsyth.
Finally, after a spot of hand-shaking outside Tesco, the entourage swept off to the university, where Mr Smith hob-nobbed with his old school friend Prof Ian Gow about management skills — essential for anyone aspiring to No 11.
General Election: J Smith (Lab) 22,649; J Love (Con) 6,260; K Gibson (SNP) 4,790; S Grieve (L/All) 3,442.
Lab majority: 16,389.
Election ‘92: Kirk attacks ‘unacceptable’ Tory policies
By Damian Thompson, Religious Affairs Correspondent
THE Church of Scotland has launched a blistering attack on Conservative social and economic policies, describing them as unacceptable in a civilised society and accusing the Chancellor, Mr Lamont, of expressing ‘hollow and cynical’ views.
In a report published just two days before the election, the Kirk's Church and Nation Committee demands emergency action to end the ‘waste of human resources’ caused by unemployment.
It is also fiercely critical of the Government's health policies, claiming there has been ‘increasing political interference’ in the NHS and attacking the setting up of hospital trusts in Scotland.
But the committee has denied that it is attempting to influence the outcome of the election.
The Rev Norman Shanks, its convenor, said yesterday: ‘There is no attempt to embarrass the Government or tell people how to vote.
‘These are matters of national importance and this is a contribution to the public debate.’
The report, to be debated by the Kirk's general assembly in May, says Government economic policies might have reduced inflation, but at a human cost ‘unacceptable’ in a civilised society.
It warns of the danger of short-term economic gains compared with a ‘well-considered strategy involving massive investment by public and private sectors’.
It adds that Mr Lamont's statement that unemployment was ‘a price well worth paying’ is ‘hollow and cynical’.
The report attacks the ‘astonishing’ pay rises for leading industrialists.
‘Can anyone properly be said to ‘earn’ these amounts?’it asks.
It also calls on the general assembly to deplore British Steel's ‘abrupt’ closure announcement of the Ravenscraig plant.
On the NHS, the Church and Nation Committee says there is a ‘threefold crisis’ of funding, public confidence and staff morale.
‘Disturbing trends have emerged pointing to increasing political interference and the gradual distancing of decision-making processes from the communities in which health-care facilities are situated.’
The report suggests that the decision to set up hospital trusts in Scotland resulted either from ‘deference’ to the arguments of groups applying for trust status, or from ‘blind determination to implement unpopular policy’.
On the subject of homelessness, the committee says the problem is a ‘scandal’ in Scotland and calls for a ‘more realistic’level of central Government funding.
The vehemence of the attack on the Government has not surprised Church of Scotland observers.
In recent years, the Kirk's senior clergy have consistently attacked Tory policies.
In contrast, many elders — leading lay people — are politically more conservative.
The links between England and Scotland that had held the nation together for nearly 300 years would be endangered by a premature move to Scottish home rule that had not been thoroughly debated, Mr Major said yesterday.
He said the debate had to be ‘widened’ before decisions of such importance were taken.
Labour proposes a Bill in the first Queen's Speech establishing a Scottish parliament elected by proportional representation.
The Liberal Democrats have staged a recovery in Scotland, according to the latest System Three Scotland survey for The Herald.
It puts support for them at 13 per cent(up five points on last month), with Labour in the lead on 41 per cent (down three), SNP on 24 per cent (down two) and Conservatives on 21 per cent (down one).
Election ‘92: Devolution debate ‘must be widened’
By Philip Johnston Political Correspondent
THE LINKS between England and Scotland that had held the nation together for nearly 300 years would be endangered by a premature move to Scottish home rule that had not been thoroughly debated, Mr Major said yesterday.
He said the debate had to be ‘widened’ before decisions of such importance were taken.
Labour proposes a Bill in the first Queen's Speech establishing a Scottish parliament elected by proportional representation.
Mr Major said such an assembly would ‘lead to chaos, bitterness and move us a step forward towards separation’.
There would also be problems with the EC if more authority was devolved from Westminster to Brussels.
‘The underlying point I am seeking to make is that the debate on which decisions on devolution must be taken has not yet been concluded,’ Mr Major said.
‘The ramifications of what it would mean has not yet been understood, either by Scotland or elsewhere in the UK.’
Election ‘92: Read history's lips —‘no new taxes’ is not always a winner
By ANTHONY KING
ONE PIECE of political folk wisdom is being tested in this campaign — possibly to destruction.
It is the notion that high tax parties invariably lose elections and low tax parties invariably win them.
The early stages of the present Tory campaign were based almost entirely on this idea.
Like much political folk wisdom, this particular belief is of recent origin.
It probably dates back only to 1984 when the Democratic presidential nominee, Walter Mondale, promised to raise taxes on Americans to curb the US budget deficit and was promptly beaten by Ronald Reagan.
Four years later George Bush based his famous ‘Read my lips — no new taxes’ on the same assumption.
In Britain, the idea seemed confirmed during the 1980s.
The Conservatives cut income tax throughout the decade.
Labour was seen as a high tax party in 1983 and again in 1987.
The Conservatives won both elections.
Ergo, high tax parties in modern Britain are doomed to defeat.
The folk wisdom led Tory politicians to dismiss opinion poll findings suggesting the opposite.
Three weeks into the campaign the conventional wisdom is looking less convincing.
Labour is a high tax party and voters know it.
The Liberal Democrats are a high tax party and voters know that too.
Yet Labour leads the Tories in most polls and the only party to make significant gains during the campaign — the Liberal Democrats — has actually promised to increase the standard tax rate.
One problem for the conventional folk wisdom is the curious British understanding of the word ‘tax’.
In most countries people understand taxes to refer to everything from income tax and inheritance tax through VAT and petrol tax to compulsory social security contributions.
But in Britain ‘tax’ has for some obscure reason become synonymous with income tax.
The Conservatives can thus claim to have cut tax since 1979 while official statistics show that total taxation as a proportion of GNP has increased.
The Conservatives are not lying.
They are just using ‘tax’ in its peculiarly British sense.
Another problem is that the prosperous middle classes — who pay high marginal income tax rates themselves — exaggerate the importance that taxation plays in most people's family budgets.
For most people, a penny on or off the standard tax rate — that formulation again!— pales into insignificance compared with their pre-tax income, the inflation rate, the size of their pension and their mortgage interest rate.
Politicians — especially Tory politicians — also make another mistake.
They imagine if they make subtle and marginal changes in tax rates everyone will notice.
The figures look — and are — imposing in the Treasury (or Walworth Road).
They must look equally imposing on the breakfast table.
But most voters never look at the detailed figures and would probably not believe them if they did.
Voters expect all governments to put up taxes.
Only if the burden becomes insupportable — or increases too abruptly — do electors seriously complain (as they did in the last days of the 1964 and 1974 Labour governments).
Tory politicians are also liable to misread the trade-off in voters' minds between taxation and spending.
When both taxes and public spending seemed out of control at the end of the Callaghan era, the proportion of voters telling Gallup that ‘taxes should be cut even if it means some reduction in government services such as health, education and welfare’ was exactly the same as the proportion saying ‘government services such as health, education and welfare should be extended even if it means some increase in taxes’.
Today, tax-raisers outnumber tax-cutters by nearly seven to one.
The question may not be perfect but the shift in opinion is unmistakable.
Nor should anyone be surprised.
Incomes have risen considerably in recent years.
The total tax burden has risen only slightly.
Most people see modest tax increases as being within their means and they value highly — because they themselves use — the NHS, the state education system, public transport and other public services.
They also believe many of these services have deteriorated.
For most voters the impact of Labour's proposed tax increases (as distinct from the tax increases Labour might actually impose) would be minimal.
They welcome the idea of higher pensions, an improved NHS and commuter trains with enough seats.
The Conservatives have been right to warn voters that a Labour government would mean far higher tax increases than John Smith currently promises — either that, or Labour would not be able to improve benefits and services in the way people want.
But in banging on to such an extent about high taxation, and promising to reduce income tax still further, they have probably missed the public mood.
Voters' trade-off between taxes and services has changed since 1979 — and anyway the folk wisdom was always misleading.
Whatever Messrs Mondale, Foot and Kinnock said about raising taxes in the 1980s, they were going to be beaten anyway.
The politics of taxation was, and remains, only a small part of a much bigger picture.
Anthony King is Professor of Government at Essex University.
Election ‘92: What the main players had to say about a hung parliament
By PHILIP JOHNSTON
AT CONSERVATIVE Central Office, the Prime Minister expressed his confidence in winning a clear overall majority, though only after being drawn into a discussion on how a Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition leading to proportional representation and devolution for Scotland would irrevocably change the face of Britain.
Mr Major said he believed the constitutional issue ‘transcended’ the election.
He added: ‘It is more important than the general election itself that we maintain a constitution that has served us well for generations, and ought not to be lightly tampered with for party political purposes in the midst of the general election.’
Mr Hurd, Foreign Secretary, openly addressed the possibility of a hung parliament in which national decisions were ‘made in smoke-filled rooms.’
‘The recent flirtation of nods and winks between the Labour and Liberal campaigns would become a way of life,’ he added.
‘Parliamentary business would be dominated by measures which bore no resemblance to the priorities of real people.
Everything would be done for party interests — and nothing for the nation.
‘We would live in an election atmosphere month after month.’
Mr Hurd recalled the last Lib-Lab pact in the late 1970s as ‘a period of shabbiness and indecision’ and a time without social or economic achievement in which the Labour government lived from hand to mouth.
‘No one should suppose that the Liberals would carry any more weight this time.
‘They won't stop Labour's worst excesses or their disastrous economic plans.
To expect the Liberals to control Labour would be like asking Dad's Army to restrain the Mongol Hordes.’
AT LABOUR'S campaign press conference, Mr Kinnock reaffirmed his belief that he would be leading a majority government on Friday.
‘We will introduce the policies that we have undertaken to introduce, and in the course of doing that I hope we can attract a breadth of support to add to our majority and to add to the degree of consensus supporting that majority,’ he added.
He disputed poll suggestions that a hung parliament was the most likely outcome, pointing to Labour's strong showing in individual constituency surveys up and down the country.
‘What you observe there is that in the battleground seats, the seats where this election will be determined, Labour is doing even better than we are in the national, overall polls,’ he said.
‘All the polling organisations, like our own private polling, demonstrate a very great firmness of support in those who say thus far that they are going to be voting Labour, and softness in Conservative support.’
Mr Kinnock refused to consider circumstances in which he failed to win outright and was required to include Liberal Democrats in his Cabinet at the head of a coalition government.
‘There will be a decisive result,’ he declared.
‘It will enable us to introduce our decisive policies, especially those that will directly combat unemployment.
‘Mr Ashdown would be better concentrating on the basic issues that are of concern to the electorate rather than perpetually engaging in imagined card games that he thinks he would like to play on Friday morning.’
THE LIBERAL DEMOCRATS accused the Tories and Labour of preferring to ‘hide from the truth’ than face up to a hung parliament.
‘With just three days until polling, it is becoming clear that the voters do not want either the Conservative or the Labour Party to win this election outright,’ Mr Ashdown told his party's campaign news conference in London.
A minority government formed by Labour or the Conservatives would, he maintained, create instability and uncertainty rather than work constructively for a partnership government which would last for a parliament.
‘They prefer to risk all the consequences for our economy, for education, for the success of our relations within the European Community,’ Mr Ashdown added.
The Liberal Democrats were not working on the hypothesis that the phone would ring to ask them to join a coalition government.
‘No one wants to fight another election.
I'm not keen to do so.
But the fact of the matter is, if you have a minority government, that election will be coming sooner or later.’
His party was ready and able to fight a second campaign and ‘immeasurably better placed’ than either Labour or the Tories.
Election ‘92: Kinnock to aim for full employment
By Jon Hibbs Political Staff
FULL employment was reinstated as a central aim of Labour's economic recovery programme by Mr Kinnock yesterday as he pledged to ‘mobilise the talents of all the people’ in an education and training revolution.
The Labour leader told an audience of business people, academics and professionals that his aim was to return to the situation of the 1960s, when fewer than one million were unemployed at any time and then mainly for short periods.
‘Yes, I do think those conditions can be repeated,’ said Mr Kinnock.
‘Not easily, not quickly, but I am not prepared to abandon the ambition of having a fully working economy, and having a fully working economy means there are jobs available for just about everybody who is looking for a job.’
Labour's traditional commitment to restoring full employment was dropped during a policy review after the last general election as an impractical hostage to fortune and does not appear in the party's manifesto.
However, in reaffirming it as an objective, Mr Kinnock was careful not to set a timescale for reducing unemployment to between 750,000 and one million, depending on circumstances.
Speaking at the Institute of Civil Engineers, the venue for the unveiling of the Shadow Budget at the start of the campaign, Mr Kinnock claimed that Labour would be the most industrially-orientated government Britain had ever seen.
Election ‘92: Final film labours the point
By Jon Hibbs, Political Staff
IN THE beginning there was John Mortimer QC, waxing lyrical about the great ideals of the 1945 Labour government and judging that its commitment to the welfare state and social equality made it the greatest this century.
At the end there was Glenda Weston, ward sister at Kettering General Hospital, pledging to vote Labour because of its commitment to the NHS and ordinary men and women.
In between, Labour's final party election broadcast last night consisted largely of three dozen talking heads — some famous, others unknown — telling the viewers why it was time for a change.
It was a curiously flat note on which to end the campaign.
Chopping from a celebrity to a caricature, mixing expert opinion with commonsense pronouncements, it underlined Labour's claim to appeal across the classes by featuring a cross-section of the population in the simplest electioneering format of all.
Nigel Kennedy, the punk violinist, sawed away in the background as a midwife, a builder, a pensioner and a child minder gave their testimony alongside a consultant paediatrician, a couple of professors, and several actors.
There were clips from the campaign trail and one-liners from Mr Kinnock's speeches.
Then Labour's stirring campaign theme heralded a passage on Mr Kinnock's leadership, with comic Ben Elton praising his ‘dignity, courage and good humour’.
Shots of the Kinnocks' 25th wedding anniversary party portrayed Neil the family man, dancing the anniversary waltz with Glenys to Larry Adler's solo harmonica, watched by daughter Rachel, striking in a red dress.
The climax was a clip from last week's Sheffield speech, a call for the country to ‘pull together’.
Then, instead of ending with a bang, the broadcast trailed off into more endorsements, leaving a slogan to sum up: ‘It's time for a change; vote Labour.’
Election ‘92: How Ashdown could make Labour sweat
By Jonathan Petre, Political Staff
THE LIBERAL Democrats are prepared to sustain a minority Tory Government in power without any promise on electoral reform in order to put Labour under pressure to do a deal, senior party advisors said yesterday.
While the official party line remains that the Liberal Democrats would vote against a Queen's Speech that did not contain a commitment to introduce proportional representation at Westminster, party strategists have not ruled out the option of abstaining.
They feel that if the Conservatives emerge as the largest minority party on April 9 and attempt to rule alone, the Liberal Democrats could make Labour ‘sweat’ by keeping the Tories going, even though this would mean effectively abandoning their clear commitment to electoral reform above all else.
While they are aware of the dangers of being seen to support the Tories, senior party members would argue that neither party had won the election, and Labour could not assume the Liberal Democrats would play its game.
They believe that such a move could provoke Labour into accepting their terms for a partnership government as its anxiety to hold office mounted.
‘The pressure from Labour's grassroots would be enormous,’ said one advisor.
‘We do not want to do anything which would prematurely lever Mr Kinnock into Number 10.
‘In those circumstances, we might calculate that letting Labour sweat for a while could well bring it round.’
With the horse-trading in the event of a hung parliament certain to be ferocious, Liberal Democrats are keen to indicate that they would strike a tough bargain.
Mr Kinnock has already warned that he would give Mr Ashdown a ‘short, sharp’ lesson in political poker.
Mr Ashdown yesterday sought to provide himself with even more leeway in a hung parliament by outlining circumstances in which he would not feel bound to vote against a Queen's Speech which did not contain PR.
Speaking on BBC TV's Election Call programme, he said he could not provide ‘an in-all-circumstances’ undertaking on how his party would react, saying that he was being asked ‘how I would play as a batsman the third ball in the fourth over after next.’
While in almost all cases the Liberal Democrats would vote against a Queen's Speech which did not offer stability, factors such as the threat of war against Libya or an economic crisis with the pound ‘dropping like a stone’ would change the situation.
‘Obviously, everyone has to do what they think is right,’ he said.
Rebutting suggestions that Scottish Liberal Democrat MPs would baulk at losing the opportunity for a Scottish Assembly, he added: ‘My colleagues and I have taken this decision jointly and collectively.
‘Anyone who underestimates our capacity to hold firm in these matters will be involved in a terrible miscalculation.’
Earlier, at a London news conference, Mr Ashdown challenged Mr Kinnock and Mr Major to make clear where they stood in the event of a hung parliament.
He accused them of failing to face up to the implications of the voters' choice should this happen, and of preferring to hide from the truth.
‘They prefer to go it alone, creating instability and uncertainty,’ he said.
Election ‘92: Party leaders in 20-minute TV grilling
By Philip Johnston, Political Correspondent
THE THREE party leaders faced their most hostile audience of the election campaign last night when they each endured a 20-minute television grilling from 500 voters.
Mr Kinnock ran into a wall of derision when he declined to say whether or not he favoured proportional representation.
Mr Major left the stage at London's Grosvenor House hotel to a mixture of loud boos and cheers after fielding tough questions on the poll tax and the demise of Mrs Thatcher.
Mr Ashdown, who was the first to run the gauntlet on Granada TV's World in Action, escaped relatively unscathed though he was accused of seeking to ‘blackmail’ the country by insisting on proportional representation as his price for a coalition.
The interrogation, chaired by Sue Lawley, was conducted by members of an audience representing a cross section of voters from the two marginal seats in Bolton.
Mr Ashdown dismissed suggestions that he would ask for four Cabinet posts for his party in a coalition government.
‘There has been absolutely no discussion going on as to how many Liberal Democrat bottoms will sit in the back of how many government Daimlers,’ he said.
Mr Ashdown reaffirmed his willingness to be flexible and to compromise if it came to negotiating with a minority government of either hue.
He was then asked why he was proposing to blackmail the country rather than enter a coalition without preconditions.
‘It is not a question of blackmail,’ he said.
‘For 40 years both of those parties have grabbed power on the basis of 40 per cent of the electorate at most and with 60 per cent against.
It is they who have misused the democratic system to give them an unfair majority of power.’
Mr Kinnock looked uncomfortable when Alec Dunn, a 20-year-old first-time voter, asked where he stood on proportional representation.
‘I would be delighted to be able to tell you,’ Mr Kinnock began.
‘You either agree with it or not,’ said Mr Dunn.
‘I will tell you exactly, absolutely what my approach has been.
Two years ago, I established a process because it is important that we get…
’ The Labour leader's answer was drowned out by shouts of ‘Yes or No’, ‘Give him an answer’, ‘Tell us in English not Chinese’.
At which point, Miss Lawley drew his ordeal to an end.
By the time Mr Major arrived, the denizens of Bolton were hungry for more and the first question went to the heart of the Tory dilemma.
‘Mrs Thatcher stated that you were carrying on with all her policies.
If this is true why did the parliamentary Conservative Party get rid of her?’
Mr Major explained how he was carrying on the principles of his predecessor and pointed out that he was her seconder in the leadership ballot and regretted that she had not stayed on.
The question, he suggested, should be ‘directed at those who did get rid of her, not me’.
It got no easier.
‘Do you seriously expect us to forgive and forget the inhumanity and the misery of the poll tax?’
Mr Major said the community charge, as he preferred to call it, had been replaced with a new property-based system which contained improvements that were never in the old rating system.
Hear, hears.
So, said Miss Lawley helpfully, will you now say you are sorry for introducing it?
‘I supported the principle of the community charge at the time because I thought the principle was right.
In practice it didn't work…
I don't think I should say sorry for doing what at the time I believed to be right,’ said the Prime Minister, receiving his loudest ovation of the night.
Further questions on unemployment ‘people don't want training they want jobs’, homelessness and the NHS left Mr Major a little wobbly but provided him with the best and closing line of the night.
‘I am no more likely to privatise the health service than I am likely to join the Labour Party,’ he said.
There will have been some satisfied smiles on the buses back to Bolton last night.
Vicars learn from teller of tall tales
By Colin Wright
A TELLER of tall tales has been brought in to help would-be vicars keep the congregation rolling in the aisles.
Mr Taffy Thomas, one of Britain's few professional story-tellers, will show 30 trainee clergy at St John's College, Durham, how to stop parishioners nodding off.
The agnostic 42-year-old former drama teacher describes himself as ‘a teller of tales, stories and elaborate lies’.
His regular audiences are to be found in schools, libraries and village halls.
His services have been engaged by Canon Trevor Pitt, principal of the ordination course for members of the Church of England, United Reformed Church and Methodist Church.
He said: ‘Most people have a jaundiced idea of sermons as boring and not worth listening to.
With Taffy's help we can make sure the sermons grab everyone's attention.’
Mr Thomas, whose real name is David, comes from Grasmere, Cumbria, and is not Welsh at all.
He said: ‘I'm looking forward to the challenge.
The man they follow was a fine storyteller himself by all accounts — and there is no question they have some very good basic material.’
Take an April shower
By Charles Clover Environment Editor
PEOPLE were urged yesterday to start taking showers instead of baths to avert disaster for the wildlife of rivers, lakes and wetlands as the country suffers its worst drought for 200 years.
The Royal Society for Nature Conservation called on the next government to give the National Rivers Authority powers to veto thirsty building and industrial developments, and to make more water available for rivers and wetlands.
Rain was falling in London, where Sir David Attenborough was launching Water for Wildlife, a two-year campaign by the society.
The television naturalist said southern England recorded its lowest January rainfall for 154 years.
He added: ‘Even if it rained between now and October more heavily than it has ever done in recorded time there would still be rivers, such as the Ver in Hertfordshire, that would not get enough water to enable them to flow properly.
‘Rivers like the Wharfe in Yorkshire, the Darent in Kent, the Burn in Norfolk are drying up.
Where there were once kingfishers, bullrushes and reeds, there is now dry, parched land.’
The source of the Kennet, one of Britain's best trout streams, was now a sewage farm outfall because springs had dried up.
The source of the Wylye, a famous Wiltshire trout stream, was a million gallons of water pumped from a nearby borehole.
‘Many of the things which bring joy to our hearts in the countryside have been destroyed,’ said Sir David.
‘We are all guilty of carelessness and waste, damaging our rivers and wetland.’
According to the society, water voles, otters, redshank, snipe and lapwing and wetland plants such as marsh orchid and bog pimpernel had declined as a result of over-abstraction and drainage over many years.
Each person in Britain uses an average 30 gallons of water a day and the society called for consumers to take conservation measures to save water: to turn off taps when brushing their teeth, to fix drips and leaks, to water the garden in the cool of the day and to collect rainwater for garden use.
Isobel Drury, of the society, warned against plans to solve water shortages through a national grid or local water grids.
She said they could have worrying consequences for wildlife because the grids could entail the mixing of water from acidic catchments with water from alkaline chalk streams.
Mr Gary Mantle, director of the Wiltshire Trust for Nature Conservation, one of the 47 country trusts involved in the society, said water rats were declining and the water weed had been ‘badly hammered’ on the Wylye.
However, it was not on the priority list of 20 rivers singled out for urgent action by the National Rivers Authority.
‘It is sick but not dying,’ he said.
The society wants development proposals, such as the building of 10,000 new houses in west Swindon close to drought-stricken rivers, to be refused if there is too little water available.
Anglers are to challenge Yorkshire Water at a public hearing today over plans to abstract half the 10 million gallon flow of the river Hull, which they claim is already running dangerously low.
Mr Allan Edwards, director of the Anglers Co-operative Association, would be opposing all applications to abstract more water from the chalk streams of southern Yorkshire, which are famous for their wild trout.
Dog killed by heater at parlour
By David Graves
A POODLE collapsed and died from heat exhaustion after being chained next to a fan heater at a dog grooming parlour, a court heard yesterday.
An hour after the seven-year-old bitch's death a veterinary surgeon found its body temperature was 109.2 degrees and it had died from heart failure caused by heat stress, Birmingham magistrates were told.
Ann Cook, 48, of Church Road, Yardley, Birmingham, who ran the Posh Paws parlour, had tethered the dog to a table next to the heater to dry while she made herself lunch, said Mr Wykeham Garsia, prosecuting.
She admitted causing the dog unnecessary suffering and was fined £1,000 and ordered to pay £508.72 costs.
Mr Garsia said the bitch, called Trixie, was taken to the parlour by her owners, Mr Keith Roberts and his wife, Debbie, on April 17 last year.
He told the court: ‘She was chained to a table next to a fan heater to help dry her coat after grooming.
Mrs Cook left for 15 minutes while she made lunch in the kitchen.’
Mr Garsia said that when Mrs Cook discovered the dog had collapsed she telephoned the owners, and took the dog to a veterinary surgeon.
Weal marks were also found around the bitch's abdomen from straps rubbing her skin.
These had probably been caused as Trixie tried to pull away from the heater.
Undercover police to testify in open court
By R Barry O'Brien
A JUDGE'S refusal to let undercover police officers give evidence behind a screen at the trial of 19 Manchester United fans was upheld in the High Court yesterday.
Lord Justice Lloyd and Mr Justice Waterhouse said they could not interfere with the exercise of discretion by Judge Owen in Manchester Crown Court last November.
The prosecution wanted the officers, who infiltrated a group of suspected hooligans, to testify behind a screen in sight of lawyers and defendants but hidden from the public to protect their identities.
The judge was told it might not be possible for the trial to take place if the officers' identities were not protected.
Judge Owen said he had no objection to the officers not revealing their names and addresses in open court but he would not allow evidence to be given in secret.
In response to an application by the Crown Prosecution Service for a judicial review, Lord Justice Lloyd said it was not open to the prosecution to take such action ‘whenever faced with what is regarded as an inconvenient or unjust decision’.
The courts could not create a ‘surrogate right of appeal’ by extending the High Court's supervisory role through judicial review proceedings, even though it meant a trial might never take place.
But the two judges overturned Judge Owen's decision to stop the proceedings because of delays in bringing the case.
They found there had been no unjustifiable delay and said time had been needed to assemble evidence.
The 19, charged with riot, violent disorder and conspiracy, were arrested after an investigation into football violence between September 1989 and October 1990.
Judge Owen stayed the proceedings last November, ruling the trial should not go ahead because delays in bringing it to court amounted to an abuse of the court process.
Lord Justice Lloyd said the judge had been the victim of ‘inexplicable confusion’ in reaching this decision.
Mr Anthony Scrivener, QC, for the defendants, said he would be seeking leave to appeal to the House of Lords.
It was of public importance that the issue should be resolved because many other cases were ‘in the pipeline’.
Man is buried alive trying to save terrier
By Paul Stokes
THE body of a 26-year-old man who was apparently buried alive while trying to rescue one of his terriers when it became trapped down a hole, has been found on a Welsh mountainside.
Philip Edwards is believed to have suffocated when the 14-inch wide gap caved in.
He was found by a mountain rescue team near his home in Edmondstown, Rhondda, on Sunday, six days after going for a walk with his two terriers named Sweep and Red.
Sweep was found dead 20ft down the hole and Red was lying hungry and weak tethered to a tree.
Search for clues after IRA bomb explodes in Soho
By Colin Randall and David Millward
A SUSPECTED IRA bomb exploded without warning in the heart of London's West End yesterday, damaging a block of flats and empty offices but causing no casualties and little disruption.
Some elderly residents of John Broadwood House in Bridle Lane, behind Piccadilly Circus, were fortunate to escape injury as the blast, caused by a device containing less than 1lb of high explosives, blew out windows of their homes.
Cdr George Churchill-Coleman, head of Scotland Yard's anti-terrorist squad, described the attack as ‘an act of sheer recklessness’.
Although there were some police flats 200 yards away, he was unaware of any person or premises representing a likely IRA target.
In the absence of a specific object, it was assumed that the IRA may have intended little more than to carry out its threat to keep ‘the war in the Ireland’ in the limelight during the election campaign.
But another theory was that the bomber dumped the device after becoming nervous about possible discovery on his way to plant it elsewhere.
However, the blast was yards from the offices of Granada Television.
Although the company was planning to record interviews with Mr Major, Mr Kinnock and Mr Ashdown for a World in Action special they were to be made in a central London hotel some distance away.
Mr Nick Morris, 40, a producer with Academy Commercials, which has first-floor offices overlooking Bridle Lane, was standing next to a window shattered by the explosion.
‘I was so lucky that I turned away,’ he said.
‘There was this huge explosion and glass everywhere and there seemed to be an age of silence before pandemonium broke loose.
Thank God I wasn't facing the window.’
Miss Corinne Day, 27, a fashion photographer with The Face magazine who lives in a top-floor flat in Brewer Street, said: ‘I was putting my socks on ready to go out.
All the glass came through into my bedroom.
It was because I had my blinds closed that I didn't get hurt.’
Residents of the flats told of their shock when the bomb exploded.
Mr Delmo Vigna, who was lying in bed in his first-floor flat when the bomb went off, said: ‘Just 20 minutes earlier, I had stuck my head out of the window to throw a bucket of water on the street to clean it.
If it had gone off then, I would have died.’
A Soho nightclub manager, Mr Peter Goodchild, 56, was walking past the flats when the device exploded 20 yards behind him.
‘I was deafened in my right ear by the noise,’ he said.
‘Bits of broken glass showered over me but luckily I wasn't injured.’
International: Maastricht abortion controversy
By Boris Johnson
THE FUTURE of the Maastricht Treaty on European Union has been thrown into serious doubt after Common Market foreign ministers clashed unexpectedly yesterday over the controversial protocol which explicitly blocks Irish women's EC right to seek abortion overseas.
Mr David Andrews, the new Irish Foreign Minister, received a humiliating rebuff, led by the Germans, in his attempts to reopen negotiations to change the protocol.
Only Britain and Holland supported Dublin's attempt to alter the language on abortion.
Irish sources predicted that yesterday's outcome would cause ‘chaos’ in Dublin.
The repercussions could also be felt in Britain and the rest of Europe, since Irish liberal opinion now seems set to campaign against Maastricht unless the anti-abortion clause is neutralised.
A senior British source said yesterday: ‘If the Irish find they cannot ratify the Maastricht treaty there isn't going to be a treaty.’
With the 12 countries already in the toils of a budget renegotiation, it would mean a delay of at least a year before the ambitious plans for monetary and political union could be relaunched.
The issue has been blown open by the case of the girl, 14, who was forbidden by the Irish High Court to travel to England to seek an abortion.
That decision was overturned by the Dublin Supreme Court, and the pro-abortion movement in Ireland is now alarmed these gains could be lost.
To prevent a backlash against Maastricht, Mr Andrews yesterday proposed to amend the protocol by adding words guaranteeing the right to travel and to receive information about abortions.
Germany and France led a protest fearing months of long negotiations could be undone.
International: Libya sanctions
By Our EC Correspondent
The European Community agreed yesterday to support UN Security Council resolutions on sanctions and calling on Libya to hand over two men suspected of the Lockerbie bombing.
International: Bosnia in turmoil as battles rage between Serbs and Muslims As the republic prepares for EC recognition, Michael Montgomery witnesses its capital flaring out of control
By MICHAEL MONTGOMERY
THE breakaway Yugoslavian republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina sank deeper into bloodshed and turmoil yesterday as it prepared to receive recognition as an independent state by the European Community.
Authorities in the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo, imposed a 10pm-to-6am curfew last night, amid reports of widespread looting and continuing gun battles.
For a second day yesterday, snipers fired on peace protesters in the city, killing two or more and taking the number of casualties there since Sunday to at least 11 dead and more than 100 wounded.
Clashes between Serb and Muslim militiamen raged in the streets throughout the day.
Artillery and mortar shells fired from surrounding hills by Serb forces struck the city's historic centre.
Police commander Dragan Vikic said he was no longer in control in Sarajevo.
‘No-one controls it,’ he said.
The clashes spread to the republic's parliament building yesterday afternoon, when suspected Serb gunmen opened fire on tens of thousands of demonstrators, who had braved the troubled streets to call for an end to the spiralling violence.
Groups of Muslim demonstrators retaliated by attacking the nearby Holiday Inn with small arms and grenades in an effort to dislodge several snipers who could be seen firing from the hotel's upper floors.
Fierce artillery duels and machinegun attacks — pitting Muslims and Croats loyal to the Bosnian government against Serb units — were also reported in northern Bosnia and in western regions near Mostar and Kupres.
Fighting intensified around the republic on Sunday in advance of recognition by the EC.
Ethnic clashes have pushed the republic's Serb, Croat and Muslim communities to the brink of all-out war.
‘This is barbarism at its most extreme,’ said Mr Selim Hadjibajric, the mayor of Sarajevo's Muslim-populated old quarter.
Violence spilling over from the conflict in Croatia has escalated dramatically in recent weeks after the republic's 1.9 million Muslims and 750,000 Croats voted overwhelmingly to secede from Serb-controlled remnants of Yugoslavia.
Minority Serbs, whose fears of life in an independent state have been stirred by militant nationalist leaders, vowed to fight to remain within Yugoslavia.
Last week, Serbian-based militias captured two key towns in Bosnia in bloody assaults which left more than 50 people dead.
Croats in western parts of the republic reacted by seizing control of large tracts of territory.
After capturing the town of Kupres on Sunday, Croat forces were reported yesterday to have begun moving along a strategic road towards the town of Bugojno, which has a sizeable population of Serbs.
Fighting around Kupres, in which Yugoslavian federal fighter jets have been used to attack Croat positions, is thought to have claimed more than 100 lives, although there has been no independent confirmation.
Bosnia's embattled President Alija Izetbegovic has declared that the violence has been fomented by Serb militants and supported by Yugoslavian army hardliners in an attempt to destabilise the republic and thwart its international recognition.
But yesterday, with the republic's police force ruptured along ethnic lines, and civilians heavily armed, Bosnian leaders made a volte face and appealed to the federal army to step in to help separate the warring factions.
‘Time is quickly running out for the army to show whether it is on the side of the people,’ said the Bosnian Interior Minister, Mr Alija Delimustafic.
The bursting of artillery shells were clearly visible from the wooded hills to the south-east when I slipped into Sarajevo yesterday along a dirt track after crossing Serbian and Muslim lines in a hail of sniper bullets.
Nearly all the red-tiled-roof homes along the ridge line, high above Sarajevo, were deserted, with the last remaining people hurriedly packing their belongings on to cars and wagons.
Rival Serbian and Muslim gangs stood poised to repel any attempt to breach the fluid battle lines.
Like the dozens of blue uniformed Serbs, who hold the high ground around outlying Serbian villages to the east of Sarajevo, the bands of Muslims who greeted me on the other side with loud applause expected I would somehow provide aid.
‘In America, there is the Wild West.
Here is the Wild East,’ said one Muslim defender of Sarajevo.
His gaunt son, who could not have been older than 12, stood slumped over a hunting rifle, gazing at the plumes of smoke rising from the green expanse which runs along the fringes of Sarajevo's old quarter.
Several other Muslim families stood by in shock, their eyes fixed on brush fires scorching the opposite hillside.
In a brave effort to recapture Sarajevo's streets from the forces of destruction, tens of thousands of pensioners, families and workers flooded into the capital to demand an immediate ceasefire and the formation of a government of national unity.
A mixture of sorrow and jubilation punctuated the voices of those who addressed the crowds.
They blamed the republic's nationalistic coalition government for the slide into civil strife.
Waving Bosnian flags and portraits of the late Yugoslav communist leader, Marshal Tito, a large crowd of miners still in work clothes chanted: ‘Down with the murderers!
Down with the people who would kill Bosnia!’
One speaker said: ‘Let all the Serb chauvinists go to Serbia and let the Croat chauvinists go to Croatia.
‘We want to remain here together.
We want to keep Bosnia as one.’
The moving spectacle, which was interrupted repeatedly by rounds of automatic weapons fire, was carried live on Sarajevo television, and beamed to homes in all the former Yugoslavian republics.
Ironically, it was one of the first broadcasts which extended to the entire federation since its collapse last year.
International: Britain fights Delors budget
By BORIS JOHNSON
MR TRISTAN Garel-Jones, Foreign Office Minister, last night repeated the Government's implacable opposition to plans of M Jacques Delors, EC Commission President, to raise the EC's budget by 30 per cent over the next five years — a plan which would cost British taxpayers at least one billion pounds extra per year, writes Boris Johnson, EC Correspondent, in Luxembourg.
Speaking at the second full discussion of the ‘Delors Two’ budget among the 12 foreign ministers, Mr Garel-Jones said the increase was unnecessary in view of the extra cash already available.
M Delors plans to increase the EC budget from about £45 billion today to about £60 billion by 1997.
Britain says the EC could comfortably levy enough for a reasonable increase in EC spending by sticking to its present formula of 1.2 per cent of European Gross Domestic Product.
M Delors wants 1.4 per cent.
International: Agreement allows recognition by EC
By Boris Johnson in Luxembourg
THE European Community will formally recognise the Yugoslav republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina from today.
Recognition follows agreement between Britain and Germany that there was no sense in delaying it, despite the upsurge in violence.
Mr Tristan Garel-Jones, Foreign Office Minister, told a meeting of EC foreign ministers that the violence was the result of Serbian and Croatian regular and irregular troops staking out their positions in advance of recognition.
‘A lot of the violence stems from the fact people are expecting a decision today [yesterday],’ said one senior British source, arguing that the pattern would only be repeated if ministers postponed their decision for another month.
The EC does not believe that recognition will be a panacea for Bosnia, the tinderbox of the First World War and a patchwork of warring groups made up of 60 per cent Muslims, 30 per cent Serbs and 20 per cent Croats.
‘No option is risk-free,’ said one diplomatic source.
Ministers also agreed to lift progressively economic sanctions against Serbia in the hope of discouraging Mr Slobodan Milosevic, the Serbian President, from waging further attacks on the new country.
Serbia is the last government in Yugoslavia to face EC trade restrictions, which prevent its products from receiving the privileged access enjoyed by other republics.
Serbia must comply with conditions insisted upon by Britain before the sanctions are fully lifted.
These include respect for borders and minorities as specified under Lord Carrington's plan.
Serbia must also drop its claim of jurisdiction over Croatian airspace and rescind legislation tabled in violation of the peace plan, such as the Serbian parliament's attempt to extend its rule over Krajina and other parts of occupied Croatia.
British officials denied the conditions were already virtually fulfilled by Serbia, saying that Mr Milosevic ‘had a long way to go’ before the EC would be satisfied.
In deference to German wishes, the EC agreed that recognition of Bosnia should not take place from yesterday, April 6, a date still remembered in the Balkans as the anniversary of the Nazi invasion in 1941.
Four Yugoslav republics originally applied for EC recognition and only the comparatively peaceful Macedonia is still unrecognised, because of Greek objections.
Ministers once again ducked the question of recognising Macedonia, even though Lord Carrington is believed to have said there was no practical reason why it could not go ahead.
Greece insists that the creation of a new state by that name would imperil the safety of its own northern province of Macedonia.
But EC sources said last night that Greece would not be able to withstand the pressure forever.
International: History of bloody rivalries
By MICHAEL MONTGOMERY
BOSNIA-Hercegovina, with its potent ethnic mix and history of savage internecine warfare, is widely considered one of the most unstable and volatile regions in the Balkans and in Europe, writes Michael Montgomery.
For centuries, it has been a focal point for some of the great rivalries between Christianity and Islam, Catholic and Orthodox, fascist and communist.
The republic saw brutal ethnic violence in the Second World War, when its wooded hills and lush valleys were transformed into killing fields.
Of the 1.7 million Yugoslavs who died, more than half were killed in Bosnia, most of them by fellow Yugoslavs.
Hopes that the republic could survive Yugoslavia's demise intact have been blunted by territorial battles reminiscent of the opening rounds of the civil war in neighbouring Croatia.
As in Croatia, the Bosnian conflict is fuelled by the determination of the minority Serbs to remain linked to Serbia and the equally strong desire of Croats and Muslims to break free of Belgrade.
Muslim descendants of Slavs who converted to Islam under the Ottoman Empire make up the largest ethnic group, accounting for 43 per cent of the republic's 4.3 million inhabitants.
Catholic Croats constitute 19 per cent of the population.
Tension has risen sharply since a referendum last month in which the majority of the population voted for independence.
Such a move is opposed by the Serbs, who, although accounting for only one third of Bosnia's population, have laid claim to more than two thirds of the republic's territory.
The lack of any precise boundaries between the three closely-interwoven ethnic groups leads most observers to believe that Bosnia's civil war will know no bounds, with the battle front cutting through villages and streets.
International: Japanese stall over Emperor's China trip
By Robert Whymant in Tokyo and Graham Hutchings in Peking
TOKYO politely turned aside an invitation from Peking for Emperor Akihito to visit China yesterday as hostility from the past continued to complicate bilateral ties.
Jiang Zemin, Chinese Communist Party secretary, is visiting Japan to mark the 20th anniversary of normalising Sino-Japanese relations.
Chinese leaders are keen to strengthen what has become an increasingly important relationship with Tokyo, and have sought to use the five-day visit to invite Emperor Akihito later in the year.
In Tokyo, Mr Miyazawa, Prime Minister, employed a classic Japanese stalling tactic, telling Jiang that they would give ‘serious consideration’ to China's invitation.
Right-wing hardliners in the ruling Liberal Democrat Party have given warning that the Emperor might be drawn into apologising for Japan's past aggression in China, unleashing a flood of demands for reparations.
Tactfully, Jiang did not refer to the voices in China calling on Japan to compensate people for their suffering during the Pacific War.
Some delegates to China's parliament last week called for billions of pounds in compensation.
This alarmed Japanese officials.
On another thorny subject, Mr Miyazawa gently reminded Jiang that the Senkaku isles in the East China Sea, to which Peking recently reasserted its claim, belonged to Japan.
Jiang responded by saying that in 1978, Deng Xiaoping, then Vice-Premier, said that resolving this issue should be left to the wisdom of future generations.
Jiang, the most senior Peking official to visit Japan since China's 1989 crackdown on democracy protesters, is eager to secure loans and technological aid from Japan.
International: Ambushers kill Israeli soldiers
By Our Tel Aviv Correspondent
Muslim gunmen ambushed an Israeli armed convoy, killing two soldiers and wounding five, at Houle village, in Israel's self-proclaimed security buffer zone in southern Lebanon, yesterday.
The Israeli army said three of the attackers were killed.
International: Defiant exile held as he flies back to Malawi
By Scott Peterson in Nairobi
THE most outspoken critic of Malawi's repressive government, Mr Chakufwa Chihana, was arrested by police yesterday as he entered the country.
Mr Chihana, the secretary-general of the influential Southern Africa Trade Union Co-ordination Council, who flew from Johannesburg to Lilongwe, Malawi's capital, was detained while he was attempting to read a prepared statement after he descended the steps of a South African Airways flight.
Diplomatic sources who witnessed the incident said he was driven off at speed in a police convoy and his whereabouts are unknown.
The American embassy in Lilongwe reacted at once, saying that it viewed his arrest ‘in the most serious way’ and urged his immediate release.
There has been a warrant out for Mr Chihana's arrest since he told a meeting of Malawian political exiles in Lusaka, Zambia, two weeks ago that the ruling Malawi Congress Party was the party of ‘darkness and death’.
President Banda's one-party government has a ruthless record, especially when dealing with political opponents.
Since Dr Banda, 93, took control after independence from Britain in 1964, he has governed the country with an iron grip that may finally be loosening.
Political opponents such as Mr Chihana take great risks by returning to the country; Dr Banda recently said that if they did, they would be ‘meat for crocodiles’.
Mr Chihana made it clear, however, that he intended to be the first opposition leader to confront the government openly from inside Malawi.
‘I'm returning to Malawi to advocate multi-party democracy — is that such a crime?
The decision of whether I will be meat for crocodiles is up to Banda himself,’ he told the BBC before his flight.
‘We can't wait for Dr Banda to die to be free again.
For Malawi to be democratic, I am prepared to die.’
In the 1970s, Mr Chihana spent seven years in prison as one of thousands of prisoners of conscience who were picked up by the regime but were never charged.
Opponents lucky enough to escape Malawi to live in exile have sometimes been hunted down and assassinated or abducted by Malawian agents in Zambia or Zimbabwe.
The head of a new clandestine 250-member opposition group inside Malawi, which calls itself the United Democratic Party, said Mr Chihana's return yesterday was ‘suicide and an unnecessary waste of human life’.
The internal opposition to Dr Banda's rule has become more brazen since a critical pastoral letter signed by Malawi's seven Catholic bishops was read out in every Catholic church last month.
They decried human rights abuses and curbs on basic freedoms.
The church distributed 16,000 copies of the letter which was immediately declared seditious, and the Congress Party secretly sentenced the bishops to death.
Mr Ahmed Dassu, an exiled opposition leader, appealed to aid donors to suspend immediately contributions to Malawi, except humanitarian aid.
International: Success for de Klerk
By Christopher Munnion in Johannesburg
PRESIDENT de Klerk of South Africa has achieved his most important breakthrough in international relations with a formal invitation to visit Nigeria for talks with President Ibrahim Babangida, chairman of the Organisation of African Unity.
Mr de Klerk and his Foreign Minister, Mr Pik Botha, with leaders of business and commerce, will fly to Lagos on Thursday for the two-day visit, ending nearly three decades of hostility.
However, the African National Congress described the invitation as ‘premature and inopportune’.
The European Community last night lifted its oil embargo against South Africa in recognition of the continuing reforms.
The restrictions on imports from and exports to South Africa have been in place since 1985.
International: Iran demands extradition of embassy attackers
By Anton La Guardia in Teheran
IRAN yesterday demanded the extradition of demonstrators who ransacked several of its embassies on Sunday, including the mission in London, and said it would claim compensation from Western governments for damage to its property.
Only days ahead of a general election in Iran, Teheran has taken a strident and uncompromising stance against the Mujahideen Khalq opposition group and its patron, Iraq.
On Sunday, Iranian F-4 Phantom jets bombed a Mujahideen base in Iraq in apparent retaliation for a rebel raid on two Iranian border villages near Qasr-e-Shirin.
The Iranians said several people were killed and some abducted, but the rebels denied staging the attack.
The Iranian air strike was the first against Iraqi territory since the Iran-Iraq war and one of the most serious clashes since the two countries agreed to a ceasefire in 1988.
Iraq and the Mujahideen claim separately to have shot down one of the Iranian aircraft.
Different reports put the number of planes down at either eight or 12.
Sympathisers of the Mujahideen, who are denounced as ‘hypocrites’ by Teheran for their attempt to weld Marxist and Islamic ideology, later rampaged through several Iranian embassies in what appears to have been a co-ordinated raid.
The Iranian Foreign Ministry said it summoned representatives from Western capitals, where the incidents took place, yesterday to deliver a ‘strongly-worded protest’.
The ministry said it had requested the extradition of the assailants.
Despite Iran's attempt to improve its ties with the West, yesterday's official statement was harsh.
‘The indifference and lack of firmness shown by the Western governments in the face of these attacks are the best proof of the existence of co-ordination between them and…the terrorist elements.’
The renewed sabre-rattling between Iran and Iraq is a surprise for Western diplomats in Teheran, given the recent cautious rapprochement between Teheran and Baghdad following Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.
It is not clear who is responsible for stoking the latest tension.
But one theory is that the Mujahideen are seeking to use the election to demonstrate that opposition to the mullahs is alive and strong.
Iraq may also want to warn Iran against supporting Shi'ite rebels in southern Iraq and the Kurds in the north, who both revolted against Baghdad's rule at the end of last year's Gulf war and were bloodily suppressed.
The initial assessment in Teheran, however, was that neither Iran nor Iraq has an interest in allowing the clashes to run out of control.
The Iranian election is seen as an opportunity for President Rafsanjani to strengthen his pragmatic policy of seeking an accommodation with the West to restore Iran's economy.
But Mr Rafsanjani is exposed to accusations that he is departing from the policies set out by the leader of Iran's Islamic revolution, the late Ayatollah Khomeini, and may have seized on the Mujahideen attacks to demonstrate that he is not selling out the imam's legacy.
Britain has not yet received any formal demand for the extradition of the demonstrators who threw bricks at the Iranian embassy in London and smashed windows.
There is no extradition treaty between Iran and Britain, though this does not rule out granting a request, if properly formulated.
But demands for compensation for damage are likely to be met by Britain under the terms of diplomatic norms.
International: Italian coalition suffers setback in poll ‘earthquake’
By Robert Fox in Rome
ITALY'S ruling Christian Democrats appear to have suffered their most severe setback in any general election since the Second World War, according to first results and projections last night.
With nearly half the votes counted, it was clear the outgoing four-party coalition was going to be hard put to get a working majority in the Rome parliament.
Commentators were calling the results ‘a political earthquake’.
It was feared Italians had voted for ‘a Polish parliament’, where more than a dozen parties will be represented in parliament, incapable of supporting a coherent government coalition.
This removes any realistic prospect of a government introducing severe economic reforms to reduce Italy's huge public debt to fulfil norms for the EC single market laid down by the Maastricht Treaty.
For the first time, the Christian Democrat vote was less than 30 per cent for both Houses of Parliament — though by the vagaries of the complex system of distributing seats it looked as if the alliance might get a majority in the lower house, the Chamber of Deputies.
But the general response of voters made nonsense of the Christian Democrats' appeal for support for strong government.
‘Instead, Italians have voted for fragmentation,’ said Signor Arnaldo Forlani, the party general secretary, who said he would now consider his own position.
The political historian Massimo Teodori, who was re-elected on the radical list, predicted another election this year.
But he said there would have to be a complete overhaul of the electoral system first.
The greatest gains were made by the separatist Northern League, which increased its vote from…5 of a per cent to 9.3 per cent for the lower house.
Last night, the League was expected to have at least 26 seats in the 315-seat Senate and at least 60 in the 430-seat Chamber of Deputies.
The leader of the League, Senator Umberto Bossi, said he would now press for a new federal Italy in which the northern regions would be a separate republic.
The most spectacular loss was suffered by the old Communist Party, now split into the progressive Democratic Left, and the traditional Marxist Refoundation.
Together they totalled less than 20 per cent, more than six per cent down on the votes for the old Communist Party, which took 26.6 per cent in the 1987 general election.
Socialist support went down a fraction, with losses in the north compensated by gains in the south.
But it was a poor showing, since Signor Bettino Craxi, Socialist Party leader, hoped to overtake the reformed communists.
In Palermo, the charismatic former mayor of the city, Signor Leoluca Orlando, founder of the Rete party, scored an astonishing personal victory for his outspoken opposition to Mafia violence and corruption.
Late last night he was believed to have taken well over a third of all the votes cast in the Sicilian capital.
The only party of the outgoing four-party coalition to gain votes was the Liberal Party, which went up from 2.1 to 3 per cent on latest projections for the lower house.
The fourth partner, the Social Democrats, fell slightly to 2.9 per cent.
At the headquarters of the ultra-Right Italian Social Movement in Rome the atmosphere was one of uncontained euphoria after it was projected to take 6.9 per cent of the vote in the Senate.
The party's best-known candidate, Alessandra Mussolini, the Duce's grand-daughter, said yesterday: ‘I'm very happy for the MSI, even if I still don't know if I've been elected’.
International: Main parties seek joint front against German far Right
By Robin Gedye in Bonn
GERMANY'S ruling and opposition parties, reeling from the largest electoral success for the far Right since the Second World War, called yesterday for urgent joint talks to prevent further haemorrhaging of their support.
Chancellor Kohl said: ‘I do not believe this is a trend that will destroy the party system.
But it will not be contained effectively if we do not deal with the refugee problem immediately.’
A weekend election in Baden-Wurttemberg, where the extremist Republican Party, led by Herr Franz Schonhuber, a former Waffen-SS officer, gained 10.9 per cent of the votes, was fought mainly on the concerns of the electorate over Germany's generous political asylum laws.
The previous highest post-war electoral gain by a far Right party was in 1968, the year of the Left-wing student riots, when the National Party of Germany gained 9.8 per cent of the vote, also in Baden-Wurttemberg.
Herr Kohl acknowledged that the far Right was gaining support from people opposed to the EC's Maastricht agreement, which they saw as an anti-nationalist pact to give up the Deutschemark.
The Chancellor said he wanted talks with the opposition immediately after the Easter holidays.
These would be aimed at reaching agreement over what he believed were essential changes to the constitution if the refugee influx was to be curbed.
Herr Bjorn Engholm, head of the opposition Social Democrats, who only just managed to retain an overall majority in his Schleswig-Holstein constituency after an eight per cent drop in electoral fortunes, called for a ‘national pact of common sense’ with the ruling Christian Democrats.
He hoped a policy of ‘sweat and tears’ could be agreed.
Herr Schonhuber said people were queuing up to join his Republicans, now the third-strongest party in Baden-Wurttemberg, ahead of the Greens with 9.5 per cent of the vote and the liberal Free Democrats with 5.9.
He said: ‘We are on the march and heading for a place in the German parliament.
We are on the threshold of a great breakthrough reflected in society's incredible support.’
The extreme Right Deutsche Volks Union party won six per cent of the Schleswig-Holstein vote and six seats in the local parliament.
The mainstream parties describe the Right-wing successes as a ‘protest vote’ that will run its course as soon as they have solved the political asylum question.
Germany received 256,112 asylum-seekers last year and is expecting an estimated 400,000 this year.
In addition, 221,995 ethnic Germans immigrated last year from pre-war German territories.
Ethnic Germans and asylum-seekers are entering at a rate of 1,600 per day.
International: Socialists win in Greek poll
By Our Athens Correspondent
Greece's conservative government conceded yesterday that a socialist victory in a weekend by-election in Athens had ‘given us a clear message’.
The socialist vote was up by more than 30 per cent on its showing in the 1990 poll.
There was also a sharp rise in support for the far-Right.
But the governing New Democracy Party dismissed calls for an early general election.
International: Breakthrough as de Klerk visits Nigeria
By Our Johannesburg Correspondent
PRESIDENT de Klerk of South Africa has achieved his most important breakthrough in international relations with a formal invitation to visit Nigeria for talks with President Ibrahim Babangida, chairman of the Organisation of African Unity.
Mr de Klerk and a delegation which will include his Foreign Minister, Mr Pik Botha, and leaders of business and commerce will fly to Lagos on Thursday for the two-day visit, ending nearly three decades of hostility.
The African National Congress described the invitation as ‘premature and inopportune’.
The European Community last night lifted its oil embargo against South Africa in recognition of the continuing reforms.
The restrictions on imports from and exports to South Africa have been in place since 1985.
International: Parliament votes against challenging Yeltsin
By John Kampfner in Moscow
PRESIDENT Yeltsin staved off concerted attacks by hardliners yesterday as Russia's highest legislature voted narrowly not to table a motion of no confidence in his radical government.
The opening day of the Congress of People's Deputies reflected anger in the country at the administration's shock therapy economic programme, with one delegate speaking of ‘economic genocide’ and a host of others angrily calling the leadership to account.
The loose alliance of nationalists, communist diehards and other malcontents succeeded in forcing Mr Yeltsin to agree to give an economic report.
Mr Yeltsin had planned to leave that to Mr Yegor Gaidar, the architect of the reform programme, and to restrict himself to a general state-of-the-nation address.
His speech today promises to be one of the most crucial of his nine-month-old presidency.
The 1,000-strong Congress, which was meeting for the first time since the collapse of the Soviet Union, is the only body in the country that can change the constitution and other basic laws.
As delegates arrived at the Grand Kremlin Palace, hundreds of pro and anti-Yeltsin demonstrators rallied on Red Square.
The communist protesters chanted ‘Yeltsin resign’.
Mr Dmitry Volkogonov, one of the President's closest aides, stressed that ‘corrections’ would be made to economic policy.
‘We need to make several changes in the President's team.
There are a number of members who are not up to the job.
If we push the people to the limits of poverty, we will wreck the reforms,’ Mr Volkogonov said.
He said Mr Yeltsin was contemplating appointing Mr Arkady Volsky, an industrialist close to Mr Gorbachev, as Prime Minister.
On the eve of the Congress, Mr Yeltsin carried out a minor reshuffle, recalling one of his closest aides, Mr Gennady Burbulis, from the post of First Deputy Prime Minister back to the safer climes of State Secretary.
In the most emotional speech of the day, Mr Alexander Rutskoy, the Vice-President, appealed for parliament to come to the aid of the Russian minority in the TransDniestr region of Moldova, the scene of bitter fighting in recent months.
Mr Rutskoy proposed that the 14th army of the former Soviet forces, now under Russian control, should create a buffer zone between the Moldovan security forces and the Russian rebels.
Mr Rutskoy's weekend visit to TransDniestr, where he spoke in nationalistic tones, was sharply condemned by Moldova.
Congress voted to delay a decision pending talks that began yesterday in Kishinev, Moldova's capital, between the foreign ministers of Russia, Moldova, Romania and Ukraine.
Most of the attention, however, was focused on the nine days ahead of battling over the direction of economic reform in Russia and over a new constitution, several drafts of which have been prepared by different factions.
So worried has he apparently become that Mr Yeltsin recalled his liberal ambassadors to Washington and Paris, who still hold deputies' mandates, to bolster his support.
His concern was justified when the no confidence motion was defeated by only 447 votes to 412.
Ironically, one of Mr Yeltsin's critics, Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov, speaker of parliament, might have swung him a few votes by appealing at the start of the session for deputies to behave responsibly, seek compromise and encourage ‘dialogue, not monologue’.
Leading Article: Mandela's Greek tragedy
TO THE political burdens already on the shoulders of Nelson Mandela, President of the African National Congress, is now added a fresh wave of accusations against his incorrigible wife.
Since her trial a year ago, which led to a six-year jail sentence, Winnie Mandela has been at liberty on bail, pending an appeal.
The new allegations against her are being made by a woman who was convicted on the same charges and is out on bail with her.
The evidence she is said recently to have conveyed to ANC intelligence officers against Mrs Mandela throws darker shadows over what was already seen as a murky trial.
Mr Mandela is now being urged by ANC colleagues to announce an official separation from his wife.
As most people in South Africa know, they have been living apart for some while — ostensibly on security grounds.
Yet it is hard to think of a worse ordeal for a political leader than being urged by the party of which he is head to sever relations with his wife.
Confronted by her misdemeanours, as he ended 28 years in prison, Mr Mandela observed with dignity that if his wife was in trouble it was because he had not been free to take proper care of her.
Matters are now well past that stage.
It is wrong to suppose that Mrs Mandela any longer enjoys black African support.
Supporters of the ANC, even the activists among them, are only too painfully aware of the damage she does both to her husband and the movement.
Some would argue even that she casts a heavy shadow over present negotiations on the political future of South Africa.
They see her as a hostage, whose future fate may influence Nelson Mandela's line in negotiations.
Others consider that Winnie Mandela's record and public utterances give her husband's frequent appeals for an end to violence a hollow ring.
Here is a situation with the ingredients of Greek tragedy.
After spending a generation in prison, Mr Mandela rejoined the outside world to find his wife facing criminal charges, detested by his close supporters and an embarrassment to everyone negotiating South Africa's future.
Yet such evidence as there is suggests that his love for his wife had been deepened by the way she had stood by him during his years in prison.
It needs a heart of stone not to sympathise with a figure in this predicament — a figure on whom it may rest finally to decide whether South Africa lives in peace or at war.
Letter to the Editor: Proxy unfairness
SIR — There are at present about half a million United Kingdom citizens living in other parts of the European Community, and if Britain is to compete successfully in the Single Market, even more Britons will find themselves spending longer periods elsewhere in the EC.
Is it not illogical and counter-productive that the British electoral system denies or impairs their voting rights?
Under the existing law, these United Kingdom citizens can vote in British and EC parliamentary elections only through a complicated registration procedure, which allows voting only by proxy (difficult to arrange and flouting the whole principle of a secret ballot).
Moreover, after an arbitrary number of years, these second-class British voters are debarred from voting altogether.
While electoral democracy is spreading across Europe (and the world), why does Britain restrict it for its own citizens?
IAN HARRIS Copenhagen
Letter to the Editor: Old warning
SIR — I like to recall a wry comment on the television programme That Was The Week That Was towards the end of the Tories' last long period in office during the early Sixties: ‘There's only one thing that will make the Conservatives popular again — and that is the next Labour government!’
It could be all too true again today.
Dr M. M. SALZMANN Farnham, Surrey
Letter to the Editor: K factor
SIR — To have a prime minister's surname ‘with two Ks in it’(letter, April 1) would be a novelty.
Only two previous premiers have had a single K. They are Lord Liverpool (R. B. Jenkinson) and the Duke of Portland (W. H. Cavendish Bentinck).
In addition, the Marquess of Rockingham was Prime Minister from 1765-66 and again in 1782, but his K was in his title.
All three of the above were in the House of Lords when they formed their ministries, so the distinction of being the first elected politician with a K to become Prime Minister is still available.
DAVID REES Glastonbury, Som
Letter to the Editor: Earlier film scandal
SIR — I am a former pupil of Summerhill School at Leiston, Suffolk (television review, March 31).
When I was around eight years old in the Forties, a film crew persuaded me to steal a biscuit at teatime so that they could film the incident.
I recall from when I saw it later that it made excellent footage.
But this event was entirely unrepresentational of my behaviour at that time.
HUGH HARRIS London SE5
Letter to the Editor: Making a citizen's arrest of my own
SIR — At last I have achieved a life-long ambition and made a citizen's arrest.
I handed over a Ford transit van and its human contents to the Sussex constabulary.
The van's human contents consisted of several knockers and their boss, a Mr Fagin.
In Dickensian days Fagin had his thieves' kitchen in London, where he taught youngsters to pick pockets.
Nowadays he teaches them the cowardly art of aggressive selling to the elderly and disabled.
My particular dodger, who claimed to be selling household items, became very frightened when I took his photograph through the leaded front door window.
He used terrible language, then ran back to tell his boss.
But I had informed the police and asked for help even before the doorbell rang.
Fagin drove into the cul de sac where I live, and told me that he had a permit for conducting his alleged legal trade.
I noticed that he had a sophisticated VHF receiver listening to police control.
To ensure he did not leave before the police came — some 20 minutes after being called — I was able to block the lane by sitting in a garden chair.
I was very cold but I prevented them driving away.
Using my portable phone I was able to give the police control a running commentary of my version of the matter until officers turned up.
The men were taken away, but not charged.
Capt R. H. COURAGE Petworth, W. Sussex
Letter to the Editor: Food war
SIR — Your headline ‘Kohl criticises Turkey’(April 3) takes on a rather special meaning for those who realise that kohl in German means cabbage.
E. F. BRADFORD Castleton, N. Yorks
Letter to the Editor: What are ‘glitterfests’ for?
SIR — Just what thought-processes are assumed to make the floating voter more inclined to support party leaders whom he has seen flanked by what the newspapers call ‘glitterati’— celebrities, that is, of stage, screen, pop concerts, running, jumping and playing ball games?
He is supposed, presumably, to think one of the following:
If Mr Major consorts with glamorous personalities such as Bill Wyman, Elaine Page and Fatima Whitbread, he must, despite all evidence to the contrary, be glamorous, too, and therefore deserves my vote.
If Mr Kinnock is supported by great political philosophers, such as Ben Elton, Larry Adler and Clive James, he must be a more considerable political figure than he seems, and therefore deserves my vote.
What's good for showbusiness and for running and jumping must be good for the United Kingdom, and therefore this lot deserves my vote.
Or is the point of these ‘glitterfests’ simply mutual flattery and further evidence of the belief, common to politicians and to showbusiness, that it always helps to get one's picture in the paper?
As an electoral doctrine, this latter belief goes back at least to Alcibiades, who cut off his dogs' tails so that he should be talked about; from which little good came either to him or to Athens.
Admittedly, the thought-processes of anyone still undecided which way to vote on Thursday must be mysterious or vestigial: but I cannot believe that such nonsense will have the slightest effect on the result of the election.
The only lasting effect it may have is on the careers of some of the people involved.
Did a single American ever vote Democrat because of Jane Fonda's antics?
I doubt it, but many Americans could never again bring themselves to enjoy the sight of her on stage or screen.
I might have learnt to like Stephen Fry's version of Jeeves on television, if I had not read those maddening articles in which he was eager to give away my money in order to soothe his conscience.
Had he paused before taking up his pen, and listened to the ghost of Jeeves, he would certainly have heard a deprecatory cough and the chilling words: ‘I would scarcely advocate it, sir.’
ANTHONY LEJEUNE Pinner, Middx
Election Comment: Scots in three minds
By ALLAN MASSIE
THE Scottish mind is formed on the antithetical principle.
Example: a young minister at a church social announces ‘Miss Jeannie MacPherson will now sing ‘The Flowers of the Forest’.’
Voice from the back of the hall: ‘Jeannie MacPherson's a whure.’
Long pause, then the minister says: ‘Nevertheless, Miss Jeannie MacPherson will now sing ‘The Flowers of the Forest’.’
This election exemplifies the ‘nevertheless’ principle.
The SNP has made all the running.
It is the only party on a roll.
Nevertheless, Labour will still win at least two thirds of Scotland's 72 seats.
Labour has been a most ineffective Opposition.
It dominates the central belt of the country and maintains a huge dependent clientele, whom it has rewarded with the worst housing estates in Europe.
Labour's stronghold of Strathclyde has the worst schools in Scotland.
Nevertheless, Labour's support is loyal.
Scottish politics are different.
The election here has been fought on more fundamental issues than have been allowed to surface in England: in particular, the constitution.
Labour and the Liberal Democrats are united in supporting the scheme for devolution which they developed in the Scottish Constitutional Convention.
This proposes a Scottish parliament with very limited tax-raising powers, which would have responsibility for all matters now administratively devolved to the Scottish Office, and for ‘industrial development’, though nobody knows just what this means.
The weakness of the proposal is that it dodges the West Lothian Question, first raised in the Seventies by Tam Dalyell.
Then he argued against a scheme which would allow him to vote on matters like health, education, and local government in Wessex, but not in his own constituency of West Lothian.
The politicians who cobbled together the convention's proposals still call themselves Unionists.
But they don't care that the only honest answer to the West Lothian Question — which is to deny the right of Scots MPs to share in legislating for England and Wales on those subjects which in Scotland have been devolved to the Scottish parliament — would render any British government unstable, since it might possess a majority on some issues but not on others.
Nevertheless, Labour persists.
So its scheme is, for this and other reasons, profoundly dishonest.
SNP policy may be wildly optimistic, but it has the virtue of honesty.
The Nationalists would break the Union (though they now talk reassuringly of the continuance of ‘the social union’) and the slogan of ‘Independence in Europe’ has caught the imagination of many of the young, because it allays the fears which the prospect of separation has always aroused.
I don't think the SNP is dishonest either in brushing aside the doubts raised as to whether Scotland would be immediately admitted to the European Community: it really believes there would be no difficulty.
Scotland, it says, will be independent, but nevertheless supported by the EC — a heady message.
Nevertheless, the party with an honest policy and a swing to its campaign will be defeated by the party whose centrepiece is dishonest, and whose campaign has had all the swagger of a bedraggled old hen in a muddy farmyard.
And of course the SNP itself contains its own contradictions.
It calls itself socialist, but wins seats in rural constituencies which have no time for socialism.
Its leader, Alex Salmond, has lately taken to calling himself a Social Democrat, but this week his deputy, Jim Sillars, was again proclaiming full-blooded socialism.
He still believes this is the way to capture Labour's stronghold.
He may well be wrong.
Scottish socialism is a timid beast, and its blood runs thin.
For this reason Secretary of State Ian Lang is finding that his threat of ‘Caledonia: the new Albania’ makes no flesh creep.
Labour claims that the Tories and the SNP need each other: the Lib Dems, the party of PR, which in Scotland actually benefits most from what Mr Ashdown condemns as ‘our unfair voting system’, agree.
Perhaps they are right, though the SNP has now taken to calling Labour ‘Tartan Tories’, a jibe once more fairly directed at them.
So the Tories are the only party left unequivocally defending the Union.
That assures them of a bedrock of support.
Nevertheless, even fervent Unionists concede that the worst thing for the Union might be another Conservative government with even fewer Scottish seats.
The nightmare vision is: down to three or four, with one of them still held by Sir Nicholas Fairbairn — try staffing the Scottish Office with that.
Then, whatever Miss MacPherson's morals, she might have all us Unionists singing ‘The Flowers of the Forest’.
‘There's an end to an auld sang,’ said Lord Chancellor Seafield when the Scottish Parliament dissolved itself in 1707.
The Unionist fear is that we may be on the last verse of another.
Letter to the Editor: Odd socs
IT LOOKS like farewell to the National Ferret Welfare Association, the Legion of Frontiersmen of the Commonwealth, and the Association of Hand Made Cheeses of Scotland.
These institutions are among some 200 ‘unverified and lost’, and so excluded from the 11th edition of the Directory of British Associations, just out.
‘We do our best to hunt them down, but eventually accept defeat,’ says Chris Henderson, who helps edit the biennial volume from Beckenham, Kent.
A family concern, the directory (a snip at £115) is also mourning the loss of the Federation of British Kipperers, the Lard Association, and the British Experimental Aircraft Association.
‘On the upside we do get some new associations to replace the old,’ says Henderson, who is happy to welcome the Anglo-Mongolian Society, among others.
‘People try to take us for a ride from time to time.
There is a couple in north London who keep presenting us with ‘new’ organisations.
One of their latest was OBEL, the Organisation of British Objectors to Elections.
It didn't actually exist, although they'd probably get swarms of people prepared to join it just now if they tried.’
A system that no-one loves Now that proportional representation has become a possibility here, Ambrose Evans-Pritchard and Robin Lee examine its track record in Europe
By ABROSE EVANS-PRITCHARD and ROBIN LEE
PADDY Ashdown has warned that the Liberal Democrats will not join a coalition with either Labour or the Tories in the event of a hung Parliament, unless one agrees to introduce proportional representation.
John Major has refused to deal.
Neil Kinnock has offered an elusive maybe.
With the polls now pointing to a Labour minority government, the question of PR can no longer be treated as an academic abstraction.
If the Liberal Democrats were to get their way, it would amount to the biggest change in our system of government since the 1832 Reform Bill.
The chief attraction of PR is fairness.
It would ensure that the vote of every citizen had equal weight.
It would allow small parties to gain a footing in the legislature, which would tend to promote coalition governments and avoid the radical swings that have characterised British politics since the Second World War.
By spreading power across a wider spectrum it would also make it less likely that any one region, such as Scotland, would find itself being governed by a party that it had rejected by huge margins at the polls.
Mr Ashdown makes a further claim for PR.
He says that it has been the foundation of Europe's post-war success, the implication being that we must adopt the same system in Britain if we are to become a modern, prosperous nation.
Is this proposition really true?
GERMANY THE SHOWCASE for PR is Germany, which has enjoyed stable coalition governments for much of the post-war era.
Since 1969 the centrist Free Democrats have held the balance of power in the Bundestag.
They have formed successive alliances with the two main parties of left and right, using their position to maintain continuity.
However, it is only a partial PR system.
Half the seats are contested on a constituency basis, and parties have to clear a five per cent hurdle to get a seat.
But some argue that the German system has serious defects.
Dr Mark Almond, lecturer in Modern History at Oriel College, Oxford, makes the point that the centre party, though only supported by 11 per cent of the vote, has controlled the foreign and economics ministries for the last generation.
These have become party fiefdoms.
For example, Hans Dietrich Genscher has been Foreign Minister for the last 18 years.
Secondly, the voting system puts patronage in the hands of the elite in each party.
Chancellor Kohl can intimidate mavericks in his Christian Democrat party by threatening to move their names down on the electoral list, exposing them to the risk of defeat at the polls.
It is a system which makes change difficult and leads to stagnation.
It is also misleading to judge Germany by its post-war experience alone.
Otto von Habsburg, the Habsburg heir and now a Euro-MP for Bavaria, argues that Hitler's National Socialists would never have gained power if the Weimar Republic had adopted the British voting system after the First World War.
PR may work well in times of prosperity but the real test for a constitutional system comes in times of turbulence, social change, and economic slumps.
FRANCE FRANCE abolished PR for the legislature in 1986 after Jean-Marie Le Pen's National Front stunned the nation by winning 33 seats in the previous election.
Under the new system he has only one seat.
President Mitterrand now wants to return to PR, apparently for party advantage.
Frequent tinkering with the system has been a feature of politics in France, where it is possible to change the constitution by simple majority.
In the view of many observers this has undermined the authority of the Fifth Republic, which some doubt will endure at all.
ITALY POST-WAR Italian governments have lasted an average of one year.
Behind the appearance of instability, however, the centre-right Christian Democrats have never lost their grip on power.
By constantly shuffling alliances with smaller satellite parties they have been able to prevent the left from taking office.
This pattern may now be changing.
The recent collapse of the Communist Party, which used to win a third of the votes, has taken away the vital ingredient of fear that held the system together.
The effect of Christian Democrat hegemony for four and a half decades has been the perpetual incumbency of a small circle of politicians.
This ruling caste has come to rely on Italy's huge public sector as a patronage machine for rewarding friends and supporters, a system that not only leads to corruption but also acts as a break on much needed free market reforms.
Yesterday's elections showed that there is now a widespread cynicism about the political system.
A quarter of the vote in the North went to the Lombard League, which has called for the establishment of an independent north Italian state unless Rome puts its house in order.
An increasing number of Italians now want to adopt a British first-past-the-post system so that there can be a periodic clean sweep, of the kind Britain experienced in 1964 and 1979.
Last year Italians voted in a referendum for changes to the voting system that would weaken the control of the party elites.
A growing number of influential voices are calling for a more radical move away from pure PR.
BELGIUM LAST WEEK John Major pointed to Belgium as a cautionary tale of what can happen under PR.
It took the country 100 days to form a government after the elections last November, when a surge of votes for maverick parties — the Greens on the left, and the Flemish nationalist Vlaams Blok on the far right — deprived the ruling coalition of its majority.
Belgium has a history of unstable governments.
This may help to explain why the country has a national debt of about 120 per cent of GNP, one of the highest in the world, compared to a modest 35 per cent in Britain.
A study in the October edition of Economic Policy shows that there is a remarkable correlation between huge national debts and the purer forms of proportional representation.
This is because coalition partners in a fragmented system demand public spending for pet schemes as the price for their support.
‘It's so hard to change the status quo that borrowing is always the easy way out in the short term,’ says Guido Tabellini, Professor of Economics at the University of Brescia.
EAST EUROPE THE EXPERIENCE of Eastern Europe is also revealing.
Mr Ashdown, in a speech last week, made the point that all the post-communist democracies installed PR instead of the British system of voting.
However, many already regret their choice, especially in Poland where PR has tempted factions of Solidarity to break off and go it alone as independent parties.
In the elections last October no fewer than 29 parties gained seats in the lower house.
This has led to parliamentary deadlock.
President Walesa has been unable to form a stable government, usually because one or more of the coalition partners have been unwilling to share responsibility for unpopular economic policies.
OVERALL, few political scientists would argue that PR is a self-evidently superior system.
It often has unintended consequences.
It leads to opaque government, where parties engage in horsetrading.
Politicians often lose touch with the people because they lack intimate constituency contact.
The British system has quirks and can be unfair.
But defenders argue that the British electorate has a very clear understanding of how it is governed.
As they go to the polls the voters know what package of compromises they are voting for.
From time to time they lose patience and sweep aside decadent governments.
The fact that they can do this is perhaps the chief reason why Britain's constitutional arrangements have stood the test of centuries.
Peterborough: The wise men
THE late Earl Spencer chose his executors with a keen sense of balance.
They are Viscount Coke (pronounced Cook), John Partridge and Hugo Southern: one landowner, one art expert and one legal brain to help the new Earl settle in.
Coke, heir to the Earl of Leicester, farms 26,000 acres at Holkham, Norfolk, next to Sandringham.
Cokes have long moved in Royal circles, and he is well placed to advise the new Earl Spencer on estate affairs and any more delicate matters.
Partridge, meanwhile, who has a gallery in Bond Street, was in charge of restoration work at Althorp in the 1980s.
He was also at Harrow with Southern, the Spencer family's solicitor for more than 30 years, who tells me: ‘The will is quite straightforward and there is not much unravelling to do.’
RAF Church Fenton near York is to close this month after 55 years.
It will be remembered by old Spitfire pilots for its boggy runway and dense fog.
Planes regularly sank into the soggy ground, tipping on to their noses and bending propellers.
The blades, twisted like tentacles, were then dumped in the corner of the field, near a hangar, which of course swiftly became known as the Octopus Den.
Peterborough:
APPEALING to instincts other than, perhaps, raw politics, the Labour party will wheel out the ‘heart throb’ actor Alan Rickman (above left) in Chelsea on Thursday to boost the chances of its candidate, Rima Horton.
Rickman, the thinking woman's Anthony Andrews, is only doing his duty: he and Miss Horton (above right) step out together.
‘It wouldn't have been fair on Alan to ask him to canvass for me before.
He's got such a famous face,’ says Miss Horton, an economics lecturer at Kingston Polytechnic, who may struggle to dent Nicholas Scott's 13,319 majority.
‘I might have produced Alan before if it was more of a marginal seat.
But he may sway the odd wavering voter on polling day.’
Miss Horton has already enlisted ‘celebrity’ Labour supporters such as Lord Longford, Lord Williams of Elvel, Baroness Ewart-Biggs and author Ken Follett.
Rickman, star of Close My Eyes, Truly Madly Deeply and Robin Hood, may be a trump card, although Miss Horton should bear in mind that the convivial, once dashing Scott also has his female admirers in the well-appointed mansion blocks off Cheyne Walk.
Personal View: A brave deed in a shabby world
By GEOFFREY WHEATCROFT
OBLIGED to vote (if at all) in an English seat, I wish I had a vote in Northern Ireland, especially in North Down.
There are plenty of other reasons for wanting to live there, with Carlingford Lough in one direction and the Mountains of Mourne in another: the physical beauty of Ulster is a secret as well-kept as the undemonstrative friendliness of its people.
But to live there means also the opportunity to vote for a particular party, whose quixotry and honesty have touched me.
The Northern Ireland Conservatives have a principle and a resolution which you have to look hard for among the parties on ‘mainland’ Great Britain.
This party is in fact a reproach to British political system.
The NI Tories are standing in several constituencies apart from North Down where their candidate is Dr Laurence Kennedy, the animating spirit of the party.
They are now recognised as a branch of the British Conservative and Unionist Party, but only thanks to a peasants' revolt within that party, and no thanks at all to the mandarins of Central Office.
The point about them is that, uniquely in the Province, they are both Unionist and resolutely non-sectarian.
There is a lot to be said against the politics of Left-and-Right.
But even Labour v Tories is better than a party-political system which depends on religion, and an accident of birth.
Whom do you vote for in Ulster if you are a Roman Catholic Tory — and such people do after all exist?
You have a choice of dark green Sinn Fein, pale green SDLP, and two shades of Orange.
And there is no pretending that these are anything but sectarian.
‘Unionist’ has long been a misnomer for both parties of that name in the Province, which are Protestant first and Unionist second.
Some of their enthusiasts in fact fit Mr Enoch Powell's phrase, ‘Protestant Sinn Fein’.
For that matter, whom do you vote for in Ulster if you are a Protestant and a Socialist?
They exist also, and know better than anyone how contemptible is Labour's attitude to Northern Ireland.
The party refuses to organise in Ulster, effectively abandoning the Protestant working class to Orange jingoism.
And Labour's official policy is ‘a united Ireland by consent’.
The only thing to be said to that was said eight years ago by Michael Kinsley, a Washington journalist, when the Democrats had the same plank in their platform for the American elections.
As Mr Kinsley put it, they should have had another plank: ‘A united Ireland through consent’ should have been followed by ‘cheaper air fares through the abolition of gravity’.
Not that the Conservatives — that is, the London government — are much better.
Their manifesto says that the government ‘will continue to work strenuously for a political solution acceptable to all parties’, which is to say for a gravitational system in which apples fall upwards.
There can't be such a solution.
There can, of course, be talks.
Mr Brooke invited to his round table both the Ulster Unionists and the Democratic Unionists, along with the centrist Alliance, and the SDLP (who have been the intended beneficiaries of the whole exercise since the Anglo-Irish Agreement — the actual beneficiaries have been the IRA).
He invited, that is, every constitutional party in the Province except the one party which is non-sectarian, which supports the Union, and which is linked to his own governing party in London.
As the Americans say, go figure.
Well, actually it isn't difficult to figure if you have followed the story so far.
Mrs Thatcher once said that Northern Ireland was as British as Finchley, but the actions of her Government and her successor's have consistently belied that.
At the last general election, the section on Northern Ireland in the Tory manifesto would have appeared under the heading ‘foreign affairs’ if someone hadn't noticed it in proof at the last moment.
It was a wonderful politico-Freudian slip: London has indeed treated Northern Ireland as a foreign or colonial problem, looking for almost every ‘solution’ along the lines proconsuls and diplomatists have practised across the globe these past decades.
The one thing the government won't even try is to treat the Province as an integral part of the United Kingdom.
And it is this which explains the London Tories' prolonged, teeth-gritting reluctance to recognise their Ulster colleagues.
‘Ulster Unionists’ can be patronised as fractious tribesmen; Northern Ireland Conservatives might expect to be treated as equals.
Laurence Kennedy has gently teased the government, wondering why Mr Major's brave defence of the principle of Union between England and Scotland doesn't apply to Northern Ireland as well.
His party is a protest: against the sectarianising of politics in Ulster, and against the treatment of the Province as a colony by London.
It is a brave deed in a shabby world.
Obituary of Sir Joseph Burke
SIR JOSEPH BURKE, who has died aged 78, was Professor of Fine Arts at Melbourne University for more than three decades, before which he had been a member of Attlee's secretariat at 10 Downing Street.
It was the Second World War that plucked ‘Joe’ Burke from the tranquil backwaters of aesthetics to the whirlpools and rapids of government administration.
In 1939 he joined the Ministry of Home Security, and served as private secretary to three Lords President of the Council in succession — Sir John Anderson, Clement Attlee and Lord Woolton.
After Labour won the 1945 election, Burke accompanied Attlee to the Potsdam Conference; and later that year the Prime Minister named him as one of his private secretaries.
But Burke served no more than eight months.
In 1946 he became Professor of Fine Arts at Melbourne, Australia's first such Chair, which he occupied for 32 years.
There was scarcely a branch of Australian art to which Burke did not make a contribution, through research, criticism, personal contact with artists, and as a member of countless boards, committees and trusts.
He played a vital role in setting up the Australian National Trust, and was president of the Australian Academy of the Humanities.
Joseph Terence Anthony Burke was born on July 14 1913 and educated at Ealing Priory School and King's College, London, where he subsequently taught the history of art before becoming assistant keeper at the Victoria and Albert Museum in 1938.
His particular interest was in 18th century painting.
His books included Hogarth and Reynolds: A Contrast in English Art Theory (1943); an edition of Hogarth's Analysis of Beauty and Autobiographical Notes (1955); Hogarth: The Complete Engravings (with Colin Caldwell, 1968); and volume IX of the Oxford History of English Art, 1714-1800 (1976).
He also contributed articles to the Burlington Magazine, the Warburg Journal and other periodicals.
‘Joe’ Burke was regarded in Australia as very much the English gentleman.
He was tall and elegant, with a good head of hair, and was much given to pacing about.
A courteous man, he had an expression that he used for all seasons —‘Lovely!
Splendid!
Bless you!’
For relaxation he golfed, swam, and walked.
Obituary of Bill Smith
BILL SMITH, who has died aged 68, was the first man in Britain to adopt aggressive American-style methods in retailing remaindered books.
Smith saw the opportunity to do for books what Jack Cohen had done for groceries at Tesco's —‘Pile 'em high and sell 'em cheap.’
Remaindering was rather a dirty word in the book trade, and those involved were known as ‘vultures’ and ‘scavengers’.
Smith argued that where a print run — or more likely a reprint — had left hundreds or thousands of unsold copies, it made sense in times of crippling warehouse costs and tight cash flows to unload slow-selling stock.
Where a book might originally sell at £15, Smith might buy it for £1.50 and sell it at £5.50 — a profit was turned, and the public benefited.
William George Smith was born at Southampton on Nov 4 1923, son of a Merchant Navy engineer who had accompanied Shackleton on his journey to the Antarctic.
Smith flew with the RAF at the end of the war in India and was a navigator in the aeroplane which flew Lord Mountbatten around the country when he was the last Viceroy.
After a decade or so as a librarian, and a spell as editor of Books and Bookman in the 1960s, Smith travelled around America with a suitcase full of samples of remaindered copies, which he sold to bargain book shops.
He picked up many of his ideas from this American sojourn, and on his return to London set up a string of shops.
His flagship, in St Martin's Lane, was the first shop to experiment successfully with the then heretical idea of staying open until 8pm.
It closed only last Christmas, when the lease expired.
His brightly-lit London ‘bookmarts’ provided wire baskets at the entrance, and the young sales staff sported T-shirts printed with the firm's logo.
In partnership with the Australian bookseller Max Harris — and latterly with Fred Bass of New York — Smith went on to establish Bibliophile, a sort of book club for remaindered books.
He also organised special print runs with publishers of such relatively slow-selling classic titles as A P Herbert's Uncommon Law and Hilaire Belloc's Cautionary Tales, and so enabled publishers to keep otherwise uneconomic editions in print.
‘Another great book saved,’ Smith would say.
Smith was working at the High Commission in India when he met and married his wife, Isa, who survives him.
Obituary of Maj-Gen Michael Skinner
MAJOR-GENERAL Michael Skinner, who has died aged 60, was Director General, Weapons, from 1986 to 1988, when many important decisions were taken on the future equipment of the Army.
With the Malayan campaign and three tours in Northern Ireland behind him, Skinner knew just what the Army's requirements were, and as far as possible ensured they were met.
He brought the same sense of duty to his various roles in retirement, as a lay canon, chapter clerk and Comptroller of Rochester Cathedral.
Michael Timothy Skinner was born at Lee, London, on Aug 5 1931 and educated at Merchant Taylors' School, Mons Officer Cadet School and Sandhurst.
Commissioned into the Royal Artillery in 1953, he served with 62 Heavy Anti-Aircraft Regiment at Lincoln.
He was then posted as a troop commander to 1st Regiment RA at Singapore, where he was mentioned in despatches for his timely use of 3.7-inch guns in the fight against Communist terrorists.
On leaving Malaya, Skinner joined the 33rd Parachute Light Regiment, RA, at Aldershot, as a troop commander; in 1960 he went as Adjutant to 95th Amphibious Operations Regiment, RA, in Malta.
The next year he also served for six weeks in Kuwait, with the 2nd Battalion of the Parachute Regiment, to counter an Iraqi threat.
He returned to Britain in 1964, as a student at the Royal Military College of Science, Shrivenham, before joining the course at the Staff College at Camberley.
He was then posted to the Royal Radar Research Establishment at Malvern as a technical staff officer.
In 1969 he became a battery commander in the 47th Light Regiment, RA, at Yeovil, though four months of this period were spent on an emergency tour with 4th Battery in Belfast.
From 1971 to 1972 he was at Woolwich as a technical staff officer, and then took command of 4th Field Regiment, RA, in Northern Ireland.
Skinner continued in that appointment at Munsterlager and Catterick, before returning for a third tour in Northern Ireland, during which he was again mentioned in despatches.
His next posting, in 1975, took him to the Ministry of Defence, where he remained until his retirement in 1988.
Most of that period was spent on the secretariat of the Master General of Ordnance, with the task of examining the needs and procurement of various weapons, including tank main armaments.
Michael Skinner was a brilliant staff officer, with the great advantage of personal and successful experience in the field.
When he commanded 4th Field Regiment in Northern Ireland in 1974 the regiment was awarded four Queen's Gallantry Medals and four Commander-in-Chief's commendations; it also recovered more weapons than any other unit serving in Belfast up to that time.
He believed firmly in working hard and playing hard and was an enthusiastic gamesplayer; he was also keenly aware of the need for the Army to become part of the community it serves.
His recreations were travel, opera, roses and collecting campaign medals.
Skinner married, in 1959, Anne Perry; they had three sons.
City: O&Y rail £40m
CANARY Wharf developer Olympia & York hopes, by the end of the week, to have reached agreement for the payment of the first £40m of its contribution to the extension of the London Underground Jubilee line into Docklands.