

Gambler's spree after bank error
An office cleaner went on a betting spree after a TSB error gave him a £10,000 bank overdraft, Liverpool Crown Court was told yesterday.
By the error was discovered Geoffrey Holden was overdrawn by £9,960.
Holden, 48, of Lyme Close, Knowsley, was given a nine-month sentence, suspended for two years, after admitting three specimen theft offences and asking for 48 others, spanning six months, to be considered.
Wednesday Matters: The tyranny of the school trip TRAVEL
Teachers like it and pupils love it, but parents dread the prospect of yet another tour of faraway places, says Nicola Tyrer
By NICOLA TYRER
ONCE upon a time, a school trip meant a week under canvas in Wales or, if it was especially adventurous, a visit across the Channel.
By today's yardstick these forages seem quaintly parochial.
In the opinion of some schools, even the annual skiing trip is old hat.
These days the top schools send their cricket and rugby teams to Africa, New Zealand and the West Indies; the school choir may tour Japan, while geography and biology pupils go on fact-finding expeditions anywhere from the jungles of Borneo to the Himalayas.
Few would dispute that travel broadens the mind, but with basic school fees at the top independent boarding schools at around £10,000 a year and some of these trips costing as much as £2,000, many hard-pressed parents admit they have come to dread the arrival of the letter informing them that the cricket 1st XI is to visit Zimbabwe.
Of course, these trips are not compulsory, but as one Eton parent put it: ‘Few parents would want to deny their child the opportunity to play for the school under these circumstances.’
Moreover, since teachers usually travel free, there is a sneaking suspicion that many exotic trips owe their genesis less to the intrinsic fascination of the flora and fauna than to the fact that the geography master has always wanted to visit Thailand.
A disgruntled father whose two sons have been on several skiing fortnights feels school trips are run primarily for the teachers' convenience.
‘It cost £500 and I really can't see what my boys got out of it.
By the time the masters had recovered from the apres ski and had their lie-in, the boys only managed about two hours’ skiing a day.’
Many parents, increasingly pressed to meet school fees, say they would rather the trips were not on offer than have to explain yet again to their children that they can't join their friends on this once-in-a-lifetime trip.
The schools vigorously defend the trips.
They point out that in many cases they are not only far cheaper than the same holiday bought through a travel agent, but also often offer a unique experience in leadership, endurance and community service.
Jeremy Woodhouse is Registrar at Marlborough, which has led a number of ambitious expeditions, including a six-week stint living 10,000 ft up Mount Kenya helping local people with projects.
‘The benefits delivered by a trip like this are considerable.
It offers adventure, contacts and understanding of other cultures and the opportunity of standing up to pressure.
It would be different if a school was making parents feel morally obliged to find these extras for their children, but we do not.
We are very aware of what it is costing parents to send children here.
‘I am deeply impressed by the self-sacrificial dedication of parents.
I think many feel that if one is going to make the sacrifice that is required in the first place then one accepts that there will be other things one will want one's child to benefit from — even if it means tightening one's belt for an extra month.’
Many of the masters who lead the trips, and therefore either travel free or at a reduced rate, are surprised that so many parents can still afford further-flung expeditions.
A master at Millfield — who admitted that destinations were often chosen because a member of staff was keen to go there — said: ‘There are still enough takers to justify organising these trips.
I believe that the vast majority of our parents are struggling.
But it seems there are some that still have plenty of money.’
David Livingstone, a geography master at Rugby who led an expedition to Borneo, said: ‘It was a memorable trip which will give the pupils tremendous confidence in the way they tackle travel as adults.
They discovered that you don't need to book into the Sheraton Hotel to visit a country.
But it was expensive.
I'm amazed parents can afford it on top of the fees.
Next year's trip to Kenya costs even more — £2,200.’
Sporting tours, where the whole team is expected to visit Australia or the West Indies, place the biggest burden on parents.
Some schools say they have an emergency fund they can dip into if family finances are really tight.
Others say simply that market forces must prevail.
Many schools have team members in reserve so that a quota can always be mustered to stand in for any bona fide team member whose parents cannot afford the trip.
Roedean is planning a hockey and cricket tour of South Africa next year at an estimated £1,200 a head.
Even though it hopes a third of this will be raised through sponsorship, the school is aware that some parents will still not be able to meet the cost.
A 20-strong squad is available to ensure that 11 girls will be able to go.
Other schools, however, reject this as unsporting.
At Sherborne, the philosophy is that if it is a team trip then the whole team must be able to go.
The sailing team recently undertook a trip to New England which cost parents the princely sum of £7.
The balance came from a combination of money raised by the boys — through bring-and-buy events, house-to-house sales of old books, and sponsored parachute jumps — and generous sponsorship from Coca-Cola Japan.
Sue Francis, a spokeswoman for the school, said: ‘This was unusually well sponsored.
Despite the recession we have never had any trouble getting money from industry.
One has the impression that many companies have money set aside for sponsorship, but don't often get asked.’
Many parents, for whom the basic school fees already represent a considerable personal investment in the future, would welcome this contribution.
Wednesday Matters: It's back to school for Russian wives.
Fiona Fleck visits the class of ‘92 who are turning on the charm by rediscovering their femininity
By FIONA FLECK
ASINGLE red rose seemed a fitting image for Katerina Sobchak's Ladies’ School of Charm.
Poised in a glass bottle, the flower looked unruffled under the neon strip-lights in a draughty sixth-form college room, where the classes are held.
Sobchak, 37, thrice married and a professional psychologist, opened the school in Moscow three years ago, developing her own dynamic style of group therapy.
The school has nothing in common with the old finishing schools for daughters of the party elite.
Neither is it an image-building centre capable of transforming politicians and public figures.
It is more concerned with the personal problems of today's Russian women.
The clientele, aged between 17 and 60, are mainly professional women with one thing in common: a desire to rediscover their femininity.
The main tenet of Sobchak's philosophy is that a woman should never forget to be a woman.
She believes that the emancipation of Soviet women after the 1917 Revolution was a catastrophe because it distorted their feminine psyche and behaviour.
‘Since the Revolution, women have been obliged, by law, to do the same work as men.
At the same time they took responsibility for the home,’ she says.
‘Our women are constantly having to fight in shop queues, and have thus become aggressive and unfeminine.
As soon as a woman takes the dominant role, that is when things start to go wrong.’
In short, her aim is to redress the natural balance and harmony between the sexes.
Three years ago, having worked as a psychologist for 10 years and become disillusioned with traditional psychotherapy, Sobchak opened Russia's first Ladies' School of Charm as an experiment.
The two-week course has become so popular that there is a six-month waiting list.
She is now planning a series for Russian television.
Her classes are held evenings and weekends, cost 1,000 roubles (£8) and teach women to examine the nuances of body language and conversation with men.
They act out their role in a number of scenarios with an actor, such as meeting for the first time, attracting the man's attention, and putting him off the trail.
Sobchak demonstrates how, with grace and elegance, a woman can let the man take off her coat; how to be coquettish, without being vulgar, and betray interest without immediate surrender.
The women are guided in fashion, deportment and etiquette classes: ‘We are not trying to mould clients into an image of Miss Perfect,’ she adds.
‘We do not encourage them to follow fashions blindly, but suggest a set of variations which expresses their individuality.’
Recently when one girl, in her end-of-term questionnaire, wrote that after the course she ‘no longer felt afraid to be a sexually attractive woman’, Sobchak claimed her greatest triumph.
‘Shortly after the Revolution there was a decree prohibiting any sexually provocative behaviour on the part of a woman,’ says Sobchak.
‘Even after the war, in Soviet films, the attractive woman who wore lipstick and beautiful clothes was always the negative heroine.’
Sobchak claims the results are sometimes astounding.
‘When husbands come to fetch their wives after school, they gasp ‘what have you done with my wife, she has become so gentle!’’
Peterborough: Flame flickers
A FIZZING torpedo is heading in the direction of Juan Antonio Samaranch, president of the International Olympic Committee.
Samaranch, who became a senior civil servant in Franco's Spain, is being accused of a long-standing involvement with a Spanish fascist movement.
Vyv Simson and Andrew Jennings have written a book, The Lords of the Rings, which carries photographs of Samaranch wearing, they claim, the uniform of the fascist organisation Movimiento.
One seems to show Samaranch being sworn in as a national councillor in 1967.
‘In his own words,’ the authors write, ‘Samaranch was ‘one hundred per cent Francoist’.’
Jennings asks: ‘How can a man who was a fascist run an organisation which is supposed to be non-discriminatory?’
Samaranch was in Russia on Olympic business yesterday and could not be reached to rebut the allegations in person.
But an aide in his office in Lausanne, Switzerland, said: ‘The allegations won't damage him.
He was never at the top of politics.’
Samaranch has received a fairly agreeable press since becoming IOC president in 1980.
Typical comments have included ‘a man of impeccable diplomatic credentials’.
In 1988, when he was awarded the Seoul Peace Prize he announced the cash award of £180,000 would help establish an Olympic Museum in Lausanne near the committee's headquarters.
But Jennings passes this off as evidence of ‘a desire for immortality’.
Peterborough: Time for field sports to reshuffle the pack
PERHAPS the only group to have fought a less impressive general election campaign than the Conservative party is the field sports lobby.
Anti-hunting groups have seized the initiative, organising newspaper advertisements and urging parliamentary candidates to run with the ‘anti’ pack.
Meanwhile, little has been heard from the fragmented pro-hunting campaign.
I now hear that John Hopkinson, director of the British Field Sports Society, is to surrender his responsibilities.
The timing of his departure has yet to be decided.
Yesterday saw Hopkinson in sad, frustrated mood, attacking the ‘complacency’ among many field sportsmen and bewailing the lack of support he has received over the past seven years.
‘There are insufficient sportsmen who appreciate that they will lose their sports and the whole fabric of life in the country,’ he said.
Regrettably, the feeling has been mutual — Hopkinson, courteous, if mild-mannered, has many detractors.
He is the victim, perhaps, of the splintering of the pro-hunting lobby.
In the words of one observer: ‘There are far too many organisations trying to save hunting.
They are making a thoroughly poor fist of it, and many people have virtually given up.’
Fingers are also pointed at the Society's two tame MPs, Michael Colvin and Sir Nicholas Bonsor.
‘They should have spoken up more during the election campaign,’ adds a critic.
Perhaps the only good news for hunting people is the impressive progress of Edmund Vestey, new chairman of the Campaign for Hunting and chairman-elect of the Masters of Foxhounds Association.
Vestey undertook with the Society — misguidedly — to play no part in the election campaign for tactical reasons.
But he now hopes, as soon as the general election is out of the way, to unite the various pro-hunting campaigns.
‘People are confused at the moment,’ he says.
‘We have to sit down and consider that.
There is an immense educational job to be done.’
152 mph coupe
A new type of turbocharger has boosted the top speed of the Vauxhall Calibra Turbo 4x4 to 152 mph.
New Zealand lead for Grandmaster Miles
By Malcolm Pein
TONY MILES, the first Englishman to qualify for the Grandmaster title, now holds the joint lead after six rounds of the Netway Masters in Auckland, New Zealand.
Miles' sixth round win over International Master Vernon Small of New Zealand brought him to 5/6, equal with the untitled Ben Martin of Australia.
Miles and Martin are likely to be joined by Grandmaster Ian Rogers of Australia, who holds a clear advantage in his adjourned game against Martin.
Round 6 results: Dreyer DRAW Garbett; Miles 1-0 Small; Wallace 0-1 Noble; Metge 0-1 Levi; Sarfati 1-0 Sarapu.
Latest scores: Martin 5 + 1 adj; Miles 5; Rogers 4 + 1 adj; Garbett 4; Sarfati & Levi 3; Small & Noble 2.5; Dreyer 2; Sarapu & Wallace 1.5; Metge 1.
Staffordshire decisively won the Midlands County Chess Union Championships, defeating Leicestershire 14.5-5.5 in the final.
The following game was the best from the event:
Way of the World: Dog lovers unite
By AUBERON WAUGH
HOWEVER confident we pretend to be that the Conservatives will be returned with a majority of at least 25, we must accept the possibility that this gesticulating Welsh oaf will hold centre-stage until such time as the economy, public order and constitution collapse about his ears.
There is a certain silliness around in the country.
When I sternly remind my dear Wife (a Liberal supporter) that a vote for the Liberal Democrats is a vote for Adultery, she agrees enthusiastically.
This is not at all her normal line on the subject.
While all this talk of constitutional change is in the air — Kinnock proposes to abolish the House of Lords and dismember the United Kingdom, as well as to forbid the whole country from hunting — I wonder if I may make a proposal.
Many parents of grown-up children find it odd, not to say unfair, that while their children are allowed to vote, their pekingeses (or other dogs) are not.
In fact pekingeses have a much more robust and independent attitude to life than many young people.
If they and other dogs had the vote, they would see off these foolish and disagreeable animal sentimentalists who wish to forbid hunting, in the twinkling of an eye.
From the ruins which Kinnock leaves, a new national order and constitution must emerge.
Progressive taxation must be outlawed for all time; educational qualifications for jurors must be introduced; the voting age must be raised to 21 and suffrage extended to dogs of three years or more, subject to simple intelligence tests.
Racing: Arazi confirms superstar status
By HOTSPUR (J A McGrath) at Saint-Cloud, France
ARAZI returned to the racecourse as if he had never left at Saint-Cloud yesterday, cruising home by five lengths in the Prix Omnium II.
He is now best-priced 5-4 favourite for the Kentucky Derby, on May 2, and as low as Even-money ‘with a run’ to take Epsom's Ever Ready Derby.
The Blushing Groom colt never had a moment's worry on the soft ground, sitting in fifth position until straightening for home and then powering away from his rivals inside the two-furlong marker.
The winning distance was conservative considering his clear superiority.
Now the sky is the limit, it appears, for Arazi, who heads next for the Kentucky Derby, at Churchill Downs.
His performance in that race will determine whether he remains in America for the Triple Crown or returns to Europe for a crack at the Derby at Epsom on June 3.
‘If he was only 60 per cent today, he is going to be awesome,’ said proud joint-owner Allen Paulson after the race.
‘After the Kentucky Derby, we will make a decision on where he goes, but I'm a Yankee and that might give you a fair indication of where I'd like to see him run,’ he added.
If this brilliant colt attempts the Triple Crown, in Louisville, Maryland, and New York, it would be impossible for him to take in Epsom.
Clearly, if Arazi goes on winning — and there is every indication that he will — an almighty confrontation between Sheikh Mohammed and Paulson is likely.
Significantly, despite his huge investment in bloodstock, Sheikh Mohammed has never won the Epsom Derby and the pressure will be on to have this exceptional three-year-old line up for the world's most famous Classic.
Steve Cauthen, having his first race ride on Arazi yesterday, described him as a suitable type for Epsom.
‘He's very agile and very well-balanced.
I've seen all kinds of horses win around Epsom as long as they are travelling well,’ Cauthen said.
‘I've ridden a lot of good horses, but this is the first one I would maybe compare with Affirmed.
I can't see any horse beating him in the Kentucky Derby.
‘There is no problem settling him; he is very like Affirmed, as he can switch on and off.
As soon as he hits the front, he doesn't pull up but he relaxes, and today he wasn't really doing much in the last furlong.’
Cauthen was very obviously impressed and excited by this first outing in Arazi's three-year-old campaign.
However, American Pat Valenzuela is booked for the Kentucky Derby ride.
‘I just hope that Arazi comes back to Europe soon,’ said Cauthen.
‘Who knows?
Pat might get sick before the race,’ he added with a grin.
The significant features of Arazi's victory over Supermec and River Majesty were that the knee operation carried out last November appeared to have no effects and, this time, the colt was not racing on medication, as he had been when winning the Breeders' Cup Juvenile.
The race itself was uneventful for Arazi as his two pacemakers, Carson Bay and Akiko, made the early running, and led the field into the home straight.
There, Arazi asserted his superiority, prompting Corals to quote him 4-1 to complete the Kentucky-Epsom Derby double.
Trainer Francois Boutin said he had no worries about Arazi staying one and a half miles.
Boutin added that, in his opinion, Arazi was a ‘more intelligent horse’ than Nijinsky, whose temperament was often a factor.
‘After this race, I am sure Arazi will be 100 per cent for his trip to Kentucky.
I expect him to improve another 30 per cent,’ said Boutin.
Paulson obviously has mixed feelings about selling 50 per cent of Arazi to Sheikh Mohammed, although he described their arrangement ‘a very good partnership’.
It remains to be seen, though, whether the cordial relationship which exists lasts when the decision on the colt's next race has to be made after Kentucky.
Racing: Quick Opinion is Best
QUICK OPINION*, who failed by the narrowest margin to open his account at the fifth attempt when a short-priced favourite at Nottingham, may make amends in the Fairview New Homes Novice Chase (2.30) at Ascot, writes Course Correspondent.
Nicky Henderson's gelding rallied after being headed on the flat by Rio Haina in that two-and-three-quarter-mile event, and judged on that game performance, should not be unduly troubled by today's extra two furlongs.
Golden Arctic may initiate a double for Henderson in the Lily Tree Novice Hurdle (2.00); King Credo is expected to complete his four-timer in the Trillium Handicap Hurdle (3.40) and Relekto is preferred to Wall Game in the Mahonia Hunter Chase (4.45).
Racing: New landmark for Pipe
By Tony Stafford
THE PARTICIPATION of Grand Frere in the opening race at Ludlow today may hardly seem epoch making, but he will propel Martin Pipe to yet another landmark.
Pipe, well clear of his rival trainers in both winners and prize-money, breaks new ground when Grand Frere becomes his 200th individual runner of the campaign.
In becoming the first trainer to reach that unlikely statistic, Pipe qualifies as a consummate organiser, supreme in attracting owners to send horses to his prolific winner-making factory.
Pipe has achieved ever-increasing tallies in each of the 14 years since he took out a licence.
Those increases have accompanied an ever-growing string.
But the signs are that the upward curve is levelling out.
Pipe stands on 170 winners from more than 660 runs, a strike rate of 26 per cent.
That highly-creditable figure reflects nonetheless a fall over each of the last two seasons.
In 1989-90 his 224 wins came at 35 per cent; in 1990-91 230 winners were at 29 per cent .
More revealing perhaps is the number of horses he ran during those two winters.
In 1989-90, Pipe utilised 149 horses to win those 224 races; last season 179 horses were pressed into action to achieve the record.
Prize-money, respectively, during those years was £792,000, followed by just over £1,200,000 last winter.
Now Pipe must be resigned to the fact that with just seven weeks of the season remaining and only 97 jump meetings left, he is out of reach of the latter figure with £784,000.
Two factors seem to have reduced the stable's earning power.
Pipe habitually farms minor races — around 20 per cent of his 170 victories have been in selling and claiming races — and cutbacks have been severe in this area.
Most other top trainers avoid such events.
Additionally, his failure to collect one of the top races — he remains without a win in the Champion Hurdle, Gold Cup and Grand National — have limited the stable's earning potential.
These figures, perhaps, go some way to dispute the widely-expressed view that Pipe is the greatest jump trainer in racing history.
Many will still regard Michael Dickinson's big-race achievements with a much smaller team in a considerably shorter time, as more impressive.
To put Pipe's season into perspective, the details of David Nicholson's year make an interesting comparison.
Although running just 77 individual horses, Nicholson has earned for his owners a total of £459,000 in prize-money.
That represents £5,960 per horse (compared with Pipe's £3,925).
And in terms of prize-money per run, Nicholson's owners have earned £1,525 compared with Pipe's £1,183.
There is no doubt that Pipe has taken the training of jump horses into an entirely different dimension.
But whether diminishing returns are taking an increasing effect is a pertinent conundrum.
Golf: Daly proves his clubbing power at the mighty 15th
By Michael Williams in Augusta
THE different strengths of Gary Wolstenholme and John Daly were never more evident as, at different times, they came to Augusta National's 15th hole, either the graveyard or throne of so many Masters.
Wostenholme, the Amateur champion, tall, debonair in his white fedora straw hat bearing the crest of Augusta and with all the ‘cut’ of his late father, Guy, pondered again the 500-yard hole across the pond, where Gene Sarazen made his albatross two in 1935.
‘There is,’ he said, ‘no way I can reach that green in two.
I would need another 40 yards off the tee to give myself any sort of chance.
It is a lay-up hole for me, a pitch-and-putt four at best.’
Daly, whose mighty hitting swept him to fairytale victory in last year's PGA Championship at Crooked Stick, played the same hole with a drive and eight-iron.
He was not quite on, but he was able to chip and putt for his four.
No-one had ever heard of such clubbing at this par-five before and the reputation of Daly was further enhanced, substantiating an earlier assessment by Jack Nicklaus.
‘You couldn't have had a golf course made for a man's game more than that golf course for John Daly,’ observed the man who has won more Masters than anyone, six all told and now playing his 34th in succession.
However, not everyone blinked.
When I recounted the tale to Steve Richardson, the blockbuster of the European last year and, like Daly, playing his first Masters, he quietly replied that he had played the same hole with a drive and seven-iron.
The other difference was that he was not only on the green in two but pin high.
The suggestion is that the extra 15 feet by which Augusta National has raised the net at the far end of the 260-yard practice ground was only done with Daly in mind.
He has still tried to clear it into Washington Road but failed.
Raymond Floyd, now in his 50th year and playing in his 28th consecutive Masters, was mainly concerned with the greens.
‘They are fiercer than they have been for years, right back to what they used to be,’ he said.
‘It is experience that is going to count for a lot,’ he forecast.
This is Floyd's favourite tournament, and one he won in 1976 when he equalled the Nicklaus record of 271 for the 72 holes.
Having won already this season on the main tour (as well as a senior event in Japan), he believes he has it in him to do so again, though not to wipe the slate clean after his defeat in a play-off against Nick Faldo in 1990.
‘The course owes me nothing,’ he said.
‘That shot I hit into the water at the 11th was my mistake and mine alone.’
Daly found one of the hardest tasks was getting into Augusta National.
‘There are so many gates I could not figure out where the clubhouse was,’ he said.
David Feherty, who, like Richardson, has received his first Masters invitation, had much the same experience.
‘I felt like I was escaping just to get in,’ he reflected after his taxi failed to turn up and he got a lift from a receptionist at his hotel.
He had lost his gate entry card and had to open the boot of the car to reveal his clubs as proof that he was a player.
Grudgingly, the Pinkerton guards let him in.
‘It was tougher than getting past the SAS,’ he said.
Taking it all in with an observant eye, Feherty called his first practice round with Ian Woosnam ‘a fantastic walk round a property that could well be owned by the National Trust’.
Everything about it exceeded expectation, though one of the things that struck him was that while the fairways are wide, the hitting area is in fact very narrow if there is to be a chance of attacking the flagsticks.
His description was that ‘it is easy to aim for the front room and find yourself in the kitchen’.
He had no previous conception of all the undulations and, particularly, the steepness of the 18th fairway which, as Curtis Strange has described it, is not dissimilar to standing halfway up the stairs with one foot on one step and the other on the next.
Feherty described the back nine as fraught with danger but equally full of opportunity.
‘I can see sixes and sevens just as easily I can visualise birdies,’ he said.
Asked what he would feel like if, on Sunday night, he found himself on the 18th tee tied for the lead, he replied that it could only be a ‘shattering experience’.
Contention on Sunday may be something of an idle dream.
Feherty is short of competitive golf, having had only four rounds (two missed cuts) in the past seven weeks.
His last 72 holes was in the Australian Masters.
He has tried to make amends with practice sessions with Bob Torrance in Largs and long talks with Alan Fine, the sports psychologist.
‘Don't be surprised to find me sitting on the tee in the lotus position,’ he warned.
While much of the European attention in the Masters has centred on Nick Faldo, Seve Ballesteros and Jose-Maria Olazabal, who is keeping very much to himself, Bernhard Langer has been going quietly on his way.
He was one of the earliest arrivals at Augusta, playing his first practice round on Saturday, which was a direct contradiction of a statement he made to the Augusta Chronical when he said he tried to treat the Masters like ‘any other tournament’.
Sam Snead, three times winner of the Masters and 80 this year, was involved in a car crash driving to Augusta National yesterday.
He suffered injuries to his right knee and left elbow as well as cuts to his face.
Although he refused hospital treatment, he is unlikely to play his customary nine holes as the honorary tournament starter tomorrow.
Golf: Wolstenholme must just play within himself Peter McEvoy gives the Amateur champion advice on how to cope with the professional game at Augusta
By PETER MCEVOY
GARY Wolstenholme no doubt arrived at Augusta with a set of expectations borne of years of reading about the Masters, watching the final stages on television and latterly imagining what it will be like, for he is playing in the US Masters as an automatic invitee after winning the 1991 Amateur Championship.
He won the Championship in September 1991, but received his invitation only a couple of months ago.
He has not, therefore, had that much time to imagine what it will be like.
If he is anything like I was when I played my first Masters (of three) in 1978, this limited time will not have prevented him from dreaming of all possible scenarios, from an air shot on the first tee to outright victory by some 10 shots.
I am sure Wolstenholme was a bit surprised at the location of Augusta National.
Magnolia Drive, a dead straight 300-yard long entrance drive to the club, is directly accessed from Washington Road, which is a main thoroughfare in Augusta and appears to house every fast food joint in Georgia.
From Washington Road, one leaves a typical middle-American urban scene to be transported into an old South environment within a matter of seconds.
It happens too fast.
His heart will have started to race as he looked left and right and saw the two main practice strips.
Jack Nicklaus was practising on one the first time I arived.
Excitement turned to terror.
At the end of the drive sits the colonial-style clubhouse.
It is less imposing and less impressive than I expected and is bordered by similarly styled ‘cabins’.
It all makes for a village-type feel, which was a little like a ‘theme park’ with no public.
I cannot remember what I was expecting exactly, but I found this slightly disappointing.
Wolstenholme no doubt wanted to do only one thing at this stage — get to the other side of the clubhouse and look at the course.
A short walk around the clubhouse, between the pro's shop and one of the accommodation blocks, and there it is.
If he is anything like me, he will have been struck by three things.
First, it is so hilly.
The clubhouse has a dominant view, but the land it dominates is certainly, for a golf course, of above-average contour.
This is a golfer's first impression.
Anyone else would notice the second impression first — the beauty.
Layers of colour, white, reds and vast expanses of different tones of green.
It looks slightly unreal.
These aesthetic thoughts will have been overcome by a glance at the grass, the playing surface.
I can guarantee that Wolstenholme has not seen anything like it before.
The fairways look so perfect, so uniform that the whole course looks carpeted.
I actually found it hard to make myself make a divot at first— it just seemed wrong.
He will then have hurriedly made for the large sloping putting green, where professional golfers will have been holing putt after putt from 10 feet.
They stay out there for hours, repeating this exercise.
It is important to be around the professionals, the leading players in the world.
Playing is going to be hard enough, without feeling uncomfortable with the course and the company.
One of the best ways for Wolstenholme to ease his nerves a little will be to play in the par-three competition today.
This is played over nine holes in a beautiful area surrounding a large lake.
The vast crowd are allowed to walk freely in this area.
The pros play in the par-three for fun, to give something back to their public in return for the millions of dollars they earn from golf.
It is light-hearted, semi-serious stuff for them.
I did not find it light-hearted at all.
The holes are short, ranging from about 70 to about 150 yards.
The greens are tiny and all seem to be located close to, or nearly in, the lake, and the speed of the greens is extremely fast.
Wolstenholme will have played the course many times when the tournament starts tomorrow.
He will have played practice rounds with great names.
He will have noted how wide the fairways are, how incredibly fast the greens are, and how white the sand is.
He is a very straight hitter but not as long as some.
He will probably not reach the par-fives which Greg Norman, Ian Woosnam and Fred Couples will reach with ease.
This could be in his favour, as the penalties for failing to hit the targets at the par-fives are known to all television viewers.
Tomorrow, he will be paired with a past Masters champion, one of the many traditions which run a rich seam throughout the event.
Wolstenholme is accurate and he can putt.
If he remembers to set realistic targets and play within himself, he can perform with credit.
But above all, Gary — remember to enjoy it.
Bowls: Stanley make know-how tell
By Donald Newby
STANLEY and Brackley, from County Durham and Northamptonshire respectively, meet at Melton Mowbray today in the triples final of the Manchester Unity National indoor championships after semi-finals of contrasting styles yesterday.
Stanley, represented by new England international Chris Palmer, John Thurlbeck and skip John Leeman surged 14-0 ahead of Kingsthorpe (Northampton) with the aid of a third-end six.
Then their opponents scored a five on the seventh end and played with increasing confidence.
Manton contained Palmer and they closed to within a shot with two ends left for play.
But Leeman's experienced trio added a three and a two to go through 20-16.
In the other semi-final Brackley's Ray Gaskins, Gary Harrington and Ted Hanger took nearly five hours to overcome a stubborn Paddington side comprising Alan Lines and internationals Gerry Smyth and Steve Halmai.
Brackley, leading 6-5 after seven ends, collected scores on the next six to build a cushion of eight shots and held on to finish 17-9 ahead.
Andy Thomson and John Price, who between them have dominated the indoor season, move outdoors today when they line up in the five-day Mazda International Singles Championship on Australia's Gold Coast.
Golf: Beauty hides beastly secrets
By Ian Ridley at Augusta
RAINY day in Georgia.
Augusta was not at her best yesterday on a drab, grey day.
She was gorgeous nevertheless.
Walking the back nine confirms what all the fuss is about, why Sunday night at the Masters is one of the most dramatic pieces of sporting theatre there can be.
As the Scot, Colin Montgomerie, playing in the tournament for the first time, said: ‘They are exceptional — the best nine holes of golf you will play.’
— Or watch, for that matter.
‘I understand now, when the pressure is on, how people succumb.’
In the way it is said that the Tour de France does not really begin until it reaches the Alps, the cognoscenti contend that the first 63 holes are jockeying for position.
Then comes the mind game, involving both a player's mind and game.
Television captures brilliantly the beauty, colour and class of Augusta.
What it does not convey are the undulations, the surprising humps and bumps more redolent of a seaside links.
It is clear now that as well as a strain on the nerves, the nine are physically very demanding.
And when bodies tire, so do minds.
‘It's much more hilly that I expected, much more severe, more than anyone said to me,’ said Montgomerie.
‘It doesn't look anything like it does on TV,’ said Craig Parry's caddy as he set off with his man and Wayne Grady down the 10th in practice.
Down is the word.
After the drive the hole doglegs left as a vista of azaleas and a fairway bunker — which scarcely troubles the professionals and appears more for decoration — opens up.
It is mere preparation, if any par-four of 485 yards can be mere or preparation.
The 11th, Nick Faldo's hole, scene of both of his play-off triumphs, is up then down.
It was here that, heaven forfend, a broken sprinkler head could be spotted yesterday interrupting all the perfection.
Once over the hill, having driven, the view of Amen Corner blooms with its floral dance of pinks and purples, its green bridge, its blue water.
Yes, the water does look dyed.
How deceptive, too, is the serenity of the scene.
This is a bridge over troubled water.
The variety of colour here is in contrast to the simplicity elsewhere around Augusta; all white clubhouse, lush greenness and yellow flags.
In that lies the venue's success in understated marketing.
The players are more concerned with the water that intrudes to the left of the green.
It seems unobtrusive, but that is undoubtedly its function.
Ray Floyd, having dumped his ball in it to help Faldo to the second of his titles, would not deem it so.
The theme of deception continues through the 12th, only a six- or seven-iron to 155 yards but all water and bunkers.
Here Tom Watson, in contention with Ian Woosnam last year, took five.
The par-five 13th, along with the long 15th, is probably the key, where scores can be made or broken.
Woosnam survived a fright here last year.
The 405-yard 14th, again mostly uphill, can appear a respite — until the green is reached that is.
There are not so much two tiers to it as two storeys.
Then that 15th.
The water guarding it does not look nearly so dangerous as the water behind it as a player comes down the hill debating whether to go for the green with his second shot.
It is a mirage again, encouraging underclubbing, as Severiano Ballesteros will testify.
In 1986, when leading, he hit a four-iron into it, his confidence seemingly shattered for a few years after.
By contrast, Jack Nicklaus made an eagle three and went on to birdie the next two holes, turning around a deficit of four shots to win the tournament.
The 16th is a high handicapper's daymare, with water stretching along its 170-yard length to the left.
To the right of the green are bunkers from which it appears easy to thin the ball into the water the other side.
Uphill again to the 17th, a gem of a hole on many courses yet merely ordinary at Augusta, the distinctive feature being Eisenhower's Pine encroaching into the fairway.
The 18th, so unexpectedly steep, astonishes.
Memories abound on the tee, of Lyle hitting his seven-iron from the fairway bunker to 10ft, of Woosnam creaming his drive way to the left and almost redefining the way to play the hole.
This year the tee is 15 yards further back, which may preclude a repetition, though no trees have been planted, as was hinted, to prevent the feat.
Here the drive seems more claustrophobic than TV memory recalls.
‘The 18th is getting tougher over the years,’ says Lyle.
‘The trees are growing farther and farther out into the fairway.
There is very little hitting area left.’
What surprises also is the sheer climb to the green — 70ft in elevation from the hollow in the fairway.
Curtis Strange has described addressing the second shot as like preparing to play with the feet on separate steps of a staircase.
For all that, though, it should not be especially difficult — except when the nerves are jangling; except when it's this for the Masters.
Here the tournament is lost more often than it is won.
Everyone has their memory of someone who has done just that, from Jose-Maria Olazabal last year backwards.
The important thing is not to be intimidated by venue or tournament.
‘Just like arriving at any other golf club,’ said Montgomerie abruptly when asked of his first trip up Magnolia Drive to the clubhouse.
‘No, no, no,’ he said about intimidation.
That, though, was in the cool, wet and quiet of a Tuesday morning.
It may just be a little different in the heat, dryness and noise of a Sunday afternoon.
Squash: Merger closes divide
By D J RUTNAGUR
THE LARGE divide between the sport in North America and the worldwide game will be closed with the imminent merger, made known yesterday, of the International Squash Players' Association and the body representing professionals across the Atlantic, the World Professionals Squash Association, writes D J Rutnagur.
Negotiations are at an advanced stage.
In effect, the merger will be more a takeover by the ISPA, who will acquire the American body's assets and their administration.
The international and American codes have been separated by the dimensions of the court and ball specifications.
Over the last decade new recruits to the game in America and Canada have been drawn to the international code and following the merger most tournaments will be played to its rules.
The ISPA yesterday elected Mark Maclean, of Scotland, as chairman in place of Jahangir Khan, who retired from the post.
Squash: Jansher poised to break hoodoo in British Open
By D J Rutnagur
WITH Jahangir Khan not defending his title, a new era dawns today in the history of the Hi-Tec British Open Championships, which, with the qualifying rounds completed, begin at Lambs and continue from Friday at Wembley.
From the time Jansher Khan, Jahangir's Pakistani compatriot, reached the final on his debut in the competition in 1987, his succession to the most prestigious title in the sport seemed imminent.
In the five years since, he has been world champion three times, but the British Open has eluded him.
Jansher, 22, has talent and youth on his side and it would be unwise to say that if he fails again this year, he will never win the British Open.
But his chances of laying the bogey are better than ever.
In Jahangir's absence, the three Australians meant to offer the strongest challenge — Chris Dittmar, Rodney Martin and Chris Robertson — are not in best fettle judging by their performances in the three most recent tournaments, all won by Jansher.
On the basis of rankings, Scotsman Mark Maclean leads the British challenge -14-strong in a 32 draw.
But on form the best prospects are Peter Marshall, the national champion, and Simon Parke.
Marshall, however, has a testing first-round opponent in Australian Anthony Hill, the world No 18, who is, perhaps, the most dangerous ‘floater’.
A crop of injuries and a long break from competition militate against England's Lisa Opie successfully defending the women's title, for which Susan Devoy, of New Zealand, seven times champion, is the firm favourite.
She has not been beaten on the European circuit this season.
The highest-seeded home challenger is Martine Le Moignan, at No 3.
Her prospects of playing her third final in eight years must be bright, since she beat the No 2 seed, Robyn Lambourne, of Australia, in Cardiff in February.
Hockey: New ground for Hounslow
By Chris Moore
HOUNSLOW's eight-year search for a new home has ended.
The Hockey Association Cup-holders are preparing to move to a new ground on the banks of the Thames at Chiswick, west London.
With support from the local council and a recent £500,000 grant from the Foundation for Sport and the Arts, Hounslow are hoping to move in and have an artificial pitch laid in time for the start of next season.
However, final planning permission may delay the start of work and it seems likely that the club's Pizza Express National League team will continue to play their home matches at Feltham at least until Christmas.
Hounslow's headquarters have been at the Church Meadow ground for 70 years but sharing with a cricket club makes it impossible to lay a synthetic surface there.
But for the opening of two artificial pitches at Feltham School, they would have had great difficulty in finding a home venue in recent seasons.
Led by Maurice Kittrell, the club president, the club have explored the possibility of moving to various sites but planning obstacles and other problems ruled out any change.
Despite their success in recent years, Hounslow have feared that their lack of attractive facilities would make it difficult to build on the present winning team.
Jon Potter, the Great Britain international right-half, has moved to the North and will not be available next season.
Martyn Grimley, another Great Britain player, will be appearing for Brooklands in the Second Division.
The International Hockey Federation have announced the draw for the Women's Internations Cup, the first of two qualifying tournaments for the World Cup.
Scotland have been grouped with Belgium, Hong Kong, India, Italy and Singapore.
Cricket: Simmons smashes 122 as South Africa succumb to nerves
By Geoffrey Dean in Kingston, Jamaica
SOUTH AFRICA were easily beaten in the first one-day international against West Indies at Sabina Park in Kingston, Jamaica, yesterday.
Chasing a massive 287 for six, which included a powerful 122 off only 113 balls from Phil Simmons, South Africa succumbed to some accurate bowling to be all out for 180 in the 43rd over to give West Indies victory by 107 runs.
Simmons's innings, his highest in one-day internationals, was awesome.
If Brian Lara's timing and placement helped to give the West Indies' innings its early momentum — 81 came off the first 20 overs — Simmons used his massive strength to devastating effect as 102 were plundered off the next 15 overs.
Always hitting straight, he started by launching into the left-arm spin of Henry, whom he twice lifted over long-on for six.
The first of these caused a five-minute delay for the ball landed in a garden outside the ground and was promptly stolen.
Police chased the thief and eventually recovered the ball.
Van Zyl's quickish medium pace was the next to be targeted by Simmons.
A good-length ball was deposited over long-on into the George Headley Stand and in van Zyl's next over, Simmons flat-batted him straight for four, smashed him imperiously over the extra-cover boundary for six and then drove another four through extra cover.
Having reached 50 off 71 balls, Simmons was unstoppable as he sprinted to his third hundred in one-day internationals from a mere 102 balls.
He then hit Snell for a fifth straight six and a 12th four before being deceived by Kuiper's slower ball, which he skied to extra.
Of the 138 that Simmons and Richardson put on in 19 overs, the out-of-form West Indies captain contributed only 30.
He was loudly booed by the 10,000 crowd as he walked in to bat and prepared to face his first ball, Jamaicans being of the opinion that he shares the blame for some poor World Cup selections.
The pitch, without a blade of grass on it, looked such a good one for batting that the West Indies clearly felt that seven batsmen, even given the recent fallibility of their top order, were unnecessary.
Adams was accordingly left out.
Although Henry was not inexpensive, conceding 51 off his 10 overs, he took the important wicket of the dangerous Lara.
Driving with considerable power, he failed to get over a ball of fullish length, giving Wessels a stinging catch at mid-on.
Lara had played just where he left off in the World Cup, where he was comfortably the leading West Indian run-scorer with 333 at 47.
He scored three, three and four off his first three deliveries and reached a delightful 50 from 68 balls.
The South Africans, who had won the toss, looked to be suffering from nerves in the early overs.
Their direction was poor and in the first 12 overs they conceded 12 wides and no-balls, so it was an unexpected bonus when Donald, with the last delivery in his first spell of four overs, had Haynes caught at backward square-leg.
Rugby Union: Leicester fall prey to Steele boot
By John Mason
Leicester 19pts Northampton 22 NORTHAMPTON, boosted by 14 points from outside-half John Steele, moved to the top of Courage League One last night after the narrowest of victories in a splendid contest at Welford Road.
Four penalty goals and a conversion by Steele, who could still figure in England's plans for the B tour of New Zealand in June, allowed the Saints to record their seventh successive league win.
Leicester, removed from the Pilkington Cup on Saturday, bravely chipped away at a 15-9 lead throughout the second half and, with an hour gone, led by a point (16-15).
A fourth penalty goal by Steele, who also has a qualification for Scotland, put Northampton in front again and an opportunist try by loose-head Baldwin finally took Northampton clear.
Four scores in the opening quarter, all stemming from errors were evidence of the stresses of the occasion — a 12,000-strong crowd, oceans of neighbourly pride and a league challenge to sustain.
Steele was continually involved, beginning with a penalty goal in the opening seconds after Leicester had pulled down a driving maul.
Next Steele hurried a defensive clearing kick.
Harris, restored to the team for this match, was first to the ball over the line and Liley converted from the touchline.
That was in the third minute and, four minutes later, Steele landed a second penalty goal when Leicester erred at a line-out.
He also added the conversion points when Liley, Leicester's adventurous full-back, sought more room and had his clearing kick charged down by Olver, who skipped after the ball for the try.
Northampton were in business again, not least because Steele kicked a third penalty goal immediately before half-time.
Liley's first-half penalty goal was indifferent reward for hard work, though he added two more goals.
The second Leicester try came from Grewcock.
He sped to the line for the try after the ball evaded Packman and Northampton were on the edge of defeat.
But good work by Thorneycroft allowed Baldwin to get away on the left and, though Liley kicked a third penalty goal for the Tigers, Northampton's challenge continues.
Leicester: J Liley; S Hackney, A Key, L Boyle, T Underwood; J Harris, D Grewcock; S Redfern, C Tressler, D Garforth, M Johnson, M Poole, J Wells (capt), N Back, S Povoas.
Tries: Harris, Grewcock.
Conversion: Liley.
Penalty goals: Liley 3.
Northampton: F Packman; B Ward, M Dawson, R MacNaughton, H Thorneycroft; J Steele, D Elkington; G Baldwin, J Olver (capt), G Pearce, M Bayfield, J Etheridge, R Tebbut, S Foale, W Shelford.
Tries: Olver, Baldwin.
Conversion: Steele.
Penalty goals: Steele 4.
Referee: S Griffiths (N Midlands).
England senior international referee Fred Howard has been appointed to referee the Pilkington Cup final between Bath and the Harlequins at Twickenham on May 2.
Rugby Union: Ireland's Lenihan retires
By Keith Peters
DONAL LENIHAN, second only to Willie John McBride as Ireland's most capped lock, yesterday announced his retirement because of a recurring neck injury.
Lenihan, 32, who made the first of his 52 international appearances against Australia in 1981, missed all of last season's Five Nations programme after an operation to repair damage to his neck.
He made his Ireland farewell in the defeat by Wales in January and shortly afterwards aggravated the injury while playing for his club, Cork Constitution, in a league game against St Mary's.
‘It was always my intention to go on playing in club competition with Constitution after finishing my international career and to that extent, I am disappointed by the way things have worked out,’ Lenihan said.
Lenihan, one of the outstanding line-out players in the Five Nations during the 80s, was a member of two Lions touring parties without making a Test appearance.
A seven-hour festival of youth rugby will be staged at Bristol's Memorial Ground next Sunday.
More than 20 teams, ranging from under-12s to under-18s, will be involved, writes John Mason.
In Middlesex, the number of schools playing rugby has increased by almost 200 per cent since October and at Dorking last weekend, more than 1,000 boys and girls took part in a mini-rugby event.
RFU officials, headed by Don Rutherford, the chief technical administrator, are grateful to England's players.
The back-to-back Grand Slam and a place in the final of the World Cup in November have been the triggers for a vast increase in recruitment.
The idol of the juniors is Jeremy Guscott, the Lions, England and Bath centre, whose first steps in the game were as an eight-year-old mini-rugby player.
Rutherford, a former Lions and England full-back, has been banging the youth drum for a couple of decades, latterly urging that the clubs undertake the nursery work no longer automatically done by the schools.
Reg Brookes, chairman of the Bristol Schools' Rugby Union, who have organised Sunday's competitions, said: ‘We're fortunate in this part of the world.
There's co-operation from top to bottom in all respects.’
Lawn Tennis: Javer reaches quarter-finals
By Barry Martin in Tokyo
MONIQUE JAVER reached her third quarter-final of the year yesterday when she defeated Catarina Lindqvist, of Sweden, at the Suntory Japan Open.
The manner of her 6-4, 7-5 victory over the 1990 champion was impressive, for the Swede offered a strong challenge, and led 5-2 in the second set.
Lindqvist often troubled Javer by pulling her wide with an excellent forehand, but Javer kept her head, moved well to the ball, and hit out hard and accurately.
Mark Petchey went down 6-4, 6-2 to Grant Connell.
The Canadian frequently came to the net, so Petchey had to rely on his passing shots, but not enough of them found the mark.
Pat Cash is to request a wild card entry for Wimbledon, but it is open to question whether it will be granted.
Though Cash is a former champion, he is no longer willing to commit himself full-time to the game.
Next month he will commute from his home in Fulham to a club in Hamburg, where he will prepare for the grass-court season by playing on clay for a club in the Second Division of the German League.
David Lloyd, the former Davis Cup player, and his son Scott, 16, reached the semi-finals of the Remington Family Tournament with a 6-3, 6-2 win over Peter and Michael Ratcliffe at Brentwood yesterday, writes Bill Edwards.
The Lloyds, who retired in last year's final, meet Hiralal and Hitesh Soma, who survived three match points to beat Keith and Kevin Dewick 3-6, 7-6, 8-6.
Cricket: Bryson's pace could end 10-year wait
By Geoffrey Dean Surrey
SURREY will clearly not be the same threat this year without the redoubtable Waqar Younis, whose 113 championship wickets helped the county into fifth position last season.
If a first championship since 1971 looks out of reach, they should be able to challenge strongly in the one-day competitions.
Lack of early-season form undermined their attempts to reach the last eight of the Benson & Hedges Cup, and in the Refuge League they were inconsistent.
That Surrey can beat the best sides in one-day cricket is in no doubt — Lancashire were trapped in the Refuge at Old Trafford and Essex and Northants overcome in the quarter- and semi-finals of the NatWest Trophy respectively.
A narrow defeat by Hampshire in the final at Lord's, however, leaves the county still looking for their first trophy since 1982.
Another shrewd overseas signing seems to have been made in Rudi Bryson, the South African fast bowler, who can also score quick, useful runs down the order.
Kepler Wessels, his captain at Eastern Province, says he can be as quick as Allan Donald, though he does not really swing the ball.
‘He's very aggressive,’ Wessels added.
Bryson, 23, was signed after Wessels recommended him to Geoff Arnold when the Surrey coach was in South Africa in February.
Craig Matthews, another South African, had been the first choice before he failed a medical.
Strong and stocky at 6ft, Bryson narrowly missed selection for the World Cup after being named in South Africa's short list of 20.
Mr Arnold commented: ‘He's sharp, a good fielder and mover, and bowls well at the end in one-days.’
With Waqar on Pakistan's tour of England, Bryson will open the bowling with Martin Bicknell for whom this is an important summer after a winter operation on his left shoulder forced him to withdraw from the England A tour.
He will be hoping for more wickets than his 45 last year from 15 games.
Support will come from another useful acquisition in Joey Benjamin, 31, who was kept out of the Warwickshire side last year after impressing in 1990 with 34 wickets at 30.
Darren Bicknell is impressed with Benjamin: ‘His slingy action makes him difficult to pick up.
We needed another strike bowler, which he could be.’
Mark Feltham and Tony Murphy, who both took 35 wickets last year, though Feltham's came at 28 and Murphy's at 48, are the back-up seamers, with Andrew Robson and Nick Peters having been released.
Ian Greig and Jonathan Robinson, the two batting all-rounders, will be pressing for places in the championship, the latter being a definite starter for one-day games.
A new young all-rounder to watch is Mark Bainbridge, who toured Pakistan with England Under-19s in the winter.
Greig has a benefit this year, having relinquished the captaincy in favour of Alec Stewart, who is likely to keep wicket in the one-day games, but not the championship.
Neil Sargeant, who is the first-choice wicketkeeper, will be under pressure from another new signing, David Ligertwood, a young Australian who has a British passport.
A vice-captain has not been named.
There are several players who might deputise for Stewart when he is on England duty, with Monte Lynch and Keith Medlycott strong contenders.
To be sure of their places, however, both may have to improve on their form of last year, Lynch averaging only 21 in 10 matches and Medlycott's 38 wickets costing 41.
Only three Surrey batsmen scored more than a thousand championship runs last year — Darren Bicknell, Graham Thorpe and David Ward.
Alikhan made 963 at 31, and is likely to start the season as Bicknell's opening partner.
Robinson, who is primarily a one-day opener but who scored two fifties when going in first in the final game of last year at Old Trafford, may press Alikhan, as could Paul Atkins and Ally Brown, a gifted striker of the ball who has tightened up his game.
There will also be strong competition for places among the three spinners.
Medlycott turns the ball the most while the dependable Neil Kendrick finished last season much more strongly, displacing Medlycott and taking 10 wickets at Old Trafford.
James Boiling also returned career-best figures in that game, and deserves more than a regular one-day place.
Cricket: Tendulkar is doubtful starter
By William Gray
SACHIN Tendulkar, Yorkshire's first overseas signing, is likely to miss the first five matches of the season because he is contracted to play in Bombay.
It seems Tendulkar's debut will be delayed until April 30 when Yorkshire are at home to Kent in a Benson & Hedges Cup qualifier.
Imran Khan, Pakistan's captain, has hinted a nagging shoulder injury might prevent him from playing throughout the World Cup winners' tour of England this summer.
Imran, 39, who first injured his right shoulder during pre-World Cup matches in Australia, is due to lead Pakistan on a five-Test tour of England beginning in early May.
This year's winners of the NatWest Trophy will receive a record £27,500 prize — around £5,000 more than Pakistan collected for beating England in the World Cup final — because the total prize-money has increased to £73,350.
Champions Hampshire are at home to Dorset in the first round on June 24, while Durham make their first NatWest Trophy appearance as a first-class county against Ireland in Dublin.
The close of play has been extended from 7.30pm to 8pm to accommodate delayed or interrupted matches and over-rate fines have also been increased.
Tarry keeps up title challenge
By Hugh Condry
JAMES TARRY followed up his previous week's treble with a double at the Blankney last Saturday on Fine Lace and St Laycar.
His tally now stands at 11, which puts him in third place behind Robert Alner (16) and Philip Scholfield (12) in the Daily Telegraph Men's Championship.
Tarry's first mount, Bright as a Button, was out-galloped in the Restricted by John Sharp on five-year-old Aldington Baron, but the riders' roles were reversed in the Maiden (Div 2) when Tarry forced St Laycar up to beat Sharp on River Spirit.
Earlier, in the PPOA race, Fine Lace led four out and Tarry did not have to press too hard to beat Lady Tiki.
Noel Wilson's chance on Flap Jack looked dim with two to jump in the Bramham Moor's Restricted, with G Derek still going strongly a dozen lengths ahead.
But Flap Jack, successful in his previous run in a Holderness Maiden, caught the leader after the last to win.
Carol Bartram made her first point-to-point ride a winning one on gift horse Nokuru, but the rest of the meeting belonged mainly to Grania Furness, who trained three winners.
The 1988 Scottish Grand National winner Mighty Mark has been missing engagements since the start of the season but finally appeared at Corbridge where he trotted up in the Open.
FIXTURES.
— Today: Axe Vale Harriers, Stafford Cross, Devon,(3m W of Seaton) 2.0.
Saturday: Belvoir (Garthorpe); Bicester with Whaddon Chase (Kingston Blount); Dartmoor (Flete Park); Llandeilo Farmers (Erw Lon); Llangibby (Howick); Middleton (Whitewell-on-the-Hill); Percy (Alnwick); Portman (Badbury Rings); Puckeridge and Thurlow (Horseheath); United (Brampton Bryan); West Kent (Penshurst); West Somerset Vale (Kingston St Mary).
Dressage: Goodwood support
By ANNE INCE
INTERNATIONAL dressage at Goodwood from May 1-3, which is being sponsored by Hermes for the fourth year, is attracting more foreign competitors than ever before, writes Anne Ince.
So far the 18 countries have nominated over 60 riders including 10 full national teams.
Many riders are still short of Grand Prix qualifiers necessary for Olympic acceptance.
Three nominated judges will officiate at the two Grands Prix, which lead to the Kur or Special tours.
Holland and Japan will select their teams on the basis of the Sussex meeting.
Eleven of Britain's top riders will pit themselves against international stars of the calibre of Kyra Kirklund (Finland), Margit Otto-Crepin (France), Pia Laus (Italy) and from Holland Anky van Grunsven and Ellen Bontje.
NORTHERN RUGBY FOCUSBy Graham Tait
Morley in £1,500 phone call
IN THESE days when money is scarce for most rugby clubs Morley earned themselves £1,500 on the toss of a coin over the weekend.
Not that it was any old coin — a two-headed Churchill crown to be exact.
Having been beaten 20-16 by Wakefield on their own Scatcherd Lane pitch in the North East final of the National Sevens Morley took part in a telephone toss-up with Waterloo, the North West runners-up.
The two sides were vying for the third spot behind Wakefield and Orrell in the Northern Division allocation for the national finals to be played at Bath on April 26.
Just who paid for the telephone call is in some doubt.
Jamie Grayshon, the Morley captain, tossed the coin, and Waterloo bellowed ‘Queen’ down the receiver.
But it came down with Churchill's head showing.
One presumes Waterloo then asked for the best of three for just qualifying for Bath is worth a minimum of £1,500.
COACHING juniors can give much satisfaction but it also has its drawbacks as Gareth Parkin, coach to Broughton Park Under-12s and a regular playing member of the club's third team found to his cost after his charges won the recent age-group competition at Waterloo.
The youngsters were so delighted when the final whistle went that they all jumped on the luckless coach, bruising his ribs so badly that he was ruled out of the next weekend's third team fixture.
THE Newcastle Gosforth Nomads team that defeated Novos in the final of the Northumberland Junior Cup included two internationals of yesteryear in Colin White and Richard Breakey.
Other players who have turned out for the Nomads this season include the likes of Peter Dixon and Brian and Harry Patrick.
No wonder the senior team is scoring so many points.
RENEE SMITH, widow of the late Eric Smith —‘Mr Orrell’ to most people — came across an interesting series of correspondence when going through her husband's effects which had obviously appealed to his great sense of humour.
It began with a letter from a certain hotel in Selkirk dated September 1982 and addressed to the local club following the Selkirk Sevens.
‘Dear Sirs.
Ref, the Orrell football team's stay at the above hotel.
They broke four legs off a bed making it unrepairable.
We would be grateful if you reimburse the hotel for the bed (£45).
Apart from the above they were extremely well behaved.’
The letter was forwarded to Orrell and Mr Smith, then the club president, replied as follows:
‘Dear Sir.
I have to report that a bed was damaged during our stay.
The damage was reported to the management and the captain was told not to worry as the item in question was in a damaged state before our visit.
Indeed one corner of the bed was supported by a number of books in place of a missing leg.’
Some days later, Mr Smith received the following reply from the Selkirk club.
‘Dear Mr Smith.
Many thanks for your explanation.
In view of your comments, I think we can safely tell the hotel what to do with their bed.’
EASTER weekend is one of the busiest days of the year in such job-starved places as St Ives, Newquay and Falmouth and it is hardly any quieter in Blackpool, Southport and Morecambe.
So can someone explain why the County Championship final between Cornwall and Lancashire being staged at Twickenham on Easter Saturday?
Lenihan retires at 32
By Keith Peters
DONAL LENIHAN, second only to Willie John McBride as Ireland's most capped lock, yesterday announced his retirement from rugby because of a recurring neck injury.
Lenihan, 32, who made the first of his 52 international appearances against Australia in 1981, missed all of last season's Five Nations programme after undergoing an operation to repair damage to his neck.
He made his Ireland farewell in the defeat by Wales in Dublin in January and, shortly afterwards, aggravated the injury while playing for his club Cork Constitution in a league match against St Mary's.
Lenihan, one of the outstanding lineout players in the Five Nations Championship, was a member of Lions' touring parties in 1983 and 1989 without ever making a Test appearance.
The Irish RFU yesterday ordered the Leinster Branch to bring forward by a week the date of the Provincial Cup final, scheduled to be played at Lansdowne Road on May 2.
Equestrianism: Davidson to ride luck of Irishman
By Alan Smith
BRUCE DAVIDSON, the United States rider who has taken the world three-day event championship twice but never won Badminton, will try again on last year's winner, The Irishman II, from May 7-10.
Rodney Powell scored on the then 12-year-old last May, and later sold him to Davidson, primarily to ride in this year's Olympic Games.
Davidson, who was second to Richard Meade at Badminton 10 years ago on J J Babu, is among riders from 10 overseas countries taking on the British.
Altogether 115 horses have been entered for the Mitsubishi Trophy, the first year of the event's new sponsorship, which equals the 1984 record.
The United States and New Zealand, the reigning world champions, will make especially strong challenges, the latter including Blyth Tait and Messiah, Badminton runners-up in 1990 before going on to win the individual world title.
Mark Todd, winner of the last two Olympic three-day events and of Badminton in 1980 on Southern Comfort, and third on The Irishman, a ‘spare ride’ in 1989, has 1990 Burghley winner Face the Music among his two entries.
Ginny Leng's Master Craftsman won Badminton in 1989, but missed the last two runnings because of injury, which also prevented her from defending her European title last season.
They will need a good showing to put themselves back in contention for a place in Britain's Olympic squad.
Boxing: Wharton sounds warning to Carr
By Ken Mays
HENRY WHARTON plans to take the short route to victory at Leeds Town Hall tonight when he defends his Commonwealth super-middleweight title against Australian Rod Carr, the man he beat to win it last year.
Wharton, who clinched the title by a point, now believes he is back to his best form.
He has had three contests since defeating Carr — a draw with Lou Gentan, victory over Nicky Walker inside the distance and, two weeks ago, a quick destruction of Kenny Schaefer.
His confidence stems from the last two victories.
‘I was getting a bit stale, but I felt really great against Schaefer and I know I have regained my punching power,’ said Wharton, who will be fighting in his home town after drawing full houses in York.
He needs an impressive victory, for manager Mickey Duff is already planning bigger things, such as a European title fight in the near future and possibly a world challenge by the end of 1992.
With 12 wins — nine inside the distance — in 13 fights, Wharton is on the right course and Carr can be expected to find it tougher this time.
Lennox Lewis dismissed the world title plans of rival British heavyweight Frank Bruno during the latest round of verbal in-fighting between the two men, writes Steve Bunce.
‘It is just hype and boxing politics,’ said the British and European champion of Bruno's possible world eliminator against South Africa's Pierre Coetzer.
Lewis, 26, who meets Commonwealth champion Derek Williams in a triple title fight on April 30 at the Royal Albert Hall, says he has altered his style and returned to the ‘Lennox of old’.
Since his last dismal points victory over an ordinary and overweight American, Levi Billups, in Las Vegas on Feb 1, Lewis has dismissed his trainer, John Davenport, and recruited the flamboyant Cuban-born Pepe Correa, who once worked with Sugar Ray Leonard.
‘I won a gold medal dancing and jabbing, but I have since neglected the two basic ingredients,’ said Lewis, who is unbeaten in 19 fights.
‘I have been watching videos of my fights and I have been making a lot of basic mistakes.
I have not been happy with my lateral movement and Pepe has helped me to rediscover the sweet science.’
Williams has been working out in Miami under the supervision of Muhammad Ali's old trainer, Angelo Dundee.
Colin McMillan's WBO featherweight title challenge against Italian Maurizio Stecca has been fixed for Saturday May 16 at Alexandra Palace.
The bout has been switched from May 2, so that it can be shown on television.
Also on the bill will be Derek Angol, recently named as official challenger for Akim Tafer's European cruiserweight title.
Angol, whose sights are set on a tilt at the vacant WBO crown against Yuri Vaulin, recently gave up the British title but is still Commonwealth champion.
Point-To-Point: Carl's sets pace in Trophy race
By Hugh Condry
EAST ANGLIAN horses are dominating the race for the Daily Telegraph Trophy.
Carl's Choice galloped to his seventh win of the season in the Open at Saturday's East Essex meeting an hour or so after Rubie's Choice had chalked up his fifth in the Confined.
No other horse has yet won more than four races.
The two Choices — both 11-year-olds but unrelated despite the name similarity — won their races in the same front-running style and finished in identical times.
Mountain Crash, stable-companion of Carl's Choice, held off the Daily Telegraph Trophy holder, Fort Hall, with reasonable comfort in the Ladies' and Richard Hunt gained more admirers when following up his Higham win by catching Manor Mieo on the line in the Intermediate.
Philip Scholfield reduced Robert Alner's championship lead to four with a double at the Spooners and West Dartmoor, which lifted his seasonal tally to 12.
Scholfield teamed up with Georgie's Caper for the first time to win the Restricted (Div 2) and then took the Open unchallenged on Confused Express.
Heavy going at Heathfield made for some slow times at the South Down & Eridge, where Chris Gordon scored a double for the second successive Saturday on Kirstenson and Please Explain.
Brunico maintained his winning form under Ron Treloggen in the Monmouthshire Open.
Since joining Peter Owen's stable for this season he is unbeaten in three starts.
Talking Rugby: Hong Kong in hot water over sevens fiasco
By JOHN REASON
THE recent attempts made by Hong Kong to have their sevens tournament accepted by the International Board as part of the official international calendar will not have been helped by the travesty to which they reduced this year's tournament at the weekend.
So much torrential rain fell overnight and throughout the day of the finals that the organisers decided to dispense with scrums and let the team who would have had the scrum take a free-kick instead.
The experts in rugby law at this end of the world say categorically that the organisers of the tournament were simply not entitled to do that and, as a result, there must be an inquiry.
I understand Keith Rowland, the IB secretary, watched the tournament on his way the Board's annual meeting in New Zealand.
His observations may make interesting reading.
Furthermore, as Hong Kong is still affiliated to the Rugby Union, Dudley Wood, the RU secretary, acknowledges that ‘we will have to look into the matter’.
The decision to opt out of the requirement to scrummage changed the whole nature of the game.
It removed an essential feature of ball-winning and turned the tournament into a lottery.
It also enabled a physically small team like South Korea to advance far beyond their capabilities and beat the Barbarians.
Admittedly, the Barbarians were considerably below their traditional strength because of the priorities of the cup and league matches in England and Wales but I doubt if the Barbarians would have lost to South Korea if scummaging had been part of the game.
Smart teams such as Australia and New Zealand adopted a version of the game played by Sid Going and New Zealand when they beat Scotland on a deeply flooded pitch in Auckland in 1975.
Instead of kicking the ball high so that it splashed down into a lake and bounced backwards, as Going did on that ludicrous day, the Australians and New Zealanders took advantage of the wide open spaces in sevens and kicked long, flat balls which stopped dead in the water.
This forced the defender to chase back and dive for the ball in the mud.
The men following up therefore had only to pinion the defender and use their momentum to force him backwards to be given yet another kick instead of a scrum.
It was touch rugby in flippers and snorkels.
The only team who disdained such artifices were Fiji, who are used to playing in ankle-deep water.
They do not mind it in the least, as long as the water is warm.
They went on playing traditional sevens and as they were not inconvenienced by their one weakness, which is their lack of appetite for scrummaging, they played everybody else off the colony by an even larger margin than usual.
For some years now Fiji have been playing the sevens tournaments of the world and have been winning them all.
Indeed, with little Serevi masterminding their operations, they have opened up such a lead in this version of the game that the world sevens championship, which will be held in Scotland in a year's time, could turn out to be distinctly one-sided if the countries at this end of the world do not get their act together very rapidly indeed.
Already the Five Nations have almost run out of time.
As England discovered in 1986 when they performed so lamentably at the international sevens tournaments in Sydney, it is just not possible to turn round a few weeks before an event and pick up a team and set off with any expectation of success.
A venture like that needs just as much planning, evaluation, preparation and practice as the international championship.
As far as I can make out, all we have done so far is talk about it and we have not even done very much of that.
Some months ago I wrote that England should put a sevens specialist like Les Cusworth in charge of their campaign.
This has not been done and if England are not careful, Ireland could well step in, as Wales did with Rupert Moon, and resurrect that legendary Irish Wolfhound, Leslie O'Cosworth.
I understand the England coach, Dick Best, who was in Hong Kong with the Barbarians, will take charge of the England operation.
Nothing wrong with that.
Best probably knows he should have Cusworth on board and you have only to look at the magical (and almost posthumous) transformation that Best has wrought in Peter Winterbottom's handling and passing to see what a course in sevens indoctrination can achieve.
So miracles can be worked, but what we need is a few smoke signals to indicate that someone, somewhere in the four home unions has the preparations for the world sevens championship a little further advanced than the drawing board.
Yachting: Farr unhappy with sails
By Tim Jeffery in San Diego
CONFIDENCE in the New Zealand camp, following their yacht's performances in the challengers' semi-final races of the American Cup trials off San Deigo, is not at its highest.
Bruce Farr, the boat's designer, appears to have increased her displacement and her mainsail, as well as fitting a new bow, but the edge she had shown in earlier rounds has been lost.
Farr, who invariably sails in the 17th man jump-seat position, has told John Clinton, the New Zealand sail designer, to re-assess the yacht's sail inventory.
Nippon, Ville de Paris and Il Moro di Venezia have all been more innovative in the shaping and cutting of their sails, which explains why Farr is getting more involved in the New Zealand sail programme himself.
It is a sure sign he is taking the issue extremely seriously.
Venezia are thought to have been altered slightly.
In the defenders' trials, Dennis Conner's Stars & Stripes has to win only one more race against America to be sure of a place in the final later this month.
It is believed Stars & Stripes will sport the first of North Sails' revolutionary seamless sails, made in a 3-D mould, before the end of this round.
A light air genoa is expected to be the first to be tested over the next few days.
Conner yesterday sailed against the newest of Bill Koch's contenders, Kanza, amid mounting ridicule of Bill Koch's impetuous decisions about who steers his boats.
Koch has the luxury of knowing that at least one of his boats will make the final, for he can enter either Kanza or America.
Therefore, he is treating the semi-final trials more as a tune-up.
Chris Law's last-minute attempt to win a place in the British Olympic team briefly flickered to life yesterday when he won a Soling race in the French Olympic Classes Regatta at Hyeres, finishing in front of Lawrie Smith, writes David Pelly.
But later in the afternoon he finished well down the fleet, as he did on Monday, so his chances now are extremely slim.
In order to win through to a match-racing play-off, he needed to finish among the top six nations at this regatta.
Meanwhile, Smith continued to pull away and on present form will not even need to sail a match-race final to be selected for Barcelona.
The one skipper who might have forced him into it, Glyn Charles, was out of touch yesterday.
There was another impressive British result when Stuart Childerley won the Finn class race, passing Oleg Khoperski, of Russia, on the final leg.
Although it is still early in the Finn selection battle, Childerley already has easily the best record.
Soccer: Lineker scores twice to ease Tottenham's relegation fear
By Colin Malam
Notts County 0 Tottenham 2 GARY LINEKER gave Tottenham another farewell present last night by taking his goal tally for the season to 32.
Lineker's double at Meadow Lane brought Spurs one of the two victories they feel they need to avoid the relegation fate that now seems inevitable for Notts County.
It was an appropriate way for the prolific England striker to sign off in his native East Midlands before he leaves to start a new life in Japanese football next season.
But it was also another uncomfortable reminder of how difficult it will be for Tottenham to replace him.
But Tottenham's problems pale by comparison with those of last night's opponents; should Coventry beat Sheffield Wednesday at home tonight and win or draw here on Saturday, then County will be on their way back to the Second Division.
The Midlanders were well down that road after failing to win any of their previous 14 League matches.
The lack of confidence engendered by such a barren run was all to evident, as Tottenham soon set about imposing themselves on this unremarkable match.
Eager, it seemed, to atone for the embarrassment of Saturday's 5-2 home defeat by Aston Villa, the London side could have scored three times in the opening nine minutes and went on to dominate the rest of the first half with an ease that pointed to only one result.
Howells, put clean through by Gray, a major influence, miskicked badly under pressure from Chris Short; then Dryden's desperate sliding tackle denied Stewart in the act of shooting and Cundy's shot from a Gray free kick was hacked off the line by Craig Short.
As Tottenham began to exploit Lineker's pace, the striker offered a flighted centre that Stewart headed inches wide.
With Walsh then skimming the bar with a spectacular overhead shot, it seemed to be just a matter of time before Tottenham would score.
Their first goal came after 32 minutes, thanks partly to Chris Short.
The County defender needlessly gave away a corner with a wild back pass to Cherry and Lineker rose to head home Gray's place kick through a crowd of players.
His second goal in this game, and his seventh in Spurs' last four, was scored six minutes into the second half.
Howells made the opening by surging down the left and squaring the ball across the penalty area for Lineker who, right leg outstretched, steered the ball into the bottom corner of the net.
County rang the changes desperately, sending on Slawson for Lund in an attempt to pep up an attack in which Farina, the striker on loan from Bari, made a rather featureless full debut.
But in the end they had to rely on a Tottenham error for a glimmer of home.
Walker, the England Youth international goalkeeper, who has been deputising for the injured Thorstvedt, gave away a free kick just inside his penalty area by taking too many steps with the ball.
The situation seemed so threatening that Tottenham formed a 10-man wall but Wilson shot wide when Slawson tapped the free kick to him.
County, penned in their own half for long periods, were unable to manage more than two genuine scoring attempts in the whole match.
Craig Short, booked later for a crude foul on Gray, headed wide from a free kick by Draper.
Spurs also used both their substitutes.
Sedgley was sent on for Walsh in order to protect the two-goal lead, and Hendry was given a couple of minutes at the end so that Lineker could take a well-earned breather.
Notts County: Cherry; Palmer, Dryden, Craig Short, Chris Short, Draper, Williams (Thomas 76), Harding, Lund (Slawson 55), Farina, Wilson.
Tottenham Hotspur: Walker; Van den Hauwe, Edinburgh, Gray, Cundy, Mabbutt, Stewart, Walsh (Sedgley 82), Howells, Lineker (Hendry 88), Allen.
Soccer: Whitton penalty subdues Wolves
By Brian Oliver Ipswich 2 Wolves 1 IPSWICH, clearly suffering from the end-of-season jitters afflicting so many of their promotion rivals, needed an 89th-minute penalty to see off an enterprising Wolves side and extend their Second Division lead to seven points.
When Andy Mutch scored a deserved equaliser for Wolves five minutes from time, it seemed that Ipswich manager John Lyall's pep talk at the interval had been to no avail.
The East Anglians, who are the form team among the top eight, had been outplayed in the first half, when Wolves had half a dozen shots on goal and several others narrowly off target.
But Mr Lyall's words led to a more purposeful approach from the home side after the interval, with Dutchman Zondervan more influential in midfield and Thompson pushing forward adventureously from left-back.
The pressure paid off in the 58th minute when central defender Whelan, scorer of a late winner at Southend on Saturday, rose to direct a far-post header over Stowell, in the Wolves goal, from one of Thompson's many excellent dead-ball crosses.
Bull, whose next goal for Wolves wil be his 200th in the League, would have equalised in the 65th minute but for a bad bounce on the edge of the six-yard area.
The prolific striker added to a succession of first-half near-misses with another spectacular shot on the turn which just went over the Ipswich bar.
Wolves looked to have earned a point when, after a free-kick had been blocked by Forrest, Mutch followed up to equalise.
A draw would have been no more than Wolves deserved, but Kiwomya, Ipswich's most impressive forward, was not finished.
He found the energy for one last run down the left and it ended with a foul by Birch.
Referee David Axcell pointed to the penalty spot and Whitton stepped forward to score and send most of the fans in a 17,000 crowd home happy.
Mathematically, Ipswich need 11 points from their last six games to be certain of securing a place in the Premier League.
Realistically, six points will probably be enough, and with all those matches against teams in the bottom eight of the Second Division, promotion looks a formality.
Wolves had gone into the match halfway down the table and seven points adrift from the top six.
Their manager, Graham Turner, had said before the game that Wolves could still make it into the play-offs, but this result has put paid to those hopes.
Ipswich Town: Forrest; Zonderan, Thompson, Stockwell, Wark, Whelan, Milton (Palmer 85), Goddard (Johnson 85), Whitton, Dozzell, Kiwomya.
Wolverhampton Wanderers: Stowell; Ashley, Venus, Rankine, Madden, Mountfield, Birch, Cook, Bull, Mutch, Downing.
Referee: D Axcell (Southend).
Soccer: Portsmouth run out of steam
By William Johnson
Tranmere 2 Portsmouth 0 PORTSMOUTH who, on Sunday, came agonisingly close to depriving Liverpool of a place in the FA Cup Final, were brought back to earth when they visited the unfashionable part of Merseyside last night.
Jim Smith's Cup-fighters were hoping to rekindle a fading promotion play-off challenge and they were forced to put out what was, on paper, their strongest team, even though many of them looked as if they needed a rest after their efforts at Highbury.
A disappointed Mr Smith indicated that several of his players would get a breather when they entertain Grimsby on Saturday, to ensure fresh legs for the semi-final replay at Villa Park on Monday.
He hopes that Beresford, who departed with hamstring trouble, Anderton, who took a blow on the ribs, and Awford, who injured a hip, are among those who will prove refreshed.
Tranmere, keen to salvage some Merseyside pride and also consolidate their own mid-table position, took full advantage of their opponents' fatigue to claim the points with two exceptional goals.
The first, through Irons, came a minute from half-time when he hammered in an unstoppable drive after a good run into the penalty area by Harvey.
The second, as spectacular as any this season, came seven minutes from the end when Thomas found an empty net from nearly 50 yards.
An appalling clearance by Knight presented Thomas with the chance, but it still needed to be capitalised on and he launched a tremendous, looping shot which the Rovers' supporters behind the goal knew was on target from the moment he hit it.
Tranmere would have won more comfortably if Aldridge, the League's leading scorer with 38 goals, had managed to convert a fortuitous penalty, awarded for a handling offence by Butters.
After fooling Knight with his now-customary shuffle, he screwed the penalty kick embarrassingly wide.
It was his fifth penalty miss from 13 attempts since joining Rovers from Real Sociadad in the summer.
Portsmouth's best chance fell to the talented Anderton, but the advancing Nixon and the covering Nolan averted the danger after he was put through by Beresford.
Kuhl was also denied early in the second half.
Tranmere Rovers: Nixon; Higgins, Nolan, Irons, Harvey, Vickers, Morrissey, Aldridge, Steel, Malkin, Thomas.
Portsmouth: Knight; Awford, Beresford (Powell 39), McLoughlin (Aspinall, 65), Symons, Burns, Neil, Kuhl, Clarke, Butters, Anderton.
Soccer: Bristol City rescued by Cole's goal
By Sue Thearle
Bristol City 1 Middlesbrough 1ANDREW COLE, on loan from Arsenal, saved Bristol City last night by equalising in the 66th minute against Middlesbrough after the visitors seemed to have taken command in the first half.
It was all rather unfortunate for City, whose impressive opening minutes promised much.
Polish international Jacki Dziekanowski had danced almost at will through the Middlesbrough defence to create chances for Scott, Llewellyn and Mellon.
But the visitors, who have seen their promotion challenge falter with only one point from the last three games, survived the early storm.
Despite leaving out 18-goal striker Bernie Slaven and winger Stuart Ripley, there was a prelude of better things to come when Andy Payton tested Welch with a curling shot in the 15th minute.
Three minutes later, Payton put a precise pass through the home defence, and John Hendrie accelerated away to walk the ball past Welch for his fifth goal this season.
Bristol City: Welch; Llewellyn, Scott, Aizlewood, Bryant, Osman, Mellon, Dziekanowski, Cole, Rosenior, May.
Middlesbrough: Pears; Fleming, Phillips, Mohan, Kernaghan, Peake, Pollock, Payton, Wilkinson, Hendrie, Falconer.
Referee: J Carter (Christchurch).
Sports Round-Up: Plaatjes runs own ‘Olympics’
MARK PLAATJES, the London Marathon favourite, who cannot compete in Barcelona this summer because he is considered stateless, says he intends to make Sunday's race his Olympics, writes Ken Mays.
Plaatjes, who has given up his South African citizenship but cannot compete for the United States until he has completed his five-year residential period next year, is the second-fastest man in the race behind Yakov Tolstikov, but his recent form is better than that of the Siberian runner.
‘I am much fitter and stronger now than when I won the Los Angeles marathon,’ said Plaatjes, who is based in Bolder, Colorado.
‘This will be my Olympics.’
With the South Africans due to be readmitted to the Barcelona Games, the irony of his exclusion is not lost on Plaatjes or his manager, Glenn Latimer, who believes the exile is unfair.
‘He's in a time-warp,’ said Mr Latimer yesterday.
‘But he's followed all the rules since he was given political asylum and I think he should be allowed to compete as an individual.’
The City Centre road races, held in Newcastle and Gateshead for the past five years, have been switched to Aberdeen on May 16 following the end of General Portfolio's sponsorship.
Grampian Regional Council have agreed to back the event this year.
RUGBY LEAGUE: An unnamed player has failed a drugs test.
League official David Howes confirmed that a sample had proved positive but, in line with normal procedure, neither the name of the player nor his club will be released unless he is found guilty of taking a prohibited substance, writes John Whalley.
‘We don't want the player's name slurred for the rest of his career for something done in innocence,’ said Mr Howes.
‘The vast majority of cases found to be positive are due to household products which can be bought from the chemist and the player is then simply given a telling off.
‘The result should be known before the end of the season but it is a long, drawn-out procedure under Olympic rules.’
Greg Mackey, the Hull captain, has rejected the club's terms for a further one-year contract.
SWIMMING: Kornelia Ender, winner of four gold medals and a silver at the 1976 Olympic Games in Montreal, will make her first appearance in Britain when she competes in the Edinburgh International Meet from April 16-18.
Ender, 33, is unlikely now to produce the kind of speed that helped her break no fewer than 27 world records during her distinguished career.
But she could well match her rivals over the 50-metre sprints at the meet, which this year will also incorporate the Super Final of the Uncle Ben's Rice British Grand Prix series.GOLF: A statue of Harry Vardon which, as reported in The Daily Telegraph, was stolen from the South Herts golf club in north London last month, has been located in the Hendon area.
A man is helping police with their enquiries.SPEEDWAY: Leigh Adams, the Australian champion, spearheads his country's Test challenge against England at Oxford on Friday, writes Barry Alcock.
The Swindon rider, 20, who is also the Australian under-21 champion, has been named at No 1 for the first Test of a three-match series.
Their team is weakened by injury and missing the likes of Todd Wiltshire, third in the World Final at Bradford in 1990, and Oxford's Troy Butler.
England have already named an experimental team.
AUSTRALIA (v England, Oxford, April 10): L Adams (Swindon), S Regeling (Middlesbrough), S Parker (Ipswich), G Doyle (Eastbourne), C Boyce (Poole), M Carlson (Oxford), T O'Brien (Rye House), T Langdon (Poole).
CYCLING: The hybrid sport of mountain-bike racing, which was officially recognised only last year, received its biggest vote of confidence so far yesterday, when a new World Cup series with a £90,000 prize fund was announced in Brussels.
The Grundig World series, in its fifth year but now officially recognised by the International Cycling Union, will visit Strathpeffer in the Scottish Highlands for the third of 10 rounds on May 3-4.
American John Tomac, who is also the World Cup holder, will defend his title, returning from his Colorado home to Belgium for the opening round at Houffalize.
Ireland's Stephen Roche leads the Basque tour after Switzerland's Tony Rominger won yesterday's 114-mile second stage between Orio and Salvatierra.
Overall (after 2nd stage): 1, Roche 8h 7m 06s; 2, Rominger same time; 3, Pensec; 4, Alcala; 5, A Kvalsvoll (Norway) all 7s.
SHOOTING: Charlotte Lemmer, the captain of the Gresham's School rifle team touring Jamaica, won two of the range championships at Kingston, scoring 49 out of 50 at both 500 and 900 yards.
Soccer: Bates set to bid for control of Bridge
By Christopher Davies
CHELSEA are set to secure their future at Stamford Bridge by buying the company who own the ground.
Ken Bates, the Chelsea chairman, had been given until tomorrow to pay £22.85 million to Cabra Estates, the property company who are Stamford Bridge's landlords, as the independent valuation put on the ground.
The alternative was possible eviction, but Mr Bates has been busy behind the scenes, and is poised to buy SB Properties, the Cabra subsidiary who own the ground.
The Mears family, former owners of Chelsea, formed SB in 1978 to counter increasing debts.
They retained the company — and therefore ground ownership — when Mr Bates bought the club for £200,000 four years later.
Mr Bates later tried to buy the lease, but instead former chairman Brian Mears sold out to Marler, a property company who were, in turn, swallowed up by Cabra in 1989 for £1.5 million.
Mr Bates has built up a 29.65 per cent stake in Cabra through a Virgin Islands-based company, Vanbrugh, but a full-scale bid looks unlikely.
Instead, Mr Bates may buy SB, with various factors, including Fulham's Craven Cottage site, reducing the outlay to around £13 million.
The plan is for Fulham to share Stamford Bridge.
Cabra's shares stand at around 7p and the company have debts of £50 million.
There has been a feeling that they would compromise with Chelsea to the extent of accepting half the £22.85 million valuation.
Gordon Taylor, chief executive of the Professional Footballers' Association, yesterday rejected the help of Leeds manager Howard Wilkinson as a mediator in the dispute with the Premier League.
But Mr Taylor was in an optimistic mood yesterday after a two-hour meeting with Rick Parry, his Premier League counterpart.
The pair will meet again today.
John Camkin, chief executive of the League Managers' Association, had written to Mr Taylor and Mr Parry suggesting that Mr Wilkinson, the association's chairman, could help.
But Mr Taylor said: ‘We already have Professor Sir John Wood in that very role.
He is an experienced, professional negotiator.’
It appears the terms agreed yesterday include a higher minimum guarantee of television revenue to the PFA.
Initially, they were offered £1 million, but that may now be nearer £1.5 million.
Martin O'Neill, manager of Conference side Wycombe Wanderers, has again been charged with bringing the game into disrepute.
O'Neill denies using abusive language to referee Eddy Green, who dismissed him from the dugout during a win over Northwich on March 24.
Last month, O'Neill was fined £200 under the same FA disciplinary rule, following an incident with referee Royston Osborne, when Wycombe lost at Cheltenham in February.
Worried Bilbao appoint Heynckes
By Graham Turner
SPANISH club Athletic Bilbao have appointed Jupp Heynckes as team manager for the next two seasons and have declared Real Sociedad manager John Toshack persona non grata.
The two announcements are not entirely unrelated.
For the Basque club, presently 13th in the Spanish first division, it is the fourth managerial appointment in the last two seasons.
This lack of continuity — and the failure of the club's famous youth scheme to produce players of acceptable quality — has left Athletic in danger of relegation for the first time in 64 years of Spanish league history.
Several weeks ago, the board decided the route out of a prolonged crisis had to be via a young, but internationally-experienced coach.
Uli Stielike, Alex Ferguson and Graeme Souness were on the short-list.
They have now decided, however, that Jupp Heynckes, 46, is the man for the job.
Capped 39 times by West Germany, the former Borussia Moenchengladbach forward was dismissed by Bayern Munich last October after elimination from the domestic Cup by second division Homburg and another home defeat in the league against modest Stuttgarter Kickers.
Heynckes had joined Bayern in 1987 after seven years as manager of Borussia, and led the Bavarian club to two Bundesliga titles.
At Bilbao, whose list of foreign managers includes Ronnie Allen and Howard Kendall, he will replace caretaker-manager Jesus Aranguren at the end of this season.
Bilbao's disarray has been underlined by the board's decision to declare John Toshack persona non grata.
Before last Saturday's Basque derby between Athletic and Toshack's Real Sociedad, Jesus Aranguren complained that the Bilbao side had been ‘ill-treated’ in San Sebastian.
In replying to the accusations, Mr Toshack pointed out that Bilbao's attempts to culture a romantic image as the sole defenders of Basque traditions were at odds with £3.75 million invested in signings and more managers in 12 months than Real Sociedad have had in the last eight years.
In Bilbao at the moment, the truth hurts so much that club employees — players and coaches included — have been banned from attending any social event where Mr Toshack's name appears on the guest list.
Jupp Heynckes faces a tough job at a club desperately in need of coherent policies.
England international Trevor Steven has a stress fracture of an ankle bone and missed Olympique Marseille's French Cup tie against second division Valenciennes last night.
Steven also missed last Friday's league match at Nancy and may be rested for Saturday's match with Montpellier in view of the possible championship-decider at Monaco a week on Saturday.
Chris Waddle confirmed he would leave Marseille at the end of the season.
‘The game against Cannes on April 25 will be my last match at the Velodrome,’ he said.
‘There is no way I can see [club president]Bernard Tapie changing his mind.’
Waddle, 31, wants to stay in France and would like to join Monaco whose coach Arsene Wenger, he says, is the best in France.
‘The only thing I'd miss is the contact with the fans,’ said Waddle.
Marseille average 25,000 crowds while Monaco play in front of 3,000 in their Louis II stadium.
A current England international anxious to play down speculation about a move is Bari forward David Platt.
Already linked with top Italian clubs Roma and Juventus, Platt is now said to be booked for a £5.7 million summer move to Napoli.
But Platt insisted that his only interest in Diego Maradona's old club was beating them at the weekend to boost Bari's survival chances.
With seven matches to play, 16th-placed Bari are in trouble and Platt said: ‘All I am interested in is Bari staying in Serie A. Three consecutive defeats have made the job harder, but I believe we will stay up, particularly if we beat Napoli at home.’
McDonald's Corporation said yesterday they would become the ninth sponsor of the 1994 World Cup in the United States.
‘This represents our first global sponsorship of a sporting event,’ said David Green, vice president of marketing for McDonald's, the fast food chain who boast 22 million customers a day.
A full sponsorship of the World Cup costs approximately £20 million and gives companies four signboards surrounding the pitches for all 52 games of the competition and all games at this summer's European Championship in Sweden.
McDonald's agreed to a two-board sponsorship, estimated at £11 million.
Soccer: Liverpool's worries turn to semi-final casualty list
By William Johnson
ONLY two hours before entering the operating theatre of a Manchester hospital for major heart surgery yesterday, an indefatigable Graeme Souness was on the telephone to his temporary replacement as Liverpool manager, Ronnie Moran.
He was not attempting to pick the team for tonight's First Division match against Wimbledon.
That is not his style, emphasised Mr Moran on the second day of his second spell as Anfield caretaker manager.
‘He wouldn't have been able to anyway because he didn't know what players we have available,’ said Mr Moran.
‘Neither do I. We'll be looking at one or two players in the morning and pick a side then.’
Liverpool suffered several injuries during Sunday's nerve-racking FA Cup semi-final against Portsmouth at Highbury and they will be below strength in the two matches before next Monday's replay.
Definitely out tonight is their outstanding young forward, Steve McManaman, with knee trouble.
He sees a specialist tomorrow but the club are optimistic that he is not as badly hurt as first feared.
Mr Moran sees no reason why Liverpool should not function normally in Mr Souness's absence.
‘I've seen it all before,’ he said.
‘I didn't have a chance to get a briefing from Graeme but I didn't get one when I took over from Kenny Dalglish.
‘I've been here long enough to know how it works.
I've learned a lot in my time working under various managers.
It is just a question of sitting down with people like Roy Evans and taking it from there.’
Mark Wright, who was Mr Souness's first signing last summer and was made club captain in December, was also confident that the Anfield machinery, which has been close to breaking point several times this season, will run smoothly until the manager's expected return in July.
‘Each of our backroom staff has his own individual character, but they are all very strong characters,’ said Wright yesterday.
‘Ronnie Moran and Roy Evans have been through a lot and seen a lot of players come and go.
I don't think there will be any problems.’
Appreciating that the key to a successful season lies in winning the replay against Portsmouth, Wright has no intention of allowing his team-mates to ease up in the two intervening League games.
‘That can never happen here,’ he insisted.
‘If you let the pace drop you would not be on the pitch for very long.
‘We know that the semi-final is important, and every one of us wants to win it for the manager, but we have got to approach every game in the same way.
‘We just have to hope that there are no more injuries before Monday and that Mr Moran has a good squad to pick from.
After that we can only hope that it goes in our favour because we know it won't be easy.’
Sunderland, whom Liverpool hope to oppose at Wembley on May 9, are worried about the size of their allocation of FA Cup final tickets.
Bob Murray, the Sunderland chairman, has made a personal plea to Football Association chief executive Graham Kelly over suggestions that there will be fewer Roker supporters at the final than at Sunday's semi-final victory over Norwich when more than 22,000 travelled from Wearside to Hillsborough.
The Second Division club fear they will be allotted 17,800 tickets if Liverpool overcome Portsmouth at Villa Park, though they expect to receive more if Portsmouth reach the final.
Liverpool would get the lion's share on the basis of their having 20,000 season-ticket holders and an average Anfield crowd of 35,000.
Soccer: Confident Taylor declines help offer
By Christopher Davies
GORDON TAYLOR, chief executive of the Professional Footballers' Association, yesterday rejected the help of Leeds manager Howard Wilkinson as a mediator in the dispute with the Premier League that has brought the game to the brink of a strike.
But Mr Taylor was in an optimistic mood after a two-hour meeting with Rick Parry, his Premier League counterpart, yesterday.
The pair will meet again today and Mr Taylor said: ‘We want to dot the I's and cross the T's on a whole range of issues — and we want to do it sooner rather than later.’
Earlier yesterday, John Camkin, chief executive of the League Managers' Association, wrote to Mr Taylor and Mr Parry suggesting that Mr Wilkinson, the association's chairman, could help resolve outstanding points.
But Mr Taylor said: ‘The PFA have to look after their own affairs and we already have Professor Sir John Wood in that very role.
He is an experienced, professional negotiator and if both sides agree to arbitration then he would be the man involved.’
It appears the terms agreed yesterday included an improvement in the minimum guarantee of television revenue to the PFA.
Initially, they were offered a minimum guarantee of £1 million, but that may now be closer to £1.5 million.
Also, the Premier League are offering a sliding scale of percentages of television revenue, rather than a straight five per cent.
Arsenal, Liverpool and Sheffield Wednesday are involved in the chase for a UEFA Cup place tonight.
Third-placed Wednesday go to relegation-threatened Coventry, outgoing champions Arsenal visit Norwich and Liverpool entertain Wimbledon at Anfield.
Arsenal take an unbeaten 11-match run to Carrow Road, where Norwich may still be under a cloud after their FA Cup semi-final failure against Sunderland on Sunday.
Wimbledon could give Arsenal a lift by continuing their jinx on Liverpool.
They have lost only once at Anfield since beating them in the 1988 FA Cup Final.
Soccer: Bruce error helps City's 10 men haul back United
By Colin Gibson
Manchester Utd 1 Manchester City 1 JUST when the First Division championship seemed within touching distance for the first time in a quarter of a century, Steve Bruce pushed it just out of Manchester United's reach at Old Trafford last night.
Until a moment of madness by Bruce, the United stand-in captain, Alex Ferguson's side appeared likely to open up the most significant lead in this topsy turvy title race.
With the prospect of putting four points between themselves and the chasing Leeds, United lost their tempers — and their lead.
Bruce, who has been inspirational in United's pursuit of their first championship in 25 years, was guilty of a reckless and needless challenge he will regret.
This most abrasive of Manchester derbies had exploded in the 55th minute with the sending-off of Pointon, the former Everton defender, for a crude and cruel tackle on Giggs.
He is the first player to be sent off in a Manchester derby since 1974, when both Lou Macari and Mike Doyle were dismissed.
Pointon had been caught by a late Giggs tackle just before, and the referee decided that a strong word with the young Welshman, who had given United the lead with a goal worthy of crowning champions, was sufficient.
The City defender, clearly felt that sterner action was required.
Within seconds he had felled Giggs, leaving the United winger crumpled on the Old Trafford mudheap after taking the law into his own hands.
It was a horrible tackle.
Bruce was incensed.
Captaining the side in the absence of the injured Robson, Bruce foolishly ran 40 yards to become involved, and his action prompted a mass confrontation.
Had Schmeichel, the giant Danish international goalkeeper, not intervened and dragged Bruce out of the melee by the scruff of his neck, there might have been more red cards.
But Bruce's anger was matched by that of Alex Ferguson, the United manager, who accused Pointon of trying to ‘maim’ Giggs.
The Football Association might now look into the incident, which is captured on film.
Bruce was still lost in the red mists of temper seven minutes later when Simpson, City's impressive recruit from Swindon, released White with a splendid pass — and Bruce tracked him almost to the deadball line before scything him down.
Referee Worrall pointed to the penalty spot.
Even the massed ranks of City supporters behind the United goal could not have expected their great rivals to throw away their lead in such a foolish manner.
Curle stepped up and placed the penalty beyond Schmeichel and suddenly United looked as though they would be grateful for a point from a game they should have controlled — and won.
Until Pointon's dismissal, which gave Peter Reid's side new passion and determination, City looked prepared to play their part in gift-wrapping the championship for United.
They had demolished Leeds in such a pyschologically damaging fashion on Saturday at Maine Road that Howard Wilkinson's side were steeling themselves for disappointment.
But then City, who have not won a League match at Old Trafford since condemning United to relegation in 1973, reverted to the sort of form that has left them without an away win since November.
Although McMahon at first was an abrasive force in midfield, where United missed the steadying influence of the injured Robson, he began to lose possession — and control — in his first Manchester derby, and he was robbed of the ball by Sharpe and McClair.
The ball went from McClair to Hughes, whose cross-field pass sent Giggs away to crash a shot past Coton.
It was Giggs second successive goal in Manchester derby matches.
His first, on his debut a year ago, was a scruffy affair, but this one, his first League goal since Boxing Day, was fit to lift the championship.
But Bruce's irrational behaviour spoiled it all.
Not only did he concede the penalty but he also presented White with the perfect chance to cap a memorable day.
The City winger had spent the day with his wife, who had given birth to a son.
In the dying moments of the match, Bruce made another wild swing at a cross and the ball fell to White, unmarked, six yards from goal.
But he shot tamely wide of Schmeichel.
Manchester United: Schmeichel; Donaghy, Irwin, Bruce, Blackmore (Kanchelskis), Pallister, Giggs, Ince, McClair, Hughes, Sharpe.
Manchester City: Coton; Hill, Pointon, Brennan (Brightwell, 62), Curle, Vonk, White, Sheron (Reid, 75), Quinn, Simpson, McMahon.
West Country Living: Putting great store in setting up shop Cheryl Taylor on the lure of cottage industry for restless townies
By CHERYL TAYLOR
THERE is still a strong desire by prosperous townies for that little grey home in the West with business attached.
Post offices, general stores, small hotels and bed-and-breakfasts are all popular; so are equestrian centres.
‘Many people have left the bright lights and made a success in tourism-related businesses and cottage industries, such as cheese-making and brewing,’ says Terry Trevarthen, regional director for Miller Countrywide in Truro.
‘But there have been failures.
Not everyone can last the course down here; they find the long hours and the winter climate not to their liking, and there is a high drop-out rate.’
Lyn Haughey gave up her job as a secretary in Tring, Hertfordshire, when she moved to Cornwall six months ago with her fiance Robert Brown, a retired policeman and accomplished chef.
Now the proud owner of the Chelsea House hotel overlooking the seafront in Falmouth, she says: ‘There's a lot of competition, but you can make a living here if you're prepared to work hard.
The cost of living is cheaper, rates are lower and farm produce plentiful and cheap.’
The couple paid £140,000 last September for the abandoned Edwardian seafront hotel, a bank repossession, and have spent another £30,000 doing it up.
They are now booking for Easter (£17 per person for bed, breakfast and evening meal).
Ian Perry, fed up with the daily commute on overcrowded trains and a boring bank job in the City, traded in his four-bedroomed detached house in New Malden for a village post office and general store in Paul, near Land's End.
A year later, living above the shop — a 150-year-old converted granite cottage — he finds running his own business a lot more stimulating than working in a bank, and village life much more fun.
He plays darts for the local pub, and his wife Anne, has joined the Womens Institute.
‘The hours are long, but it doesn't really feel like work.
Life down here is conducted at a far more relaxed pace of life and the people are friendlier,’ he says.
‘We feel a real sense of belonging, and even if the business collapsed tomorrow we'd never go back to the south east.’
Mike Bettsworth, a freelance writer and Press consultant now living in a converted chapel in the small village of Bere Alston, on the banks of the Tamar Valley at the edge of Dartmoor, says it is the slowness of life in the West and the wide open spaces which appeal to him.
He finds excitement watching the local lifeboat being launched or the rescue teams in action on Dartmoor.
But he cautions the prosperous townie newcomer that money and ambition will count for nothing: ‘You must wait patiently for acceptance into the village, and learn to share the atavistic values of the region.’
West Country Living: More chain store links John Dudman on how the supermarkets are branching out west
By JOHN DUDMAN
THE FIVE counties making up the south western corner of England have become a prime target for supermarket development.
Supermarket property developers have been scouring Cornwall, Devon, Somerset, Avon and Dorset for suitable sites in a concerted research drive covering the income potential of every postcode district, the location of residential areas, traffic flow and key road junctions.
The creation of hundreds of retail jobs is a significant factor in a region where unemployment can go as high as 23.7 per cent.
The Sainsbury's which opened last November at Torquay has a shopping arcade of 38,000 sq ft, with parking for 600 cars.
Another opening at Taunton later this year has room for 1,750 cars.
Planning permission is awaited for stores in Plymouth, Exeter, Frome, Somerset, and Ferndown, Dorset, and last month the firm presented designs for its first Cornwall supermarket to Truro council.
The most recent Safeway opened in Penzance in 1989; new stores open in Plymouth and Tavistock later this year.
Others are under consideration in Frome and Heston, Cornwall.
To meet the competition from the supermarkets, 240 West Country retailers in the Spar franchise sell mainly convenience food.
Coupled with Sunday trading and later hours, this attracts the frequent customer rather than the weekly shopper.
Gateway, already the leading chain store in the West Country with 96 supermarkets, is also expanding.
Three supermarkets will open this year in Knightsbridge, Sidmouth and Minehead.
West Country Living: It may be roses but it's not all rats
By LYNNE EDMUNDS
HORROR stories still rife about thatched cottages are the dark lining to the dream of living a rustic roses-round-the-door life in one.
They cover everything from rats running about the roof to astronomic insurance charges; from a gale removing the whole roof to the discovery that there is a two-year waiting list for repairs.
Many are apocryphal, although where a thatcher makes use of straw which contains a few ears of grain, rats may be a problem.
Types of reed are now chosen which are less combustible, and then specially treated, so insurance companies who understand thatch now offer better deals.
As for shortages of craftsmen, there are now more apprentices in Devon and more qualified thatchers than work to go round.
What about losing your roof?
Tony Williams, whose family has worked at the craft for around 110 years in the Truro area, finds thatch is likely to be more secure than other types of roofing.
‘You don't get the suction effect of the wind, which you do with tiles,’ he explains.
‘And you gain on heating costs.’
One of 10 thatchers in Cornwall, he estimates that a totally new reed thatch can cost from £3,500, and lasts around 12 years.
West Country Living: Londoners lead rush for houses John Dudman finds a pre-election surge
By JOHN DUDMAN
BEHIND the excitement of general election campaigning, a significant surge in property sales has been quietly building up in the West Country.
Londoners lead the buyers from the south east looking for that cottage with an acre, or the house beside a river or overlooking a rugged coast.
Last week GA Property Services, which has 28 offices in the south west, sold £50 million worth of houses there.
John Waldron, regional managing director, reports ‘a significant increase’ in sales in the £150,000 to £400,000 band.
He confirms a 24 per cent rise in sales between January and March, compared with the same period last year, with buyers from outside Devon, Cornwall and Somerset stimulating local business.
‘You'd be amazed how many people live in this region because they are fed up with the rat-race,’ he says.
‘But whatever the outcome of the election, we are anticipating that the market for the rest of this year will be reasonably healthy.
I'm more optimistic than I have been for the past few years.’
Confidence has risen since Christmas as prices dropped to more realistic levels.
But, he says, agents have also learned the lessons of recent years by adapting their sales measures to cope with the recession, identifying more closely buyers capable of meeting their financial responsibilities and building solid ‘chains’ to ensure successful completion of negotiations.
In St Austell, one estate agent, May, Whetter and Grose, sold more than 20 houses last month.
Assistant manager Louise Chadwick says: ‘We were very happy with March.
Prices have dropped to a reasonable level, and we have buyers competing for them, with gazumping going on.
When the election is over I think we shall see further improvement.’
West Country Living: Houses with a clubhouse attached Roy White finds plenty in the area to attract the golfer, including homes a chip shot away from a course.
Ideal for retirement…and you might see some big names in action
By ROY WHITE
RETIREMENT to the West Country is often the result of years of holidaying there.
But a week or so in a holiday cottage isn't the same as becoming a permanent resident.
It is, of course, very different in the winter, and in high summer your peace may be shattered when the tourist season gets under way .
It all needs careful consideration.
But for those who take the plunge there is plenty to keep them amused, particularly if they play bowls or golf.
Bowls clubs abound, and for the golfer there is a good selection of courses, ranging from parkland courses inland to some truly great links, particularly along the northern coast.
At Kingsley Park, opposite the Royal North Devon golf club, what was once a leisure complex with holiday bungalows and apartments has now become a development of retirement and second homes.
The bungalows are in the process of being completely refurbished.
The properties, all two bed units, vary in price according to whether they are detached (£39,950), semi-detached (£35,750), or a unit in one of the blocks of three in a terrace at £33,750.
(Saylex Properties, 0237 473314).
All the properties have small gardens and parking space.
The golf club is open for membership subject to committee approval.
Entrance fee is £220 plus VAT, and the annual subscription is the same.
Other facilities at the nearby leisure centre include indoor bowls, a ballroom, restaurant and a swimming pool.
Not far from Barnstaple, at Umberleigh, is Libbaton golf course, a new development with a range of properties overlooking its fairways.
These include three- and four-bedroom, two-bathroom homes available from £120,000, including life membership of the club.
(Details, J.E.G. Construction, 0769 60080).
At Blackawton, near Totnes, the first nine holes of the Dartmouth Golf and Country Club course will be ready for play next month, and the second nine should be ready by July.
Membership is being structured through a sale of shares.
The first tranche at £8,000 per ordinary share closed last month.
The course, which was designed by Jeremy Pern, has three nine-hole loops.
Nigel Mansell, who has a house on the course, is the club's president.
(Details, 080 421 650).
Hitchens Quality Homes has developed a number of properties close to the golf club, ranging from two bedroom detached bungalows (£159,500) to three bedroom three storey houses (£169,950).
All are leasehold.
(Constables, 0752 668242)
At Old Stone Cross, not far from the club, is The Firs, a four-bedroom detached house, with lounge and dining room plus a study or 5th bedroom.
Standing in a third of an acre, it has a small kitchen garden and a double garage.
(£229,000 freehold).
About four miles from Dartmouth, at Hemborough Post, is Stonehouse, a four-bedroom semi-detached 16th century cottage with ample parking.
(£155,000 freehold).
Adjoining Stonehouse is Stone Cottage, a converted barn which has three bedrooms, bathroom, a large lounge, dining room, a modern kitchen and parking for two cars.
(£145,000 freehold.
Fulfords, 0803 832223).
Perhaps the most exciting development in the West Country over the past 20 years is the St Mellion Golf and Country Club, near Saltash, in Cornwall.
This was the brainchild of Martin and Hermon Bond, two farmers, who had more than a passing interest in golf.
It all began in 1974 when the brothers invited J. Hamilton Stutt to design a golf course in this beautiful area of Camelot country.
A hotel and leisure complex followed, and then the Bonds invited Jack Nicklaus to design a second, which is the country's first galleried golf course.
It was officially opened in 1988 and introduced tournament golf to Cornwall.
Next month the Benson and Hedges International Open will be held there.
Golfers seeking a new home may be interested in the properties now being built overlooking the second and third fairways of the Nicklaus course, known as St Mellion Park.
Built by ARC Homes, prices range from £159,500 for a three bedroomed bungalow to £350,000 for a five bed, four bathroom house, with a triple garage.
Owners are entitled to two residential memberships of the country club and this can be up-graded to include golf membership of either course, without having to join a waiting list.
(Details, 0579 50116).
West Country Living: Here's health, though don't go and get too remote Out-of-the-way retirement is idyllic.
But then, Joanna Lyall points out, comes the day when you fall ill
By JOANNA LYALL
THE West Country, together with East Anglia, came out top in a recent satisfaction survey by the National Association of Health Authorities and Trusts.
Overall, 83 per cent of respondents were satisfied with the NHS in Avon, Somerset, Dorset, Devon and Cornwall and even more — 89 per cent— were happy with their GPs.
London, by contrast, came bottom with only 62 per cent of respondents saying they were satisfied with their health services.
‘The quality of life is undoubtedly much better down here,’ says Dr Peter Sims, director of public health for North Devon, who moved from Bedfordshire three years ago.
But transport is difficult and the remote country home can be a mistake, particularly for the retired.
‘One of the partners dies and it's often very difficult for the one left alone with the big garden, particularly if they don't drive.’
People should try to think several years ahead, considering factors such as access to hospitals and choice of GPs, he suggests.
Linda Stapleton, who moved down from Middlesex 10 years ago, and is secretary of the North Devon community health council in Barnstaple, agrees: ‘Services down here are generally very good, but you have to go further and choice can be limited.
And what do you do if you're not very mobile and fall out with the only GP or practice in the village?’
Patients must go to Exeter — an 80 mile round trip — for hip operations and to Bristol if they need heart surgery.
The West has more than 200 hospitals, including 60 small community hospitals where GPs can look after their own patients in places such as Axminster, Bovey Tracey, Brixham, Burnham-on-Sea, Clevedon, St Austell, Lydney, Tiverton and Totnes.
A programme of accreditation, aimed at improving these small units, was launched by South Western regional health authority two years ago and 26 have already been accredited.
The 21-bed Clevedon hospital near Weston-super-Mare is one of those which has been accredited.
Opened in 1875, it now provides physiotherapy, x-ray, a casualty service and minor operations.
Last year 365 patients were admitted and 13,971 casualties were assessed and treated.
Local GPs carried out 279 operations there.
‘These hospitals are essential in an area like this where many older people find themselves a long way from their family,’ says Dr David Skerrett, a GP who has practised in Fowey, Cornwall, for 30 years and plans to stay put for his retirement.
‘We definitely have a privileged existence here.
But isolation is a problem,’ he adds.
It is 25 miles to the nearest district general hospital from some parts of the county and ambulances can be delayed on narrow roads, crowded with holiday traffic.
Cornwall's air ambulance service, based at Newquay, has undoubtedly saved many lives, following heart attacks and major accidents, according to Mike Sheen, director of ambulance services for the county.
‘The air ambulance can go anywhere in Cornwall and is on the scene in nine minutes from the time of getting the 999 call, on average,’ he says.
Established in 1987, and called out up to six times a day in the summer, the service has completed more than 3,000 missions with the running costs of £500,000 a year met entirely from donations.
There are private hospitals in Bath, Bournemouth, Bristol, Dorchester, Exeter, Plymouth, Taunton, Torquay and Truro, as well as several centres offering private health screening.
There are NHS stroke units at Frenchay hospital, Bristol, the Royal Devon and Exeter, and at Torbay hospital, Torquay.
In Somerset, consultants already hold clinics in GPs' surgeries, but the health authority is looking at new ways of providing services in rural areas, following a recent survey which showed a low take up of hospital services by those in remote areas with poor transport.
‘There's a great temptation to move to the middle of Exmoor where the quality of life is fantastic.
But then you realise it's 30 or 40 miles to the nearest general hospital and that can be difficult particularly as you get older,’ says Dr Tony Hill, consultant in public health medicine.
West Country Living: Where gas really could be the main problem Lynne Edmunds suggests that all buyers should have their houses checked for radon
By LYNNE EDMUNDS
A FIRST priority for anyone considering buying a house in Cornwall and some areas of neighbouring Devon including the more remoter regions of Dartmoor is to have it tested for radon gas.
This natural gas, formed from uranium and radium, seeps out of the ground — in Cornwall it actually comes through the granite — and can build up to cancer-inducing levels if measures are not taken to deal with it properly.
In these days of double-glazing and central heating it quite quickly exceeds safety levels, especially on the ground floor where it can be trapped beneath the floor boards.
Although local authorities in the area have maps of ‘randon territory,’ the variability between dwelling and dwelling means that individual testing is essential.
‘The level depends on the geology under each house — next door could be safe but yours might have a high level,’ explains Jill Wilkinson of the National Radiological Protection Board.
‘The proved long-term risks of lung cancer — and the smaller risk of leukaemia, from inhaling it over any period of time — mean it has to be regarded very seriously.’
In response to criticisms that not enough was being done to inform people in high risk areas — and some level of randon is present virtually everywhere — the Department of the Environment recently sent out a leaflet to every house in the south west of England.
About 75,000 householders responded — and virtually all have now had their homes tested free.
‘The chances are that, even in that area, your house will be all right,’ says Jill.
‘The construction of the house is also an important factor.
The Building Research Advisory Service and the local authority can also help with information.’
But she still stresses the necessity of an expert test — and the board's concern that the information has not yet got through to all the householders in the area who are at risk.
For that reason they held a conference last month with delegates from the local authorities, and building and insurance worlds.
‘It's difficult to estimate the cost of making your house safe if it is found to have a serious problem, but in many cases it will be around £1,000.
If the house already has a suspended floor, a good do-it-yourself person can do the job.’
It is not a difficult job; it merely involves removing airbricks in one side of the house and inserting a pipe under the floor and a small fan unit on the outside.
‘That pulls the radon into the space and then out into the air.’
If the house has a solid floor then a radon stump has to be dug into the foundations.
For more information, write to Radon, N.R.P.B., Chilton, Didcot, Oxford.
West Country Living: A few hours or a few weeks before the mast With air like this, it's a sin not to get out into it.
Boating, fishing and watching a profusion of birds await you, says
Marcus Palliser
By MARCUS PALLISER
FROM Bristol to Bournemouth there are more than 600 miles of coastline; it is hard to imagine living in the West Country without taking advantage of this natural bounty.
At the top of the list is boating of all kinds.
The South coast, where there are plenty of deep, safe harbours, is preferred for most cruising — both sail and motor.
Surfboarding is popular on the North coast, where crashing Atlantic combers spend themselves in long beaches.
Dinghy sailing and competitive match racing are best in the sheltered harbours of Poole, Plymouth Sound and the Fal estuary.
Sports like jet-skiing and water-skiing are limited to specified areas.
If your fancy is for sea breezes and the gentle slap of water at the bow of a yacht, there are many sailing schools ready to teach you to sail.
Schools should be approved by the Royal Yachting Association.
Poole Harbour Sailing is one of them, giving expert individual tuition aboard a 32 ftRival yacht.
Another of the smaller outfits is Blue Peter Sailing, which runs a 29-footer with seven berths and promises not to give you the ‘sail-it-on-its-ear-and-hard-luck-if-you're-seasick’ routine.
In the same area the Dart Sailing School not only teaches but offers charter boats from 28 ft to 60 ft when you're ready to go it alone.
Fal Sail will also get you started with a full range of RYA courses, and its prices are typical with a five-day tuition package costing £320 per person in high season.
Cruises of one to three weeks can take in Ireland, the Scilly Isles or north and south Brittany.
Cornish Adventure Sailing will do all this and even take you across the Bay of Biscay to La Coruna in northern Spain.
If you yearn for the romance of the golden age of sail, try the Island Cruising Club based at Salcombe, which runs a gorgeous 72 ft Edwardian schooner and a 70 ft Brixham sailing trawler.
The sight of these two storming along under a cloud of canvas is enough to stir the blood of most landlubbers.
Even if you don't want to sail, the ICC welcomes members to help with fund-raising or maintenance — an ideal role for those retiring to the seaside for a gentler life.
The RYA can provide a full list of sailing clubs and waterborne pursuits.
For fishing fanatics, the rivers estuaries and coast offer endless opportunities.
Among many deep sea angling operators, Alternative Cornish Holidays runs a 32 ft, 120hp motor fishing vessel from Padstow to hook bass, mackerel, cod, ling, congers, pollock and even shark.
Martin and Liz Hunt's Adventurline offers walking and exploration tours to uncover Cornwall's flora, fauna and prehistory — and in warm weather you may be lucky enough to swim with Atlantic grey seals, as a break from trekking the coastal path.
To get as close as possible to sea-dwelling fauna (and perhaps pick up a crustacean for the lunchtable), take a short course in diving and snorkelling.
Bovisand Underwater Centre, near Plymouth, runs courses for beginners.
Birdwatchers flock to the West Country in numbers as impressive as their quarry.
The coast attracts many species not found elsewhere in Britain, and sometimes quite rare birds are blown off course to land exhausted on the mainland peninsula or the Isles of Scilly.
Avocets, shelduck and black-tailed godwits can be found in the estuaries, while the shores and islands are host to guillemots, kittiwakes, skuas and puffins.
Only 17 people live on Lundy Island, but there is no shortage of winged residents, so keen ornithologists may make the boat trip from Bideford more than once.
It takes two and a half hours each way.
The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds runs Avocet Cruises on Devon's Exe estuary in the winter.
In summer they set up a video camera on Berry Head near Torquay to show close-up views of cliff-dwelling birds.
Boswednack Manor is set between the Penwith Moors and the wild Cornish coastline, and combines natural history with meditation and organic food.
Graham Gynn, who runs weekend courses at the manor near Zennor, says that birdwatching and listening to waves rhythmically pounding the shore calm the mind and create a harmony with nature.
He should know; he was once warden of the remote island of Skokholm off the Pembrokeshire coast.
In the West Country you are drawn into its natural beauty by the progress of the seasons and the constant contact with the sea.Whether it be dolphin counting from a yacht or standing in esturial slime to catch a flatfish, the coast is a pleasure ground that rarely disappoints.
West Country Living: French disconnection Brits are now returning from France and heading West, says Janette Hughes
By JANETTE HUGHES
WITH a 40 per cent drop in house prices in the West Country over the past three years, this is the time to think seriously about that Cornish cliff-top cottage, waterfront Dorset flat or Devonian mansion with more than enough land to keep a few horses.
It is recognised that a lot of people who might once have bought homes in the West Country have been flocking to France in recent years to cash in on the predicted property boom.
Even British farmers have been getting in on the act, attracted by the lure of cheap agricultural land at prices half those on our side of the Channel.
Now the tide has turned.
Dai Jenkin, a director at Gribble, Booth & Taylor, estate agents in Devon and Somerset, finds a growing number of British people who bought homes and went to live in France three or four years ago are now moving back to the West Country.
He explains: ‘Summer holidays in a French village can be great fun, but the place can turn into a different proposition in the depths of winter, when you are far from friends and family, especially if you don't speak the language.’
Geoffrey Miller, an independent estate agent in Tavistock, Devon, confirms this trend: ‘There has certainly been much more activity in the market in recent months, particularly cash buyers looking for bargains.’
British farmers who sold up a few years ago to buy cheap agricultural land in France are also finding that the grass is no greener on the other side of the Channel, and costs more.
‘With a glut of farming properties on the market in parts of south west England at drastically reduced prices, now is the time for them to buy,’ Dai Jenkin says.
David Fursdon, of Stags estate agents in Devon, where a six-bedroom farmhouse near Exeter with farm buildings and 144 acres is on sale at £290,000, says: ‘With agricultural land prices at 50 per cent down, there are some good buys closer to home.’
Residential building land, too, has plummeted in value.
Self-employed builders, unable to make a living building homes in the West Country, are now busily converting rambling French farmhouses into gites.
Martin Holden, of Viner Carew, explains: ‘There is a surplus of residential building land outside main centres, particularly in parts of Cornwall, where land values have fallen by 75 per cent to less than £100,000 an acre — even in Plymouth, where land that was selling for £600,000 an acre is now fetching £200,000.
‘At this level there are some land deals being done.’
The West Country agents are now fighting back.
Dai Jenkin is staging a West Country property show at the offices of Barnard Marcus, the Knightsbridge estate agents this weekend from 10am-5pm.
‘We want to bring to the attention of people in the south east of England just what we have to offer in the West Country,’ he says.
The estate agents' hyperbole pushes the line that the countryside is lush and green, the beaches are superb, and there are still plenty of pretty villages on our side of the Channel.
For instance, a two-bedroom terraced cottage in Cornwall can now often be found from as little as £30,000, or there are Devon waterfront houses from £60,000.
And there are no estate agents' fees to pay when you buy, unlike in France, where all fees — from 10 to 25 per cent of the purchase price (the cheaper the property the higher the fees)— including four or five per cent for the estate agent, notarial costs, taxes and other liabilities, must be paid by the purchaser.
Buying costs on a £30,000 French property, for example, would amount to around £6,000.
This compares with a bill of around £600 in this country, including solicitors' costs and mortgage evaluation fee, but not including Stamp Duty (at least until August).
While prices in many parts of northern France are still cheaper than in south west England, those who dabble in French residential property will quickly discover there are few fat profits to be made.
Restoration costs are high, resale may be difficult and French tax will take a large proportion of any profit.
Improved road and rail links with the rest of Britain, good local amenities, and a wide range of leisure activities make the West Country a popular location for weekend home owners, and retirement.And retired people should also bear in mind the high cost of French health care.
Although basic medical treatment can be obtained in France under a reciprocal agreement, it is not entirely free.
You may be required to pay up front for any treatment and will only be able to reclaim part of the cost.
You are unlikely to find much in the way of sheltered housing or retirement home developments in France.
In the West Country, buyers are spoilt for choice.
Even some of the most popular retirement spots, such as Torbay, Sidmouth, Bath and Budleigh Salterton, have their fair share of bargains, with prices 40 per cent down on three years ago.
A big attraction of the West Country for many second home owners is the opportunity it offers for waterside living.
Peter Thompson, marketing director of Marina Developments Group, says:
‘We have the best sailing and the best facilities for boat owners, with prices of waterfront homes here at rock bottom.’
West Country Living: Where you can't overlook the sea Anyone thinking of living in the region must take into account the waterside factor, says Marcus Palliser
By MARCUS PALLISER
IN MID-SUMMER, contemplating a day on the beach, Truronians will cast an eye skywards and decide on the instant whether to head for the north coast or the south.
For the chances are that one will be shrouded in a cool mist, while the other bakes in blazing sunshine.
And with either coast no more than eight miles away, the right beach is reached in minutes.
Nowhere in the West Country is far from the sea, which can be glimpsed from many high points: Exmoor, Dartmoor, the spine of Cornwall.
At Carn Brea, near Redruth, on a clear day, the sea can be seen in three directions.
The distance between Avonmouth, near Bristol, and Poole in Dorset is only 65 miles as the crow flies.
Anyone contemplating living in the West Country must take into account the waterside factor.
The maritime climate has its pros and cons.
Wonderfully clean air and an almost Mediterranean translucence have attracted both convalescents and artists for centuries.
And when it is hot, it is very hot; but mostly it is just wet.
So you want to live on the coast?
The big choice is, which one, north or south?
Dorset, Devon and Cornwall on the English Channel side are Britain's riviera, more sheltered from the prevailing winds, and offering a charmingly soft coastline dotted with pretty fishing villages.
Turning the corner at Land's End brings you to another world.
The high jagged north coast of Cornwall, Devon and Somerset rises to meet pounding surf and gales.
There are few havens from storms, but the coastal scenery verges on the Wagnerian.
There are miles of the finest, cleanest sandy beaches in Europe and some of the best surfing in the world.
On the tempestuous north coast, double glazing, central heating and damp proof courses are among the first essentials.
Winters are wild enough to curtail many of the outdoor pursuits that attract in the first place.
Except for the strongest constitutions, coastal walking, bird watching and easel painting are best reserved for milder seasons.
A cruise along the more poular southern edge of the region reveals a greater variety of environments.
Large population centres include Bournemouth, Poole, Weymouth, Torbay, Plymouth, Falmouth and Penzance.
Unspoilt havens on the coast are non-existent, but some smaller communities have escaped the worst.
Swanage (Dorset), Salcombe (Devon), Fowey (Cornwall) and the whole of the Isles of Scilly may teem with tourists in the summer, but have managed to keep their general character intact while not being ruined by development.
The random and unrestrained building of pre-planning times is over, of course, and the National Trust owns a larger proportion of the coastline than any other part of the country.
No more virgin coastal cliff will be sprinkled with bungalows.
Devon county council, typical in the region, has the over-riding aim of protecting the natural heritage against the ravages of tourism (which accounts for a large part of the county's economy), the needs of the local industries and rising demand for retirement homes.
New tourist attractions are welcome only inland.
The coastal towns are expanding in their hinterlands rather than along the waterfront, and disused industrial areas are favoured for development.
At Exmouth there are plans to redevelop the old docks for new housing.
The Exe estuary is an international bird sanctuary under pressure from surfboarders, waterskiers, yachtsmen and anglers.
Exton, a village on the estuary, has doubled in size since 1984, says Keith Taylor, Devon's planning chairman, who lives there.
He is now losing his watery view because a house is being built in front of his.
Other planners are wondering how much more development can be absorbed.
Just outside the region, Hampshire county council has banned future marina development, pressuring Dorset, Devon and Cornwall to create extra moorings.
The RYA says that over the next 10 years demand for new berths will reach 85,000 nationally on top of the present 190,000.
Most of these are needed on the coast from Bristol to King's Lynn.
But with as many as 28 separate bodies — from the Department of Environment to the Crown Estates Commissioners (who control foreshore leases) to the RSPB — being involved in waterfront planning, development wrangles will continue.
Nor have official bodies been able to ward off the most sinister threat.
Toxic waste from Cornwall's mining past is discolouring the mud and threatening wildlife in the Fal estuary, one of the country's most desired spots for waterside living.
West Country Living: Now's the time to take the plunge at the water's edge The property price fall is worst of all where waves are in view, Marcus Palliser finds
By MARCUS PALLISER
WHATEVER your dream of living by the water in the West Country, now is the time to make the move.
Property prices are down around 30-35 per cent from the high of 1988, and for waterside locations have plummeted by 40 per cent, says Dai Jenkins of Gribble, Booth & Taylor, who have branches in Devon, Cornwall, Somerset and Dorset.
‘If you want to be ahead of the market in the most favoured areas, start looking now,’ says Jenkins.
In good times, properties in places such as Newton Ferrers, Sidmouth and Salcombe commanded a premium.
But in the bad times the market for second and retirement homes disappeared, and the local market can't take up the slack.
This view is supported by Millers of Truro.
The head of its specialist waterside and country homes department, Ian Lillicrap, says the market is rich with opportunities.
At secluded Pill Creek, near Feock on the Fal estuary, he has two sales now under way and three more properties to choose from.
Yet he has seen only two other houses in the creek come on the market in the last 12 years.
Agents can find the charming cottage in local stone or sun-soaked limewash on the edge of a sandy beach in a sheltered creek, but be prepared to pay top money.
A patch of waterfront can treble the value of an ordinary house.
With its own small quay, a landing stage and 180 ft of frontage on to Mylor Creek, near Falmouth, Otter Bridge would fulfil many a dream, even though the house itself is modern.
The principal rooms look out over Mylor Harbour and Carrick Roads, one of Britain's most beautiful estuaries and busiest day sailing haunts.
At Otter Bridge, a deep water mooring near the house can be rented.
Millers has the house for sale at £295,000.
For sheer quantity of waterfrontage — 800 yd of it — Bellscat Farmhouse near Fowey must be hard to beat.
The grounds total about 55 acres with gardens, pasture and woodland rolling down the steep slopes to meet the waters of the River Fowey and Woodgate Pill.
The Georgian farmhouse is listed Grade II, and the whole is for sale through John D Wood at £450,000 freehold.
However, at low water, the river is little more than a trickle.
If the bungalow on the clifftop is more your style, then Old Farm Bungalow at Pentire, near Newquay, perches high above the Cannel estuary, and includes 125 ft water frontage.
The house has three bedrooms and a separate two bed flat is included in the price of £285,000 (Millers).
Devon also offers watery dwellings.
Right at the top of the scale must be Waddeton Court, near Stoke Gabriel, overlooking the River Dart.
The house is a large Elizabethan revival mansion built in the 19th century with 152 acres of grounds including river frontage along the entire southern side.
An old boathouse has been converted into a three bedroomed cottage.
For sale through Knight Frank & Rutley as a whole or in six lots, the asking price is £2.3 million.
More modestly, the same agents are offering six new apartments at Kingswear with views across to Dartmouth.
There is no frontage included but prices start at £145,000 for a two bed flat.
If views are enough to satisfy watery aspirations, the Somerset coastline should be on your list.
Prices for these northern shores are generally 10-15 per cent lower than their English Channel equivalent.
In the Minehead area, Gribble Booth & Taylor have properties as diverse as a fisherman's cottage at £69,950, a modern flat development at £79,950 and a detached bungalow at £82,500.
Modern harbourside developments are increasingly popular.At Admiral's Quay in Falmouth, part of the old waterfront, six flats and four houses in Phase I are new and only a minute's walk from the town.
Prices start at £175,000 through GA Town & Country.
You can enjoy the water in a small dinghy as much as in a luxury yacht.
In the West country waterside living offers a similar breadth of choice, and with the market approaching its low water mark, now might be the time to take the plunge.
West Country Living: The squire found fortune and the building bug Chris Partridge on a 19th century love match — she loved his
By CHRIS PARTRIDGE
THE West Country has seen some notable eccentric squires, such as the squire of Selworthy who took a fly-fishing rod to church so he could wake anyone nodding off during the sermon with a smart crack on the head with a lead sinker.
But few came odder than Joseph Neeld.
Up to the age of 39 he was one of that sad, nervous and obscure clan of people who scraped a living as a barrister while waiting for a distant relative to die and leave him an independent income.
Nobody was more surprised than Neeld when his miserly great-uncle proved to be worth nearly £1 million, mostly in cash.
In 1827 this was a fabulous fortune.
Neeld decided to become a landlord, and began buying estates in Somerset and West Wiltshire.
He also became a compulsive builder.
Eventually he owned most of the country between Bath and Malmesbury, an estate that he covered with a complete range of model estate buildings, from tiny farm workers' cottages to his great house at Grittleton.
Rather endearingly, his own houses came last, since he started off by erecting a school for his tenants' children.
The first house he built for his own occupation was a stopgap, put up to live in until something more suitable was acquired.
The house was originally called The Resident Lodge, now known as the Tower House, near Bath.
This enchantingly dotty building has recently been restored and is now on the market.
For all his wealth, the Tower House is not a particularly grand or imposing building — rather a suburban villa in a sort of Egypto-Italian style, plonked on a hillside at Kelston, west of Bath.
The tower itself is a tapering rectangular pylon capped by a line of corbels that look as though they should support a belfry.
Round the base are peculiar attached columns with upside-down flower pots in stone on top.
The front door in the tower leads to a two-storey hall, with all the rooms leading directly off it, without the usual dank corridors.
The drawing room, dining room and library combine elegance and homeliness in a way that suits our century admirably.
The staircase sweeps up to a first floor balcony connecting four bedrooms, most with en suite bathrooms.
A concealed door leads to a charming tower room, usually bagged by one of the children as an ideal retreat.
The house was built for Neeld in 1835 by the architect James Thomson, who had come to Neeld's attention with his book Retreats, ‘a series of designs consisting of Plans and Elevations for Cottages, Villas and Ornamental Buildings.’
Thomson's first work for Neeld was a Norman-style addition to Grittleton, Neeld's principal seat.
The house was clearly meant to be a family home rather than a place for grand entertaining.
Neeld's daughter by his French mistress was brought up in the house.
In 1831 he had married Lady Caroline Ashley-Cooper, sister of the Earl of Shaftesbury.
It was a love match — she loved his money, he loved her social connections.
But when she arrived at Grittleton to find an illegitimate daughter living there just as though she was one of the family, Lady Caroline stormed out.
She bought a successful suit for restitution of conjugal rights, expecting to move back to Neeld's palatial house in Grosvenor Square, but, to spite her, Neeld moved into two rooms in a hotel.
Lady Caroline later settled for an annuity of £15,000 after a squalid and gleefully publicised court case.
The house sank into a gently decayed condition when a local architect bought it four years ago.
Since then it has been brilliantly restored to as close to its original condition as can be.
A modern kitchen has been added, and the cellars converted into office space and a huge romper room for children.
Outside, the gardens have been laid out in the Italian style, with wide staircases from level to level, which should look spectacular when more mature.
The Tower House is on the market through John D. Wood at £775,000.
Neeld's mother and daughter lived in the Tower House until 1850, when the lease of Kelston Park, the gracious Georgian house across the valley, expired and they moved there.
Kelston Park was built by John Wood, the architect of Bath's noble terraces, in 1770.
It is a simple, square house in Bath stone with an understated pediment and porch, but inside is a grand suite of reception rooms connected with arches supported on columns.
Kelston is being sold by a descendent of Joseph Neeld, Michael Neeld, who, with his father, farms the part of the estate that survives after the ravages of death duties in the decades after the war.
He is conducting a low profile marketing campaign with Lane Fox at a general price level of £1.25 million, depending on how much land the buyer wants with it.
Neeld's main house at Grittleton (now a school) was the nerve centre of his estate of over 16,000 acres.
He provided a comprehensive network of farm buildings connected, it is said, by a telegraph system.
A number of the farms have ornate towers based on Italian belvederes, which local legend says were fitted with semaphore arms to send messages to the tower on Grittleton, even though the Grittleton tower was too short to be seen by any of them.
Michael Neeld is rather doubtful.
‘It seems a bit unlikely.
They were more likely to have been bell towers, although Neeld was very much of the feudal landlord ilk and everything was designed to give an impression of vast wealth and efficiency,’ he says.
One of the grander Neeld buildings on the estate is Leigh Delamere House, built as the rectory in the mid 19th century.
Clad in Bath stone, it is a rather stern house with an oriel window over the front door.
For 45 years it was the home of the Wiltshire historian Canon Jackson.
Leigh Delamere House is on the market through John D. Wood at £425,000.
It is a shame that Leigh Delamere should be associated in the public mind not with Joseph Neeld and his eccentricities but the drab utilitarianism of the M4 services nearby.
West Country Living: You go and enjoy yourself in Australia: I'll find you your dream home
By LYNNE EDMUNDS
CRICKET FANS Gordon and Barbara Bidlake, began searching Cornwall for their dream home by the sea when, with retirement looming, they decided to exchange their holiday hideaway there for a permanent residence.
But it looked at one stage as if they might lose their first choice and have to stay in Reigate for another summer when negotiations for the purchase coincided with their long-planned holiday of a lifetime — watching last month's world cup cricket in Australia.
Instead they managed both by using the County Homesearch Company based in Truro to take over the housing negotiations, reports of which chased them round Australia on fax.
The Bidlakes sent back their instructions in the same way, and were able to keep following England's march all the way to the final in Melbourne.
County Homesearch wasfounded last year by Jonathan Haward to service the upper end of the individual relocation market to the West Country.
Oddly, he finds that about 70 per cent of his clients end up buying very different homes than they originally intended.
As part of the service, which involves a £250 fee and either one per cent of the purchase price or 15 per cent of any reduction of the asking price he negotiates, they are helped, to analyse their needs, expectations and priorities.
‘Common mistakes are to feel they've got to live near a beach, when they can in fact drive visitors there from many other areas in half an hour,’ says Jonathan.
‘And too many sailors target the very sought-after minority of waterside properties,’ whereas they can live on the outskirts of somewhere like Truro or surrounding areas (where new five-bedroom executive houses have dropped to around £90,000 from £140,000 and large Victorian detached houses are £110,000) and have moorings within a couple of miles' reach.
He also provides clients with a list of local experts like solicitors and surveyors to prevent very localised property pitfalls — such as discovering that someone owns the mining rights under or beside your home, or that the Duchy of Cornwall has the title to the foreshore and your mooring, which can lop £100,000 off the house value.
Currently Jonathan has clients from Dubai, Venezuela, Hong Kong and Miami, as well as the British-based, on his books, and a tour around the little harbours of Looe, Fowey and St Mawes with fishing boats bobbing in the deep blue waters, or a ride through the tiny villages on high-banked, well-surfaced, empty country roads, makes it easy to see why Cornwall and East Devon are prime targets for relocation.
There's also the rugged remoteness of Dartmoor or the North Cornwall coast for those wanting real isolation.
This kind of specialist service has, solicitor James Whelan believes, made the difference between success and failure for himself and his wife in finding an ideal base in Devon to come back to from Dubai, where they lived since 1985.
‘We would probably have been fleeced by some estate agents who would have smelled our lack of knowledge of the market a mile off.
But during our holiday visit we found exactly what we wanted, helped by the way Jonathan used his imagination about what we might like, even though we hadn't specified it.’
West Country Living: Where waves wash away city tension Lynne Edmunds finds that the trek to a more leisurely crowd-free lifestyle is far from being an over-60s monopoly
By LYNNE EDMUNDS
HAMPSHIRE born and bred, the Tyler-Upfields each started going to Cornwall with their buckets and spades 30 years ago.
Sometime this year, when they find the five-bedroom house and 100 acres or so they want, they will take themselves and the building business they have run for 10 years down there permanently.
Stephen Tyler-Upfield wants to switch from conversions into building for the first-time buyers he believes are now increasing there.
He wants to farm beef cattle ‘as a paying hobby’ and, with his wife Annie, convert outbuildings into holiday homes.
They hanker for the climate, the friendly slower-paced lifestyle and lack of congestion…and a new start at 40.
The Aldam family from Guildford have beaten them to it.
They moved last year into their 180-year-old converted barn in 12 acres near Launceston (Peter Aldam negotiated a third off the six-figure asking price).
Their business, a factory making patio doors for the trade, was initially based in Newton Abbot because of economical site and labour costs; now Peter Aldam looks forward to a mere 30-minute commute there along the soon-to-be finished A30 extension.
He and his 14-year-old son David have joined St Mellion golf club, and the whole family intends to use the nearby equestrian centre.
They love walking the dogs on Bude beach, 30 minutes' drive away.
These two families are typical of present day ‘relocatees’ into the West Country in their individuality.
Professionals and local authority employees are still moving to jobs in one of the most sought-after parts of Britain, but the blockbuster moves — 600 in the Lloyds retail banking arm into the Bristol area in 1989-91, and 100 British Aerospace workers into the Plymouth region recently — are probably over for the immediate future.
Slimmed workforces and dropping city office rents have seen to that.
Yet 150,000 people chose to settle in Devon, Cornwall, Dorset and Somerset in 1991, with another 28,000 relocating in Avon.
Around 78 per cent were under 45, and even in Cornwall fewer than 1,000 of the 13,000 who migrated last year were of retirement age.
This suggests a major shift in the emphasis of work done by big relocation agencies like Black Horse Relocation (BHR).
Given its Lloyds connections, it naturally handled the bank move.
In this case the incomers had their homes bought for them.
BHR had organised visits and briefings on schools, medical services, shopping, leisure facilities and property.
Wives were told about local work.
But now it is individual skilled and managerial people (plus entrepreneurs and self-employed) who are relocating West).
Local estate agents Gribble, Booth and Taylor report that local economies in such areas as Plymouth, Exeter, Tiverton and Taunton are growing, making these areas the least risky to buy into.
But even when moving to cities like Bristol, people still need specialist advice on preferable location — there is the still sought-after north side, in the country yet near the M4/5 junction and the M32 into the centre, with Bristol Parkway railway station accessible.
About £75,000 can buy a '30s to '50s three-bed semi, and properties are still proving more saleable than in other parts of the city.
Office space is another story throughout the West Country.
Premiums are beginning to be waived, and three month rent holidays are being offered to try and speed up movement.