

War widows' plea for Gulf Trust cash rejected
By Peter Almond Defence Correspondent
THREE women widowed in the Gulf war have been told by Government officials that they will not set aside money from the publicly-donated Gulf Trust to help them with an education fund for their children.
Mrs Anne Lennox, whose husband, Sqn Ldr Garry Lennox, was shot down and killed over Iraq, said that the three RAF widows would have to undergo ‘demeaning means tests’ years from now if they wanted something from the fund.
The three women say this is contrary to the wishes of thousands of people who contributed about £3 million to help troops and their families who suffered in the war.
Mrs Lennox said Air Chief Marshal Sir Roger Palin, Air Member for Personnel, told them in a letter last month that their application was ‘unlikely to succeed’ before they had even submitted estimates from insurance companies of what their children's education was likely to cost.
‘They keep saying that we should apply to the RAF Benevolent Fund and it depends on whether we have got money in the bank, etc,’ said Mrs Lennox at her home near Tadcaster, north Yorks.
‘Why should it matter what we have got in the bank?
We don't believe that was what the public intended when they donated to the Trust.’
However, RAF and Gulf Trust spokesmen said the charity laws under which the trust was established allow for payment only in cases of need, and education trusts do not qualify for this.
‘If they wish to have their children privately educated and they feel they can't afford it, when the time comes they can talk to the benevolent fund,’ he said.
‘People didn't contribute towards an education trust.’
The hardened government attitude was reflected by Mr Archie Hamilton, MP, Armed Forces Minister.
Mr Hamilton met the three widows — Mrs Lennox, Mrs Elizabeth Weeks and Mrs Lyn Hicks — at the MoD in January when he indicated a compromise could be reached.
However, he said this week: ‘They would like some guarantee for the future…
But that's not the way the trust is set up.
We have learned not to repeat the South Atlantic Fund (when too much compensation money was handed out quickly).
But I was certainly hoping that they [the widows]might get a better response.
I think the public wants to know that all those people, and their families, who suffered in the war will be looked after for the rest of their lives.’
Mrs Lennox's Conservative MP, Mr Michael Alison, said: ‘What we have had so far is a red light on the road.
But red lights go yellow and then green.
‘I think this is a temporary hold up.
I understand the Gulf Trust's anxiety, but I think they have not really focused on this case or heard the reasonableness of advanced payments.’