

Arafat plane disappears over Libya
By Ian Brodie in Washington
A PLANE carrying Mr Yasser Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organisation, disappeared over the Libyan desert, Libyan radio reported early today.
The radio said contact with the plane was lost during a severe sand storm in the evening.
Libya's Voice of the Greater Arab Homeland, quoting the Libyan news agency JANA, said the plane was crossing Libyan airspace from Sudan and disappeared from radar screens at 8:45 p.m.
Libyan time (5.45 BST).
The radio said radar contact was lost when the plane was 70 miles from the village of Sarrah.
It quoted Libyan civil aviation sources as saying that Al Kofra airport in Tripoli lost contact with the plane due to‘bad weather conditions’.
Mr Arafat, had been in Sudan and was expected to visit a guerrilla base in south-east Libya.
A PLO official in Cairo said that Libyan officials were attempting to reach the area overland.
Mr Said Kamal confirmed Libyan radio and news agency reports that a Boeing 727 from Khartoum to Sarrah in South East Libya carrying Mr Arafat ‘disappeared from radar screens’ over the Libyan desert.
Mr Kamal confirmed that Mr Arafat was on board and that no other members of the Palestinian leadership were on the plane.
The Fatah leadership was reported to be having an emergency meeting in Tunis as a result of the reports.
Mr Arafat's disappearance comes at a time of unprecedented crisis for the PLO.
Once accorded head-of-state treatment throughout the Arab world, Mr Arafat has been in sharply reduced circumstances since his ill-judged support for Saddam Hussein during the Gulf crisis.
In recent months, the only countries which have welcomed him have been Yemen, Sudan and Tunisia, where the PLO has its headquarters since being driven out of Beirut in 1982.
Clinton set for victory amid doubts
By Ian Brodie and Patricia Wilson in Washington
GOVERNOR Bill Clinton was beating Mr Jerry Brown in early polling in New York's Democratic primary election yesterday, but Mr Paul Tsongas, who dropped out of the presidential race three weeks ago, was running a strong third.
Mr Clinton was also winning in two other primaries in Wisconsin and Kansas.
According to exit polls in New York, the day's richest prize, Mr Clinton, governor of Arkansas, had 40 per cent, Mr Brown, former governor of California, 30 per cent and Mr Tsongas, former senator from Massachusetts, 28 per cent .
In Wisconsin, Mr Clinton had 40 per cent to Mr Brown's 31 per cent with Mr Tsongas in the 20s.
In Kansas, Mr Clinton was 46 per cent, Mr Brown 17 per cent with Mr Tsongas trailing even further back.
If these figures held steady through the late polling hours, Mr Clinton would remain the Democrats' nominee-presumptive for the presidential election in November with an overwhelming lead in convention delegates.
But 68 per cent of Democrats leaving the polling stations in New York said they wanted someone new in the race.
Doubters among the party's membership will argue that the combined Brown and Tsongas vote against Mr Clinton confirms their fears that questions about his character will lead to a crushing defeat at the hands of President Bush.
Party leaders face a dilemma over whether to continue their search, already discussed in private meetings in Washington, for an as yet undeclared candidate in time for their convention in July.
Although Mr Brown, the anti-establishment populist, failed to come close to his win over Mr Clinton in Connecticut two weeks ago, he will undoubtedly fight on as a spoiler until the final primary in California in June.
The strong Tsongas vote reflected the widespread disenchantment among primary voters who have misgivings about Mr Clinton's integrity and Mr Brown's performance as a political chameleon.
Mr Tsongas is a pro-business liberal who won primaries and caucuses in seven states before lack of funds forced him out.
He is expected to reveal his plans today.
He offered a cliff-hanging reply when asked yesterday if he would re-enter the race.
‘There would be two criteria.
One would be how well I did and, secondly, how Bill Clinton did.’
While Mr Tsongas stayed out of the New York contest, Mr Clinton and Mr Brown had a bruising fight.
They argued angrily over who was the real ‘Prince of Sleaze’ for running commercials attacking the other's honesty.
Mr Clinton was battered with new questions about avoiding the Vietnam war after admitting he received his call-up papers.
His wife Hillary had to apologise for suggesting in a magazine article that Mr Bush had an adulterous affair.
Mr Clinton occasionally lost his temper, but through all the flak he showed remarkable staying power, which his supporters say is a mark of his fitness to occupy the White House's Oval Office.
‘I set no bounds to my ambitions for Britain'
By Philip Johnston, Political Correspondent
MR MAJOR said last night that he had only just begun the tasks he had set himself.
In his final set-piece speech of the campaign at a Wembley rally, the Prime Minister said: ‘I set no bounds to my ambitions for this country or its people.
I know that we have in our grasp a truly glorious future.
It is what the whole nation has worked for this last few years.’
However, it could all be thrown away if Labour was elected, an outcome that would risk the ‘massacre of the innocent by the ignorant’.
Mr Major warned against the ‘dead end of Socialism’ and spoke of the 10 ‘Tory truths’paving the way for a golden future — strong defences, free market economics, tax cuts, low inflation, curbed union power, a flourishing health service, better schools, wider ownership, privatised industry and strong Government.
Three weeks after the Tory campaign opened with a film of Mr Major's journey back to his south London roots, he again invoked the ‘Brixton to Downing Street’ theme in an emotional peroration.
‘No one knows more than me how much I owe to this country, how much I vow to give back to it for what it has done to me,’ he said.
‘I've lived life in many stations.
I believe I understand what makes the heart of Britain beat, what inspires all those millions of families across the land to go out each day to work and strive and create for the future.
‘They are the people who are carrying the long glorious story of Britain forward across the years.
It is their dreams and ambitions that are the building blocks for an even better future for us all.’
The alternative was a Labour government led by Mr Kinnock, a man ‘grasping desperately at the prospect of power’, and the collapse of everything the Tories had worked for.
The return of socialism would be the ‘road to nowhere, a dead end’ at a time when economic recovery was around the corner.
‘Britain is ready now to move forward,’ he said.
Since Mrs Thatcher's first victory in 1979, the country had enjoyed ‘13 of the finest years in history’.
‘We took the axe to the cold rock face of socialism and we hewed out the secret for which generations had searched in vain— private wealth and public welfare growing together.’
A Labour victory would see house prices fall ‘almost overnight’ and a collapse in the value of pensions that would far outweigh the ‘piffling promises’about most families being better off under a Kinnock government.
‘It would be a massacre of the innocent by the ignorant — perhaps the biggest transfer of wealth away from personal ownership that this country has seen,’ said Mr Major.
‘It is a nightmare prospect for family after family after family.’
The Prime Minister reaffirmed his commitment to the unity of the nation, which Labour would jeopardise.
‘There is no issue more crucial at this election than the defence of the unity of our United Kingdom,’ he said.
Irish given vote on abortions abroad
By Chris Ryder, Irish Correspondent
IRELAND is to hold a referendum on women's rights to go abroad for abortions and to obtain information in Ireland before doing so.
The decision was forced on the government by several EC partners who refused to allow it to amend a protocol to the Maastricht Treaty.
The country now faces a bitter debate, with anti-abortionists seeking to overthrow the dilution of the constitutional ban, which was forced on the government by the Supreme Court after a 14-year-old rape victim was initially prevented from leaving the country for an abortion.
Dublin had feared that up to £6 billion in EC aid could be lost if pro-life campaigners turned the forthcoming referendum seeking approval for the Maastricht Treaty into a plebiscite on abortion.
The new abortion referendum, approved by the Cabinet last night, will probably go ahead with all speed while the Maastricht vote may not take place until the autumn.
Anti-abortionists have launched a vigorous campaign to reinforce the constitutional ban on abortion.
In the last week, one MP has received 100 calls and another has had 70 letters.
Campaigners fear that unless the ban is made watertight, liberal EC laws will ultimately be forced on Ireland, overturning the ban.
Mr Albert Reynolds, prime minister, is talking to the leaders of all the main political parties in an effort to find a consensus on the issue.
Yeltsin ready for navy fight with Ukraine
By John Kampfner in Moscow
RUSSIA and Ukraine were on a collision course last night as President Yeltsin signed a decree that would put the Black Sea fleet into Russian hands, directly contradicting an earlier order from President Leonid Kravchuk.
With the war of words between the two largest republics of the former Soviet Union reaching dangerous levels, Mr Yeltsin's deputy, Mr Alexander Rutskoy, warned that if Kiev pressed its claims on the fleet, Russia would re-examine the status of the Crimean peninsula, where it is based.
Outlining the decree, Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov, Commander-in-Chief of Commonwealth forces, said the fleet's military operations would remain in CIS hands, but be subordinate to Mr Yeltsin, and that all financing would come from Russia.
Marshal Shaposhnikov said Russia's foreign minister would be asked to open talks with the Ukrainian leadership on handing over a segment of the 300-ship fleet to Ukraine for a national coastal defence force.
The row overshadowed the second day of Russia's Congress of People's Deputies, where Mr Yeltsin escaped the rough ride that hard-liners had threatened as he delivered a thorough, if lacklustre, report on economic reform.
Mr Yeltsin made clear he would not contemplate any reduction in his powers and that his government would stick to its monetarist path, albeit with greater emphasis on social protection for the hardest hit.
In a more combative address, which would have helped to win over the uncommitted vote, Mr Yegor Gaidar, the architect of the shock therapy programme, said preconditions for rapid economic growth comparable to Western Europe after the 1939-45 War had been created.
An aide to Mr Yeltsin said a draft of a new constitution prepared on behalf of the president would be presented to Congress today that would put the emergency powers he was granted last autumn on a permanent basis.
Mr Yeltsin repeated his threat that, if parliament did not approve his version, he would take it to a national referendum.
Other drafts give parliament considerably greater authority than he would like.
Exploiting the nationalist rhetoric that has been the hallmark of the Congress, Mr Yeltsin promised to support the 25 million Russians living in other Commonwealth states.
He was referring mainly to Ukraine and to Moldova, another republic with which tensions have flared and where the prospect of direct confrontation between two sovereign states looms.
EC frowns on dried milk's baby smiles
By Boris Johnson, EC Correspondent, in Strasbourg
PICTURES of smiling babies can no longer be used on the packaging of powdered milk for infants after the European Parliament voted yesterday for measures to encourage mothers to breast-feed their children.
The vote means that manufacturers of infant formula produced within the EC are also obliged to use labels which advise mothers that breast milk is safer.
The European Commission proposed a directive on baby feeds last year.
Since then lobbyists, including the British-based National Council of Baby Milk Action, have mounted a campaign to warn mothers in Europe and developing countries of the risks of powdered milk.
Large European companies such as Nestle and Nutricia have the major share of the £3 billion world-wide market, with most of the milk for their products coming from the EC's 25 million cows.
With 300,000 tons of skimmed milk powder in Common Market stores already, dried milk for babies is a highly lucrative means of reducing EC surpluses.
According to UNICEF, about a million babies a year die because their mothers stop breast feeding too soon and switch to dried milk substitutes — without access to clean water for mixing.
An EC ruling announced yesterday and supported by the European Parliament, will require manufacturers to print easy-to-understand instructions and graphics on their product labels.
Manufacturers must also warn mothers that the powdered milk must be mixed with boiled water.
There will also be restrictions on advertising in Europe and companies will no longer be able to send free samples to maternity wards.
A spokesman for Nestle UK said yesterday that the company does not manufacture or sell infant formula in Britain.
He said the policy of Nestle in the rest of the EC is in line with the 10-year-old World Health Organisation code on the marketing and sale of infant formula.
This specifies that packaging should not carry pictures of smiling babies, no free samples should be distributed and there should be no advertising directly to mothers.
A spokesman for Oxfam, which has also lobbied for measures to prevent mothers in developing countries being encouraged to feed their babies on infant formula, said: ‘These are good measures and will benefit mothers and their babies everywhere.’
The most compelling argument against selling artificial milk feed in the Third World is that it may be mixed with contaminated water.
Breast milk gives nutrients, also provided in formula feeds, in a perfect blend as well as antibodies and white blood cells which protect against disease.
Allergies are less common in breast-fed babies.
The most recent research suggests that children who were breast fed have higher intelligence than those bottle-fed from birth, after allowing for the extra time breast-feeding mothers might spend with their babies or extra effort they might put into mothering.
Photo-finish as polls trim Labour lead
BY GEORGE JONES
MR MAJOR appealed to the nation last night not to turn its back on 13 years of Conservative rule as the latest opinion polls showed the Tories narrowing the gap with Labour but still facing the prospect of losing power.
He sought to focus attention on imminent economic recovery while Mr Kinnock said that after presiding over two recessions the Tories ‘simply don't deserve’ to be re-elected.
As the campaign entered its final 24 hours, the main parties returned to their central themes: the economy for the Conservatives and the health service for Labour.
Mr Ashdown promised to give priority to ending the recession, with more investment in schools, hospitals, housing and transport.
All three parties were braced for a possible photo-finish as the latest poll gave Labour a two-point lead — reduced from six in a similar survey a week ago.
According to Harris for ITN, Labour is on 40 per cent(down one) the Conservatives 38 (up three), the Liberal Democrats 18 (down one), and others four (down one).
Such a result would almost certainly put Mr Kinnock in Downing Street at the head of a minority government.
A Mori poll for ITV's First Tuesday gave Labour 40 per cent, Tories 37, Liberal Democrats 20, others three.
A clearer indication of the voters' mood will emerge on the eve of the election with four polls to be published in national newspapers, including The Daily Telegraph.
Pollsters say they have detected signs of a swing back to the Conservatives — and that Labour support may have peaked last week — but it may not come in time to save the Tories.
It will take a supreme effort by Mr Major to pull ahead of Labour in the last 24 hours of the campaign.
The final push — intended to win over waverers, particularly those considering voting Liberal Democrat — was given added impetus with the Tories' final election broadcast last night, stressing Mr Major's international role.
He was in upbeat mood earlier as he hailed the prospect of a spring economic recovery following a confidence-building Tory victory.
‘The economic circumstances are right and recovery is on the way.
What could stop it?
Labour's policies of higher taxation and new burdens on business could kill it,’ he said.
Mr Major and Mr Lamont, Chancellor, pointed to surveys indicating an improvement in business confidence, with more companies expecting higher orders and sales.
Mr Lamont said the election of a Labour government would ‘stop recovery in its tracks and risk turning recovery back into recession’.
Mr Heseltine, Environment Secretary, said a Kinnock government would ‘take the economy on a headlong dive to disaster’.
Ministers said their warnings that a Labour government would lead to higher interest rates were backed up by a business survey for today's Financial Times.
According to the poll, conducted among directors of the leading 500 companies, 96 per cent of business leaders think a Labour victory would bring higher interest rates, while 83 per cent also expect a fall in the value of the pound against the German mark.
Over a third — 38 per cent— of business executives say that under Labour they would decrease planned investment.
The prospect of a hung parliament is also disliked strongly, with 87 per cent saying it would be bad for the country and 80 per cent bad for business.
Asked whether Labour's tax plans would reduce incentives for managers and executives, 22 per cent say they would work less hard.
Nearly half (48 per cent) think middle managers would work less hard.
Mr Kinnock and Mr Smith, shadow Chancellor, sought to reassure the financial and business community that they would not devalue the pound.
Mr Smith said: ‘If there was any pressure on the currency I will take the action necessary.’
The Labour leader, addressing a rally at Blackburn, Lancs, described the Tories as the ‘architects of recession and the engineers of rundown’.
He added: ‘For the fourth time, they are coming back to the people and asking everybody to forget two recessions, forget millions unemployed, forget thousands of bankruptcies and thousands more whose homes have been repossessed.
‘They are asking people to treat what they have done as a success.
I say to the British people: after all they have done, they simply don't deserve to be re-elected.’
Highlighting Labour's key theme of the NHS, he said voters faced a stark choice: to build up the health service under Labour or to break it up under the Conservatives.
Mr Ashdown rebuffed Tory attack on his demands for electoral reform and devolution, accusing the Conservatives of playing a dangerous game by ‘gambling’ with the unity of the country.
Car salesmen ‘traded in’ for women
By David Graves
FOUR car salesmen are claiming sexual discrimination after losing their jobs in a takeover by a company that boasted of its success in using saleswomen.
The men claim they were not offered new sales posts with Swithland Motors, of Mountsorrel, Leics, after it took over the Birmingham-based Colmore Group in March last year.
They are to have their claims heard by an industrial tribunal.
One of the four, Mr Gary Johnson, 46, said yesterday a job interview he had with Mr David Sharratt, Swithland's financial director, was ‘a sham’.
Mr Johnson, of Coningsby Drive, Kidderminster, claimed the company had boasted of the success of using saleswomen and never had any intention of offering him a job because he was a man.
‘It was general knowledge that Swithlands operated such a policy and it was plain men were never going to be offered positions on the sales force,’ he said.
A preliminary hearing in Birmingham yesterday rejected a company claim that the four failed to lodge their case within the required three-month period.
Mr John MacMillan, tribunal chairman, said it was proper to extend the time period ‘in the interests of justice’.
A full hearing will start on April 27.
The other three salesmen are Mr Richmond Clarke, 47, of Walsall, Mr Alan Tudor, 52, of Sutton Coldfield, and Mr Michael Smith, 32, of Solihull, West Midlands.
Swithland Motors denies sexually discriminating against the men.
A company spokesman said: ‘We do employ men in sales positions.
‘While it is true the majority of sales staff at our 19 sites are women, we select our people purely on merit to offer our customers the very best in service and care.’
The company, founded 15 years ago by Mr John Hayes, 34, has claimed that its success has been due, in part, to its saleswomen.
Mr Hayes said after the takeover: ‘Buying a car should be a pleasurable experience but most people dread it.
‘I think the Arthur Daley image, picked up in the 50s and 60s, is unfair now but people still expect to be greeted by a young man in a sharp suit who baffles them with technical details and hard sell.’
Of his saleswomen, he said: ‘They are certainly not bimbos.
They are largely women who have got to the top in other careers and found they could not go any further.
They are professionals, not just pretty faces.’
Two of the firm's directors, the general manager and many managers of the company are women who have worked their way up from the sales force.
‘Women are more sincere, more trustworthy and harder working.
They have a lot more empathy when it comes to handling customers.’
The feminine drive is key to success
By David Millward
MRS Jacki Taylor, 37, senior sales manager at Swithland's Hall Green branch, Birmingham, said her success in the motor trade was due to her ability to ‘talk to people at all levels and my knowledge of the product’.
Denying that women clients required special handling, she added: ‘A customer is a customer, I approach them in all the same way.
If somebody wants detailed technical information, I can provide that.’
Before entering the motor trade five years ago Mrs Taylor sold insurance.
The skills were similar.
‘Selling is selling,’ she said.
None of the other five saleswomen was available for comment.
The feminine touch in the car showroom could go a long way towards clinching a deal, the Retail Motor Industry Federation said yesterday.
Mr Geoff Dossetter, the Federation's spokesman said: ‘It is a buyer's market out there and there is no reason why women should not be good at selling cars.’
Within the industry, Swithland Motors is recognised as one of the fastest growing dealerships in the country and its success is partly explained by its female sales force.
Ms Angie Wilde, of Swithland, said women had proved effective in the showroom and only two of its 65 sales staff were male.
‘They are very approachable and buying a car can be a frightening experience for anybody without technical knowledge.
Our technique is to make customers feel relaxed and make them feel they are buying the right car for their needs.’
Missing boy ‘seen’ on Greek island
By Tim Butcher
A CHILD resembling a two-year-old British boy, who vanished last July while on holiday with his family on the Greek island of Kos, has been spotted on another island 400 miles away.
The Port Authority policeman on the Ionian island of Kefallinia saw a child believed to be Ben Needham, from Sheffield, South Yorks, being driven in the back of a blue vehicle by two non-Greek women on February 17.
The policeman noted the registration number of the vehicle and passed it to the Kos police dealing with the investigation.
Almost nothing has been heard of Ben since he went went missing on Kos, although a British couple claimed to have seen him in August on the island of Lesbos.
The details of the sighting on Kefallinia were passed last month to South Yorkshire police, who have been asked to deal with the British end of the case.
Ms Kelly Needham, 20, Ben's mother, and his father, Mr Simon Ward, 22, agreed to be interviewed by police in Yorkshire police, who sent family details to the Greek authorities.
Greek police are now treating the case as kidnapping, instead of viewing Ben merely as a missing person.
Det Sgt Norburn, of the Yorkshire force said: ‘Anyone who is going to take a holiday in Greece can play their part by keeping a lookout for a child with a shock of white hair and a friendly disposition.’
Police chief apologises over sex bias
By David Graves
DERBYSHIRE police discriminated against a woman officer by blocking her transfer to the criminal investigation department, the Chief Constable said yesterday.
Mr John Newing apologised to Pc Joy Court, 36, who had sought a transfer for five years.
He said she would be given a ‘substantial four-figure sum’ in compensation.
He accepted there had been an unofficial quota system to limit the number of women serving in the department.
Pc Court had threatened to take the force to an industrial tribunal last year alleging sexual discrimination in a case supported by the Police Federation, but Mr Newing agreed she had been disadvantaged after the arbitration service ACAS was brought in.
The federation said the settlement would help ‘eradicate cloistered thinking and sexist views in the service’.
Pc Court, who joined Derbyshire police 17 years ago, had never been interviewed for the CID.
She was transferred to the department last October by Mr Newing after making her formal complaint and is now a detective.
Mr Newing said the force was reviewing its policy on CID attachments ‘to ensure there is no further discrimination’.
In a statement, he said: ‘People in the force have to appreciate that equal opportunities policies mean just that.
In the future people will be selected for posts on merit, regardless of gender or race.
‘I must put on record my admiration for Pc Court who showed a great deal of bravery in bringing this action.’
Pc Geoff Towle, secretary of the federation's Derbyshire branch, said the quota system had been operated by senior CID men who did little to conceal it.
China Sea cargo fetches £2 million
By Godfrey Barker
QING blue and white china salvaged from the floor of the South China Sea in 1990 off Vung Tau in Vietnam fetched £2,030,000 at Christie's in Amsterdam yesterday.
It was the first part of a two-day sale in which all the lots found buyers.
Christie's expected only £900,000 for the entire cargo.
Most estimates were exceeded three or four times, while a handful of the strongest colours and the rarest patterns and shapes fetched 10 times over estimate.
The 20,000 urns and vases had been lying in deep salt water for 302 years.
Five London dealers plus Harrods, which plans a display next week, carried off nearly half the lots while Vietnam government officials, the vendors, looked on from the balcony.
The auction of the 530 lots on offer was still in progress at 8pm last night.
The highest price of £14,059 was bid by a Taiwan dealer for two 12 in-high wine beakers decorated with feathers (estimate £1,500 to £2,000), the ceramic decanters of the pre-refrigeration age.
Christie's auctioneer Colin Sheaf mounted his rostrum in front of a wall of 1,100 blue and white vases.
The Vietnamese, who have kept a few items of sunken treasure for a museum in Hanoi, but sent most of it for auction in the West, pronounced themselves well satisfied.
Aintree claim
Animal rights activists claimed yesterday they carried out the arson attack that destroyed the Becher's Brook jump on the Grand National course at Aintree, Liverpool.
Self-help leaflet for would-be shoplifters
A self-help ‘charter’ for would-be shoplifters, detailing seven ways to foil shop security staff, is being distributed anonymously by what retailers describe as ‘an anarchist organisation’.
Copies of the leaflet, headlined ‘Help Yourself Unlimited’, are believed to have been circulated in London shops as a prelude to what shopkeepers fear could be a campaign of organised theft.
The security firm Chubb said yesterday that further copies of the document had been discovered in a West Country shopping precinct.
Man savaged for 15 minutes by pit bull terriers
By Alastair McCall
TWO policemen armed only with truncheons rescued a 40-year-old man as he was savaged by two pit bull terriers in a west London street yesterday.
With their bare hands, they fought to save the man who had an ear ripped off in the attack.
Mr George Daszczuk was pinned to the ground and mauled for 15 minutes as he was set upon by the two dogs, which had chewed their way through the wooden door of a garage they were guarding.
Then one officer drove his car with headlights flashing at the dogs who released Mr Daszczuk and the two animals were eventually shot dead by police from an armed response vehicle.
Their owner was arrested but released without charge on police bail.
He must report to police again on May 5.
Mr Daszczuk had gone to the car repair garage in Radbourne Avenue, Ealing, at 1am to investigate the continuous noise of barking dogs.
As he neared the garage, one of the dogs grabbed his foot and dragged his leg under the door.
He managed to break its grip before both animals burst through the wooden doors.
Miss Elizabeth Brown, whose flat overlooks the alley where the dogs were eventually cornered and shot, said: ‘I looked into the alleyway and saw the dogs going mad.
‘One had him by one arm and the other his other arm.
But he managed to break free and run into the street.
‘I went to the front of the house and saw the dogs catch up with him and knock him to the ground.
It was terrible.
They were just tearing him apart — really eating into him.’
After his ordeal, Mr Daszczuk criticised a neighbour who had ignored his pleas to be let in when the dogs were chasing him.
‘One dog jumped up and bit off my ear then they pulled me to the ground.
I was amazed when they attacked me.
They seemed to know what they were doing.
‘I've also got a chunk of calf missing.
One of them chewed it off and swallowed it and I'm covered in gashes where they bit into me.’
The first policemen on the scene, Pcs Jim Birtwell and Warren Pash, saw one dog was attacking Mr Daszczuk about the head and the other biting his arms and legs.
At first, they tried to pull off the dogs with their hands and then used their truncheons.
‘They still could not make the dogs let go and so they got in their car and drove at the dogs with headlights flashing,’ said a Scotland Yard spokesman.
‘This made the dogs let go but they still could not control the animals which started to turn on them.
‘Fortunately at this point the armed response vehicle arrived and the decision was taken to shoot the dogs.
Several shots were fired, killing both animals.’
The victim's ear was retrieved from the mouth of one of the dead pit bulls.
He was later transferred to the Mount Vernon Hospital, in north-west London, where he underwent several hours plastic surgery and microsurgery to reattach his ear.
A hospital spokeswoman said later he was in a ‘satisfactory’ condition.
Pc Birtwell, 44, an officer for six years, said last night: ‘I went for one of them with my stick.
I hit it several times but it had no effect.
We dragged the man free and Warren drove the car at the dogs to box them in the alleyway so they could not escape.
‘The victim was in a terrible state.
There was blood everywhere.
He was in shock and really did not know what was happening.
His left calf was missing and we could not find that.
I think the dogs must have eaten it.’
His colleague, Pc Pash, 27, said he used the police car to trap the dogs.
‘They had tasted blood and I feared they would attack someone else.
The dogs were still trying to escape.
‘It got to the point where they were jumping on the bonnet and it would have been a matter of time before they ran over my roof.’
Under the Dangerous Dogs Act, all pit bulls must be registered, neutered, and have an identification number tattooed on their inner rear thigh and a microchip identifier inserted into the scruff of their neck.
In addition they must always be muzzled and leashed when taken out in public and owners, who must have third party insurance, have to take adequate precautions to stop dogs escaping.
Failure to comply with the regulations can result in a £2,000 fine or six month prison sentence.
If the dog runs out of control, the fine can be unlimited and there is provision for a maximum two years' imprisonment.
A week-old baby, Jack Steff, had an ear sown back on yesterday after being attacked in his home in Upminster, east London, by the family's Jack Russell, which was later destroyed.
In Plymouth, Ricky Maule, six, underwent plastic surgery after he was attacked by an unknown dog while playing in the street.
He suffered serious face injuries.
Shock for mother over body in lake
By Alastair McCall
AN Englishwoman who went to Canada in search of the son she believes could have been murdered has been told that a body recovered from a lake at the weekend was not that of her son, but of an older man.
Mrs Denise Allan, 42, of Sowerby, West Yorks, pledged yesterday to continue her search.
Anonymous letters sent to her motel said her son Charles was lying 130 ft down in Lake Okanagan, 200 miles from Vancouver.
Charles, 20, disappeared while trekking in Canada three years ago, and Mrs Allan has campaigned tirelessly to find out what happened to him.
Speaking last night from the motel in Kelowna, 400 miles north of Vancouver, where she has lived on and off for the last three years, Mrs Allan said: ‘I am not coming home until I have got my child.
That would betray him.
The odds are that he is no longer alive, but I have a silk thread hanging in there with God that he is still alive.
‘I will not accept it until he is on a mortuary slab.
It would be immoral for me to give up on my son; I have been through so much in the last three years,’ she said.
Mrs Allan and her husband Stuart, 52, have spent more than £20,000 on the search.
She said Canadian police had taken her son's disappearance seriously only since last week.
Police angry at murder mistake
By Nigel Bunyan
DETECTIVES were trying to find out yesterday why scientists took 49 days to tell them a supposed murder victim was killed by drugs.
An inquest in Lancaster had earlier been told that by the time the information was received, Lancashire Police had spent £250,000 investigating what they thought was the murder of John Threlfall, 18.
A team of 40 detectives took 1,000 statements and the case was featured on the BBC's Crimewatch UK television programme.
In addition, a reward of £5,500 was offered for information leading to an arrest.
Mr Threlfall, bruised and bleeding, was found dead at his home in Bolton-le-Sands, near Morecambe, on Nov 29.
Three weeks ago, police closed the investigation after a medical review by Dr Iain West, a Home Office pathologist, indicated Mr Threlfall had died from a self-induced overdose of narcotics.
Det Supt Graham Gooch, who had led the murder inquiry, told the inquest how the assertion of Dr Alan Williams, another pathologist, that Mr Threlfall had been strangled, had led him to suspect murder.
But he said it was only when Dr Philip Owen, a Home Office toxicologist, told him on Jan 16 that he learned Mr Threlfall had taken a fatal dose of 90 dextropropoxyphene tablets.
‘Until that time we had no knowledge of any sort of drug involved in the death,’ said Det Supt Gooch.
‘It would have been very helpful had we known earlier.
Suddenly we had a cause of death’.
The inquest was told the injuries were sustained during convulsions induced by narcotics.
An open verdict was returned.
Election ‘92: Egg case man's link to Labour
The man charged with throwing an egg at Mr Major at Eastleigh, Hants, on Monday was revealed yesterday to be a Labour Party member.
John McIntyre, 25, was among those who nominated the Labour candidate for Portsmouth South, Mr Syd Rapson.
Mr Larry Whitty, Labour's general secretary, demanded a report into the affair yesterday from the Portsmouth South Labour Party.
After being charged, McIntyre had denied being a Labour Party member.
Browne rejects stand down plea
John Browne, who is standing as a rebel Tory candidate against the official Conservative in Winchester, rejected yesterday a plea by five people who had been supporting him that he should stand down.
Mr Browne, MP for Winchester since 1979, said he was defending the right of his constituents to decide who they wished to have as MP, and added: ‘None of the five ex-supporters is either my election agent or holds any other official appointment within my organisation.’
No 10 spot taken
An election candidate has made it to Number 10 — in the pop charts with Evapor-8.
Chris Peat of the group Altern-8, who is standing in his home town of Stafford for the Altern 8-ive (Hardcore) Party, said: ‘It must be an omen — I won on the Grand National with Party Politics as well.’
Hospital ban
Harriet Harman, Labour's health spokeswoman, was banned from Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, yesterday.
A hospital spokesman said the wards had been declared election-free zones.
Election ‘92: NHS is being broken apart says Kinnock
By John Hibbs, Political Staff
MR KINNOCK put the future of health care back at the centre of the electoral stage last night with a powerful warning that the NHS was in mortal danger if Labour did not win power.
In the starkest expression so far of the choice he believes the country faces tomorrow, the Labour leader launched an 11th-hour appeal to bring the Health Service back from the brink of destruction.
He said health and the economy towered above all other issues in the election campaign, and added that the nation faced an alternative between modernisation and recovery under Labour, or privatisation and recession under the Tories.
He told thousands of supporters at a rally in Blackburn, Lancs, that the Conservatives did not deserve to win on their economic record, and had run out of ideas for rescuing the country from recession.
‘If you had asked the same plumber three times to fix a leak, and, every time he has been, he has pottered around a bit and he has gone away, telling you he has fixed it and there you are standing in the kitchen up to your waist in water, are you going to call the same plumber to fix it again?’ he asked.
Mr Kinnock also took the unusual step of appealing to all electors, whatever their political persuasion, to turn out and vote.
His appeal reflects unease among the Labour leadership that, with the polls continuing to show the party with a narrow lead, its supporters may take victory for granted.
He accused the Conservatives of squandering £100 million of North Sea oil receipts that could have rebuilt the country on tax cuts.
But he also acknowledged doubts about Labour's capacity to ignite recovery as he stressed the party's programme of practical measures was based on what Britain's successful European competitors had already undertaken.
Mr Kinnock described the health service as the bedrock of Britain and health care as an inalienable right of citizenship.
He said the Tories were destroying the national character of the health service and were intent on breaking it up and replacing it with an American-style system that owed more to accountants than doctors.
‘The health service now is in mortal danger.
Its whole future rests on the decision we take as a nation when we vote in the General Election on Thursday,’ he said.
Conservative plans would split it from top to bottom in a complex network of charging that pitted patients against doctors, doctors against hospitals, hospitals against charities and charities against patients.
Condemning the Tory obsession with tax relief and profitability, he said: ‘The NHS is not safe in their hands.
They are breaking it apart, and if they were to get another five years they would all but finish the job.’
Mr Kinnock said the choice on polling day was between a Tory Party that, after 13 years in power, had proved beyond doubt it had no ambition to make Britain better and no conscience to make Britain worse, or a Labour Party with active policies to pull the country out of recession and build a lasting recovery.
Election ‘92: Major urged to disown Baker
By Our Political Staff
THE Liberal Democrats and the Labour Party reacted with outrage yesterday to suggestions by Mr Baker, Home Secretary, that the combination of proportional representation and looser immigration controls could open up Britain to a flood of immigrants and permit the rise of fascism.
Mr Baker had sought to link the rise of the fascist Republican Party in Baden-Wurtemburg in Germany's regional elections with the system of PR voting.
Mr Ashdown said he had ‘never heard such ‘panicky scaremongering’ in his life.
‘The Home Secretary knows it, everyone knows it.
If he thinks we are going to return to the old trick of frightening people into the ballot box by raising red bogeys or fascist bogeys, then he is sadly mistaken,’ he said in an interview on BBC Breakfast News.
Mr Kinnock challenged the Prime Minister to disown Mr Baker.
‘When he [Mr Baker]reflects on it, he will realise it is the kind of remark that, even in the heat of an election campaign, was not really worthy of him, and I think John Major will want to step away from that.’
The Labour leader described the Home Secretary's comments as ‘peculiar’ and insisted that race should remain firmly in the background as a potential issue in the last few days of the campaign.
At the Conservatives' daily press briefing Mr Major unreservedly backed Mr Baker.
Asked whether he felt comfortable about Mr Baker's speech, considering that Sir Nicholas Fairbairn's recent comments about immigration had been repudiated by the Tory Party, Mr Major replied that Sir Nicholas's ‘colourful’ views did not represent the views of the Conservative Party.
The Prime Minister added: ‘The Home Secretary is responsible for immigration and has made speeches about it for many months.
‘What has predominantly improved race relations in this country over the last 25 years has been the firm, fair immigration controls we have sustained throughout that period.
‘Mr Baker was talking about the danger that could be caused if those controls were swept aside.’
Election ‘92: How the West may change colour
By Paul Stokes
A GLANCE at the present political map of the South West shows almost all of the region under Conservative control.
The 1987 general election left just four opposition MPs: two Liberal Democrat, one Labour and one SDP in 31 seats from Bristol to Land's End.
But the Conservatives are bracing themselves for a map of somewhat different complexion on Friday morning, if the opinion polls’ verdicts prove true, with most of the changes wrought by the Liberal Democrats.
The chief trophy they seek is the scalp of the Conservative Party chairman, Mr Patten in the key marginal of Bath, where he faces a backlash against national party policies such as the uniform business rate and the poll tax.
Liberal Democrat Mr Don Foster, a former leader of the Alliance group on Avon county council, needs only a 1.4 per cent swing to wipe out Mr Patten's 1,412 majority after his 13 years as the constituency's MP.
These are some of the other possible changes in control that could take place: Conservative seats at risk to Liberal Democrats: Plymouth Sutton: surprise late retirement of Tory veteran Alan Clark encouraged Julian Brett Freeman to feel he can achieve the four per cent swing needed for victory.
Devon North: a top target in Devon.
Nick Harvey, a professional lobbyist, needs only a four per cent swing to take a seat held by Jeremy Thorpe for many years, where Liberal traditions are still strong.
North Cornwall: key Cornish seat, where swing of less than five per cent would unseat Sir Gerry Neale, who helped to run Mrs Thatcher's unsuccessful campaign to remain party leader.
Lib Dem hopes pinned on Paul Tyler, who won the old Bodmin constituency with a majority of just nine in 1974, but lost it later the same year.
Some local resentment over the Government's stance during the Camelford water poisoning incident in 1988.
Taunton: considered Lib Dem best hope in Somerset, even though Jackie Ballard, former district council leader, would have to overturn David Nicholson's 10,380 majority.
Devon and West Torridge: Friday afternoon declaration could make this a crucial seat; Emma Nicholson, who angered some local supporters by backing Michael Heseltine in leadership election, is fighting challenge of David McBride.Falmouth and Camborne: Former double Olympic gold medallist Sebastian Coe in first attempt to become an MP; but Lib Dems believe retiring Tory David Mudd's majority of just over 5,000 is vulnerable to Mrs Terrye Jones, chairman of the local district council.
Conservative seats at risk to Labour: Bristol East: Jonathan Sayeed's 4,123 majority would disappear if there were a 4.1 per cent swing to challenger Jean Corston, a barrister.
Bristol North West: barometer seat signalling national outcome that has changed hands between Labour and Conservatives six times in 12 general elections.
Labour's Doug Naysmith, Bristol city councillor who presided over privatisation of Bristol port, needs a six per cent swing to wipe out Michael Stern's 6,952 majority.
Bristol Kingswood: Rob Hayward defending 4,393 majority against Roger Berry, Labour group leader of Avon county council; 3.8 per cent swing needed.
Plymouth Drake: tough fight for Dame Janet Fookes in seat that used to be one of most marginal in Britain; though Lib Dem Val Cox needs only a four per cent swing, Labour barrister Peter Telford has best hopes.
Social Democratic Party seat at risk to Labour: Plymouth Devonport: Dr David Owen's old seat expected to revert to Labour after heavy job losses at naval dockyard.
Council election results suggest local headmaster David Jamieson will win for Labour.
But both Tory Keith Simpson and Liberal Democrat Murdoch McTaggart hope to pick up Dr Owen's huge personal vote.
There are, of course, numerous seats in the region unlikely to change.
Election ‘92: Ashdown sets sights on Tory Achilles’ heel
By Jonathan Petre
THE CHOICE of the ‘capital’ of Cornwall's one-time china clay industry as the venue for the Liberal Democrats' penultimate and most glitzy election rally last night was no accident.
St Austell is smack in the middle of the party's natural heartland which Liberal Democrat strategists are increasingly confident will largely revert to its traditional Liberal colours on Thursday.
Mr Ashdown descended on the area yesterday for the third time in his marathon campaign amid growing recognition among Tories that the South-West could prove their Achilles' heel, a danger underlined by the Press Association opinion poll which showed a swing against the Conservatives in the region of six per cent.
Liberal Democrat strategists predicted that such a swing would deliver into their party's hands up to seven Tory seats in the area, including Bath, the constituency held by Mr Patten, Conservative Party chairman.
‘This is the area where we are the clear challengers and we have a strong presence,’ said Mr Ashdown during a photogenic visit to a seal sanctuary in Gweek.
‘It is a bedrock of traditional liberalism to build on and it is here that we are likely to see the most substantial progress of all.
Some are talking about Cornwall falling to us lock stock and barrel.
I wouldn't go so far.’
As the only viable West Country alternative to the Tories — there are no Labour MPs between Bristol and Penzance — the Liberal Democrats are benefiting from simmering resentment that, while the boom years largely past the region by, the recession has hit agriculture, tin mining, and tourism.
Cutbacks in local defence establishments is also a factor in some constituencies.
In the Fawlty Towers belt of Torquay, abandoned hotels have been boarded up against vandals.
Significantly, farmers — generally reliable Tory supporters — are blaming the Government for the sins of Brussels and appear to be turning a blind eye to the Liberal Democrats' pro-European stance.
Conservative Central Office has been inundated with jittery reports from regional Tory organisers, but is banking on driving home the message to a receptive audience that a vote for the Liberal Democrats would effectively open the door of Downing Street to Mr Kinnock.
‘When people vote on the day, they are looking at the party who will form the government, and in this part of the country they do not want socialism,’ said Mr Peter Hodgson, the Conservatives' Western Area chairman, who was confident the Conservatives would retain all their seats.
At last night's rally, which culminated in fireworks, Mr Ashdown did not miss the opportunity to evoke the West Country's Liberal roots.
‘Long before the most recent dramatic rise of the Liberal Democrats, Cornwall was the bedrock of liberalism and democracy.
For even in the darkest days of two-party Tory and Labour domination, the flame of hope burns brightly here,’ he said.
‘And whenever Liberal Democrats are on the up, we sweep ahead in the South-West.
We'll do so on Thursday.
Here in Cornwall, you are in the vanguard of conscience and reform.’
He warned the Conservatives and Labour that ‘from the ancient bastion of liberalism, the flames are fanning out in all directions, consuming your shabby campaigns, your out-of-date policies, your visions of the future’.
Election ‘92: Tories have won battle of ideas but may lose on the hustings
By ANTHONY KING
IN A SPEECH a few weeks after he became Conservative Party chairman, Chris Patten developed an interesting thesis about this election.
He suggested that Labour governments came to power only when there had been a radical change in the climate of opinion.
It was not enough for voters to be dissatisfied with an incumbent Tory government.
Labour already needed to have won the ‘battle of ideas’.
In 1945 Labour won because its thinking was clearly in tune with the times.
Economic planning had won the war and there was every reason to think it would win the peace.
Keynesian ideas were predominant in the Treasury as well as among academic economists.
The spirit of comradeship that had made victory possible had the welfare state as one of its natural corollaries.
William Beveridge, the author of the famous report on National Insurance, was himself a Liberal, not a Socialist, and his ideas were widely taken up in the Tory Party.
Similarly, Labour in 1964 won because its message was in tune with the prevailing intellectual climate.
There was a widespread feeling that the old order — represented by Etonians such as Harold Macmillan and Sir Alec Douglas-Home — had passed and that the age of the scientifically minded technocrat had dawned.
Harold Wilson's famous phrase ‘the white heat of the scientific revolution’ struck a chord.
The concept of French-style economic planning had become fashionable in the CBI and the Tory Party as well as among Socialists.
Mr Patten went on to draw the obvious conclusion.
Labour in the 1990s had not won the battle of ideas.
It was therefore unlikely to win the election.
He was clearly right about the battle of ideas.
One of the most striking features of this election is the extent to which — intellectually — it is being fought on the Tories' terms.
Labour promises not to increase the Public Sector Borrowing Requirement even in the midst of a deep recession.
The market rules.
Moreover, Labour has jettisoned its traditional ideological baggage without acquiring any new ideas distinctively its own.
Most people find it hard to say what Labour stands for at the moment.
Traditional Socialist values, notably egalitarianism, remain but, as Roy Hattersley frequently complains, Labour as a party has not embodied them in policies — or even slogans — that enunciate a clear vision of what a Labour Britain would be like.
Labour at the moment offers ‘more of the same but better’.
Most of its more radical ideas, including those on constitutional matters and Europe, it shares with the Liberal Democrats.
The upshot is that there has indeed been a battle of ideas — and the Conservatives have won it.
Mrs Thatcher has gone but her intellectual legacy lives on, not least in the Labour Party.
As an intellectual pace-setter, she is the Keynes or Beveridge of our times.
Yet the other part of Mr Patten's analysis appears to be wrong.
The Conservatives are losing the campaign.
Why?
There are two reasons — one minor, one major.
The minor reason is that the Tories at the moment sound — because they are — intellectually incoherent.
They are simultaneously in favour of high levels of public spending and the rigorous control of public spending, of low interest rates and a huge Public Sector Borrowing Requirement, of individual self-reliance and an extended welfare state.
The major reason is that ideas in politics are not just academic.
They are judged, not for intellectual elegance but for their ability to deliver.
Keynesianism succeeded in the 1950s and 1960s because it was credited — probably wrongly, as we now think — with bringing about full employment.
It failed in the 1970s and 1980s because it offered no solutions to the new problems of chronic inflation and low growth.
Beveridge's legacy endures because the welfare state works tolerably well and is immensely popular.
Now Thatcherism is being put to the same test as Keynesianism was.
There is no serious intellectual challenge to it.
Labour has not so much won the battle of ideas as deserted the field.
There is no new Keynes.
Rather, the challenge is exclusively — but dangerously — political.
Thatcherism was supposed to operate on the money supply and the productive side of the economy to produce low inflation and a high and sustainable rate of economic growth.
Inflation is down but the problem for the Tories is that unemployment is up, business failures are up, house repossessions are up, interest rates are high and economic growth is non-existent.
Conservative ideas delivered the goods in the 1980s.
They are not delivering the goods today.
That is the essence of the Conservatives' problem.
Mr Patten was wrong.
Ideas as such are not central in electoral politics.
Their consequences are.
The Tories, the victors in the battle of ideas, look like losing the political war.
Anthony King is Professor of Government at Essex University.
Election ‘92: NHS is being broken apart says Kinnock
By John Hibbs, Political Staff
MR KINNOCK put the future of health care back at the centre of the electoral stage last night with a warning that the NHS was in mortal danger if Labour did not win power.
In the starkest expression so far of the choice he believes the country faces tomorrow, the Labour leader portrayed the NHS as a benchmark of civilisation that would be threatened by a fourth Tory term.
He said health and the economy towered above all other issues in the election campaign, and added that the nation faced an alternative between modernisation and recovery under Labour, or privatisation and recession under the Tories.
Mr Kinnock told thousands of enthusiastic supporters at a rally in Blackburn, Lancs, that the Conservatives did not deserve to win on their economic record, and had run out of ideas for rescuing the country from recession.
He also took the unusual step of appealing to all electors whatever their political persuasion to turn out and vote, a move that reflected unease among the party leadership that, with the polls showing a narrow Labour lead, its supporters might take victory for granted.
Mr Kinnock accused the Conservatives of squandering £100 billion of North Sea oil receipts on tax cuts when it could have been used to rebuild the country.
‘We have come to the end of that chapter, they have spent the money, sold off the assets, squeezed the public services, cut the training, tossed everything they possibly can out of the boat, and it is still sinking.
They promise nothing but more of the same,’ he said.
But he also acknowledged doubts about Labour's capacity to ignite recovery as he stressed the party's programme of practical measures was based on what Britain's successful European competitors had already undertaken.
‘It cannot be done overnight, but when we look at all our successful neighbours in Europe, we know it can be done over years, so not only do we have an economy in which we all have confidence, a society in which we can all be at ease, and a country of which we can all be proud, but our children can have the benefit too,’ he said.
Mr Kinnock described the health service as the bedrock of Britain and health care as an inalienable right of citizenship.
He said the Tories were destroying the national character of the health service and were intent on breaking it up and replacing it with an American-style system that owed more to accountants than doctors.
‘The NHS stands on a par with any achievements of any government of any nation since the Second World War.
It is a benchmark of civilisation in our century,’ said Mr Kinnock.
‘It is something to be cherished and nurtured, adapted and improved, but in our country it is in mortal danger.’
Conservative plans would split it from top to bottom, he said, in a complex network of charging that pitted patients against doctors, doctors against hospitals, hospitals against charities and charities against patients.
Condemning the Tory obsession with tax relief and profitability, he said: ‘The NHS is not safe in their hands.
They are breaking it apart, and if they were to get another five years they would all but finish the job.’
Mr Kinnock said the choice on polling day was between a Tory Party that, after 13 years in power, had proved beyond doubt it had no ambition to make Britain better and no conscience to make Britain worse, or a Labour Party with active policies to pull the country out of recession and build a lasting recovery.
Election ‘92: Egg arrest man linked to Labour
By Susannah Herbert
THE MAN charged with throwing an egg at Mr Major in Eastleigh, Hants, on Monday was revealed yesterday to be a Labour Party member.
John McIntyre, 25, was among those responsible for nominating the Labour candidate for Portsmouth South, Mr Syd Rapson.
Mr Larry Whitty, Labour's general secretary, demanded a report into the affair yesterday from Portsmouth South Labour Party.
After being charged, McIntyre had denied being a member of any party.
Mr Rapson, a former mayor of Portsmouth, condemned the egg-throwing incident and said: ‘It is disgraceful that anybody should resort to such measures to make a political protest.’
Mr Tony Cook, Labour's regional organiser, said: ‘A full investigation is under way.
Mr McIntyre is a Labour Party member and if the charges are proved expulsion is one option open to us.’
Election ‘92: Minimum wage raises caller's ire
By Ben Fenton
A TRADE unionist told Mr Kinnock yesterday that his minimum wage policy would destroy jobs.
Questioning him on the BBC's Election Call, Mrs Yvonne Anthonychallenged the Labour leader on the minimum wage, unemployment and relations with the unions.
Mrs Anthony, 50, from Middle Zoy, Somerset, a Tory councillor and a retired senior union negotiator, said the minimum wage would undermine agreed pay structures and force people higher up the pay ladder to seek rises to maintain differentials.
Mr Kinnock argued that most pay structures were not worked out by reference to the lowest-paid.
Mrs Anthony said he was wrong and that most unions negotiated pay structures on a percentage basis.
Later she said: ‘I think I ate him for breakfast.
If he can't cope with me, how is he going to cope with people like Boris Yeltsin if he is elected?’
Election ‘92: Our Cilla sends Major to his date with the voters
By Robert Hardman
THIS WAS the last rally, the last speech and the last chance for the Tory faithful to enjoy the John Major planetarium experience.
And they gave him the rowdiest send-off of the campaign.
Given the impenetrable darkness surrounding the opinion polls, who better to rouse the rabble than the host of Blind Date?
For once, Our Cilla was utterly biased in her choice of which of the three hopefuls should win Thursday's star prize: five years of running the country.
Anyway, at last night's show in a Wembley conference hall, there was only one contestant.
And he needed a lorra, lorra votes.
‘There I was in our ‘ouse reading the Labour manifesto to Our Jack — well, he loves fairy stories…’ she began, her audience lapping it up.
Accomplished compere that she is, she knew just when to stick in the ‘but seriously, folks’ bit.
‘I'm voting for John Major because he is a great Prime Minister.
Because he doesn't punish success, he promotes it,’ she purred.
Less chirpy was Amstrad chief, Alan Sugar, who spoke bluntly of the perils of a Labour government.
‘Let Labour loose and you can wave cheerio to enterprise,’ he said.
There was a This Is John's Life feel to it all.
Members of the audience — a nurse, a headmaster, a doctor and a shopkeeper — gave glowing endorsements for last night's star guest.
Then, sure enough, there was a satellite link-up.
Who could it be?
Which megastar was about to beamed in from a Hollywood poolside to give a transatlantic Tory thumbs up?
It turned out to be Douglas Hurd and Michael Heseltine, live from the campaign trail.
But the audience didn't care.
By the time they had sat through two party political broadcasts and Chris Patten in TV evangelist mode, they could not stand up fast enough when the Prime Minister finally appeared.
In his most passionate tones yet, Mr Major delivered his Ten Tory Truths and his personal plea to be given the chance to build a ‘golden future’ for Britain.
He finished to well-mannered bedlam.
Party managers had not taken any chances, though.
Under each seat was a packet.
Inside was a baseball cap with JM4PM on it, a Union flag and a party popper.
Regimented jubilation was not required, though, as the Majors clasped, kissed and saluted a crowd which also included the England cricket captain, Graham Gooch.
The only thing missing in the party pack were tissues for the more emotional.
Cilla looked on, grinning as if she was watching the perfect Blind Date union.
But it will be Friday morning before the the screen of national opinion is drawn back and she discovers whether it is John from Huntingdon or Neil from Islwyn on the other side.
Election ‘92: Boyo Show brightens Tory spirits
By Philip Johnston and George Jones
IT WAS as though a great weight had been removed from sagging shoulders.
After three weeks’ hard pounding, both administered and received, the melancholy of the Conservative campaign ‘A-team’suddenly lifted and journalists attending their morning news conference were treated to a double act worthy of The Two Ronnies.
The inspiration for the Blue Revue was Mr Kinnock's discomfiture the previous evening on Granada Television's World In Action, when he was asked where he stood on the question of proportional representation.
Armed with a transcript, Mr Patten, Tory Party chairman, and Mr Heseltine, Environment Secretary, launched into a carefully-rehearsed re-enactment of the Labour leader's encounter with 20-year-old Alec Dunn, a first-time voter from Bolton.
With the Prime Minister sitting, smiling, between this unlikely comic duo, Mr Patten took on the role of presenter Sue Lawley while Swansea-born Mr Heseltine — billed by the Tory chairman as ‘the most famous living Welshman’— groped into his memory for an accent with which to parody Mr Kinnock.
‘I was extremely unfair, uncharacteristically, to Mr Kinnock when I said he hadn't made his position on PR absolutely plain,’ said Mr Patten, warming up his audience.
‘So I was delighted when last night he clarified the issue for the nation.
As vicars say, I would like to share with you exactly how he put it because it is a very important constitutional question.’
Patten/Dunn: Are you in favour of proportional representation?
I want to know where you personally stand on the subject.
Heseltine/Kinnock: Yes, well I would be delighted to be able to tell you.
Patten/Lawley: Now.
Heseltine/Kinnock: At this juncture, well I'd be delighted to, but what I, what do you mean…
Patten/Dunn: It's yes or no, isn't it?
Either you agree with it or you don't agree with it.
Heseltine/Kinnock: Yes sure, well quite.
No it isn't quite as simple as that, not sitting where I am sitting.
Patten/Lawley: You have about 30 seconds Mr Kinnock to tell them why you won't say where you stand on this as the other leaders do.
Heseltine/Kinnock: Many times in public, exactly, absolutely, exactly what my approach has been.
It is that two years, two and a quarter years ago I established a procedure in the Labour Party…(uproar from audience).
It was performance that drew applause from a press corps relieved to be approaching the end of at least the first election campaign this year, and brought smiles to previously glum ministerial faces.
It was also indicative of an air of fatalism hanging over Conservative Central Office, a feeling that they had answered all the questions on the examination paper without doing themselves justice and were now awaiting the marks with trepidation.
One reporter asked whether they were ‘demob happy’.
Mr Heseltine, by now carried away with his role, replied: ‘I tell you, we are on our way, boyo.
We are going to win this election.’
It was the first time in the campaign that there had been any rapport between the embattled figures on the platform and the assembled press and television correspondents.
Throughout, Mr Patten has sought unsuccessfully to convince a largely sceptical, and at times hostile, media that the Tories can come from behind in the polls to win tomorrow.
Many of those who have attended the Tories' daily press conference have effectively written off their chances, at best predicting they will form the largest party in a hung parliament.
The mood has been very different from Labour's controlled and skilfully-packaged press conferences, where Mr Kinnock and his shadow Cabinet colleagues have presented themselves as a government-in-waiting.
One of the few criticisms that has rankled with Mr Kinnock has been the allegation of cockiness — the presumption he has won before the votes have been counted.
A few hundred yards away at Conservative Central Office the mood has been more subdued, though not defeatist.
Party strategists acknowledge that the overwhelming weight of opinion polls has been against them — and that for Mr Major to win tomorrow he would need a movement in public opinion greater than that achieved in nine of the past 10 election campaigns.
The Tories have been comforting themselves that they are holding their own in marginal seats while Labour's national poll ratings are being inflated by piling up extra support in its strongholds.
But the ICM poll for the Press Association, conducted among 10,000 people and the most comprehensive so far in the campaign, made bleak reading for the backroom tacticians at Central Office.
Although it showed an overall swing of seven per cent to Labour since the last election, in the key regions it was much bigger.
In the West Midlands, the swing was 10.5 per cent; in the East Midlands eight per cent ; and Yorkshire and Humberside 10.5 per cent — enough to turn many areas of the electoral map red tomorrow night.
In addition, the Tories are being squeezed by the Liberal Democrats in the South-West.
Nationally, the polls suggest Labour is still short of the unprecedented swing needed to guarantee an overall majority, although if mood — particularly among the politicians and media most closely associated with the campaign — is a pointer to the outcome of the election then the Tories have lost.
But in 1987, Labour also won the campaign — only to see Mrs Thatcher back in Downing Street with a majority of 101.
Veterans of previous campaigns caution against writing off the Tories before the votes are cast.
Election ‘92: Thatcher views threat of coalition with alarm
By Hugh Davies in Indianapolis
MRS THATCHER went to the American heartlands yesterday and made clear when questioned by university students that she viewed with alarm the idea of Britain under a coalition government.
She said: ‘The strength of my country in recent years has been that we have had no coalition, just clear leadership, a clear majority and clear decisions.
This has done a great deal for the world.’
In the midst of an American speaking tour, she stopped to lecture at Depauw University at Greencastle, near Indianapolis.
When an undergraduate suggested there was ‘some question’ about the leadership of John Major, she gave him a cold stare and replied: ‘I support John Major wholly.
I hope he will still be Prime Minister on Friday.
Next question!’
Asked if she anticipated a hung parliament she smiled.
‘As Mark Twain said: ‘never prophesy, especially about the future’.’
she replied.
Another student pointing out that Britain ‘was mired in recession and the Conservative Party unable to do anything about it’ asked what Britons would gain by electing Mr Major.
Mrs Thatcher instantly fired back, saying: ‘the kind of policies that restore our fortune and reputation in the world’.
Election ‘92: The agonising is over for floating voters
At the start of the campaign Maurice Weaver visited the key constituency of Peterborough.
Yesterday he went back to the city to see if the voters to whom he spoke had changed their minds
By MAURICE WEAVER
PETERBOROUGH, the Fen city identified as the fulcrum of this general election, has made up its mind.
The candidates, all seven of them, are still canvassing hard but it is not conversions they really expect now, just promises to turn out and vote.
Convictions have hardened, for better for worse, and the floaters have touched bottom.
As in Peterborough, one suspects, so in Britain, barring bombshells.
‘I don't think there is any point in agonising any more,’ said Mrs Irene Reynolds, 32, a housewife.
‘The arguments just go round and round.’
Her Lib-Lab dilemma has swung Paddywards.
Louise Sewell, 24, who works in a local bank, was a committed Tory from the start.
She was uneasy about Mr Major then but he is her darling now.
He has run an ‘exceptional’ campaign, she says.
She thought the television saga of Jennifer's grommet was ‘despicable — typical Labour dirty tricks’.
Bernard Allway, 55, voted Tory last time but swung to Labour early on in the hustings in protest at the poll tax and the economy.
‘We have not been diverted back,’ he says.
‘I don't think it will be sweetness and honey under Labour and have misgivings about union power.
But at least Kinnock and Ashdown have campaigned on policies.
I haven't liked the way the Tories got the knives out.’
Peterborough is the most fickle of seats.
In 1966 it produced the closest contest of any post-war election with a three-vote Conservative win after seven recounts.
It was Labour in the 1970s but went Tory in 1979 and Dr Brian Mawhinney, the Northern Ireland Minister, held it with a 9,784 majority in 1987.
If Labour gains 97 seats on Thursday it will win the election.
Dr Mawhinney's is the 97th most at risk.
He is acutely aware of it and so is Miss Julie Owens, Labour's challenger, who gave up her job with the Socialist Group in Brussels to do battle.
I caught up with Dr Mawhinney at Deacon's School, a local comprehensive, where he subjected himself to 45 minutes of questioning from 60 youngsters as part of an in-school mock election.
The head girl, Nikki Carmichael, who is 18 and will be participating tomorrow in the poll proper, thought he was marvellous and said he could have her vote any time.
The majority thought differently, however, and voted to give him the heave-ho in Labour's favour by a margin of nine per cent.
The doctor is under no misapprehension that the real contest is just as tough.
The TV-promoted ‘Peterborough effect’ has turned sour with industrial closures, redundancies and repossessions.
Dr Mawhinney acknowledges that a majority nudging 10,000 was ‘never natural’ for such a community but is confident of hanging on.
Mrs Ann Wright, a lorry driver's wife, is the type of C2 voter all parties have been wooing.
She was once a Tory activist, but told me in the first week of the campaign she had lost faith.
And now?
‘I'm not going back.
I'm definitely Labour.’
Such responses inevitably raise the question of how much effect nearly four weeks of canvassing has really had on the voters.
Did the floaters find a safe haven early on?
Were they ever truly susceptible to doorstep persuasion?
Perhaps it has really been so much hot air.
A poll for the Peterborough Evening Telegraph suggests that the Tories will scrape home.
But it predicts that Dr Mawhinney's 7.9 per cent lead over Labour has been whittled to 3.4 per cent(Con 42.3 per cent ; Lab 38.9; Lib Dem 16.1).
The constituency's middle ground is a mess.
The original Liberal Democrat candidate, Pamela Beasley, 47, a local councillor, was de-selected following allegations of theft and she is standing as an independent under a People's Party flag.
She appeared before Peterborough magistrates last week on 12 charges of theft from a pensioner and was committed for trial at Crown Court.
Ms Amanda Taylor, 29, who took up the Lib Dem banner, also has to contend with an Official Liberal Party candidate, Mr Erbie Murat.
Election ‘92: Scotland ‘on the sidelines’
By Robert Reid and Jenny Shields
THE FUTURE of Scotland and the United Kingdom was ‘under threat as never before’ Mr Heseltine, Environment Secretary, told a rally of Conservative supporters in Edinburgh last night.
He said that all the party's opponents wanted ‘a different Britain.
A Scotland on the sidelines.
A Scotland diminished.
A Britain disunited.
A Britain broken.
‘The Nationalists offer the straight choice — separatism and socialism.
Theirs is a cynical creed; a creed which spells destruction, division and disunity.
‘The Labour Party and the Liberal Party see their votes at risk.
They change their policies; not just on separatism — on anything — everything — Europe, defence, enterprise.
So Labour will do anything, say anything.
Is that leadership?
Is that integrity?
Is that what earns a good reputation abroad or respect where it counts?’
And he told his cheering audience: ‘Of course it won't work.
It won't work because it doesn't address the real issues.’
Mr Heseltine said these were competitiveness, tax levels and European opportunity.
In all those areas, he said, Conservative polices worked.
‘Look at the record, look at the potential.
But their way won't work.’
The Act of Union, he added, had brought prosperity, peace and strength to both nations over 300 years.
Earlier, Mr Lang, Scottish Secretary, had spelled out the ‘stark choice’ facing Scots.
‘Either they can back the Union or they can take the first, irrevocable step towards separation,’ he said at the party's morning press briefing.
‘There can be no middle way or half-way house.
We can't have our cake and eat it.’
Mr Lang added: ‘The SNP want cold-blooded separation.
They want to tear Scotland away from Britain, with all the pain and anguish that would inevitably ensue.
‘Labour and the Liberal Democrats want to pull Scotland out of the mainstream of the United Kingdom.
If Scotland goes down the road mapped out by them, there would be no return journey; no turning back.’
Election ‘92: On the road with the no-hopers
Susannah Herbert meets two candidates putting a brave face on the prospect of certain defeat
By SUSANNAH HERBERT
IT WOULD take an early Christian fresh from ancient Rome to appreciate the hazards facing Mr David Melding, Conservative candidate in the Labour heartland of Blaenau Gwent.
If Tories are not flung to the lions in Blaenau, it can only be because lions are rare in the one-time mining valleys of South Wales.
Bricks, however, are not — which is why Mr Melding seldom parks his car in a conspicuous spot without removing his Vote Tory posters first.
‘Don't call this seat hopeless,’ he begged.
‘Let's just say it's…er…politically challenging.’
In the last election, Mr Michael Foot held the seat, one of Labour's safest, with a majority of 27,861.
Now he has retired, his successor, Llewellyn Smith, is expected to do the same.
Luckily Mr Melding, 29, a corduroy-clad career Tory who runs the Welsh Centre for International Affairs in Cardiff, has a sense of humour as black as the local coal.
He will need it when the returns are counted and he discovers if he has retained the 4,959 Tory votes of 1987.
His campaign headquarters in a Brynmawr back street echoed with his laughter as he spelt out his tactics.
‘When they shout abuse at me, I wave graciously and say ‘Thank you for your support’.
It drives them all crazy.
I love it,’ he said gleefully.
Although Mr Melding, a first-time candidate, has not the faintest chance of winning, he is reluctant to dwell gloomily on the fact.
‘Naturally I am fighting to win.
You see, I expect a lot of Labour voters will spoil their ballot papers by writing ‘F…ing Tory’ next to my name.
Apparently they usually do, here,’ he said.
His three-strong campaign team, which can fit comfortably into his small car — and prefers to stay there — would rather not risk door-to-door canvassing.
But Mr Melding says he is happiest standing on municipal benches with his megaphone, annoying the socialists of Abertillery.
His claims that most people are too stunned to react violently —‘the nearest we come to any threat is people laughing at us’— are contradicted by the experience of his right-hand man, Mr Mark Smith, whose cat was garrotted last week, but he sticks to his guns regardless.
‘I want to be a Member of Parliament.
If I have to do what is necessary here before looking for a position where the statistical likelihood of victory is higher, so be it,’ he said.
‘A campaign is a campaign, wherever you are.
It's good experience.
If you have a thin skin you shouldn't be in politics.’
One hundred miles away, Mr Alan Lloyd, Labour candidate for Christchurch, Dorset, nodded in agreement.
His defeat is as certain as Mr Melding's, although his campaign has been a good deal less rough: canvassing for Labour in a prosperous south coast resort may be discouraging, but it is scarcely dangerous, unless you count the speechless stick-waving of elderly gentlefolk as assault.
‘The nice thing about fighting a seat like this is that we can't lose since we're coming from rock bottom.
It can only get better.
It's fun really, because I can enjoy myself, I've got no pressure on me from the party to succeed,’ he said gamely.
Mr Lloyd, 39, a councillor who works on the Ford assembly line in Southampton, is used to hopeless cases: his first political action as a child was to take the newsboys on his street out on strike.
They were all sacked.
He fought four times for his seat on Southampton council before winning it: a result that encouraged him to move into national politics.
In 1987 he fought and lost the general election as the Labour candidate for Gosport, another Tory stronghold.
‘I'm doing all this because I believe in Labour and I love talking to people on doorsteps, finding out what matters to them.
This is the good side of politics, not the back-stabbing in Westminster,’ he said.
Unlike Mr Melding, he does not regard this campaign as a stepping stone on the route to Westminster, but sees it as an extension of his involvement in local politics.
‘Of course, I would like to be asked to fight a marginal one day, but it would have to be local.
Southampton would be ideal,’ he said.
‘I'm not interested in going any further afield.’
This time, he does not expect to unseat the Tory incumbent, Mr Robert Adley, who got 35,656 votes in 1987 — against Labour's 5,174 and the SDP's 13,282 — but he does hope for a big swing to Labour.
‘I don't pretend that this will ever be a Labour seat, but at least we can force the opposition to work harder, give them a run for their money,’ he said.
Unfortunately for the Lloyd campaign, unemployment, poll tax, homelessness and the state of the NHS are not issues that keep the Christchurch voters awake at night.
‘This is real retired major country, with a sprinkling of yuppies.
No one is rude to me,’ he said.
‘I know that lots of them would never dream of voting Labour, but it doesn't bother me.
I suppose you could call me a born optimist.’
Sex abuse victim's 30-year secret
By John Steele Courts Correspondent
A WOMAN told an Old Bailey jury yesterday she had broken a 30-year silence about sexual abuse by her step-father to protect a young girl.
The woman, who alleged the abuse started when she was five and ended a decade later when she left the family home in Edmonton, north London, had heard her stepfather was seeking access to his five-year-old daughter by another woman.
‘I approached Social Services because I thought the child might be in danger,’ said the 35-year-old woman.
She had kept silent because ‘my understanding was that if I told anyone I would die.
It was all as though I had a horrible secret I had to keep.’
Mr Neill Stewart, prosecuting, said the woman had become pregnant at 13 and at last told her mother her stepfather was responsible.
He denied it but after she had an abortion allegedly confessed to his wife, who had been too afraid and embarrassed to go to the police.
In 1976, the mother and step-father parted, and in 1990, the woman heard he had parted from the mother of his daughter and wanted access.
The man denies seven offences of rape and indecency.
The trial was adjourned until today.
Joyrider saved
A policewoman pulled a teenage joyrider from a stolen Vauxhall Astra after it crashed and burst into flames in Leeds early yesterday.
Another teenager was thrown from the car.
Both were being questioned by Wakefield police yesterday.
Student critical
Anandan Ganesan, 19, a university law student found on a towpath 260ft beneath Clifton suspension bridge was in a ‘critical’ condition in Bristol Royal Infirmary yesterday.
Semtex detector
A device to detect plastic explosives, including Semtex, is to be launched next month by Ai Cambridge of Pampisford, Cambs.
It costs £15,000.
Trapped miners crawl to safety after 15-hour ordeal
By Colin Wright
EIGHT Yorkshire miners, trapped for 15 hours behind thousands of tons of rock, coal and twisted steel half a mile underground, are expected back at work today after what British Coal described as ‘a stunningly successful’ rescue operation.
A team of 30 rescuers battled throughout Monday night and yesterday morning to free the men, crawling on their stomachs and ripping out debris with their hands as temperatures reached 30C three-quarters of a mile from the pit shaft of Stillingfleet colliery, North Yorks.
After being trapped by a roof fall at 4.30pm on Monday, the six miners, a pit deputy and a mining engineer crawled to safety through a small hole in the rubble clawed by the hands of their exhausted rescuers.
All were passed fit after medical checks and were driven home to rest.
None has been named.
As investigators from the Mines Inspectorate, British Coal and unions began their inquiries into the accident, the company disclosed that the trapped men had never been in serious danger.
They had been working about a mile along a blind underground roadway, ending at what is due to be a new coal face, when the roof fell in 500 yards behind them.
Within minutes of being trapped behind a 20-feet thick wall of coal, steel and rubble completely filling the 12-feet high and 16-feet wide tunnel, they were in contact with colleagues on the opposite side using the undamaged Tannoy system which runs along the wall of the roadway.
They received ventilation through a compressed air pipeline, also running along the side, which is used to power cutting tools at the coalface.
Able to see by lights from their pit helmets, the trapped miners cut the pipe at their end of the blockage while their rescuers did the same, pumping through fresh air by fan.
The operation to free them involved four teams of three men from mines rescue centres at Selby and Doncaster working in 10-minute shifts to claw away debris from a bottom corner of the fall.
Rescuers, working in stifling temperatures in a space no bigger than three feet wide and two feet high, reached through a small hole they had dug to the men at 9.30pm and passed through drinks and sandwiches.
Their work was hampered when a large boulder blocking their way was moved, resulting in a further fall of shale which took them several hours to remove.
As they shored up the ceiling with wooden planks, the cleared rubble was passed in buckets along a human chain of miners in the underground roadway.
Mr Ken Capstick, vice chairman of the Yorkshire region of the National Union of Mineworkers, said the rescue had been remarkable.
‘This has been a magnificent effort.
The organisation was superb.’
Mr Mark Davies, NUM branch secretary, said the trapped men had been in high spirits throughout their ordeal, singing and joking and, at times, trying to move rubble themselves.
‘They were even asking the manager if he was going to continue paying their bonus for still being down the pit,’ he said.
Mr Alan Houghton, group director of the Selby mine complex, of which Stillingfleet is one of five collieries, said: ‘Everybody knew exactly what we were doing.
They were supremely confident that we would achieve the result.
It was just a matter of time.
‘The men involved in the rescue were in the most danger and were in the worst condition, because of heat and fatigue, when it was all over.
‘It was the finest organised rescue in which I have ever been involved.’
He added: ‘I walked along that roadway myself only two weeks ago and I can honestly say it was one of the best I have ever seen.
This one has got us scratching our heads.’
Chase ‘led to fatal crash’
By Paul Stokes
AN insurance clerk told a jury yesterday he was unaware he had run down a mother and her two daughters as he tried to escape from a man in car who had threatened him.
Martin Flook, 19, said he had twice been beaten up in the previous year by Ian Coombes, a passenger in the other vehicle, who was dating his ex-girlfriend.
Bristol Crown Court has heard how Mrs Lorraine Hurkett, 26, and her daughters Sharon, four, and Lisa, two, died after being struck by Flook's Vauxhall Nova when it jumped red lights.
Her husband Mr Stephen Hurkett, who was holding the hand of their eldest daughter Emma, seven, saw the incident.
Flook claimed he did not see the family as they crossed a dual carriageway in Patchway, Bristol, as he was chased ‘bumper to bumper’ by two men in the other car.
He said: ‘The car came alongside me.
Coombes leaned out of the window and shouted ‘Come on then, this time’ as if to pull me off the road.
He had clenched fists and seem very angry.
I was panicked.’
Flook, of Worthing Road, Patchway, Bristol, denied three counts of causing death by reckless driving on June 29 1991.
The trial was adjourned until today.
Listed chapel was blown up by developer
By Paul Stokes
A LISTED Wesleyan chapel facade was blown up with gelignite in an abortive attempt to allow a hard-pressed property developer to build flats in its place, Mr Andrew Chubb, prosecuting, told Plymouth Crown Court yesterday.
The overnight explosion not only destroyed the chapel but also sparked a security alert in Dartmouth, Devon.
Mr Chubb said Steven Mann, 23, a quarry worker, was offered £7,000 to ‘put a crack’ in the 19th century structure in February last year.
‘People nearby were shaken from their beds,’ he said.
Peter Denega, 42, a property developer, of Walnut Road, Torquay, bought the Grade Two listed chapel, with its classicial facade supported by four Ionic columns, from South Hams District Council in 1988.
Shortly after buying it, Denega was refused listed building consent to demolish the chapel and develop 21 sheltered accommodation units.
Later he won an appeal to develop the site providing the facade was retained.
Mr Chubb claimed Denega was being crippled by interest rates and a development incorporating the facade was considered ‘uneconomic’.
Mr Chubb said: ‘The explosion far exceeded what they intended and the facade was destroyed.
With it went planning consent for the sheltered accommodation units.
No facade, no planning consent.’
Mann admitted executing the demolition and Denega admitted causing work to be done that would result in demolishing a listed building.
Sentence was adjourned until today.
Developer blew up listed chapel to build flats
By Paul Stokes
A LISTED Wesleyan chapel facade was blown up with gelignite in an abortive attempt to allow a hard-pressed property developer to build flats in its place, Mr Andrew Chubb, prosecuting, told Plymouth Crown Court yesterday.
The overnight explosion not only destroyed the chapel but also sparked a security alert in Dartmouth, Devon.
Mr Chubb said Steven Mann, a quarry worker, was offered £7,000 to ‘put a crack’ in the 19th century structure in February last year.
Peter Denega, 42, a property developer, of Walnut Road, Torquay, bought the Grade Two listed chapel, with its classicial facade supported by four Ionic columns, from South Hams District Council in 1988.
Shortly after buying it, Denega was refused listed building consent to demolish the chapel and develop 21 sheltered accommodation units.
Later he won an appeal to develop the site providing the facade was retained.
Mr Chubb claimed Denega was being crippled by interest rates and a development incorporating the facade was considered ‘uneconomic’.
There were two lawful ways to demolish the listed chapel — one was to have the building de-listed and the second was to obtain listed building consent for its total demolition which involved seeking representations from six conservation bodies.
Mr Chubb said: ‘It was then Denega decided to take matters into his own hands.’
In November, 1990, Denega approached Steven Mann, 23, of Ilsington, Devon, and asked him if it was possible ‘to put a crack in a building using explosive’.
Mann said it could be done and Denega drove him to the chapel to see ‘if the small cracks in the facade could be enlarged’.
Mr Chubb said: ‘The effect of the explosion far exceeded what they intended and the facade was destroyed.
With it went planning consent for the sheltered accommodation units.
No facade, no planning consent.’
Mann admitted executing the demolition and Denega admitted causing work to be done that would result in demolishing a listed building.
Sentence was adjourned until today.
Lady Weld's will
Lady Weld, of Lulworth Manor, Wareham, Dorset, who died on Sept 11 last year, left estate valued at £434,952 net (£439,975 gross) in her will published yesterday.
Lady Weld was the wife of Sir Joseph Weld, former Lord Lieutenant of Dorset.
Actress's estate
Dame Gwen Ffrangcon-Davies, the classical actress who died on Jan 27, aged 101, left estate valued at £116,124 net (£146,994 gross) in her will published yesterday.
British Rail's answer to leaves on the line: cut down the trees
By Toby Moore, Environment Correspondent
COMMUTERS stood on tracks disrupting London-bound trains yesterday in protest at British Rail's ‘scorched earth’ policy for eliminating the perennial problem of leaves on the line More than 50 people at Carshalton, Surrey, swapped season tickets for placards to protest at the transformation of leafy tracksides into what one called a ‘scene from Apocalypse Now’, the film about the Vietnam war which showed the effects of mass defoliation with napalm.
The disruption from 9.15 am to 9.45 am was designed not to affect other commuters, only gangs of chainsaw-wielding BR workers.
The company, which prides itself on its environmental record, decided a final solution was needed to avoid in one fell swoop the seasonal embarrassment of leaves on the line.
It announced a policy of clearing 60,000 trees from 12,000 miles of track in the South-East.
A quarter-mile embankment running through Carshalton on the line to Victoria was chosen as the first to experience new ‘lineside vegetation management’ practices.
Mr John Canford, who led the protest, said: ‘We wouldn't mind if that was what really happened.
But they're chopping everything down, burning trees with engine oil and leaving charred stumps and brown earth in its place.
‘BR just wanted to see what they could get away with,’ said Mr Canford.
‘If we hadn't protested, the rest of the South-East faced the same.’
Sutton Borough Council, the local authority, lost 25,000 trees during the storm of 1987 and is furious at losing several hundred more in the past four weeks to BR chainsaws.
The council has accused the company of adopting a scorched earth policy in its plan to remove trees it considers a safety hazard
‘The first we knew about it was when people rang up to complain,’ said Mr Chris Myers, council spokesman.
‘Nobody asked us.
We're particularly aggrieved because we suffered very badly from the storm in 1987 and we've been struggling in the past few years of drought to replant,’ said Mr Myers.
Sutton council has slapped a Smoke Nuisance Notice on BR to stop stump-burning but admits it is otherwise powerless to stop it felling trees on its own land.
Mrs Patricia Hughes, Chief Executive of the council, which was named greenest in London by the Tidy Britain Group, has written to Sir Bob Reid, BR chairman to complain.
The council wants BR to cut trees only within five metres of the track.
Mr Paul Knipe, British Rail's Vegetation Consultant, said 60 places had been designated in the South-East as blackspots requiring many trees to be felled for line safety.
‘This has all been carefully thought out and we will be replanting with slow growing species such as hawthorn and hazel,’ Mr Knipe said.
‘We can't seem to win: a fuss with leaves on the line and a fuss when we deal with it.’
Mrs Caroline Ford, who has lived in Colston Avenue, Carshalton, one street away from the main line for 15 years, said: ‘Until a few weeks ago we were shielded from the line by a long row of beautiful trees.
Then they suddenly came along and started felling the lot.
‘Nobody told us, the noise has increased and we've lost some much needed greenery not to mention wildlife,’ said Mrs Ford.
It's really appalling.
Can't they just trim them?’
Rail unions said yesterday there would be widespread line closures and the down-grading of some InterCity routes if the Conservative Party wins the general election.
The unions issued the warning as they published what they claimed were leaked BR maps detailing the impact of privatisation on the network.
But British Rail said it did not believe the maps were authentic.
Mr Rifkind, the Transport Secretary, described them as ‘absolute rubbish’.
International: Russia and Ukraine head for clash on fleet
By John Kampfner in Moscow
RUSSIA and Ukraine were on a collision course last night as President Yeltsin signed a decree that would put the Black Sea fleet under Russian control.
His action directly contradicted an earlier order from President Leonid Kravchuk of Ukraine.
Mr Yeltsin's deputy, Mr Alexander Rutskoy, gave a warning that, if Kiev pressed its claims on the fleet, Russia would re-examine the status of the Crimean peninsula where it is based.
Outlining the decree, the Commander-in-Chief of Commonwealth Forces, Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov, said the fleet's military operations would remain in the hands of the Commonwealth of Independent States, but be subordinate to Mr Yeltsin, and that all financing would come from Russia.
Marshal Shaposhnikov said Russia's Foreign Minister would be asked to open talks with the Ukrainian leadership on handing over part of the 300-ship fleet to Ukraine for a coastal defence force.
The row overshadowed the second day of Russia's Congress of People's Deputies where Mr Yeltsin escaped the rough ride that hardliners had threatened as he delivered a thorough, if lacklustre, report on economic reform.
Mr Yeltsin made clear he would not contemplate any reduction in his powers and that his government would stick to its monetarist path, albeit with greater emphasis on social protection for the hardest hit.
In a more combative address, Mr Yegor Gaidar, the architect of the shock therapy programme, said preconditions for rapid economic growth comparable to western Europe after the 1939-45 war had already been created.
An aide to Mr Yeltsin said a draft of a new constitution prepared on behalf of the president would be presented to Congress today.
It would put the emergency powers he was granted last autumn on a permanent basis.
Mr Yeltsin repeated his threat that if parliament did not approve his version, he would take it to a referendum.
He admitted that mistakes had been made in the five months since he personally took over the government, especially in the slow pace of privatisation.
But, he said, by the fourth quarter of the year, every citizen would be able to participate in sell-offs.
‘We need millions of owners, not hundreds of millionaires,’ he declared.
Exploiting the nationalist rhetoric that has been the hallmark of the Congress, Mr Yeltsin promised to support the 25 million Russians living in other Commonwealth states.
He was referring mainly to Ukraine and to Moldova, another republic with which tensions have flared and where the prospect of direct confrontation between two sovereign states looms.
International: End of civil war opens way for Shevardnadze
By Stephen Mulvey in Tbilisi
GEORGIA'S democrats say they have finally defeated the armed supporters of ousted President Zviad Gamsakhurdia and can now concentrate on rebuilding the country under Mr Eduard Shevardnadze, the former Soviet Foreign Minister.
‘As an organisation they have been liquidated.
There will be no more civil war,’ said Mr Jaba Iosseliani, Mr Shevardnadze's deputy and commander of the Mhedrioni, the largest Georgian armed faction.
In a radio broadcast earlier this week, Mr Shevardnadze echoed the public mood in most areas of the country expressing optimism that Georgia was now starting to pull itself out of political and economic crisis.
Georgians have put their faith in Mr Shevardnadze as the man who can ‘save’ their country.
After a month in the country which, as Communist Party boss, he controlled for 13 years in the '70s and '80s, his opinion poll rating is 70 per cent, compared with just eight per cent for Mr Gamsakhurdia.
‘The whole world listens to him, he is like God for us now,’ said one taxi driver.
Mr Shevardnadze chose the moment of his return well, arriving at Georgia's darkest hour: the whole country periodically blacked out by power cuts, hot water and central heating a dim memory, public transport ground to a halt, and even bread rarely to be seen.
But soon after his arrival, the spring thaw enabled hydro-electric stations to start generating, and bread supplies returned to normal levels of insufficiency.
‘Consciously or not this is bound to influence anybody's opinion of him,’ said Mikhail Tavkhelidze, a Georgian radio journalist.
Mr Shevardnadze is also credited with Georgia's speedy recognition by the world community.
Austria and Czechoslovakia have already opened diplomatic relations.
The German Foreign Minister, Herr Hans Dietrich Genscher, is due in Tbilisi this week to do the same, followed later this month by his French counterpart, M Roland Dumas.
Even former dissidents jailed under Mr Shevardnadze's rule in the early 1980s recognise that his public stature makes him uniquely capable of uniting and stabilising Georgian society.
Fears that he would push Georgia into the Commonwealth of Independent States have largely evaporated following his promise to leave this question to a new Parliament, due for election in October.
The second priority, economic reform, is being energetically pursued by the provisional government with the help of experts under the deputy Prime Minister, Mr Roman Gotsiridze, 35.
International: Camra fights to avert a scandal in Bohemia
By Francis Harris in Prague
BRIMMING over with the spirit that revived traditional British brewing, the Campaign for Real Ale yesterday launched its first European offensive to save Czechoslovakia's world-renowned breweries.
The home of Budweiser and Pilsner beers, the inspiration for many foreign imitations, was rudely alerted to the dangers of Dutch and American takeovers by a three-man Camra team.
‘Budweiser Budvar beer is one of Czechoslovakia's national treasures — and should remain so,’ they said.
Mr Graham Lees, a Camra founder member, added: ‘You wouldn't consider selling Prague Castle, please don't sell Budweiser beer.’
Under Czechoslovakia's vast privatisation programme, state firms such as the breweries can be sold to either domestic or foreign investors.
The British beer lovers, led by Mr John Cryne, Camra chairman, met leading officials of the Budweiser brewery and the government to plead the case for Czech independence.
They said plans by the giant American Anheuser-Busch, brewer of American Budweiser, to take a 30 per cent stake in its pint-pot Czech rival should be rejected, and warned them that the US firm sought outright ownership.
US Budweiser and the firm in Ceske Budejovice have been at loggerheads for almost a century, exchanging writs over the use of the Budweiser name.
The original brew has been made in Bohemia since the Middle Ages, the US version for a mere century.
But while the Czechs produce just 300,000 barrels a year, the Americans make 90 million.
According to Camra, Czech Budweiser uses only malt in the 12-week brewing process, meeting the requirements of Germany's ‘Pure Beer’ law.
The mass produced American version uses both malt and rice.
Many Czechs believe their product, with its justified reputation as one of the world's great beers, is interfering with the marketing plans of the US giant, thus explaining the American interest.
Camra is also worried by proposals from the Dutch brewers Heineken and their rivals, the makers of Grolsch, to buy into the makers of Pilsner Urquell (Original), based in the Czech town which lent its name to the brewing process.
International: Russia and Ukraine sail close to the wind on Black Sea fleet
By John Kampfner in Moscow
RUSSIA and Ukraine were on a collision course last night as President Yeltsin signed a decree that would put the Black Sea fleet into Russian hands, directly contradicting an earlier order from President Leonid Kravchuk.
With the war of words between the two largest republics of the former Soviet Union reaching dangerous levels, Mr Yeltsin's deputy, Mr Alexander Rutskoy, warned that if Kiev pressed its claims on the fleet, Russia would re-examine the status of the Crimean peninsula, where it is based.
Outlining the decree, Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov, Commander-in-Chief of Commonwealth forces, said the fleet's military operations would remain in CIS hands, but be subordinate to Mr Yeltsin, and that all financing would come from Russia.
Marshal Shaposhnikov said Russia's Foreign Minister would be asked to open talks with the Ukrainian leadership on handing over a segment of the 300-ship fleet to Ukraine for a national coastal defence force.
The row overshadowed the second day of Russia's Congress of People's Deputies, where Mr Yeltsin escaped the rough ride that hardliners had threatened as he delivered a thorough, if lacklustre, report on economic reform.
Mr Yeltsin made clear he would not contemplate any reduction in his powers and that his government would stick to its monetarist path, albeit with greater emphasis on social protection for the hardest hit.
In a more combative address, which would have helped to win over the uncommitted vote, Mr Yegor Gaidar, the architect of the shock therapy programme, said preconditions for rapid economic growth comparable to Western Europe after the 1939-45 War had been created.
An aide to Mr Yeltsin said a draft of a new constitution prepared on behalf of the president would be presented to Congress today that would put the emergency powers he was granted last autumn on a permanent basis.
Mr Yeltsin repeated his threat that, if parliament did not approve his version, he would take it to a national referendum.
Other drafts give parliament greater authority than he would like.
Mr Yeltsin admitted that mistakes had been made in the five months since he personally took over the government, especially in the very slow pace of privatisation.
By the fourth quarter of the year, every citizen would be able to participate in sell-offs, he said.
‘We need millions of owners, not hundreds of millionaires,’ he declared to rare applause.
Leaders of opposition factions said that Mr Yeltsin's easy ride meant they were simply holding their fire for a more opportune moment to challenge the government during the nine-day Congress.
Just as it appeared that political compromise would prevail, both Mr Yeltsin and Mr Kravchuk have allowed nationalists in their camp to take the initiative, partly to divert attention from domestic troubles.
Relations plummeted last week after visits to Sevastopol, the Crimean headquarters for the fleet, by the Commander of Commonwealth Naval Forces and Mr Rutskoy.
Their trips, and their inflammatory remarks, coincided with a statement from Mr Yeltsin's office warning Mr Kravchuk not to take any unilateral steps over the fleet.
This Mr Kravchuk did late on Monday night, announcing that he had taken over all forces in Ukraine apart from strategic nuclear missiles, and with a reported order from Ukrainian air force command banning all flights by the fleet's planes.
Senior Ukraine officials held heated talks in Sevastopol yesterday with fleet leaders and agreed to meet again in the future.
International: Army tries to fend off blame for shelling
By MICHAEL MONTGOMERY
THE POLITICAL and military crisis gripping Bosnia-Hercegovina was played out yesterday in an extraordinary debate between Muslim and Serbian commanders visiting a shelled Muslim quarter of Sarajevo, writes Michael Montgomery in Sarajevo.
Amid the smouldering ruins of a cluster of Muslim homes which suffered 24 hours of bombardment by Serbian forces in the surrounding hills, a Yugoslav Army colonel attempted to persuade assembled journalists, militiamen and villagers that his units were not involved.
‘The Yugoslav Army has never fired on the people,’ Col Budimir Mladenovic said when confronted by an angry Muslim villager who held in his hands the remains of an Army issue mortar shell.
But the feeble efforts by the Yugoslav army to shake off mounting charges that it is backing Serbian militias in the conflict in Bosnia ended abruptly with the sharp crackle of Serbian sniper fire which sent the entire delegation diving for cover.
‘This is an outrage!’ screamed a Muslim police commander.
‘For 14 years I wore the Army uniform…your uniform.
We know what you are doing, we know your plans.’
Huddled behind a clump of trees, several villagers pointed to an anti-aircraft gun mounted on a truck in the valley far below which they said Serbian forces had used to pummel their homes.
‘And where do they get such equipment?’ one of the Muslims shouted.
‘You've been handing weapons out to the Serbs for months.’
Most Muslims and Croats in Bosnia believe the Yugoslav army, whose officer corps is now almost completely Serbian, is helping Serbs to capture territory in the republic in much the same way that they backed Serbs in the Croatian civil war.
But there are still many people shocked by the events of the past few days, who never expected the Army to be prepared to launch rocket and artillery attacks on civilian targets.
The defenders of the neighbourhood we visited, known as Popavgaj, said the Serbs launched the assault to drive out the inhabitants and gain a foothold in Sarajevo's eastern hilltop trenches.
Three young Muslim reservists died and seven more were wounded in the shelling.
The snipers, who fired directly on us despite the presence of an army officer, appeared determined to drive out a team which had come to investigate rumours of a massacre of Muslim women and children by Serbs.
The story turned out to be false.
The men had sent their families to the relative security of a schoolhouse a mile down the road.
As our group made a hasty retreat, Bosnia's Muslim interior minister, Mr Alija Delimustafic, entered the fray, pressing the Yugoslav Army commander over why its forces had not intervened earlier to halt the attack.
‘If this had been a Serbian place you would have sent 500 troops here, I guarantee it,’ Mr Delimustafic said.
Trying to defend himself from the verbal barrage, Col Mladenovic moved closer to his two bodyguards and said softly: ‘You people left the Army.
All we have to rely on now are reservists and volunteers.
‘Now you leave Yugoslavia and still expect the Yugoslav Army to protect you.’
International: Federal forces send in jets to back Serbian militiamen
By Michael Montgomery in Sarajevo
YUGOSLAV jet fighters launched rocket attacks on villages in western Bosnia-Hercegovina yesterday as federal forces appeared to step up support for Serbian militiamen in the ethnic conflict convulsing the former Yugoslav republic.
Seven people were reported killed in a series of pre-dawn air raids on two Croat villages, which Yugoslav army commanders said were in retaliation for attacks on an air base in the regional centre of Mostar nearby.
The army denied it had attacked civilian targets, but Sarajevo television showed several homes damaged by rockets in the village of Siroki Breg.
President Alija Izetbegovic of Bosnia, a Muslim, condemned the attacks, and in a letter to the acting Yugoslav defence minister called on the Serbian-dominated army to cease all hostilities in Bosnia.
‘The continuation of the conflict would mean a spread of war throughout Bosnia and would have unforeseeable consequences for the army you command,’ he said.
Days of heavy fighting between Bosnia's Serbian and Muslim populations, which have left scores dead, appeared to ease slightly yesterday, but battles continued in Croat-populated regions of the republic.
Western diplomats believe the role of the well-armed Yugoslav military will prove pivotal in deciding whether all-out war erupts in Bosnia.
As in the opening stages of the civil war in Croatia, the army says it has intervened to protect its soldiers and facilities and act as a buffer between warring sides.
But two days of sustained air attacks on Croatian positions, and artillery fire near Sarajevo, indicate that elements within the army are willing to fight openly in support of Serbs, who were vehemently opposed to independence for Bosnia.
‘With each day the evidence is growing stronger that the army is supporting Serbs in Bosnia,’ said a Western diplomat in Sarajevo.
A Muslim officer who recently quit the Yugoslav army claimed yesterday it had massively armed Serbian militiamen in Bosnia and co-ordinated plans to partition the republic along ethnic lines.
He said he saw army tanks attack a Muslim village near Sarajevo on Sunday.
In reaction to Bosnia's newly-gained independence, defiant Serbs yesterday declared their own state in the region which they said will encompass more than 50 per cent of the current republic and remain under Belgrade rule.
Leaders from the self-proclaimed Serbian Assembly of Bosnia voted for independence in an early morning session in their stronghold in the northern city of Banja Luka.
The declaration will be backed up by a decision last week to form a separate Serbian Police Force and National Guard in the region.
International: US approval
By IAN BRODIE
WASHINGTON yesterday recognised the independence of three former Yugoslav republics, Croatia, Slovenia and Bosnia-Hercegovina, writes Ian Brodie in Washington.
The move brings the United States into line with the European Community, which acted alone in recognising Croatia and Slovenia in January.
International: Italian voters sweep away the old order
By Robert Fox in Rome
ITALIANS are facing a summer of political turbulence after delivering the outgoing coalition government a thin majority in the general election.
After overnight adjustments to the results, the four-party alliance will have 331 seats out of 630 in the lower house of the Rome parliament.
But they gained only 48.8 per cent of the votes cast.
This is far from the mandate for strong government for which the party leaders asked.
In particular, it is a stunning blow for the Christian Democrats, mainstay of every Italian government since the war.
Their share of the national vote dropped more than five per cent to below 30 per cent for the first time.
‘The Wall of Christian Democracy has crumbled,’ said the headline in La Repubblica, and the Milan Corriere and Turin La Stampa proclaimed it ‘the earthquake election’.
The winners are a variety of protest parties and movements.
The Northern League of Signor Umberto Bossi, which wants a separate state for the rich north in a federal Italy, has gone up from two seats to 82.
It is now the largest party in Lombardy, Italy's richest region.
A surprising victory was scored by Signor Leoluca Orlando, the former Christian Democrat mayor of Palermo, now leading his own anti-Mafia party, La Rete (the net).
It has taken a respectable 15 seats, but Signor Orlando won the personal endorsement of nearly one in five of all voters in Palermo itself.
Alessandra Mussolini, grand-daughter of the Duce and niece of Sophia Loren, won against the trend for the neo-fascist MSI in Naples.
‘Now we have another member to add to the international fame of my family,’ said her mother, Signora Sciaccone.
Signor Guido Carli, the outgoing Treasury Minister, lost his seat in Liguria.
He was due to oversee Italy's entry into the European single market next year and to the single currency in five years' time.
The new political crisis makes it less likely that Italy will meet the EC's requirements for economic convergence on time.
Another casualty was the pornographic film star MP, Ilona Staller, La Cicciolina.
So too was Moana Pozzi, co-founder of the Party of Love.
Both the Christian Democrats and the Socialists, long the leading partnership of Italian government, tried yesterday to put a brave face on their poor showing.
Signor Giulio Andreotti, the outgoing Prime Minister, said: ‘I see no alternative to a Christian Democrat-led government.
I see no other credible governments exploding round me.’
But Signor Arnaldo Forlani, the party secretary, said: ‘It is time to reflect.
I will discuss my future with my party.’
Signor Bettino Craxi, the Socialist leader, said he saw ‘difficult times ahead’.
President Cossiga has said he will not begin consultations about forming a new cabinet until he returns from his visit to America.
A new government should be sworn in by April 24.
Signor Cossiga could invoke the constitution and form an emergency executive himself, although he is due to leave office in July.
International: Tories get close to their cousins on the continent
By Boris Johnson, EC Correspondent, in Brussels
THE Conservative Party in Europe last night took the final decisive step towards uniting itself with its distant continental cousins, the Christian Democrats.
In what may prove to be the dying days of the Major government, the controversial merger between the 32 Tory Euro-MPs and the European People's Party fulfils a key prime ministerial objective in placing Britain ‘at the heart of Europe’.
It will also rekindle suspicions among the Euro-sceptical wing of the Tory Party that the MEPs, led by Sir Christopher Prout, have sold out to a new brand of Euro-federalism, redolent of continental social and industrial consensus politics.
Christian Democrats voted by 66 to 28 to accept the Tories as ‘allied members’, allowing them to sit in the same group as the Christian Democrats in the Strasbourg Euro-parliament from May 1.
The present Tories' group, the European Democratic Group, will disappear.
‘They will be subsumed,’ said one official sonorously, implying that Tory ideology, at least in Strasbourg, was about to be swallowed up by the centrist Christian Democrats.
Anti-Europeans, such as Mr Norman Tebbit, may indeed choke on reading the Christian Democrat charter agreed in Dublin in November 1990.
It contains explicit commitments to Euro-federalism, as well as such anathematised pieces of social law as a European minimum working wage and maximum working week.
Mr Glynn Ford, Labour leader in the Euro-parliament, said the Tories led by Sir Christopher were about to ‘live in sin’.
It was ironic that the union should be taking place on a day when Christian Democrats had tabled a Strasbourg motion condemning Mr Major's refusal to sign the Social Chapter of the Maastricht Treaty.
One angry Dutch CD said after the meeting that he deeply regretted the outcome, especially in view of what he took to be Mr major's anti-European comments.
But Miss Patricia Rawlings, Tory Euro-MP for Essex South-West, made light of the ideological distinctions.
‘No party agrees on everything,’ she said.
For her, and for most other Tories, the principal justification is power.
Being part of a larger group will give the Tories more influence on key committees.
Europe faces the ‘shock’ of further rapid integration to allow more countries to join the Common Market, M Jacques Delors, EC commission president, warned the European parliament yesterday.
He served notice of his intention to table a radical report on how the EC is run in time for the meeting of the 12 leaders at the Lisbon summit in June.
‘It will be a political and cultural shock for certain member states,’ he said,
International: Roman ‘quake’ shakes Europe
By ROBERT FOX
ITALIANS are hailing their election as a political earthquake.
The tremors will be felt by all Italy's partners in Europe, Britain not least, writes Robert Fox in Rome.
Following the pattern of local elections in France and Germany in the past few weeks, Italians have delivered a vote of no confidence in the parties that have governed since the war, notably the Christian Democrats.
The voice of protest against the bad old ways of Italian government has been heard across the country from the Alps to Sicily, and across the political spectrum.
The separatist Northern League, which wants to secede from Rome, is now the strongest party of the wealthy north, and in Sicily the anti-Mafia movement of a former mayor, Leoluca Orlando, has taken nearly half the vote of the capital, Palermo.
The protest parties are united in their opposition to the corruption and jobbery of the old party system, which is failing miserably to cope with worsening public services, rising Mafia crime and Italy's crippling public debt.
Against the odds, Italians have used their country's highly inflexible electoral system to deny the old ruling parties an effective majority in parliament.
At a stroke the party managers and fixers have lost their assumption of a divine right to power.
Once more Italy is faced with parliamentary chaos, but Italians are well versed in the Neapolitans' skill in the choreography of ‘order in disorder’.
Now the whiff of serious electoral reform is in the air.
This should give warning to anyone in Britain preparing to cast a vote tomorrow for proportional representation.
Italy's ills of corruption, maladministration and government irresponsibility are blamed on the extreme form of proportional representation brought in as antidote to Mussolini's dictatorship.
This places power in the hands of party managers and not elected representatives.
Reform has already begun: this weekend voters could choose for the first time a single named candidate for the lower house, instead of numbers on a party list.
The reformers cite with approval the examples of the French and British voting systems.
It is likely they will plump for a compromise between the two for the next election, likely to be in months rather than years.
The constitutional convulsions of Rome will mean urgent matters such as the fight against organised crime and tackling the burgeoning debt will be postponed.
The Mafia pervades Italy now and its tentacles reach across the continent and across the Channel by all accounts.
It will have to be fought on a European scale.
A more pressing issue for Europe is that no makeshift Italian government is likely to cut Italy's public expenditure, let alone raise taxes, to reduce public debt to make the 1993 deadline set for European convergence at Maastricht.
Italians have had the courage to vote for a greater decency and sense of public accountability, though they know the road to reform will be bumpy and uncertain.
But the Italian case will add to voices being heard in Britain, France, Holland and Germany that the European Community of the future is unlikely to have a blueprint labelled Maastricht.
International: Lone Texan takes on Bush and his rivals
By Patricia Wilson in Washington
THE Texas billionaire H Ross Perot is well on his way to becoming an independent candidate for president in all 50 states, thanks to Americans disillusioned with their choice of official party candidates this year.
Never having run for public office does not daunt this ‘can-do’ folk hero who once sent a team of ex-commandos into Iran to rescue two of his employees being held hostage.
But his policy positions, as far as they can be pinned down, seem designed to offend almost everybody.
He would run the United States like a business, with little regard for the Constitution if it interfered with his plans, declare martial law to combat the drug problem, eliminate Social Security or the entire defence budget if it was thought necessary to meet the government's deficit, and remove the power of Congress to raise taxes.
Mr Perot, 61, was not taking part in yesterday's primaries in New York, Wisconsin and Kansas, but was in Europe drumming up business for his new investment and brokerage company.
That may change if he continues to draw the kind of encouragement which has poured in since he announced in February that he might run for the White House.
More than 1.5 million calls have swamped a free telephone bank set up a month ago by his employees to sign up volunteers.
Two recent polls showed he would draw more than 20 per cent of the vote in a national election.
These surveys indicated his success at tapping into disenchantment with President Bush and the Democratic rivals, Mr Bill Clinton and Mr Jerry Brown.
International: Three hurt as Walled City is cleared
By Hugo Gurdon in Hong Kong
WIELDING a meat chopper, a man slashed and injured two government workers and a policeman yesterday as they tried to evict him from his home in Kowloon Walled City, which the Hong Kong government says is a slum and should be demolished.
While police forced open shops and houses, residents complained their compensation for moving was too low.
Kowloon Walled City is a constitutional anomaly.
It has always remained technically under Peking's control despite being surrounded by territory ceded or leased to Britain.
This made it a no-go area for the Hong Kong police and it developed into a warren of opium dens and criminal hideouts.
International: China warns of Japanese threat
By Robert Whymant in Tokyo
JIANG ZEMIN, General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party, warned in a speech in Tokyo yesterday against a possible revival of Japanese militarism, as Chinese pro-democracy demonstrators tried to disrupt his address.
‘The Chinese people have incurred great sufferings from Japan's militarism, and so have the Japanese people,’ said Jiang, recalling the ‘severe damage’to relations caused by Japan's occupation of China in the thirties.
‘We should not forget this and it should serve as a lesson,’ he said in a speech to mark the 20th anniversary of Sino-Japanese diplomatic ties.
But among the audience of around 2,300 politicians, businessmen and members of various Chinese associations in Tokyo, three hecklers who denounced Peking's bloody crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in Tiananmen Square in 1989, provided Jiang with an embarrassing reminder of his own government's harsh behaviour.
They jumped up in succession to interrupt Jiang, shouting ‘Long live democracy!’ and ‘Down with dictatorship!’before being led away by police.
Outside, more Chinese activists demonstrated.
The hecklers, who were arrested, were identified by police as members of the Japanese branch of a Chinese group promoting democracy in China.
Taken aback by the interruption, Jiang hesitated before continuing with his speech, in which he criticised the United States, describing it as the sole superpower in the post-Cold War era.
He said the US was trying to dominate other countries with its military muscle.
Jiang arrived in Tokyo on Monday for a five-day visit, his first since becoming General Secretary after the 1989 military crackdown.
International: Shelling halts UN mission to Cambodia
By Our South-East Asia Correspondent
ARTILLERY fire and minelaying by government and rebel troops have halted a United Nations reconnaissance mission in Cambodia.
Just days after a truce was agreed, Khmer Rouge guerrillas planted explosives on roads in Kompong Thom province to halt reinforcements being pushed north by Phnom Penh.
Lt-Gen John Sanderson, commander of the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia, said his forces, now on standby in Kompong Thom, would stay on the sidelines until fighting stopped.
Prince Norodom Sihanouk and other members of Cambodia's Supreme National Council yesterday began a visit to China.
International: Thai democracy hopes dashed
By Our Bangkok Correspondent
The supreme commander of Thailand's armed forces, Gen Suchinda Kraprayoon, became prime minister yesterday, dashing hopes that recent elections would return the country to full democracy.
A five-party coalition obtained royal approval for the appointment, promoted by Gen Sunthorn Kongsompong, head of the military junta which took power in a coup last February.
International: Overcrowding kills 10,000 sheep
By Our Sydney Correspondent
The Australian RSPCA has called for immediate reforms to animal protection laws after discovering 10,000 sheep had starved to death on a farm in south-western New South Wales.
The association said it had no choice but to shoot hundreds more emaciated Merino sheep among a flock of 72,000 kept on land capable of sustaining only 17,000 sheep.
International: Refugee talks
By Our Dhaka Correspondent
The Burmese Foreign Minister, Ohn Gyaw, will visit Bangladesh later this month to discuss repatriation of Muslim Rohingya refugees.
International: Mandela marriage hit by fresh claims
By Christopher Munnion in Johannesburg
A LAWYER acting for Mrs Winnie Mandela appealed yesterday for an end to press speculation about her marriage to Mr Nelson Mandela as further reports surfaced alleging links with yet another township murder.
The statement issued by Mr Ismail Ayob also denied some aspects of the latest allegations against her.
Senior officials of the African National Congress have been urging Mr Mandela to announce an official separation from his wife since her latest outburst in which she allegedly threatened and waved a pistol at Mrs Xoliswa Falati, her co-accused in last year's trial for kidnap and assault.
Mrs Mandela and Mrs Falati are on bail pending appeal against their conviction and sentence at the Rand Supreme Court for their part in the abduction and assault of 14-year-old Stompie Seipei, a township activist later found dead in the bush near Soweto.
Mrs Mandela apparently tried to attack Mrs Falati for ‘spreading false rumours’ about the Stompie case, and the alleged misuse of one million rand (£200,000) donated by Col Gaddafi of Libya for legal costs of the appeal.
This was followed at the weekend by reports alleging that Mrs Mandela was implicated in the death of Dr Abu-Baker Asvat, who was murdered in his Soweto surgery in 1989.
According to the reports, Dr Asvat was killed after he had been called to the old Mandela home to examine Stompie when he was beaten.
He allegedly refused to treat the boy, insisting that he should be taken to hospital.
Two young Sowetans were convicted of murder and armed robbery in connection with Dr Asvat's death, but newspaper reports suggested the motive had been assassination rather than robbery.
They referred to a statement allegedly made by one of the accused that they were to receive payment from Mrs Mandela once the murder had been carried out.
The alleged statement was never submitted to the court because ‘it was at odds with the police investigation’.
But Mr Jannie van der Merwe, the state prosecutor, told the newspapers he did not believe the true motive of the doctor's murder had been disclosed.
‘My gut feeling was that there was something very strange,’ he said.
Mr Ebrahim Asvat, brother of the murdered man, said yesterday the family had consulted lawyers to re-open the case.
‘We have always believed that Abu-Baker was assassinated and that it was not an ordinary robbery,’ he said.
Mrs Mandela's statement read by Mr Ayob said the allegations concerning Dr Asvat were a ‘rehash’ of evidence given at her Supreme Court trial which had been rejected by the court.
It said Mrs Falati ‘seems to feel that Mrs Mandela owed her a living for the rest of her life’.
She had been assisted on humanitarian grounds for long enough and her allegations ‘came forth when the assistance ceased’, it said.
Mr Ayob added: ‘Mrs Mandela appeals to the media not to concern itself with, nor speculate about, her personal relationship with her husband which has endured despite 27 years of imprisonment and many years of exile.’
Following township rumours that the Mandelas had been living apart for some weeks, the Sowetan newspaper said Mrs Mandela continued to live in the mansion she had built in a better part of Soweto but Mr Mandela had moved into a well-guarded home in Johannesburg's affluent northern suburbs.
Letter to the Editor: Missing flag
SIR — With regard to the cover of the Labour Party manifesto, I am not sure which intrigues me more: the omission of the flag of Northern Ireland or the inclusion of the flag of Jersey.
P. NICHOLL Axbridge, Som
Letter to the Editor: Lost line
SIR — I wonder if your readers noticed the careful editing of the accompanying soundtrack to the beautifully produced Labour election broadcast on Monday evening.
The Tears for Fears record, All Together Now, missed from its chorus, the words ‘In No Man's Land’— where we will presumably end up with Kinnock.
PHILIP GWINNELL Reading, Berks
Letter to the Editor: Time to admit error in backing Tito
SIR — Following the death of Michael Lees, who remained a stalwart supporter of the royalist cause in Yugoslavia (obituary, March 26), the time has surely come for Britain to make an official admission of Churchill's grievous error in switching our support from the royalist leader Mihailovich to Tito in 1943.
In November that year, we sent representatives to each of the major guerrilla bands.
After less than a month with Tito's partisans, Brig Fitzroy MacLean was brought out to write the ‘blockbuster’ report in which he claimed that Tito was the most important force, holding down 14 German divisions.
He swallowed the Communist propaganda about Mihailovich being inactive and treating with the enemy.
Brig Armstrong, who was with Mihailovich, was not brought out until much later.
Signals between Mihailovich's loyalists and SOE in Cairo, which showed that Tito commanded no partisans in Serbia, were delayed.
At that time I summarised German Enigma decrypts for Churchill at Bletchley Park which have never been released to the public.
However, last summer I saw German secret high command diaries, charts and maps, which have been given to the Imperial War Museum.
These show Tito had fewer than half the men he claimed.
There were fewer than seven under-strength German divisions in Yugoslavia, none of them would have been suitable for service in France or North Italy, as has been maintained.
Our decision to back Tito led to our ally Mihailovich's execution and today's Yugoslav bloodbath.
We are the last nation to acknowledge the Communist propaganda of 47 years ago.
JEAN HOWARD London SW1
Leading Article: Bad behaviour
THE stubborn candidature of Mr John Browne for Winchester would be comic were it not also deceitful — he proclaims himself the Conservative in all his literature — and dangerous to the Tory interest in a desperately close election.
Mr Browne was disowned by his party because it judged him a cad.
He is now trying to pull down the house about the ears of Winchester's Tories.
One imagines him, when a small boy repeatedly refusing to leave the crease when found LBW.
The sole virtue of his awful behaviour is its consistency.
Leading Article: Constitutional merits
IT HAS been Labour's good fortune in this election campaign that the electorate's principal concern is the recession.
The Tories have been unsuccessful in their attempts to focus public attention on a range of other matters of varying importance, including Europe, defence, the Falklands, the trades unions, immigration — not forgetting moments of tactical madness such as the party's press conference on animal welfare.
Mr Major and his colleagues lament the lack of interest displayed by the media and the public in their big speeches on great issues.
But if politicians cannot successfully steer the agenda, then that reflects a professional failure for which the price may be high.
Yet the British public may come to regret its lack of interest in one issue above all: the constitution of the United Kingdom.
Labour and the Liberal Democrats appear to accept without question the view that our constitution is absurdly out of date.
They want a written constitution (though Labour only implies this) and a Bill of Rights.
They propose to abolish the House of Lords.
They intend to circumscribe the House of Commons by introducing a Scottish Parliament and by devising assemblies for Wales and the English regions.
Labour flirts with proportional representation.
The Liberals pant for it.
As for Europe, the Liberal Democrats explicitly espouse a federal system and the consequent eclipse of the British nation, while Labour is committed to handing over control of our currency to the EC.
Two of the three parties, in short, wish to change for ever the character of the nation and the way it is governed.
Nothing so momentous — or dangerous — has ever before been offered by serious parties at a British election.
This is not to say that every idea for reform is mistaken.
For instance, the Tories have made a serious error of judgment in declining to recognise that some change in the manner in which Scotland is governed has become essential.
But it is important to point out how much is at stake, if Labour (with or without Liberal Democrat support) has its way.
Its proposals for granting devolved government to Scotland, with tax-raising powers, would enable Scottish Labour MPs to impose their will on England at Westminster, while the Union's powers over Scotland would be greatly diminished.
The great merit of our constitutional arrangements is that they have developed cautiously and case by case.
They have been tested by history.
They lack the superficial coherence of a written constitution, but they bear a much closer relation to reality than bright ideas on a piece of paper.
If they were to be overthrown, the justification would have to be overwhelming.
Take a written constitution and a Bill of Rights.
Who would compose such documents?
We are not today a society which can draw upon such political intellects as guided America in the age of Jefferson and Hamilton.
We lack any mechanism or will to keep the rancour of party politics out of the process of composition.
If a written constitution is contentious from its beginning, it will not command respect, and it will not be obeyed.
Chaos is the likely outcome.
It is one thing to observe defects, quite another to propose satisfactory remedies.
In the case of electoral reform, for example, the principle of proportion is obviously important.
But it should not override everything else.
A government is produced by the members of the House of Commons, which is the chief reason voters cast their ballots in elections.
If the British governments of the 1980s had been elected by proportional representation, it is almost unthinkable that any party could have gained a sufficient majority to impose the sweeping reforms instituted by Mrs Thatcher — or that decisive government of any hue could be achieved in the future.
This is not a formula for moderation, but for national drift.
Again, the House of Lords is hard to defend in the abstract.
But we are not talking about the abstract.
The Lords does much good work, contains many wise men and women, and acts more disinterestedly than the Commons.
It is arrogant to suppose that any new ‘Senate’ devised by Mr Hattersley and Mr Ashdown would improve on these qualities.
What evidence is there to show that the system of law and democracy in the European Community is so well established and so widely accepted that it should supersede the means by which we have governed ourselves peacefully through several centuries of war and revolution on the Continent?
There are undoubtedly faults in our political system.
In particular, all parties have failed to create good local government.
Reforms are also needed in the machinery of government and the administration of justice.
But there is no popular demand, and no need, to overturn our institutions in a fit of impatience.
We should remember Burke's famous warning that rage and frenzy can tear down in an hour what it took centuries of prudence to build.
Only the Conservatives approach these delicate and vital matters with a decent humility.
This is one of the more important, though too seldom stated, reasons for supporting them tomorrow.
Letter to the Editor: The saving graces of PR
SIR — You claim (editorial, April 4) that Italy, Belgium and Israel have suffered from proportional representation.
While all sensible people recognise that the electoral system is only one among many important factors that form the political character of a parliamentary democracy, proportional representation has saved Italian democracy and preserved Belgium from dissolution.
Also, it has not prevented Israel from repeatedly proving its prowess in war, which is usually regarded as a proof of strong government.
In Italy, for more than 40 years, the British electoral system would have polarised the country between Christian Democrats and Communists, by far the two largest parties.
The result would, at best, have been clerical absolutism, at worst , Communist takeover or civil war.
Proportional representation, by allowing smaller, intermediary minorities some power and influence, prevented polarisation and permitted some movement, if not dramatic changes, of policy.
Without proportional representation Belgium would have ceased to exist as a state.
Under the British system virtually every seat in Wallonie would have returned Socialists and virtually every seat in Flanders would have returned Christian Democrats.
As it is, Walloon Socialists have to take Flemish opinion into account and Flemish Christian Democrats have to take Walloon opinion into account.
In more homogenous countries than Italy and Belgium, proportional representation does not prevent absolute majorities being won as the record of Fianna Fail in Ireland, of Norwegian and Swedish socialists, of both Labour and Nationalists in Malta and of the British Liberal Democrats' sister party in Portugal prove.
The Portuguese Social Democrats have recently won for the second time running with a slightly increased majority and 50.7 per cent of the votes cast.
No British party, since Stanley Baldwin's Conservatives in 1935, has won an absolute majority of the votes cast.
Even where coalition is habitual, ‘chaos’ is far from typical, unless you regard Denmark, the Netherlands and Switzerland as seething with unrest.
No system is perfect but the glaring defects of the British system of misrepresentation are all too well demonstrated by the looming constitutional crisis in Scotland.
The Conservatives there will be lucky to have enough members to carry a caber after Thursday, yet with proportional representation they would have at least 15 seats.
In Northern Ireland, the British system has reinforced tribalism, so denying the reasonable Unionists representation and by under-representing the moderate Nationalist minority.
RICHARD MOORE Brussels 
Who'll you be working for?
Labour claims its tax plans will be fairer.
But, as AMBROSE EVANS-PRITCHARD explains, middle class families will be badly hit while the very rich escape
BY AMBROSE EVANS-PRITCHARD
LABOUR'S proposals for higher income tax and national insurance have faded as a campaign issue over the last two weeks, but they continue to simmer in the background.
Many observers believe that taxes could still be the deciding factor for millions of floating voters as they go to the polls tomorrow.
John Smith has sought to present Labour's tax increases as a fair way to redistribute money from rich to poor.
But just how fair are they?
Those with below average incomes would not pay appreciably lower taxes under Labour.
Whatever gains they made from Smith's 10 per cent increase in allowances would be largely offset by Norman Lamont's new 20 per cent income tax band.
On the other hand, there would be many unintended casualties of Labour's plans.
A heavy tax burden would fall on certain sectors of the middle classes, but not on others.
The effect would be arbitrary, and often highly unfair.
Professional families, where the mother stays at home to look after the children, would be severely hit.
They would see a precipitous rise in taxes even though they had high outgoings and despite the fact their income was barely above the combined average earnings for two adults (approximately £35,000), or even below it.
Jonathan Lippitt, 33, is a director of a small information technology company in Basingstoke.
He earns just under £43,000 a year, enough to classify him as ‘rich’ under Labour plans.
His taxes would go up dramatically.
He would have to pay an extra £180 a month in combined tax and national insurance.
His top rate would go up from 40 to 59 per cent.
And, whereas he and his wife now pay a combined poll tax of £536 a year, he estimates that his rates would more than double.
Lippitt is the sole breadwinner of a large family.
His wife has given up work as a secretary to stay at home with their three young children, yet the law does not allow him to take up her full tax allowance.
He has an £80,000 mortgage for his home on a new housing estate in Wokingham, and fees of about £1,000 a year for a part-time nursery.
Against this he would gain an extra £4.60 a week in increased child benefit from Labour.
He says that the squeeze on his income under a Labour government may mean that his wife would have to look for work, or he may seriously consider taking his skills abroad.
The Lippitts are surprised to learn that they are rich.
Both are children of school teachers.
Neither went to university, though he did a one-year course in accounting at Bristol Polytechnic.
‘We're not from privileged backgrounds,’ he said.
Steve Belkin, 32, is technical support manager for a City software house.
He earns in the region of £33,000 a year, but has substantial outgoings.
His wife gave up a £20,000-a-year job as an occupational therapist to look after their child, now aged four.
They have a £60,000 mortgage on a three-bedroomed house in North London.
Under Labour his top tax rate would jump from 40 to 49 per cent, and his overall tax bill would go up by about £1,080 a year, essentially because of increased national insurance.
Belkin, however, is philosophical: ‘I don't mind paying higher taxes if it is spent on education and the NHS.’
WHAT about those earning less than £22,000 a year?
John Smith claims that they would benefit.
This may be the case for some manual workers, though by no means all, but there are large numbers of people on low incomes who for one reason or another could be hurt by Labour's plans.
June Roder, 62, a pensioner from Ilford, has an income of about £6,000 a year from pensions and savings.
According to her sums, Labour's tax and pension proposals would make her about £40 a year better off.
But that fails to take into account the cost of rates, which Labour intend to bring back, uncapped, without any discount for single householders.
Mrs Roder lives alone in her own house and pays £283 a year in poll tax.
She used to pay £480 a year under the old system of rates.
Her total tax bill could go up sharply.
‘I heard a clip of John Smith saying pensioners would be better off, as if all pensioners would be better off.
It's just not true, and I think people ought to be warned.’
Among those who would either pay no extra tax under Labour, or very little extra, are many people with more disposable income than the ‘well-off’ targeted by Smith.
Take Mary Pittilla, 26, an Oxford graduate who earns £17,000 a year as a sub-editor on a London trade magazine.
Her boyfriend, Quentin Moore, 26, is also an Oxford graduate.
He earns £27,000 a year in the underwriting world at Lloyd's.
They are a talented couple, decidedly on the way up.
They share a flat together on a tranquil waterside development near the City, drive a 2-litre Volvo, and take their summer holidays on the Continent.
Together their income is £44,000, more than the Lippitt family and far more than the Belkin family, yet they will only pay a few extra pounds a week in combined tax under Labour.
But the most striking anomaly of Labour's plans is the way it treats millionaires living off unearned income.
Take a married couple with about £1.6 million invested in the stock market living off dividend income of slightly under £80,000 a year.
They could be successful entrepreneurs who have retired in their fifties, or idle sybarites with the good fortune of inheritance.
Either way, they would see no increase in their direct taxes under Labour, provided they do not work for a living.
Investment income is exempted from the 9 per cent national insurance tax, so they would not be touched by Labour's abolition of the £21,060 ceiling.
Moreover, since they are allowed to divide their investment income between the two of them — something that is not permitted with earned income — they could each stay below Labour's new 50 per cent band, which starts at £40,000.
It is easy to see why Mr Smith has decided not to target investment income.
Wealthy people can usually take their money elsewhere, for the benefit of other countries.
But is it fair if Labour's revenue demands fall heaviest on middle class employees simply because they are more of a captive market?
No tax system can take account of everything, but many commentators feel that Labour's proposals do little more than transfer money between different sets of people without taking account of the responsibilities that each has to carry.
This is in marked contrast to the tax structure in most European countries.
France's top tax level of 61 per cent, though fractionally higher than Labour's top rate, only bites at £80,000 a year, so it does not usually effect people such as engineers, doctors, or middle managers.
FRANCE pursues a single-minded policy to promote families by giving them a large tax deduction for each child, in addition to an allowance for mothers who stay at home.
Under Labour, a British family with one earner and two children earning £50,000 a year, would pay a third more in tax than a French family on the same income.
The irony of Labour's tax proposals is that they would give Britain an income tax profile like that in the United States, where the burden falls hardest on middle income families with children.
‘The Labour Party hasn't thought it through at all,’ says Richard Whitfield of the National Family Trust.
He contends that their tax regime does little for families with children, discriminates in favour of dual earners, and presupposes that both parents have jobs.
For the beneficiaries the change would be almost imperceptible: for the losers it would be a heavy blow.
The fairness of it is elusive.
Peterborough: Military cut
FIELD Marshal Lord Bramall, Chief of the General Staff during the Falklands War, flirted yesterday with the notion that Mrs Thatcher made a better war leader than Churchill.
‘She was dynamic, had tremendous energy and was thoroughly decisive,’ Bramall told me at the launch of a book, The Chiefs, which he has written with Gen Sir William Jackson.
‘Churchill's generals always had such a fight to get their military ideas across.
He fancied himself as a strategist.
With Mrs Thatcher we did get the occasional handbagging.
I would say that she was almost better than Churchill.’
Up wandered Gen Sir Peter de la Billiere, Commander of British Forces in the Gulf, who is hanging up his famous beret on Friday.
He has prepared for civilian life by going on a butcher's course.
‘I hope to help my local butcher in the Welsh Borders,’ he said.
‘The privates, the only other ones on the course, were most surprised to see a general putting on the apron.’
AFTER Monday's scramble in Southampton, John Major's egg-splattered jacket was whisked away for dry cleaning.
But Major was left only temporarily in his shirt sleeves; he keeps an extensive wardrobe on his battle bus, including spare suit, shirt, shoes, socks, and even a second pair of glasses.
Petrol bomb hurled at car chase police
A petrol bomb was hurled at police as they chased a car containing two men which later careered out of control and plunged 12 feet into a river near Devizes, Wilts, yesterday.
The bomb, thrown out of the Ford Cortina's passenger window, burst into flames in the road.
Police pursued the car along the A345 to Bulford village where it crashed.
The men escaped but police found a quantity of cigarettes floating in the river and inside the car.
Inquest opens
An inquest on three people killed at an unmanned level crossing at Moorends, South Yorkshire, was opened and adjourned at Thorne yesterday.
Neville Swales, 27, his girlfriend Maria Garbutt, 27, and her sister Louise, 23, died on Saturday when their car collided with a train.
Protest ends
Sam Kulasingham, 35, a Tamil from Sri Lanka, has abandoned an eight-week hunger strike at London's Hammersmith Hospital after Home Office agreed to review his conviction for murdering three Tamils in a London firebomb attack in 1986.
Council sale of charity playing fields blocked
By John Grigsby, Local Government Correspondent
A COUNCIL'S attempt to sell playing fields to make way for a supermarket was blocked in the High Court yesterday.
The judgment has wide implications.
Conservationists believe that it will protect hundreds of thousands of acres of informal open space.
It will prevent councils from selling open space for commercial gain if the land was given or bequeathed to local people for sport or recreation.
In what is seen as a test case, Mr Justice Chadwick ruled that Oldham Borough Council had no power to sell the 22-acre Clayton playing fields, bequeathed to the town for sport by a local benefactor.
The Labour-controlled council wanted to sell the land, which included six heavily-used football pitches, for a £14 million supermarket and car park development.
The council and its development partners had offered 13 replacement football pitches on three alternative sites between a half and three miles away, with a £2 million endowment for their maintenance and about £4.5 million for other sites or facilities.
But the judge refused to sanction the sale.
He said that the land was given in 1962 as a charitable gift by Mr Ina Clayton, a metal merchant, to be used ‘solely’ as playing fields for the benefit of local inhabitants.
Mr Justice Chadwick said that the court's powers to control the sale of land belonging to a charity stemmed from the ancient powers of the Crown.
The correct approach was to ascertain whether the person who had given the land had pointed out clearly what he intended to be done with it.
In this case, it would be hard to find language indicating more clearly that Mr Clayton intended the land to be preserved and managed as playing fields for all time, or at least for as long as the law permitted.
During the hearing, the judge was told that a deficit of £27,000 on running the playing fields in the last financial year had been met by a council subsidy.
The Attorney General, represented during the case as protector of charities, was awarded costs against Oldham.
Wendy Lutley, assistant general secretary of the Open Spaces Society, said: ‘We are delighted with the judgment because it shows the protection that charitable status can give to public open spaces, recreational areas and parks.
‘There are probably a great many parks and recreation grounds that were given to local authorities by local benefactors or acquired by public subscription where the wording in the deeds implies that there is a charitable trust.
‘Many of these have not yet been registered as charities and we will be asking local authorities to check deeds, take legal advice and, if appropriate, register these pieces of land with the Charity Commission to give them some long-term protection.’
Obituary of Rear-Admiral Garth Watson
REAR-ADMIRAL GARTH WATSON, who has died aged 78, had three distinguished careers: as an Admiralty engineer; as one of the first officers of the newly formed Naval Electrical Branch; and as an outstanding secretary of the Institution of Civil Engineers.
John Garth Watson was born on Feb 20, 1914, and educated at Holmhurst College, Belfast, University College School and at London Uni versity.
Before the Second World War he was a junior assistant engineer with the North Metropolitan Power Company at Bishops Stortford.
He joined the Territorial Army and served as a captain in the 1st Battalion of the Hertfordshire Regiment.
In 1939 he joined the Admiralty as an electrical engineer and went to HMS Vernon, the Navy's torpedo and mining school at Portsmouth, where he worked on methods of defeating the German magnetic mine.
In 1943 Watson was warship electrical superintendent for London and the South-East.
In 1945 he went to Washington as a member of the British Joint Services Mission.
On his return three years later he was appointed director of electrical engineering at the Admiralty, Bath.
One of six electrical engineers from the Admiralty civil service selected to join the new Electrical Branch, he transferred to the Navy in 1950 with the rank of Commander, appointed to the destroyer Battleaxe as electrical officer and flotilla electrical officer, 6th Destroyer Flotilla, in the Home Fleet.
From 1951 to 1952 Watson was staff electrical officer to the Flag Officer Flotillas Home Fleet.
In 1952 he was electrical engineering manager, HM Dockyard Devonport, and in 1957 superintending electrical engineer on Gibraltar.
After the senior officer war course in 1960, he was appointed assistant director of electrical engineering at the Admiralty, where he was involved in the design of high voltage electrical supply systems for the projected giant aircraft carrier CVA01 and propulsion systems for submarines.
He was ADC to the Queen in 1962.
Promoted rear-admiral in 1963, he became Admiral Superintendent, Rosyth, until he retired from the Navy in 1966.
He was appointed CB in 1965.
Watson was elected a Fellow and Secretary of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1967, and by the time he retired in 1979 he had guided it through its greatest period of change since its creation in 1818, with dramatic increases in membership.
He was also managing director of Thomas Telford, the commercial undertaking established to handle the institution's publications and profit-making activities, which now provide two-thirds of its income.
He married, in 1943, Betty Falloon; they had two sons and a daughter.
Obituary of Zulfiqar Ali Khan
ZULFIQAR ALI KHAN, who has died at New Delhi aged 59, was the last uncrowned Nawab of the erstwhile state of Rampur, one of a handful of old Muslim kingdoms in northern India.
Rampur was created in the late 18th century and encompassed an area of about 890 square miles, 150 miles north of New Delhi in the United Provinces (now Uttar Pradesh).
The Rampur Nawabs served the Mughal rulers in Delhi, before transferring their allegiance to the British East India Company.
During the Indian Mutiny of 1857 they remained steadfastly loyal to the Crown, and for this were accorded a permanent 15-gun salute by the Viceroy.
When the privy purses were abolished by Mrs Gandhi in 1969, many ex-kings sought elected office or turned their palaces into hotels to earn a living.
Khan himself was elected a Congress party MP for Rampur in 1967, and was returned another four times.
Mikki Mian (’ Brother Mikki’as he was known) was not formally conferred with the title of Nawab in 1982, after the death of his brother — who also, like their father, died aged 59.
In the manner of the old Nawabs he was fun-loving and gregarious, and presided with majestic insouciance over the Rampur palace and its priceless contents — subject of a long-standing family dispute.
Khan was also a passionate patron of Indian art and culture, a favourite pastime of the royalty in the pre-Independence days.
Zulfiqar Ali Khan was born at Rampur on March 11, 1933, the second son of Maj-General Sir Syed Mohammad Raza Ali Khan, the ruler of Rampur, renowned for his sexual prowess.
Young Zulfiqar studied for O-levels at the Doon school in Dehra Dun, a progressive public school in the Himalayan foothills, and completed his education at Millfield.
On his return home in the late 1950s he did a stint as a tea planter in Assam, before becoming an executive with a private firm in Bombay.
In 1962 he returned to Rampur and successfully contested the state seat to become a member of the Uttar Pradesh assembly.
At first his political allegiance, with several other de-recognised Maharajas and Nawabs, was to the ultra-Right Swantantra or Freedom Party.
But after early electoral success that fledgling party was crushed by Mrs Gandhi, and Khan, like many others, survived politically by joining her Congress party.
He remained loyal to the Congress party, led first by Mrs Gandhi and later by her son Rajiv, for the rest of his career.
But Mrs Gandhi never forgave Khan's opposition to her scrapping the privy purses, and to his regret she did not make him a minister.
Khan lost his seat in the 1991 elections, when a Hindu revivalist wave swept his constituency.
He married, in 1956, Noorbanu Nawabzadi, of the former Loharu state in Rajasthan; they had a son and two daughters.
Obituary of Sam Walton
SAM WALTON, who has died at Little Rock, Arkansas, aged 74, was the founder of Wal-Mart — America's largest retail chain — and became his country's richest citizen, with a net worth estimated at $18 billion.
Despite his great wealth Walton lived modestly at Bentonville, Arkansas (population 9,920), 50 miles from the nearest highway.
When his house burned down he bought a smaller four-bedroomed replacement.
And he continued to drive a battered 1979 pick-up truck, its upholstery chewed to pieces by his beloved hunting dogs.
When one of these died he renamed Wal-Mart's dog food ‘Ol’ Roy’in memory of his pet.
In 1986 Forbes magazine named him the richest man in America.
Walton was scathing: ‘All that hullabaloo about somebody's net worth is just stupid,’ he complained, ‘and it's made my life a lot more difficult.’
The next year the stock market crash wiped $2.6 billion off the value of Wal-Mart's shares, and Walton was named ‘Biggest Individual Loser’.
He was unmoved.
‘It's paper anyway,’ he snorted.
‘It was paper when it started and it's paper afterwards.’
Undaunted, he opened dozens of new stores, and by the end of his life predicted that the company's revenues would quintuple over the next decade.
‘Mr Sam’ never asked more of his employees than he did of himself.
Several years ago he told his managers that if they produced an eight per cent pre-tax profit he would dance the hula down Wall Street.
Profit for the year was 8.04 per cent and Walton duly donned a grass skirt and wiggled away.
Born at Kingfisher, Oklahoma, on March 29, 1918, Samuel Walton grew up in Columbia, Missouri, where he played quarterback on his high school football team and was captain of basketball.
His father's business suffered during the Great Depression, and young Sam had to work his way through Missouri University by delivering newspapers.
He then joined a J C Penney store in Des Moines, Iowa, as a shirt salesman.
One day James Cash Penney, the company's founder, paid the store a visit.
‘He taught me how to tie a package with very little twine and very little paper and still make it look nice,’ Walton later recalled.
After wartime service in the US Army Intelligence Corps, Walton used his savings and a bank loan to buy a Ben Franklin variety store in Newport, Arkansas.
When the landlord refused to renew his lease, Walton moved to Bentonville, Arkansas, where in 1950 he was granted the franchise of the Ben Franklin chain.
During his travels Walton had noticed that large retail chains tended to locate their stores in the vicinity of large population centres, in the belief that small-town outlets could not be profitable.
Walton thought that larger stores could be put in smaller towns: ‘There was a lot more business in those towns than people thought.’
The management of the Ben Franklin chain, though, was unimpressed by Walton's suggestion, and in 1962 he left to open the first Wal-Mart Discount City at Rogers, Arkansas.
Walton worked an 18-hour day, but to begin with his enterprise looked unpromising.
‘It was the worst retail store I had ever seen,’ an early customer remembered.
‘Sam had brought a couple of trucks of water melons in and stacked them on the sidewalk.
He had donkey rides out in the parking lot.
It was 115 degrees, and the water melons began to pop, and the donkeys began to do what donkeys do, and it all mixed together and ran all over the parking lot.
‘And when you went inside the store, the mess just continued.
He was a nice fellow, but I wrote him off.’
Undeterred, Walton continued to focus his efforts on rural areas across the deep South and the mid-West.
He placed the motto ‘We sell for less’ above the entrance to each store and banned wholesalers, passing on the savings to his customers.
He also insisted that service and chain stores were not mutually exclusive.
To enhance Wal-Mart's folksy, small-town image, Walton placed little old ladies at the door of each store, to act as official greeters.
By 1972 Walton had 64 stores, with sales of $125 million per annum, and thereafter growth was exponential: by 1991 there were more than 1,700, with annual sales approaching $44 billion.
Walton did not neglect his 350,000 employees.
He described them as ‘associates’ and tried to visit every store at least once a year (always staying at budget motels).
Employees shared in company profits (one cashier who earned $7.10 an hour retired after 25 years with $262,000-worth of shares); and Walton made every effort to foster team spirit, with ceaseless pep rallies.
The chant at these was:
Wal-Mart, Wal-Mart
That's our name
The retailing business is our game
In 1983 Walton started Sam's Wholesale Clubs, to sell merchandise in bulk to small businesses.
By 1991 there were more than 200 of these, and they were followed by further innovations: in 1987 Walton opened Hypermart USA store at Garland, Texas (a shop with 220,000 square feet of retail space, known as ‘Malls without walls’).
Later he also opened the Wal-Mart Supercentres, which combined the traditional Wal-Mart range of goods with those of an ordinary supermarket.
He was given the Presidential Medal of Freedom (America's highest civilian award) earlier this year.
Walton married, in 1943, Helen Robson; they had three sons and a daughter.
Way of the World: Cleopatra was not American
By AUBERON WAUGH
MR KINNOCK has announced that when he becomes Prime Minister he will give the Elgin marbles to Greece.
Never mind that Prime Ministers do not actually own the Elgin marbles.
They belong to the British Museum, which bought them in 1816 from Lord Elgin, as every schoolboy knows.
I wonder what other pieces of our national heritage this Welsh oaf proposes to give away.
The Egyptians are asking for Cleopatra's Needle, the great granite obelisk of 1500 BC which stands on the Thames embankment just a few yards from the Savoy.
Where the Elgin marbles are concerned, I am surprised that the present inhabitants of the Greek mainland want anything to do with them.
Anybody with a tape measure could see in a matter of minutes that the figures on these marbles have nothing whatever in common with the Greeks of today who, short-legged and stocky with low-slung, hairy bottoms, blunt noses and crossed eyebrows, are plainly a race of Turkic origin.
The idea that these people could have designed the Parthenon or carved the sculptures of Praxiteles is laughable.
Cleopatra's Needle is slightly different.
It is one of many ancient Egyptian obelisks to be found all over the civilised world: in Paris and Istanbul as well as London — Rome has a dozen of them — although there are still plenty on the banks of the Nile.
Many were taken away by the Romans, others by Napoleon, but ours was a present from the Egyptian government in the last century — a jolly nice present, too, if I may say so.
There can be no doubt that in the 112 years it has been standing on the embankment it has become a part of the London scene.
The people who live in Egypt now have little relationship to the ancient Egyptians, being (apart from the Copts) Arab invaders from the seventh century AD.
They must learn what every child knows that you can't ask for a present back.
But all is not lost.
The twin to our own Cleopatra's Needle stands, neglected and absurd, in the middle of New York's sex maniac-haunted Central Park.
If New Yorkers notice it at all, few have any idea that it is 1,500 years old, and many would be deeply shocked if they knew, reckoning that anything over 20 years old must be dirty and out of date .
Most New Yorkers probably feel that Egypt is part of Europe, and won't want a dirty old European stone cluttering their favourite wilding ground; others, the more politically correct, will feel that Egyptians have the greater moral claim because Arabs are slightly blacker than they are.
Way of the World: The young will decide
By AUBERON WAUGH
I AM reluctant to believe that the British people are so stupid as to return anyone but nice Mr Major at tomorrow's election.
A factor which the opinion surveys may have ignored is the amount of non-registration by younger voters anxious to avoid the poll tax.
The best kept secret of this election may be that poll tax collectors plan a massive drive to catch those who have failed to register for poll tax, or those who have registered but failed to pay it, when they present themselves at the polling booths tomorrow.
Although the powers of income tax collectors are limited by law, poll tax collectors count in many ways as Customs and Excisemen, whose powers are almost unlimited.
It is little known that poll tax collectors not only have the authority to arrest those they suspect of defaulting on poll tax and strip them naked for the purposes of search (without any obligation to mend or replace clothing which is destroyed in the process), but they can also apply torture in cases where they have reason to believe poll tax is being withheld — at any rate until such time as the defaulters reveal where their money is hidden.
I imagine that the brunt of this will be borne by younger voters, many of them voting for the first time, who possibly do not realise that in addition to voting they must also pay poll tax.
Personally, I have always thought it a great mistake to expect young people to be interested in politics.
It detracts from their innocence, somehow.
Perhaps on this occasion, many of them will do the sensible thing and decide to stay at home.
If not we may have to lock them in their bedrooms.