

I have Aids, says tennis champion Arthur Ashe
By Jonathan Confino and John Parsons
ARTHUR ASHE, the only black man to win the men's singles at Wimbledon, said last night that he has the Aids virus.
‘Some of you heard that I had tested positive for HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.
That is indeed the case,’ he told a news conference in New York.
Mr Ashe, 48, said he was 95 per cent certain he had contracted the disease from a blood transfusion after open-heart surgery in 1983, 18 months before the US introduced routine screening of blood for the HIV virus.
Nearly 5,000 Americans contracted Aids from blood before screening started.
Mr Ashe said he was not sick and could ‘function very well’.
He added: ‘I am not sorry.
It doesn't do any good.’
Flanked by his wife, Jeanne, and Mayor David Dinkins of New York, he said he had kept his illness secret since 1988 to protect his family's privacy but had been forced to come forward after a press inquiry.
When it came to discussing his daughter Camera's knowledge of his illness, Mr Ashe was unable to talk and his wife stepped forward to read that part of his statement.
Mr Ashe is the second prominent US athlete to admit to having the virus.
Last November, the basketball player Magic Johnson said he had contracted HIV through heterosexual activity.
Mr Ashe said he had been inspired by Mr Johnson's work for Aids victims and hoped to work with him.
If the British authorities allowed him to fly across the Atlantic, Mr Ashe said he was ‘looking forward to being at Wimbledon this year’.
The former tennis player had a quadruple heart by-pass in 1979 and further surgery in 1983.
He learned he had the Aids virus when his right hand suddenly went dead.
A biopsy of brain tissue detected the presence of toxoplasmosis, which is relatively harmless in people with normally functioning immune systems.
He said: ‘The quality of one's life changes irrevocably when something like this becomes public.
Reason and rational thought are too often waived out of fear, out of caution, or out of just plain ignorance.’
Mr Ashe, who received a supportive phone call yesterday from President Bush, shot to fame in 1968 when he won the first United States Open at a time when blacks were still largely excluded from professional tennis.
His greatest triumph came seven years later when he defeated the seemingly invincible Jimmy Connors to capture Wimbledon, with brilliant variations of pace and style.
He retired after three minor heart attacks at the age of 36, giving up his number seven world ranking, and became captain of the US Davis Cup team.
No blood risk-free — P2
£4m raised for sunken treasure
By Georgina Adam
AFTER the fourth and final session of the sale in Amsterdam of porcelain from the Vung Tau, the junk which sank off Vietnam in 1690, Christie's announced a sale total of £4,165,667 — more than four times what was expected for the entire cargo.
The porcelain was sold by the Vietnamese government.
The salvage company which had raised 28,000 pieces said: ‘We will not have to take any back to Vietnam.’
After more than 16 hours of auctioning, every one of the 1,000 lots had found buyers, with none being sold for less than low estimate and many soaring to 10 times estimate.
Some lots were damaged or dulled by their long immersion, but this only seemed to stimulate buyers.
Buying was dealer dominated, with a London dealer scooping up three of the top 10 lots in the second session.
Most sought-after were pieces with the so-called Canal House decoration, painted with what looked like Dutch canal houses.
These were probably copied from a Western pattern-book by the Chinese painter, working on orders from Dutch merchants.
An Italian private buyer paid £11,536 for just one beaker with this design.
British team in unaided trek to pole
By Christopher Lockwood
POLAR adventurer David Hempleman-Adams has set off leading a five-man British team attempting to be the first to walk to the north geomagnetic pole without dogs or air-drops.
Speaking from the expedition's base camp at Camp Resolute, Devon Island, Canada, Miss Elaine May, the expedition's link with the outside world, said the first days had gone well, with the team covering 15 miles a day.
‘They need to progress at 10–15 miles a day if they are to reach the pole by Easter, according to plan’, she said.
‘The timing is tight, because after Easter the temperature rises and the ice starts to break up.
The team are well, but they have complained about the temperature, which is down to -63F’.
Drawing 100lb sleds loaded with food and equipment, including a radio and a satellite dish which will allow them to track their position, members of the British North Geomagnetic Polar Expedition face the earth's coldest temperatures, treacherous sheet-ice and polar bears.
The geomagnetic north pole, located at 79.2N, 71W, is a cartographer's abstraction — the point which, if the earth's magnetic field were generated by a perfect bar magnet, would mark that magnet's north pole.
True magnetic north, as measured by compasses, is several hundred miles to the east.
Geomagnetic north is not to be confused with the geographic north pole, at 90N, about 770 miles to the north of both the magnetic and geomagnetic poles.
The team left Eureka, Canada's most northerly permanent weather station on Ellesmere Island on Sunday.
Their route will take them 230 miles across the Nares Straight towards west Greenland.
The other team members are Richard Mitchell, Hugh Ward, Neill Williams and Jock Wishart.
Open season for debs with books on their mind Susannah Herbert joins the girls at a grooming session for the Berkeley Dress Show
BY SUSANNAH HERBERT
THE trouble with debutantes, lamented Lady Tryon, chairman of yesterday's Berkeley Dress Show, is that they come in such a peculiar range of sizes.
And none of them has the right kind of tights.
‘Nearly black, darling.
They must be nearly black.
Send someone out to buy 20 pairs,’ she said, striding nervously over a pile of scattered silk shoes in the ballroom of the Berkeley Hotel, Knightsbridge.
‘Oh my God, that girl cannot wear that suit.
It's all wrong.
And why are her shoes muddy?’
The nerves of ‘Kanga’ Tryon, a designer more used to working with ‘supermodels’on the catwalks of the world than schoolgirls — were fraying faster than an unfinished hem.
But the 20 girls on the catwalk last night had different problems on their minds.
The Berkeley Dress Show is traditionally the start of the ‘season’ and it was their first appearance as debutantes, a social duty nowadays combined with A-levels and university entrance.
Not that they were eager to discuss the season.
‘I suppose we are debs.
But it's not a big deal.
Girl's don't ‘do’ the season any more; it's not like it was in the past,’said Sophia Burrell, 17, who confessed to having missed most of the grooming session laid on by Lucie Clayton School of Modelling, ‘because I had to do a law course’.
Sophia, who is taking A-levels in law, biology and maths, hopes to combine veterinary science and business studies at Cirencester Agricultural College.
‘I'm doing this deb thing because of my mother, really,’ she said, fiddling apologetically with the buttons of her emerald green suit.
‘All this modelling isn't half as glamorous as it's made out to be.
I'm not saying it's hard work, like working on a farm, but they certainly don't give everything to you on a silver platter,’ she added as her name was called for yet another fitting.
This year, the dress show was a serious affair and larking about was strictly discouraged.
‘We're trying to get away from the rowdy image.
Things have got out of hand in the past but this time it's just a fashion show,’ said Mrs Deborah Keily of the NSPCC, which hoped to raise £20,000 from the show.
Onlookers paying £40 a head might have disagreed, for though the clothes were gorgeous and the models undeniably pretty, the atmosphere was more like that of a girls' boarding school than an haute couture show.
‘Look at the roses I was sent today,’ said Sophia.
‘Aren't they gorgeous?
My mother burst into tears when she saw them.’
Real supermodels do not have tearful mothers, but then real supermodels know the difference between a full turn and a Paris turn and would never need to be told to wear black gloves with a black hat or to stand up straight instead of slouching.
Mrs Jean Broke-Smith, the Lucie Clayton principal, who has been coaching debs for the show for 20 years, described the problem: ‘Even though these girls are much more self-assured than their equivalent 20 years ago they still need to be told to push their hips and pelvis forward and to keep their bottoms tucked in,’ she said.
‘They'll thank me for it one day: pelvic control is useful when you're having a baby.’
Not that childbirth was the first thing on anyone's mind yesterday.
The days when the ‘season’ was the only chance to snaffle an eligible husband are long gone, according to Lady Tryon.
‘It's just a way of introducing all these girls to each other, so they can make friends, go to a few parties and have fun,’ she said.
‘I read somewhere that it cost £30,000 to do the season nowadays.
What rubbish.
It costs nothing more than a smile.’
And a pair of nearly black tights.
Flight links criticised
By John Grigsby, Local Government Correspondent
MANY travellers from British regions have to go to Holland to pick up inter-continental flights, Mr David Spooner, chairman of the Joint Airports Committee of Local Authority Airports, said yesterday.
The committee, which represents 26 local council airports, will urge the new Transport Secretary to allow them to offer more flights to Heathrow.
Mr Spooner said: ‘It is a scandal that the Government is prepared to sit back and see Amsterdam's Schiphol airport promote itself as the ideal destination for passengers from the UK regions wishing to connect with inter-continental flights.
‘Unless regional airports offer what customers want, the regions will never realise their potential.
We have the capacity to increase our passenger totals and ease congestion in the South-East.’
Fashion: Faith, hip and charity HARD TIMES
A shortage of cash doesn't necessarily equate with a shortage of style.
You can still shop till you drop in Oxfam, says Nilgin Yusuf
By NILGIN YUSUF
WHICHEVER party is in government tomorrow, there will be no fast solution to the recession.
Money is tight and fashion a luxury that has, by many, been pushed to one side.
But whatever is promoted on the world's catwalks, an infinitely cheaper version can be found.
Between them, Britain's vast number of markets, second-hand, nearly new and charity shops cater to every whim and can achieve any look.
If a slinky line of leopard print weaves down the runway, there is a wealth of Fifties sweaters and fake-fur coats to be unearthed.
If military looks raise their bereted heads, there are plenty of gilt-buttoned blazers in any army surplus store.
The stylishly inclined have always maintained that looking good needn't be a costly exercise.
They fall into broad categories: students, housewives, creative types.
They have more sense than money and realise that clothing is about individuality not uniforms.
They are aware that designer labels are no passport to instant glamour and that designers tend to recycle the past anyway.
One assistant to a renowned Parisian designer is regularly sent to scour the flea markets ‘for ideas’.
For some people, a sense of shame clings to the buying of cast-offs.
Yet whether lean times or creative instinct drive customers to second-hand shops, they remain a valuable option.
Oxfam now has 860 shops across the country.
Last year they made a net profit of £17,345,000, of which 79p in every pound goes to the charity's overseas programme.
London's Oxfam NoLoGo, at 91 Marylebone High Street, was conceived by Jeanette Swift, an art teacher at North Westminster School.
Refurbished on a budget of £20, the shop is kitted out with old tyres, corrugated iron and scaffolding.
Clothes are contemporarily customised (shortened tartan kilts, £5) while fabric donations are made up into designs by fashion students.
Oxfam NoLoGo has succeeded in making the concept of recycling fun and giving charity shops a completely new look.
The Imperial Cancer Research Fund, which in 10 years has opened 464 shops, has its own ‘fashion guru’.
Liz Redfern, area retail manager for 10 shops, including Islington, looks at contemporary trends for her window displays.
Last winter featured tartan themes, while metallic Sixties dresses and lurex tops were popular at Christmas.
This summer, she feels strongly for Grace Kelly and Audrey Hepburn styles.
‘Simple baby doll dresses that tie with bows under the bust.’
This year the 82 London shops have seen sales increase by 13.8 per cent.
They made a national profit of £7.2 million, of which more than 90p in every pound goes to cancer research.
The Salvage Shop deals in goods that have been the subject of insurance claims, fire, flood and bankruptcy.
In existence since 1983, there are two shops at 34–36 Watling Avenue, Burnt Oak and 106 High Street, Walthamstow.
Consignments arrive at Burnt Oak every Thursday afternoon to crowds of eager bargain hunters who travel from as far as the Lake District and Newcastle.
Jean Muir, Yves Saint Laurent, Ungaro, MaxMara, Chloe and Aquascutum are just some of the labels (though they are sometimes cut out) to appear.
One of London's most directional second-hand shops is the Glorious Clothing Company at 60 Upper Street, Islington.
Owners Ollie Jenkins and Jane Bateman change their spectacular windows every week.
More resembling the changing rooms at MGM, these have previously included gilded platform shoes and chain-mail tunics that attract a growing number of magazine stylists and video makers.
Currently black leather jeans, jerkins and men's frilly shirts are selling.
There are those for whom the thought of rifling through rails of musty clothes bring back horrible memories of student life.
That smell!
That Crimplene!
But with a little imagination and a flexible approach, it can be fun.
Besides trends that come and go, there are basic pieces that should be snapped up at every opportunity — anything that has been hand-made or finished: beaded and embroidered cashmere cardigans, beautiful lace shirts, superbly cut Thirties and Forties jackets or satin brocade robes.
If individuality is the keynote of the Nineties, what better way to express it than by wearing something unique?
Peterborough: Drawing stumps on the modern game
DISILLUSION with pyjama flannels and commercialism has prompted the sudden resignation of cricket's unofficial ‘conscience’.
Graeme Wright, editor of Wisden since 1986, announced he was quitting at last night's launch of the 1992 edition, held at the East India Club, London.
His place will be taken by the somewhat surprising figure of Matthew Engel, former cricket correspondent of the Guardian and a talented wordsmith.
He was one of several candidates vying to become only the 14th editor in the publication's 128-year history.
An iconoclast, Engel may find the job sedate after the hurly-burly of the general election, which he has been covering for his newspaper.
Wright, an affable New Zealander, told me last night: ‘There are loads of reasons for my going, but the main one is the state of the modern game.
The things I value, such as sporting play, are no longer valued.
‘Cricket has become too much of a business.
The prime concern of administrators around the world is making money, not providing entertainment.
Players just go through the motions and their lack of pleasure is conveyed to the crowds.
Cultural rot has set in.’
Wright, who also publishes the almanac, has often voiced his dislike of one-day cricket in the pages of Wisden but denies being a ‘a fuddy-duddy,’ declaring: ‘I'm fairly easy-going and I like rock and roll.’
His remarks left some of the cricketing Establishment at last night's dinner feeling distinctly uncomfortable.
The new Wisden, published today, confirms his ability to move with the age.
For the first time, it carries cricket averages from two girls' school teams, Roedean and Denstone.
‘They sent them in,’ says Wright, ‘so I went along to check out the Roedean girls’cricket last summer.
It was enjoyable and sporting.’
It will not be his last such outing.
‘The women's game embodies many of the qualities I admire — they have the right attitude and enthusiasm,’ says Wright.
‘I'm just not sure about the standard.’
Chess: Southern Union team in centenary win
By Malcolm Pein, Chess Correspondent
A SOUTHERN Counties Chess Union representative team easily defeated county champions Kent in a friendly match at Charlton House, Greenwich, south London, commemorating the 100th anniversary of the Southern Counties Chess Union.
The chess union team, led by International Master Michael Basman, and Egyptian No 1, International Master Tariq Fatin, won 15–5.
Results (Kent names first): IM Morris DRAW IM Basman; Hanreck 0–1 IM Fatin; A P Smith 0–1 Webster; Armstrong 0–1 Berry; Wager DRAW IM Wade; Cook 0–1 Denham; Donovan DRAW Wall; Wood 0–1 Coleman; Smart 0–1 James; McCarry 1–0 Manning; Mehmet 0–1 Spivack; Jeffries 0–1 Kemp; Barnes 0–1 Lyell; Pointney DRAW Sharp; Owens 0–1 Twythe; Milner-Barry 0–1 Cowte; McDonald Ross DRAW R Brown; Eldridge DRAW Dorn; Scott 1–0 Lee-Andersson.
An England representative team came second in the strongest open tournament of the year in Berne, Switzerland, to break the familiar stranglehold on the top prizes by players from the former Soviet Union.
The team of Grandmaster Flear, Grandmaster King, International Master Ward and Grandmaster Gallagher scored 25 out of a possible 36 points, two points behind the 1st team representing the CIS, composed of Grandmasters Sokolov, Vaiser, Ibragimov and Tukmakov.
Round-Up: Krabbe to make outdoor debut
KATRIN KRABBE, the double world sprint champion, will make her first appearance of the outdoor season in Germany next month, one day before the International Amateur Athletics Federation meet in Toronto to discuss the lifting of the four-year ban imposed on her because of alleged irregularities in a urine sample.
Krabbe's manager, Jos Hermens, said she would run at a meeting in Jena on May 28.
The IAAF meeting on May 29 will decide whether to ratify the decision of the German athletics federation (DLV) to lift the ban.
Krabbe — among the favourites for the Olympic 100 metres and 200m titles in Barcelona this summer — was suspended with fellow-athletes Grit Breuer and Silke Moller after all three provided identical urine samples during training in South Africa.
LONDON MARATHON: Portugal's Rosa Mota yesterday vowed to remove any lingering trace of the psychological scars left from her world championship defeat, by successfully defending her ADT London Marathon crown on Sunday.
The tiny athlete believes her rare lapse in Tokyo was just a temporary blip in a career of major championship success.
And Sunday's race — her first marathon since she was forced to wearily pull out after 15 miles in Tokyo — will be an important confidence-booster before the Barcelona Olympics.
ICE HOCKEY: Barring a miracle, the National Hockey League's 75th season is over, with the last 30 games of the schedule and the Stanley Cup play-offs still to be played.
The NHL Players' Association, who went on strike April 1, have rejected what team owners called a final offer.
It took the players' bargaining committee less than three hours to reject what they considered an ultimatum.
LAWN TENNIS: Four British players — Sarah Bentley, Julie Pullin, Lucy Ahl and the unseeded Karen Cross — have reached the quarter-finals of the Gabor Women's Satellite tournament.
Cross and Pullin now play each other.
RACKETS: Tonbridge professional David Makey and his erstwhile pupil Jonathan Longley had a hard-fought second round victory in the Lacoste British Open doubles championship at Queen's Club, when they beat home professional David Johnson and Julian Snow 4–15, 8–15, 15–8, 15–12, 15–9, 15–8.
Kelvin Tatum, Paul Thorp, Simon Wigg and Sean Wilson are the other Dukes among the 20 riders exempted from the three quarter-finals, starting tomorrow, from which the top four will go through.
The seeds are based on last year's First Division averages.
SEEDED BRITISH SEMI-FINALISTS: K Tatum (Bradford), G Havelock (Bradford), A Grahame (Eastbourne), M Dugard (Oxford), M Cox (Poole), J Doncaster (Reading), C Louis (Ipswich), M Loram (King's Lynn), R Knight (Berwick), J Screen (Belle Vue), P Thorp (Bradford), A Smith (Coventry), J Davis (Swindon), S Schofield (Poole), N Collins (Glasgow), G Jones (Wolverhampton), S Wigg (Bradford), D Mullett (Reading), S Wilson (Bradford), D Barker (Oxford).
SWIMMING: Two hundred potential swimming internationals have been sent a letter by British team manger Paul Bush and team doctor, Dr David Hunt, warning of the danger of using prescribed medication that is not within permitted guidelines.
The letter pointed out that testing could take place at any time, including home training environments.
With just six weeks to go to the British Olympic trials, officials wanted all concerned to be aware of the potential repercussions following the recent National Olympic Committee meeting when it was decided that anyone guilty of a violation the IOC medical code would be ineligible for any British team.
POLO: Argentina, giving a below-par performance, yesterday beat Guatemala 17–5 in their first game in the Limited Handicap World Polo Championship in Santiago, Chile.
Guatemala, receiving a one-goal handicap start, surprisingly led 5–1 at the end of the first chukka as the Argentines appeared very nervous, but they scored four goals in the second chukka and dominated the rest of the game.
Racing: ‘Ordinary’ boost for Upson
By John Oaksey
JOHN UPSON'S horses have been so badly hit by a throat infection that only six out of his 30-strong string are fit to run.
But River Bounty won at Liverpool and Very Very Ordinary belied his name at Ascot yesterday by winning the Bollinger Champagne Novice Chase.
The Ascot fences are not nearly as fierce as their Mildmay counterparts at Aintree, but several of the fancied horses made remarkably heavy weather of them.
O K Corral was one of three fallers, Liadett and Norman Conqueror pulled up and neither Storm Alert nor Sprucer ever showed with a chance.
For most of the last mile, in fact, the race looked a match between Northern Jinks and Kilhallon Castle.
But Robbie Supple had been keeping his powder dry on Very Very Ordinary and there was nothing in the least ‘ordinary’ about the long, relentless charge with which they mowed down the leading pair between the last two fences.
Upson would not normally run the winner again, but as he says, ‘things are not exactly normal with us at the moment.
I might just give him another run — if only to keep the stable going’.
A survey is being carried out to measure and assess jockeys heart and metabolic rates while race riding and Graham Bradley went out to ride Goodshot Rich in the Fairview New Homes Novices Chase wearing an assortment of electronic measuring equipment.
Even on ‘Brad’— not the most excitable jockey — they may have recorded some memorable figures.
Because, after getting the best of a long hard duel with Urizen, Goodshot Rich flew the last to win a thrilling race all out.
Sunset And Vine is owned by the independent television company of that name which provides Channel-4 Racing with much of its overseas material.
A big grey five-year-old, Sunset And Vine jumped well in the Lily Tree Novice Hurdle and stormed home well clear looking a horse with a real future — some of it, I hope on the right channel.
Since Sunset And Vine's trainer Simon Dow took over the Epsom stables of Ron Smyth last year and he has been in tremendous form since, saddling 23 jumping winners and six on the Flat.
The fall of Wall Game at one of the downhill fences gave Relekto a comparatively simple task in the Mahonia Hunter Chase and Maelkar made his long journey down from Jonjo O'Neill's Penrith stable well worthwhile in the Alpine Meadow Handicap Hurdle.
But form followers suffered and expensive reverse when King Credo disappointed in the Trillium Hurdle won impressively by Derab.
The stewards inquired into his running but Richard Dunwoody could only tell them that the favourite was ‘never going.
Racing: Smiles resigns
By JOHN OAKSEY
PETER SMILES, who had been director of the Jockey Club's Racing Security Services since 1977, has decided to retire prematurely for ‘personal reasons’, writes John Oaksey.
Smiles, 52, led a ‘police force’ of more than 50 investigators, whose job was to analyse any irregularities in the racing world.
He has been at the head of many investigations, one major case being the doping of Bravefoot and Norwich, which disfigured the 1990 St Leger meeting at Doncaster.
No culprit has yet been brought to justice.
Much-respected in the racing world, Smiles felt that the role of his office was ‘Eighty per cent preventative’ and he was largely responsible for the introduction of the Betting Intelligence Officers squad in September 1984.
The Jockey Club says that it will be looking for a successor to Smiles, but while this search is going on his place will be taken by Tony Goodhew, the present Director of Field Services.
Racing: Greenham return for Magic Ring
By HOTSPUR (J A McGrath)
CHAMPION TRAINER Paul Cole yesterday gave the thumbs up for Magic Ring to run in Saturday's Singer & Friedlander Greenham Stakes at Newbury following another pleasing home gallop.
Over the past seven days, there have been most encouraging reports about Magic Ring, winner of four of his five outings as a two-year-old — although he was disqualified once.
On the only occasion he was beaten he finished a good third against older opposition in the Prix de l'Abbaye de Longchamp.
The colt has been in constant demand for the 2,000 Guineas and is a 12–1 chance.
‘He is a definite runner, all being well,’ said Cole, who restricted the colt to the minimum trip of five furlongs in his first year.
‘He worked satisfactorily at home and is pleasing me.’
The trainer, who sent out Generous to win two Classics and the King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Diamond Stakes last year, is looking for a replacement and although Magic Ring may fall a little bit short of that high mark, he is a most interesting contender for the major three-year-old races.
A son of Green Desert, Magic Ring is out of an Empery mare and there are indications that he will stay a mile despite the amazing speed he displayed as a juvenile.
‘He'll get the trip of the Greenham [seven furlongs]alright, but like some of the others, he will benefit from the outing,’ said Cole.
The trainer also entered Dilum in the race as a precautionary move.
That colt will only run if something goes amiss with Magic Ring, and consequently, he is more likely to make his seasonal reappearance in the Sidney Thompson Memorial Stakes at Brighton on Monday.
In what should prove one of the key Classic trials, Magic Ring will meet the unbeaten 2,000 Guineas favourite Rodrigo de Triano.
Lion Cavern will be sent over from France, by Andre Fabre, while River Falls is another expected to be in the line-up.
Fabre has been a little quiet in the early stages of the new season in France but is expected to produce one of his best three-year olds, Corrouge, in the Prix de Quincy, a maiden race, at Evry on Monday.
Pat Eddery will ride.
Carrouge, a son of the dual-Arc winner Alleged, is a ‘talking horse’ already at Chantilly and Ladbrokes offer no better than 25–1 about the Khalid Abdullah-owned colt for the Ever Ready Derby.
Before that, however, the promising filly Hatoof, who disputes favouritism for the 1,000 Guineas with Musicale at 8–1, is due to make her seasonal debut against five opponents in the Prix Imprudence at Maisons-Laffitte tomorrow.
She will be opposed by Kenbu, who has been backed at long odds for the 1,000 Guineas and is a stablemate of the outstanding Arazi.
Yesterday, the superlatives were still being tossed around for Arazi, who won impressively at Saint-Cloud on Tuesday to confirm his passage to Louisville for the Kentucky Derby, on May 2.
‘He seems to have come out of the race very well, but we'll know how well by next week,’ said Francois Boutin.
‘I thought Arazi was rusty and that he will improve an enormously.
His rustiness showed at the point when he was asked to accelerate.
‘I was also particularly impressed with the way he behaved in front of the crowd,’ Boutin added.
Although Arazi is odds-on to win the Kentucky Derby with British bookmakers, reports from Las Vegas indicate the colt can still be backed there at 7–5.
Meanwhile, Mr Boston, second favourite for Saturday's Scottish National, will miss the race, along with stablemate Dubious Jake.
Both have blood disorders.
Racing: Sillars Stalker is Best
By Course Correspondent
SILLARS STALKER*, who was winning for the first time on the Flat when landing an apprentice handicap at Hamilton Park eight days ago, should make a successful return to the Scottish track in today's Levy Board Handicap (5.15).
Lynda Ramsden's gelding, who has run up a sequence of four successes over hurdles this jumps season, should be suited by today's extra two furlongs and meets third-placed Needwood Poppy on 6lb better terms.
Willie Jarvis's Rock Hard, a close fourth to Daru at Beverley on his seasonal debut, can show the benefit of that outing in the Dunwan Maiden Stakes (4.45).
Jack Berry's Laurel Queen is fancied for the Standard Life Handicap (3.15) and Bill Elsey's Philgun may defy a penalty in the Calder Handicap (4.15).
Yachting: Conner crew blame poor umpiring for latest defeat
By Tim Jeffery in San Diego
STARS & STRIPES became Stars & Gripes yesterday, as her crew made no attempt to conceal their disgust at an umpires' decision which cost them their race against Bill Koch's Kanza.
The call was a complex one, involving overlapping rules covering who gives room to whom at the final windward mark.
First Kanza was the inside boat, and then Stripes, as both tacked shy of the lay line for the buoy as the current set the pair down.
Conner luffed into the diminishing gap, hitting both Kanza and the buoy.
The umpires green-flagged the crash but penalised Stripes for hitting the mark, effectively giving Kanza the race.
Conner's crew were incensed because they thought they had made the perfect forcing manoeuvre.
What puzzled observers was that, if the umpires were unsure who caused the collision, prompting a green flag, why should they penalise Conner?
‘We hit the mark,’ said Conner's tactician, Tom Whidden, ‘but we hit it because of the other boat.’
Conner has grave doubts about how on-the-water umpiring, developed for 30 to 35-footers on the match race circuit, is working out with the bigger and faster America's Cup class yachts.
He said: ‘If we don't reach the finals because of this, I'll be sick to my stomach.’
In the three races left, Stripes needs one more win over America to reach the final.
To thwart that, Koch's America syndicate put on a new keel and removed ballast from the namesake boat, using the mid-series mode-change permitted under the barter agreement reached with Conner.
But Koch, sporting a crew shirt with a bullseye target on the back —‘when anything bad happens I seem to get blamed’— said his camp had been caught out by the light winds in the semi-final.
Although Koch prides himself on his team's technological programme, he admitted he had overlooked the change to daylight-saving time, which meant the races began an hour earlier, while the wind was still building.
Facing a gathering wave of criticism over his frequent crew swaps, and predilection to take the wheel ahead of his professional helmsmen, Buddy Melges and Kimo Worthington, Koch announced a ‘final’ crew.
In the afterguard line-up, Koch is alternate helmsman, Melges skipper, Dave Dellenbaugh starting helmsman and tactician, Bill Campbell navigator and Andreas Josenhans mainsheet trimmer.
On light air days, Worthington will replace Koch.
There was dissent yesterday on the challengers' course too, with Marc Pajot feeling that Ville de Paris' chances of making the final were undermined by lax race committee procedure.
‘I am devastated,’ said Pajot after his starting helmsman Marc Bouet had held Il Moro di Venezia's Paul Cayard above the start-line at the gun.
Cayard was recalled instantly by the committee but it took them 40 seconds to hoist the French recall signal, by which time they were well up the track.
The committee aborted the race after 40 minutes, but the delay in re-starting meant Ville de Paris raced in the fresher winds the Italians like.
Il Moro won, becoming the first challenger to claim a finals place, while Nippon's loss to New Zealand made her the first to be eliminated.
For Ville de Paris to make the final, Pajot must win his last two races while New Zealand loses hers.
Defenders' semi-final, Race 7: Kanza bt Stars & Stripes.
Pts: Kanza 5; Stars & Stripes 4; America 3 1.
Challengers' semi-final, Race 7: New Zealand bt Nippon 31sec; Il Moro di Venezia bt Ville de Paris 1m 28s.
Pts: Il Moro di Venezia 6; New Zealand, Ville de Paris 5; Nippon 1.
Olympic Games: Olympic village short of space
By a Special Correspondent in Barcelona
THE International Olympic Committee are today holding an emergency meeting with the committee organising the Barcelona Games (COBB) in an effort to combat the spiralling size of this summer's Olympics.
Games organisers admitted yesterday that the Olympic village would not be large enough to accommodate all the competitors and officials who now wish to attend.
The Games, already destined to be the largest ever, now have to find room for the extra 3,306 competitors and officials registered by the end of last month, bringing the total to 18,306.
With many more countries still to declare the size of their teams, the problem threatens to engulf the organising committee.
Until now, the organisers had been expecting 15,000 participants (10,000 competitors and 5,000 officials), and the Olympic village was constructed with this in mind.
But 12,371 competitors and 5,935 officials from 142 countries have registered, leaving another 30 countries still to announce the size of their teams.
Adrian Mac Liman, a spokesman for COBB, confirmed: ‘The numbers have increased.
Some countries have announced more members than they were allowed to send.’
He says that some members of Olympic committees will have to stay in hotels.
‘Less than 1,000 athletes will not be able to stay in the Olympic village,’ he announced.
Mr Mac Liman refused to be drawn on what action the IOC might be forced to take.
‘We are not trying to restrain the numbers,’ he added.
‘We just want to work out an agreement to provide all athletes with free accommodation.’
He denied COBB had a contract with the IOC guaranteeing a limit of 15,000 competitors and officials.
Finding room for the extra athletes may not be as simple as the organising committee would like to pretend.
The city already has a shortage of hotel rooms.
Most visitors to the Games will be put up along the coast outside the city and COBB have had to hire 10 luxury liners to be moored in Barcelona's harbour, to provide 30,000 extra rooms for sponsors and their guests.
Yachting: British trio give top-class display
By David Pelly in Hyeres
BRITONS were heading the points tables in three of the categories and were placed in three more after another day of strong performances in the French Olympic Classes Regatta in Hyeres.
With two days of racing remaining Lawrie Smith is leading the Solings, Paul Brotherton the men's 470s and Barrie Edgington the men's Lechner sailboards.
Shirley Robertson is lying second in the Europe Dinghies, Stuart Childerley is third in the Finns and Will Henderson is third in the Flying Dutchman.
Chief coach Rod Carr could hardly have expected such a position at this stage of the Olympic run-up and it is a justification of the Richard Ellis elite squad system under which financial and training assistance has been concentrated on a small number of the best sailors in each class.
With winds gusting to 20 knots in heavy rainstorms, yesterday's racing was tough and tricky.
A tense battle is in prospect as Glyn Charles fights to stay in the Soling selection series.
To force Lawrie Smith to a match-race play-off he must finish in the top six nations.
Netball: N Bucks punished
By Geoff Young
NORTH Buckinghamshire, easy winners of the English Counties League's Division Six, have been stripped of their title as punishment for not paying their All England Netball Association affiliation fees on time.
As well, the Milton Keynes-based team have been banned from this weekend's end-of-season showpiece in south London, the Evian Inter Counties tournament.
Liz Nicholl, the AENA chief executive, said North Bucks were due to pay their affiliation costs by November, but an administrative error meant the fees were not paid until January.
The association had to punish the county, Mrs Nicholl said, because the affiliation fees were their livelihood.
‘If one county gets away with late payment then others may try and we can't run the game without their money,’ she said.
Norfolk will receive the Division Six title, but North Bucks will still gain promotion as runner-up.
Audrey Thorne, the North Bucks chairman, said the banishment from the Inter Counties tournament was a blow, particularly for the players.
‘It's hard on them because they had paid their individual fees.
It wasn't their fault the All England never got paid,’ Mrs Thorne said.
‘At least we still get promoted, so our season's not been completely lost.’
Surrey, league champions and winners of the one-off Freeman's Cup after beating Essex Metropolitan last week, will be after another double when they defend the Inter Counties in Anerley, while Middlesex will be fighting to keep the Under-21 title.
Equestrianism: Whitaker out of cup
By Alan Smith
JOHN WHITAKER and Henderson Milton have had to drop out of next week's Volvo World Cup final in Del Mar, California, because the grey has an injured leg.
Whitaker and Milton would have been trying for a unique hat-trick in this, the most important of all indoor championships, after winning in Dortmund in 1990 and Gothenburg last year.
Milton missed the two qualifying rounds in Hertogenbosch, Holland, and Paris last month because of an infection in his off-fore foot.
This cleared up in time for him to jump in Zurich, however, and then he returned to Whitaker's Yorkshire stable for his final preparation before the long flight from Frankfurt to California today.
But when Whitaker rode him on Monday afternoon Milton ‘did not feel one hundred per cent’, and the following morning the grey was lame, sore in a joint in his near-foreleg.
Although he was sound again yesterday, it was clearly impossible to risk taking him.
This year's final was to have been a duel between the two most successful of all World Cup horses, Milton and Canadian Ian Millar's Big Ben, who won the final in 1988 and 1989.
Whitaker and Milton were runners-up to them in Tampa, Florida, in 1989, and the Yorkshireman was determined to go one better this time.
Big Ben has missed the past two finals, through injury, but showed himself right back to his best with a victory in the recent Tampa Invitational.
Whitaker also had Gammon entered in the World Cup final but, as his wife Claire said yesterday: ‘It would have been a long way to go with just one horse.
If that one horse had been Milton, it would have been different, of course.’
Milton, owned by Mr and Mrs Tom Bradley, whose daughter, the late Caroline, produced him as a youngster, would have achieved a second record had he won in California.
He would have become the first show jumper to win more than £1 million in prize money: at present his total earnings are about £50,000 short of that.
Now Whitaker must concentrate on an Olympic challenge with the charismatic grey, as Mr and Mrs Bradley, who would not let him go to Seoul, have given permission for him to compete in Barcelona.
In his absence, Britain's two representatives in the Del Mar final will be Tina Cassan, who won the Toronto World Cup qualifier on Fred Brown's Genesis, and US-based Tim Grubb, runner-up to Millar and Big Ben at Tampa.
Miss Cassan, 26, gave notice of her ability when second behind Michael Whitaker and Monsanta in last year's Silk Cut Jumping Derby at Hickstead, on Treffer, also owned by Fred Brown.
She had been in the winning Nations Cup team in Drammen, Norway, where she also scored her first grand prix success, and, as a result of her achievements, was chosen to go with the British squad on the autumn circuit of North American shows, in Washington, New York and Toronto.
She and Grubb were together in the team that won the Nations Cup in Washington, before she went on to take the Toronto World Cup round.
Grubb, who has lived in the United States for some years, was brought into the British team that finished second in the Los Angeles Olympics, and will be coming to Britain hoping to make the Barcelona team.
Milton's defection from the final is, of course, a major blow, but Britain are still left with two very ‘live’ challengers.
Golf: Faldo ready to produce more magic at the 11th
By Ian Ridley in Augusta
WHEN Nick Faldo signs his autograph these days he uses the ‘l’ as a flagstick, on which he draws a flag bearing the number 11.
It is a reference to the hole at Augusta on which he clinched both his Masters titles in play-offs.
It has become his hole.
Indeed, it might be said that Augusta, as a whole, is his territory.
The course seeks out flaws in temperament and technique sooner rather than later.
It is usually sooner, though the back nine on Sunday might well do it — even the 72nd hole.
The course is patient.
But so, too, is Faldo.
His temperament — for tolerating the heat of competition at least— and technique are the equal of all, the better of just about all.
He is the Geoff Boycott of golf.
In the way that if you had to choose a player to score a century to save your life it would have been Boycott, then if you were pinned to a wall and forced to choose someone to win the Masters it would be Faldo.
And you probably would not choose to spend a fortnight up the Amazon with either.
There are many players who might win the Masters, many who could.
But the feeling about Faldo is that if he is at the top of his game, he should win it.
That he is ranked only No 4 in the world at the moment is due to the eccentricity of the system.
His first Masters win has now slipped from his ranking points.
Evidence abounds that he has been approaching the top of his game for the event, following up his second place in the Tournament Players' Championship, in Florida recently, with a sixth at New Orleans on Sunday.
The preparation was correct.
‘Playing at the end of the field, being in contention, keeping myself relaxed but at the same time getting the adrenalin running,’ explained Faldo.
‘New Orleans was one of the hardest courses I have ever played.
Very good preparation for Augusta.
‘I have an excellent routine for the Masters.
This is the most upbeat I have been for more than a year.’
Not that you would notice.
This week in Georgia he has been keeping a low profile, wrapped up in his own game plan, which is how he best enjoys life, it seems.
Single-minded — selfish even — and pre-occupied are the descriptions most used of him.
While someone such as Ben Crenshaw will inquire routinely with a smile, even of a stranger: ‘Hi, how are you?’ as he makes his way through the Augusta clubhouse, Faldo moves along swiftly and silently.
For him there is not yet time to stop and smell the flowers.
But it is different strokes for different folks.
Crenshaw is a champion because of the way he is; Faldo, too, probably because of his contrasting attitude.
And there is clearly a less flinty side to him.
As he stood on the first tee at New Orleans last week, he noticed a boy in a wheelchair.
He took off his glove, signed it and gave it to the boy.
Onlookers say it was a spontaneous gesture.
This week, Faldo has been not exactly refusing interviews but making it abruptly and abundantly clear that he is willing to say nothing of import.
‘If I do it for you, I've got to do it for everyone…
Yes, everything's going good…
I don't know about Augusta being my territory but it's nice to come somewhere where you have won before, obviously, and live off the memories…
My routine's a secret, and I think it's working,’ were his responses to this inquirer as he sought the bolt-hole of the champions' locker-room yesterday.
This is upbeat, in contrast to last year when he came to Augusta ‘undergolfed’ to use his own words.
He was also upset by an article in the American magazine Sports Illustrated, in which he was quoted — legitimately, even if in infrequent unguarded moments — as criticising other players charmlessly.
The short game was awry, as, they will tell you, is that of any high-handicappers when they are ‘undergolfed’, which means all the time.
Even so, after beating the cut by only one shot, Faldo still finished joint 12th, though his season never took off.
‘Technically, there were a few bits wrong with the swing that kept holding me back,’ he said.
‘My game was just a little bit off in all departments.
I think you have to see what you can learn from it.
Finally, I sat down and said ‘OK, let's forget about all that and do what we need to get it turned round.’
It turned round instantly.’
He has also modified his fitness regime, which last year resulted in him putting on 10lb — he weighed 15st 5lb — and increased his neck size an inch to 17½.
His chest size increased to 46.
Ten years ago it was 42.
‘Everything in life is a bit of an experiment,’ he said.
‘I know I need to do some exercise for golf.
Maybe I went overboard.
I'm back to my original fighting weight.
‘I've been working out and I feel I have got it right this time.
The thing I learned from last year was the amazing way my body changed with such little work.
I'm one of those people who, if I went into a gym, could be making Schwarzenegger movies.
A month in a gym and I'd be enormous.’
What it probably boiled down to, though, was simply holing putts again.
His stroke had returned, he said last month.
He has worked hard on it, and perhaps he is at his most content when he has something in his game on which to work.
He has lengthened the putter, to stand more upright, and quickened his routine on the green.
One drill involved holding an umbrella under his armpits while striking putts.
Now he has been talking of being ‘more in control’.
He has used phrases such as‘great visualisation’ and ‘better thought processes’.
He also talks of ‘grinding out’ scores, in the way that Boycott used to grind out runs.
It was something that Ian Woosnam referred to when discussing Faldo's prospects this week.
‘This is his sort of course because he's a grinder,’ who succeeded Faldo as champion.
Now is the time for the golfer from Welwyn Garden City to put his nose to the grindstone once more.
And he could again seal victory at the 11th.
Lawn Tennis: Connors' quick exit
JIMMY CONNORS surrendered 6–0, 6–1 to Australian Todd Woodbridge in the second round of the Suntory Japan Open in Tokyo.
At 51 minutes, it was one of Connors's swiftest defeats in his long and distinguished career.
Student Rugby: Newton adds to big tally
By John Pargeter
England U-21 16pts Scotland U-21 19 SCOTLAND, better behind the scrum and with the country's top points-scorer, deserved to win yesterday at McCracken Park, Newcastle.
The match-winners were Newton, who added five penalties to the 478 points he had already scored this season, and Ness, the Scots captain.
Loughborough provided a scoring winger for both sides — Dawson for England and Anderson in reply.
But Scotland looked better in the first half when only penalties were scored.
After the interval there was an exchange of penalties before Maddocks scored a splendid try for England.
Newton regained the lead for Scotland with another two penalties.
Anderson then put the Scots seemingly safe with a nine-point lead, but a burst by Dawson brought an England try converted by Maddocks.
ENGLAND STUDENTS: A Dalwood (Bristol Univ); M D Dawson (Loughborough Univ), N Nolan (Bristol Univ), A Maddocks (Roehampton IHE), P Harrison (N Cheshire Coll); D Willetts, R Kitchen (Exeter Univ); S Brown (Cheltenham & Glos Coll), M Regan (Bristol Poly), J Groome (Notts Poly), D Ruffell (Cheltenham & Glos Coll), A Meadows (Newcastle Univ), D Walton (Thames Poly), E Murchinson, N Richardson (Loughborough Univ, capt).
Replacements: J Brennand (UMIST) for Dawson 38, L Mooney (UWC Cardiff) for Regan 51.
Tries: Maddocks, Dawson.
Conversion: Maddocks.
Penalty goals: Willetts (2).
Try: Anderson.
Penalty goals: Newton (5).
Cycling: Cipollini first after protest
By Phil Liggett in Wevelgem, Belgium
DJAMOLODINE Abdoujaparov, the former Soviet sprinter whose erratic finishing caused him to crash spectacularly on the Champs-Elysees during the final stage of the Tour de France last July, was yesterday disqualified after winning the Belgian Classic from Ghent to Wevelgem for pulling the jersey of Italian Mario Cipollini.
The two men, arguably the fastest finishers in the world, unleashed their 40mph sprints in the last 400 metres of the 131-mile race, leaving the rest of the field to watch.
They saw Cipollini, a winner five times this season, lead Abdoujaparov with 50 yards to go before veering across the road in a blatant attempt to block the approach of the Tashkent rider.
In retaliation Abdoujaparov, last year's winner, reached out and pulled Cipollini's racing jersey, using the momentum gained to pass through a narrowing gap between the Italian and the barriers on the right side of the road.
Both riders had done enough to be disqualified.
Cipollini, who recently declared himself to be the fastest finisher in the world, crossed the line in second place but with both arms in the air in protest over Abdoujaparov's jersey-pull, which, say the race referees, occurred twice in the last half-mile.
The decision to disqualify Abdoujaparov was taken after viewing TV pictures taken from a helicopter.
He was also fined £450.
Golf: Beauty of game at its very best W F Deedes explains why his vote always goes to the Masters
By W F DEEDES
TO golfers, whose appetite for party political broadcasts have been dulled to the point of anorexia, a light is breaking in the western sky.
It is the happiest of coincidences for them that on this day when the mind of thinking adults in this country is concentrated on whom not to vote for, the Masters opens at Augusta.
The relief is unspeakable, but not irresponsible.
As Sir Francis Drake reminded us, when the nation is in crisis, a ball game does not come amiss.
I look forward to the Masters, not only in the expectation of seeing fine golf in lovely surroundings, but for the message of hope it brings to my circulation.
April in this country is frequently a month when a prudent golfer will wear at least one more sweater than in January.
The Masters invariably coincides with a wind chill factor in this country.
Augusta seems bathed in perpetual sunshine.
The azaleas and the dogwood are in flower.
We can feel the blood coursing through our veins again.
A glimpse at that exclusive field of spectators in their light informal attire, and we feel warmed in ourselves and towards humanity in general.
Then there is the golf itself.
The Masters is no longer an American monopoly — which it was until 1974, when Gary Player, of South Africa, won the green jacket.
From 1980 (when Severiano Ballesteros won for Spain) it became ever more open to the outside world.
Bernhard Langer, Sandy Lyle, Nick Faldo and Ian Woosnam brushed the Americans aside.
Much of Europe now has its champion to watch on that famous, treacherous stretch; and to many, the champion is better known and better loved than any politician.
Men die to win democracy for their countries, which after a while is taken grudgingly; and its practitioners come to be seen as less skilled, worthy and entertaining than the aristocrats of sport.
But we are dwelling on the splendours of Augusta, not the frailties of Westminster or Capitol Hill.
This title, the Masters, is a good one.
When we watch it, we can feel confident that we are witnessing a severe examination of the best in the game.
Towards the end of the fourth day, as shadows lengthen across sunlit fairways, we witness a test of character as well.
Whatever else he does, Sandy Lyle will be remembered for the shot he played out of a bunker on the 18th in 1988 -150 yards to the pin.
He holed the putt.
We shall remember Jack Nicklaus shedding the years in 1986, and spiriting the ball into the hole with a long-bladed putter which must surely have made a fortune for its inventor.
And we remember the chip which Larry Mize holed in the 1987 play-off, which left Greg Norman speechless and, as PG Wodehouse had it, very far from gruntled.
If we are above a certain age, we remember Gene Sarazen's amazing three-wood at the long 15th, which went into the hole and won the jacket for him.
At Augusta, more than at almost any other golf course, disaster stalks the champions, particularly on the greens — which are said to be in fine, fiery form this year.
This is what strikes fear into the hearts of all but the most experienced, and has men playing there for the first time knocking at the knees.
And this, for golfing dunces, is one of the joys.
How smug we feel when one of the great men not only misses a short one, but, dismayingly, sees the ball roll downhill and off the green.
It is surprising in a way that we remember these things, for those of us living off Greenwich Mean Time witnessed them at hours well past our normal bedtime.
One drawback of the Masters for married men, who want to see the last putt in, is that it requires them to creep to bed as if they were returning from a night club.
Perversely, I enjoyed going beyond the last putt, and watching Augusta's chairman, embodiment of America's ‘Establishment,’ claim his share of world television with a speech of mind-bending banality.
A curiosity about this year's Masters is that Scotland, the home of golf, will be denied a view of today's proceedings.
BBC 2 in Scotland is offering a little curtain raiser at 4 pm.
But at 11.20 pm — just as Highlights from Augusta offer relief from a man repeatedly declaring that the second election result may be coming at any minute — Scotland is being indulged with different fare.
From 11.50, it will be plunged into the election itself.
Serve them right.
They take their politics too seriously up there.
Golf: Practice paying off for Torrance
By Lewine Mair
IN a week when Mark McNulty has had to pull out of the Jersey European Airways Open with a bad back, Sam Torrance, the holder, has come to La Moye with his hands covered in blisters.
They testify to the long hours he has spent working under the eye of his father, Bob.
‘It was as hard as I've practised in a long time,’ said the Ryder Cup player.
His hip turn had been the problem but, by yesterday, as he had a trial spin with John O'Leary, he was confident that it was back in good working order.
As for O'Leary, it is 3½ years since he had the car accident which left him with a back injury so severe as to necessitate three operations.
On each occasion the Irishman tried to make a comeback, his back would break down.
‘It wasn't,’ he recalls, ‘just a matter of being unable to play golf.
There were days when I couldn't even walk.’
The smile on his face told everything about how happy he is to have returned.
At that moment, Willie Aitchison, Lee Trevino's faithful caddie, must have been thinking the reverse.
The 1989 Ryder Cup caddie master had been hit on the knee by a full-blooded Neal Briggs iron and was being carted off to hospital.
Lancing, who surprised themselves and everyone else by making their first appearance in the Halford Hewitt Cup final against the winners, Shrewsbury, last April, will raise a few more eyebrows if they do half as well this time.
Their likely opponents in the second round are Charterhouse, if they get the better of Highgate today, writes Ted Barrett.
Charterhouse have won this massive foursomes festival — including 10-man teams of old boys from 64 public schools — three times in the 1980s over the Royal Cinque Ports and Royal St George's.
Shrewsbury have a good draw, with time to settle before a possible meeting with Harrow.
With five finals and two wins in the last 12 years their robust blend of youth and experience loooks a potent mix.
Rugby Union: Olver's plea to old mates
By John Mason
JOHN OLVER, captain of Courage league leaders Northampton, will be making a few telephone calls to former Harlequin colleagues in the next couple of days.
The burden of the message from schoolmaster Olver, who led Quins for three seasons before a head of department post took him to Northampton in 1990, will be about debts — moral, not financial.
Hooker Olver, the England bench reserve for a record 27 times, explained: ‘My friends at the Stoop didn't expect to be playing for the club at Easter, but now their re-arranged league game with Orrell is on the Monday.
‘It's tough, but I think we've all a debt in these league situations and I'd like to think Quins can put out the first-choice team or as near to it as possible.
I'd think that whether we, Orrell, or Bath, were in contention or not.’
Olver is right.
Hand-on-heart declarations that rugby is an amateur game and that players have freedom to play when they choose, do not in this competitive, rewarding age, ring true.
Northampton, who went top after twice coming from behind to beat Leicester 22–19 at Welford Road on Tuesday evening, continue their title challenge against Nottingham at Beeston on Saturday and complete the league season against Rosslyn Park, the bottom club, at Franklin's Gardens on April 25.
Olver, who acknowledges an even greater debt that Northampton have to All Black Wayne Shelford and coach Glenn Ross, also a New Zealander, makes no promises about the title.
‘All I know is that for as long as we go on winning, the challenge is on and Bath can't squeeze past for the title.
‘I honestly don't know what to think about Orrell's matches — away to Wasps this Saturday and Quins on Easter Monday, home to Nottingham to finish up.
I'll have to have a talk with Winters [Quins’ Winterbottom].’
What does upset Northampton is the impending change of rule — a 180 day qualification for overseas players from Sept 1 — which effectively will prevent Shelford from playing for them next season.
Geoff Allen, who has served Northampton as player and official for 30 years, said: ‘What does stick in the throat is that Shelford, who has made our leading players better players, will probably have to sit on his backside while apparently some other overseas players can come and go as they please.’
Allen refrains from naming names.
I have no such hesitation.
Cup-holders Harlequins, morally, have no right to consider lock Troy Coker, the Wallaby, for the Pilkington final against Bath on May 2, because since January he is no longer permanently resident in England.
Andy Blackmore, the Bristol lock, is unavailable for the England B tour of New Zealand in June.
The squad will be announced on Monday.
Golf: Betting folk rallying to Norman the good loser
By Michael Williams in Augusta
STRICTLY speaking, Greg Norman has little right to be in the Masters, which begins at Augusta National today.
He missed the cut in 1990 and again last year, when he also dropped to 53rd in the American money list.
He has not won a tournament since the Memorial in May, 1990, and even then he was only the ‘declared’ winner.
Leading after three rounds, the fourth was washed out without a ball being hit.
Norman got his ticket to Augusta as an overseas invitee.
Yet he is now more American than Australian, living in Hobe Sound, Florida, with an attachment to Grand Cypress in Orlando.
There is little argument that, other than by the Augusta book, Tom Kite — the world's all-time leading money winner, twice runner-up in the Masters, with only two cuts missed since his first appearance in 1976, one of them last year — should have been in.
But the rules said ‘out’ and out he is.
It is rare that America inflicts such punishment on an American.
Strange, too, that Norman, for all his indifferent form in the past 18 months or so, is quoted at 16–1 in the betting, the same as Ian Baker-Finch, the Open champion, with shorter odds against only five other players.
In Britain, the odds against Norman can be even shorter.
Such is the charisma of a man who has just had seven weeks off following an operation on an old knee injury and has played only two tournaments.
He is still unable to squat on his haunches to examine a putt.
Instead, stiff legged, he merely bends at the waist like a man twice his 37 years.
But second place in last week's tournament in New Orleans, only a stroke behind Chip Beck, was all his many admirers needed to convince them that Norman was ready to add a Masters to his only major championship, the Open at Turnberry in 1986.
Expectation is nothing new.
The golfing world has been expecting great things from Norman for years.
But it has been a rough 18 months for him and there is still a gauntness about him, even if he does claim he has never felt fitter and that his swing is closer to being ‘on track’ than for a long time.
He also claims to be concentrating on his golf again.
He has handed over his responsibilities as the figurehead of Cobra (Australia), a club manufacturing company, to his father, together with the Australian Junior Golf Foundation.
Yet when victory beckoned earlier this year in the Australian Masters, he backed off to allow Craig Parry to nip in and take the title.
The same thing had happened a year ago when Peter Senior slipped past him.
They are by no means rare occasions.
In 1986, Norman led going into the final round of all the four major championships and yet won only one of them, the Open.
In the PGA Championship at Inverness, he was four strokes in front of Bob Tway with only nine holes to play — and still lost, Tway holing from a bunker on the final green for a birdie.
This was one of several occasions on which Norman has been beaten by shots sunk from off the green at the decisive moment.
In every instance, Norman still somehow managed a smile, for, if nothing else, he has been a good loser.
When Fuzzy Zoeller, thinking Norman had just holed a vast putt across Winged Foot's final green for an American Open championship-winning birdie in 1984, he waved a white towel in surrender.
In fact, the putt was for par, Zoeller tied and won the play-off.
Norman did not forget.
Crushed by eight strokes over 18 holes the following day, it was Norman's turn to produce a white towel.
The public liked that.
Cricket: Richardson takes boos in his stride
By Geoffrey Dean in Kingston, Jamaica
THE South Africans flew out of Jamaica to Trinidad yesterday disappointed at their 107-run defeat in the first one-day international against the West Indies but overwhelmed by their reception in Kingston.
The South Africans were made to feel at home from the moment they entered Jamaica and they were clearly bewildered by the irony of their having been applauded out on to Sabina Park while Richie Richardson, the West Indies captain, was booed throughout the game.
The reaction to Richardson can be attributed to three factors — a rumour that supposed friction between him and Jamaica's Jeffrey Dujon led to Dujon's omission from the World Cup; another rumour that Richardson passed some remark about Jamaicans after the Dujon affair; and that Richardson described the historic World Cup encounter with South Africa as ‘just another cricket match’.
Jamaicans felt it was much more than that.
Richardson admitted he expected the booing.
‘I'm a very strong person and it will take more than that to get rid of me,’ he said.
South African captain Kepler Wessels's verdict on his side's 107-run defeat was that it was difficult to go straight into an international match without a warm-up game.
They were unfortunate in that batting conditions for them were not as favourable as they had been for the West Indians.
The South Africans nevertheless made a good start, reaching 79 for one in the 20th over, but the loss of the assured Hudson (50 in 66 balls) and of Kirsten in the space of three overs left the middle order with a daunting task.
Against typically efficient fast bowling, the pressure was too much and the last seven wickets fell in the space of 12 overs.
The remaining two one-day internationals are due to be played in Trinidad on Saturday and Sunday.
View From Augusta: Crowd should follow example set by players
By IAN RIDLEY
A TELEVISION commentator who once referred to the Augusta crowd as a ‘mob’ so angered tournament officials that he was not invited back the following year.
So don't tell them I told you, but the subject of spectator behaviour is under scrutiny at Augusta, of all places.
It ‘reared its ugly head’, to use Tom Watson's phrase, a year ago when he was playing with Ian Woosnam in the final round.
At the 13th, Woosnam was heckled and a cheer went up from a few spectators as he put his drive into the creek.
That brand of it is an offshoot of the United States v Europe confrontation which has been fuelled by the Ryder Cup and spilled over now into major championships, potentially the more so at the Masters where the winners for the past four years have been British.
In perspective, it is a healthy rivalry, adding spice to the game.
Out of control it threatens to undermine a game dependent on the good offices of onlookers.
Watson has returned to the theme this week at the Masters.
‘Too much is made of this US v Europe thing.
It has become a confrontation, them against us,’ he said.
‘I don't think that's healthy.
‘It's fine in the Ryder Cup, although that has got a little bit out of hand when nerves are stretched like the note of a piano.
It has spilled over into this tournament because the foreign players have won it.
They should give these players a break because they are just doing what others are doing, trying their best to win the golf tournament.’
Woosnam himself, angry at the time of the incident at the 13th, said this week that ‘only a few people spoilt it for a lot’.
He added that he had been well treated when he returned for the US Open.
The Masters guards jealously its position as dignified proponent of fair play and etiquette.
At the top of the draw sheets for each day's play is a message penned in 1967 by the co-founder of the tournament, Bobby Jones, ‘president in perpetuity’.
‘In golf, customs of etiquette and decorum are just as important as rules governing play,’ he wrote.
‘It is appropriate for spectators to applaud successful strokes in proportion to difficulty but excessive demonstrations by a player or his partisans are not proper because of the possible effect upon other competitors.
‘Most distressing to those who love the game of golf is the applauding or cheering of misplays or misfortunes of a player.
Such occurrences have been rare at the Masters but we must eliminate them entirely if our patrons are to continue to merit their reputation as the most knowledgeable and considerate in the world.’
Within that is a more worrying trend for the Masters.
The US v Europe rivalry is understandable — and excesses have happened in England.
Less so is a creeping and curious menace of players being verbally abused.
At the Los Angeles Open, Fred Couples says he was told by a spectator: ‘Have a good day and don't choke.’
Davis Love overheard the comment of ‘miss it’ as he addressed a putt at the same tournament.
‘That's a shootable offence,’ says Watson, half-joking.
Then there are incidents in which some spectators vie with each other to be the one to be heard on TV to shout ‘you the man’ just as the player connects with his shot — sometimes interrupting his downswing.
And there is the increase in shrieks of ‘way to go’.
Golf is not privileged and much as it likes to think of itself as such, Augusta is not a cathedral.
They seek only voluntary donations; people pay their money to get in here.
Neither are players above criticism.
There was once a golf correspondent for a respected national newspaper who, from beside the green, used to urge slow players to ‘get on with it, don't you know my life is ebbing away’.
More seriously, there is, though, a time and a place.
Though golf should be subjected to the same criteria as other sports, and a bit of enthusiastic reaction is part of that, it must retain its decorum if its special flavour and reputation for sportsmanship under duress is not to be undermined.
The players retain it, seemingly.
The hope is that the Augusta crowds re-learn it this week.
If they don't, there is not much hope elsewhere.
Golf: Fastest putting show on earth Ken Brown on the key to negotiating Augusta
By KEN BROWN
SINCE January, when invitations for the Masters were received, those lucky and talented enough to compete at Augusta will have been fine-tuning their games to suit one of the world's most demanding courses.
Before the swing is even given consideration the search may start for some new equipment; maybe a driver that hits a high draw from the tee.
Eleven of the 14 driving holes require a predominant right to left flight on the ball.
It will also help if the players can hit the iron shots a little higher than usual to enable them to stop the ball on the firm greens.
The most important preparation, however, will be to find the silky smooth putting touch which is essential to conquer some of the toughest greens in the world.
With the exception of the seventh and the 12th greens, Augusta's putting surfaces are of a reasonably generous size, but they slope violently and are extremely fast.
The undulating nature of the whole course, both the fairways and the greens, is something that is difficult to perceive when watching the Masters on television.
It will be on every player's mind when he stands on the tee to give himself the best chance of an uphill putt, whether it be from that tee shot or a subsequent approach.
The strategy on each hole is completely decided by the position of the flag on the green.
The par-four 14th provides a good example of how difficult the flag position can make a hole.
The pin is often positioned on the right-hand side, just over a ridge which runs across the front of the green.
If the ball is left short it is virtually impossible to save par as the approach shot will almost certainly spin back off the green, leaving the player with a chip shot which will be equally as difficult to keep on the green the other side.
Many of the other holes present similar hazards, and because of this, dare I say, there will be a good deal of conservative golf played this week, with players being forced to play into the safer, flatter parts of the green.
This style of play, though safe, leaves long putts which require imagination and a very confident touch.
I am often asked just how fast the Augusta greens are.
The only way I can describe this is to suggest that a normal 6ft putt on an average ‘club green’ would run 15ft for the players at the Masters this week.
During my first round at the Masters I four-putted the second green and a member of the gallery shouted ‘welcome to Augusta’.
There is no question that the master of the greens will wear green at the Masters.
Boxing: Wharton power destroys Carr
By Ken Mays
HENRY WHARTON gave a tremendous display of power punching to retain his Commonwealth super-middleweight title by stopping Rod Carr, of Australia, in the eighth round before 2,000 of his frenzied supporters at Leeds Town Hall last night.
In his second defence of the title, against the man he had beaten to win it in June, Wharton's awesome blows cut Carr above his left eye and then had him down for a count of eight and unable to defend himself when he regained his feet.
Carr, who went the distance with Wharton last time, protested about the stoppage, after 2min 7sec of the eighth round, but if referee Dave Parris had allowed the fight to continue the Australian could have been in serious trouble.
It was Wharton's 14th win in 15 fights — the other bout ended in a draw — but he seemed to be allowing the fight to slip away from him through uncharacteristic casualness in the fifth and sixth rounds.
Carr, to his credit, never stopped coming forward and he caused Wharton many problems until the eighth round, but the Yorkshireman then delighted his home town supporters by producing the kind of punching power they expected of him.
A left to Carr's body was quickly followed by a punch to the head, and then a right hook had Carr reeling and in trouble.
But he shook it off and came forward again.
Wharton sometimes gave the impression he had hit the challenger with every punch in the book, and was losing interest.
But then he exploded into life again and it was simply a question of when Carr would go down.
After a cautious start, Wharton, at 24, a year younger than the Australian, took his time in the first three minutes before opening up with a series of punches in the next three rounds.
Against an opponent who had bitten through his glove in their last fight, causing him to have seven stitches in the fist, he concentrated on punches to Carr's mouth.
Carr started to bleed slightly above his left eye as early as the second round, and he was twice in danger of being disqualified for using his head rather than his fists.
Yet, throughout, he was willing to trade punches.
Wharton, however, who won inside the distance for the 10th time, gradually stepped up the pace as the fight went into its second half.
Mickey Duff, Wharton's manager, has already set the stage for a sell-out contest with Sheffield's Fidel Castro (Slug O'Toole), with both Castro's British title and Wharton's Commonwealth crown on the line in what would be one of the biggest fights in Yorkshire for many years.
Mr Duff is also trying to arange a European title fight for Wharton.
LEEDS.
— 12rds C'wealth super-middleweight ch'ship: Henry Wharton (York) bt Rod Carr (Melbourne) rsf 8th. 6rds light-middle: Charlie Moore (Darlington) bt Steve Thomas (Merthyr) rsf 3rd. 8rds feather: Tony Silkstone (Leeds) bt Eddie Cook (Larkhall) pts. 8rds light-heavy: Michael Gale (Leeds) bt Tony Booth (Sheffield) pts. 6rds welter: Steve Howden (Sheffield) bt Ron Hopley (Ripon) pts. 6rds bantam: Jacob Smith (Darlington) bt Andy Bloomer (Ynysybwl) pts.
Nigel Benn has no shortage of incentive to stop South African Thulane ‘Sugar Boy’ Malinga inside the distance at the Birmingham Indoor Arena on May 23.
Malinga lost on a split decision to WBO super-middleweight champion Chris Eubank in February and Benn hopes that an impressive victory would give him a psychological advantage over his great rival should they meet later this year.
Squash: Impatience halts Wapnick's run
By D J Rutnagur
JUDGING by his debut in the Hi-Tec British Open Championships yesterday, Craig Wapnick, 21, of South Africa, is poised to make a big impact on the game.
Having made his way into the main draw via six rounds in the preliminary and qualifying competitions, he fell just short of a major upset in the first round proper.
Only lack of experience deprived Wapnick, based in Switzerland and ranked No 103 in the world, of victory over the ninth seed, Rodney Eyles, in a thrilling match lasting 74 minutes.
Having fought his way back from a deficit of 1–2 in games, Wapnick led 5–0 in the decider, dominating the court to a point where Eyles looked done for.
But Wapnick became over-eager, and his impatience triggered the series of errors which brought his downfall.
As the gap began to narrow, he continued to drum the tin, and Eyles ran and retrieved as if his life depended on it.
Wapnick is tall and long-limbed, and he uses his reach to cut the ball off early in flight and to dig it out of the corners.
He seizes eagerly on opportunities to put the ball away with explosive power.
Had Wapnick won yesterday, he might well have reached the last eight.
He would have played Finland's Sami Elopuro, who is a tenacious retriever but lacks the wherewithal to counter-attack as Eyles did.
Of the leading English contenders, Peter Marshall, Chris Walker and Del Harris made it to the last 16.
Marshall's speed in retrieving, his staying power and, not least, his unorthodox two-handed style, proved too much for the world No 18 from Australia, Anthony Hill.
The Australian's frustration at being unable to find chinks in Marshall's defence was expressed in arguments with the referee.
Walker came from behind to beat fellow Englishman Phil Whitlock, and Harris had a comfortable win over Frederik Johnson, of Sweden.
Later, two of the lower men's seeds lost: Adrian Davies, of Wales, and Bryan Beeson, of England.
Three seeds fell in the women's event.
Australia's Danielle Drady, briefly ranked No 2 in the world last year, lost to Holland's Hugoline van Hoorn in her first match since rupturing an Achilles tendon last autumn.
An ankle injury left Lucy Soutter, a finalist in 1986, unable to cope with another English girl, Linda Charman.
Soccer: Mills hits form for Leicester
By a Special Correspondent
Leicester 3 Sunderland 2 ONCE again, Sunderland were unable to transfer the marvellous form which has taken them to the FA Cup final at Wembley into their league matches.
Embarking on a spell of 10 games in 25 days, which will decide their Second Division fate, Sunderland let slip a 2–1 advantage they had obtained early in the first half.
It was a magnificent match for the spectators but Sunderland's caretaker-manager Malcolm Crosby would hardly have enjoyed it.
When Gary Bennett gave them a fourth-minute lead against promotion-chasing Leicester, the Roker Park side could hardly have made a better start.
Showing no signs of reaction to their efforts on Sunday in winning the FA Cup semi-final against Norwich, Sunderland produced some inventive, attacking football with Byrne always involved.
It was his low centre which opened the way for Bennett's goal after a well-worked short corner.
In the eighth minute Leicester drew level as Wright pounced on a loose ball after Gee's shot had been blocked, to score his 15th goal of the season.
Not to be denied, Sunderland were ahead again five minutes later, Goodman clinically finishing off another move inspired by Byrne.
At that stage, Sunderland were good value for the lead and Mr Crosby must have been a contented man.
It all went wrong for him, though, in a three-minute spell during which time Mills scored twice for Leicester to turn the game on its head.
He headed in in the 31st minute after Wright's centre had taken a deflection, then scored from the penalty spot after being brought down by Bennett.
Leicester: Poole; Mills, Whitlow, Hill, Walsh, Grayson, Thompson, Oldfield, Wright, Ormondroyd, Gee.
Sunderland: Norman; Kay, Rogan, Bennett, Hardyman, Brady, Goodman, Davenport, Armstrong, Byrne, Atkinson.
Referee: T Holbrook (Wolverhampton).
Soccer: Fashanu foils Liverpool's second string
By Colin Gibson Liverpool 2 Wimbledon 3 MAYBE it was predictable that at the end of a week of distractions for Liverpool, Wimbledon should benefit at Anfield last night.
Despite falling behind twice in the first half to Liverpool's shadow squad, the Londoners still had the determination to snatch victory with a disputed penalty.
Liverpool's defeat will not offer Graeme Souness, recovering in a Cheshire hospital after heart surgery, the best possible footballing start to his recuperation.
Mr Souness has promised to keep in touch with events at Anfield less than 24 hours after his operation.
This morning he might wish that he had not bothered.
Ronnie Moran, who had been chatting with Mr Souness about the match hours before the Liverpool manager headed for the operating theatre, will have to report failure in his first game in charge.
Predictably, though, there was little resemblence between this defeated Liverpool side and the one that came so close to being knocked out of the FA Cup in the semi-final against Portsmouth at Highbury.
Mr Moran rested Rush, Wright, Barnes and Nicol, who have all recently returned from long-term injuries, and McManaman and Burrows, who both limped out of Sunday's 1–1 draw.
Joe Kinnear, the Wimbledon manager, was concerned that despite such a list of absentees Liverpool might be even more dangerous.
He said: ‘They did not have certain top-class players out there, but the majority of those who came in were £1 million players and I felt that they would be fighting for a place in the Cup replay.’
In the absence of Wright and Nicol, Mr Moran employed the large, if not particularly mobile, central defensive partnership of Molby and Tanner.
As a consequence, Liverpool always appeared vulnerable but took the lead twice through Thomas and Rosenthal.
Sanchez played a part in Thomas's goal and then claimed Wimbledon's first equaliser after 35 minutes.
Molby's long free-kick in the seventh minute was deep into the Wimbledon area.
Sanchez should have left it alone but instead his header fell to Thomas who scored.
But Sanchez made amends.
Grobbelaar flapped at McGee's cross and when Miller drove in a low shot Sanchez turned the ball into the net.
Rosenthal then restored Liverpool's advantage with a stinging shot in the 44th minute before Wimbledon replied again in the 65th minute when Clarke converted another Miller cross.
It was then left for Fashanu to clinch the victory.
His experience forced Jones into committing what referee John Key felt was a penalty.
The Sheffield official was definitely in the minority.
Jones believed that the referee had been conned and was booked for telling him so.
Fashanu refused to be intimidated by the protests and sent Grobbelaar the wrong way.
‘They tried everything to unnerve him but he remained so cool,’ said Mr Kinnear, who took great pride in the fact that Wimbledon, now safe from relegation, are the first side to score three times at Anfield this season.
Liverpool: Grobbelaar; Jones, Venison, Tanner, Whelan, Rosenthal (Marsh 80), Saunders, Houghton, Walters, Molby, Thomas.
Wimbledon: Segers; Clarke, Phelan, Barton, Scales, McAllister (Fitzgerald 55), Miller, Earle, Fashanu, Sanchez, McGee.
Soccer: Coventry stalemate
By Geoff Young
COVENTRY and Sheffield Wednesday managed to cancel out each other 's immediate ambitions in their scoreless draw last night.
Wednesday are hoping Manchester United do the Rumbelows Cup and League double, so the two UEFA Cup places available for English clubs go to the second and third teams in Division One.
Coventry are just hoping to play in the top flight next season.
While a point puts City closer to safety, a point slows Wednesday down and allows Arsenal to move within three points of them in fourth.
Swindon Town's Second Division play-off hopes were given an initial lift by Gibson's first goal for the club at Millwall.
But Leicester's win over Sunderland did them no favours, nor did sharing the points after Allen put Millwall ahead after 11 minutes.
Peterborough United moved nearer a Third Division play-off place with a 2–0 home win over Bournemouth.
A 29th-minute incident arguably caused Bournemouth's downfall.
Morris was felled by Peterborough's Adcock and referee Taylor sent Morris off and awarded the home side a penalty, converted by Cooper to add to Charlery's earlier strike.
Soccer: Wright extends Arsenal's run
By Richard Bright Norwich 1 Arsenal 3 ARSENAL demonstrated their strength in depth and increased their chances of a UEFA Cup place next season with a convincing victory over Norwich at Carrow Road last night.
Two goals from England striker Ian Wright, which brought his total to 26 for the season, and one from Kevin Campbell, stretched injury-troubled Arsenal's unbeaten run to 12 games and kept the Londoners on course for a place in Europe next season.
Arsenal, without both first-choice full-backs Winterburn and Dixon through injury, suffered another setback when they lost O'Leary after 24 minutes with a hand injury.
Norwich also had their injury problems and were without leading scorer Fleck, whose broken ribs have still not fully healed despite his appearance in last Sunday's FA Cup semi-final defeat by Sunderland.
Apart from O'Leary's injury, Arsenal had things largely their own way in the first half against a Norwich team who were still obviously suffering from the disappointment of Sunday's Cup defeat.
Wright's first goal came in the 33rd minute.
Arsenal's Norwegian international full-back, Lydersen, played a long ball behind the Norwich defence, Wright's sheer pace tempted Norwich defender Ullathorne into a rash challenge and referee Phil Wright pointed emphatically to the spot.
Ullathorne was booked for dissent and Wright coolly converted the spot kick himself.
Lydersen again had a hand in Arsenal's second goal in the 46th minute when his long clearance found Campbell whose awesome power took him into the box to beat Norwich's former Tottenham goalkeeper Walton at the near post.
Norwich proceeded to stage a spirited rally and Seaman's goal came under intense pressure before Norwich defender Butterworth scored his first goal of the season when he forced the ball home after Beckford's shot had been blocked.
Norwich pushed forward in search of an equaliser only to concede the classic breakaway goal after Rocastle had driven forward from midfield and released the perfect ball which enabled Wright to draw Walton before netting.
Arsenal manager George Graham said that O'Leary has a suspected cracked bone in his right hand and would have an X-ray today.
Norwich: Walton; Culverhouse, Bowen, Butterworth, Polston, Goss, Fox, Power, Newman, Beckford, Ullathorne.
Arsenal: Seaman; O'Leary, Lydersen, Hillier, Bould, Adams, Rocastle, Wright, Campbell, Merson, Limpar.
Soccer: Fortune favours Forest
By Christopher Davies
Southampton 0 Nottingham Forest 1 CARL TILER'S first goal for Nottingham Forest since his £1.4 million move from Barnsley last summer gave Brian Clough's side an undeserved win over Southampton last night.
It completed a mini double for Forest over Southampton — they also defeated them in the ZDS final at Wembley the Sunday before last.
But for long periods at The Dell they appeared to be preoccupied by Sunday's Rumbelow's Cup final against Manchester United.
Their play lacked bite and they did not manage a shot at goal until Clough's attempt in the 62nd minute.
The decisive goal came in the 75th minute when Tiler swept in Crosby's right-wing centre.
Southampton should have registered a club record seventh successive League win but failed to turn their general superiority into goals.
Dowie and Moore peppered the Forest goal with headers while Marriott frustrated Hurlock with a superb one-handed save from his 25-yard shot.
Southampton: Flowers; Kenna, Benali, Adams, Moore, Ruddock, Powell, Cockerill (Maddison 81), Shearer, Dowie, Hurlock.
Nottingham Forest: Marriott; Laws, Williams, Walker (Glover 45), Wassall, Keane, Crosby, Gemmill, Clough, Sheringham, Tiler.
Soccer: Ferguson set to leave Robson out of cup final Colin Gibson on Manchester United's priority to win the League championship for the first time in 25 years
By COLIN GIBSON
ALEX FERGUSON, the Manchester United manager, is ready to leave Bryan Robson out of Sunday's Rumbelows Cup final against Nottingham Forest in an attempt to secure his club's first League championship trophy in 25 years.
Robson, 35, has been struggling with a recurrence of a calf injury and missed the explosive Manchester derby at Old Trafford on Tuesday.
But it was the evidence of that 1–1 draw against City that persuaded Mr Ferguson that Robson is crucial to United's title challenge.
While doing everything they can to make sure Robson is available for the final against Brian Clough's team at Wembley, United will take no risks with their captain's fitness.
‘Robson has a clot on the calf muscle and we are giving him some fitness routines in the gymnasium in the hope of clearing it,’ said Mr Ferguson yesterday.
‘He is also having intensive treatment in the hope that he will be able to train on Friday.
We will then look at him on Saturday to see if there is a reaction.
‘But there is no question of us risking him against Forest if he is not 100 per cent fit.
We want him available for Thursday,’ added the United manager.
United play their next League match on Thursday next week, against Southampton, and Mr Ferguson will be hoping for a less frenzied atmosphere than the one in which Manchester City's Neil Pointon was sent off on Tuesday.
Had Robson's calming influence been available to United against their neighbours, then they may not have lost their composure and the chance to move four points clear of Leeds.
Mr Ferguson felt United were in control until Pointon was dismissed for a crude lunge at United's goalscorer, Ryan Giggs, in the 55th minute of the derby.
‘It was when City had their man sent off that we really needed Robbo's experience.
He would have settled us down and kept us calm, and there is no doubt that we would have won,’ said Mr Ferguson.
Robson, a contender for the Football Writers' Association Player of the Year award, has played in only two of United's last five matches but his contribution has been significant.
Paul Parker, United's England defender who has also been missing through injury, hopes to prove his fitness for the Rumbelows Cup final in a reserve game against Sheffield United at Bramall Lane this evening.
Parker has not played in United's last five matches after picking up a hamstring strain on March 14.
One player who will definitely not be playing at Wembley is United's England Under-21 international, Mark Robins, who yesterday went into hospital for a cartilage operation.
Peter Reid, the Manchester City manager, yesterday tried to take some of the heat out of the aftermath of the derby by defending Pointon, who became the first player to be sent off in this series of fixtures since 1974.
‘There is not a vicious bone in Pointon's body,’ said Mr Reid.
‘His tackle was mistimed.
He did not know until later that he had fouled Giggs.’
The Football Association will wait until they receive the report of match referee Joe Worrall before deciding whether to take action over the mass confrontation which took place after Pointon's tackle.
Ken Bates today hopes to end his 10-year struggle to secure Chelsea's future at Stamford Bridge.
Under an Appeal Court ruling, Chelsea have until tonight to meet Cabra's asking price of £22.85 million for the ground or face possible winding-up procedings.
However, the Chelsea chairman was last night locked in delicate negotiations with John Duggan, the chairman of Cabra Estates, whose subsidiary, SB Properties, own the site.
Under the deal which the two sides were considering, Chelsea would still be required to offer Third Division Fulham a permanent home when they leave Craven Cottage.
Fulham must find a new ground by the end of next season but there had been indications that they might be prepared to quit their Thames riverside site at the end of this season.
If the deal is accepted, Fulham will share Stamford Bridge with Chelsea, paying in excess of £13 million for the ground while the £5 million Cabra owe Fulham will be waived.
It seemed both sides were optimistic last night that an agreement could be reached.
The two sides were brought together with the help of high-powered intermediaries who are keen to end the dispute.
Senior politicians, key property figures and leading City merchant banks have all taken part in the talks.
Bowls: Brackley triumph after marathon
By Donald Newby
BRACKLEY, the Northants club represented by Ray Gaskins and England bowlers Gary Harrington and Ted Hanger, took the triples title at the Manchester Unity National Indoor Championships at Melton Mowbray yesterday after their second marathon match in as many days.
They took 4½ hours to beat Chris Palmer, John Thurlbeck and John Leeman from the Co Durham club, Stanley, 19–11.
The previous day they had been on the green 5¼ hours to out-bowl Paddington.
Such long stints on the carpet are due to the consistency of leading players, whose skill is such they cancel each other out.
With 18 bowls delivered on each of 18 ends, this is pronounced in triples.
In this game strong-arm tactics were deployed by both sides to kill five ends and force replays.
Both Hanger and Leeman broke up heads with the Stanley skip being obliged to do so more often — largely due to the continuing accuracy of Harrington, the Brackley No 2.
Hanger was also well supported by his lead, Ray Gaskins who vied in drawing to the jack with his opposite number, new international Palmer.
Stanley kept in contention in the first half of the game but came to grief on the 11th end when they dropped a five.
They never recovered as Brackley rolled bowl after bowl into the head.
Leeman plugged away with constant strikes and both his colleagues joined in on the 17th end when continued Brackley accuracy brought the game to a premature conclusion.
Gary Smith, defending the pairs title, made progress skipping Brian Vickers in the absence of his Cyphers Beckenham partner Andy Thomson.
Also in the hunt in this competition is his World Indoor titleholder Tony Allcock and his partner Andrew Wills from Bentham.
Triples final: Brackley (R Gaskins, G Harrington, E Hanger) 19, Stanley (C Palmer, J Thurlbeck, J Leeman) 11.
Andy Thomson who, only three weeks ago, added the British Indoor singles and pairs championships to his growing list of titles, moved outdoors with equally devastating effect yesterday to sweep the world indoor champion, Ian Schuback, to a 21–9 defeat in the opening match of the Mazda International at the Tweed Heads Club on Australia's Gold Coast.
But the other British hope, Port Talbot's John Price, was on the receiving end of a similar scoreline from Brisbane's Rob Parrella.
Thomson's win came mainly due to his ability to handle the windy conditions better than Schuback, who managed just two counts on the opening 10 ends.
MAZDA INT'L (Queensland Gold Coast).
-Section A: P Belliss (NZ) 21, I Taylor (Australia) 10-D Katunarich (Australia) 21, E Bonutto (Australia) 3.
Section B: A Thomson (England) 21, I Schuback (Australia) 9-R Parrella (Australia) 21, J Price (Wales) 9.
Golf: Faldo in the mood to take third title
By MICHAEL WILLIAMS
NICK FALDO, with what appears to be a perfectly-timed run into his very best form, looks like being the man to beat in the Masters, which begins at Augusta National today.
His main threat could well be America's present No 1, Fred Couples.
At a time of fluctuations in world rankings, it is rash to think that the destiny of the famous green jacket is in the hands of only two players, but there is no doubt at all that — as far as Couples is concerned —‘the United States expects’.
It is now five years since Larry Mize chipped in to beat Greg Norman in a play-off, America's last victory.
In quick succession, Sandy Lyle, Faldo twice and then, last year, Ian Woosnam came riding in on the crest of a British tidal wave.
At much the same time the Ryder Cup was also being knocked from the United States' grasp.
Now they have got their hands on it again and in Couples, the runaway leader in their money list, they see the man to restore their pride.
As Tom Watson has said, however, the Masters is far from being an ‘us against them’ tournament.
The players themselves have no thoughts of flying any national colours.
This is the first of the year's four major championships, still in many ways marking the official start of the season — for all the tournaments that have preceded it.
Faldo, perhaps above all, will be hoping to turn over a new leaf.
He did not do himself justice in 1991, never getting his timing right in his early-season preparations any more than he did on the golf course.
Throughout the summer he was playing ‘catch-up’— though he never did.
This year he seems to have got it just about right.
He began early, in Bangkok and then Dubai, had a week's work-out with David Leadbetter in Orlando and then followed it with four straight tournaments coming into the Masters.
His placings were 17th, missed the cut, second and sixth.
It is in these past two weeks that Faldo has been putting the last pieces into place.
He was the leading European in both the Players' Championship and at New Orleans — and even he admits he has not felt so confident since he approached the St Andrews Open of 1990, which he won.
That is saying something and, indeed, there are those closer to him who suggest that he really believes he has got the ball ‘on a piece of string’ at the moment, but hardly dares to say so in case it tempts fate.
Faldo has the invaluable experience of having won twice at Augusta.
Should he make it three out of four, that would set a record unmatched even by Jack Nicklaus, despite his six victories between 1963 and 1986.
Couples, on the other hand, has finished no higher than fifth on his eight appearances, though he has gone all four rounds in each.
At the age of 32, he has yet to win a major championship.
Nevertheless, I marked him down, with Paul Azinger, as one of two Americans most likely to break through finally this year.
His present form is even better than Faldo's.
Couples had the lowest stroke average of 1991 (69.52) and this year has won both the Los Angeles and Bay Hill tournaments, been second twice, third once, sixth, 13th, 16th and 25th.
In 36 rounds he is 122 under par.
His secret weapon has been a three-wood he first used last June.
It is a very strong club but Couples, a naturally powerful striker, drives with it 270 yards or so, and is equally happy with it off the fairway.
The attendant fuss which comes with his being the most likely American to succeed this week is not something to which he takes readily.
He is too relaxed for all the questions with which he is being bombarded, and full of wonder at how golfers such as Nicklaus and Watson have coped with it for all these years.
Last week Couples left his clubs in the bag, relaxed and watched basketball, of which he is a great fan.
All he is concentrating on now is his first-round score.
This is his favourite event, together with the Open — an event where he is as surprised as he is flattered by the support he gets from the British public.
Couples is a naturally high flighter of the ball and that, together with his length, is an advantage at Augusta, particularly since everyone seems to agree that the greens are firmer than they have been for years.
Control is therefore going to be important around the greens and for that reason Severiano Ballesteros should be in with a good chance.
His driving apparently is still not all it might be, but his short game and putting are very good and that is where scores are salvaged as well as made.
Thirty five today, there would be no better birthday present than the sort of start he has made each time he won here — a 66 in 1980 and a 68 in 1983.
Jose-Maria Olazabal, who arrived in the US as an undoubted front-runner after finishing second to Woosnam last year, had a bad time last week in New Orleans, finishing right at the back of the field.
But it is worth bearing in mind that he is a fine iron player and, until his seven at the 10th hole in the third round of the Players' Championship, he was jointly leading the field.
Woosnam's chances look more remote, though he is undoubtedly happier now that Phil Ritson, a South African coach, spotted a technical fault in his swing and has put him back on what he feels are the right lines.
However, his putting has also troubled him and his first objective is to make the cut, which Ballesteros failed to do the year after both his victories.
Woosnam names Bernhard Langer as his ‘dark horse’ and the German has succeeded in keeping an appropriately low profile even if he has had more practice rounds than anyone.
Reluctantly, I give Sandy Lyle little chance, not helped by his wife (a non-golfer) caddying for him, while David Feherty, Steve Richardson, Colin Montgomerie and Gary Wolstenholme will be hoping just to do their best; the top 24, giving an automatic place next year, is probably their aim.
Ian Baker-Finch and Craig Parry are contenders for a first Australian victory, while Watson and Mark O'Meara and Raymond Floyd spring to mind of the other Americans.
John Daly — who knows?
Can Augusta be tamed by just brute force, by a first-timer?