

Wheelchair racers told to slow down
By Jeremy Bacon and Alastair McCall
WHEELCHAIR competitors in Sunday's London Marathon have been told that instead of going for personal best times they must take at least one hour and 50 minutes to complete the course.
The ruling, primarily intended as a safety measure, could lead to a widespread boycott by disabled entrants.
Nine of the world's top wheelchair racers due to take part have best times up to 18 minutes inside the restriction.
Three foreign entrants have already withdrawn and a meeting tomorrow of the British Wheelchair Racing Association could call for a boycott by all British competitors.
The 61 entrants were informed of the limit last week.
Sponsors ADT and the British Sports Association for the Disabled said it was necessary because of safety problems, chiefly involving the timing of road closures.
It is also hoped it will avoid the much faster wheelchairs catching the elite women runners — who start five minutes earlier — at an early point where they are running as a group and hard to pass.
The disabled racers will be kept behind motorcycle escorts until the last mile to prevent them reaching roads before they close.
Mr Stan Eldon, chairman of the organising committee for the wheelchair event, said in a letter to competitors: ‘At no time must you overtake these escorting motorcycles.
‘If any competitor goes around the course at a speed that is likely to give a faster than 1hr 50min finish time there will be real problems and it is likely that wheelchairs will be excluded from future London marathons.’
Jean Francois Poitevin, who finished third last year and has a best time of 1:32:22, has pulled out in protest.
‘It's not a marathon race, it is just a sprint,’ he said in Paris last night.
‘I have been training, and I do not go to the London marathon for sightseeing.
‘We are obliged to enter four months before the race, and then we receive this one week before.
It is not fair.’
Mr David Todd, secretary of the wheelchair racing association, said the limit was ‘farcical’.
He added: ‘Nobody enjoys taking part in any sport which is restricted and, in effect, this will be a one-mile marathon.’
England's best hope is David Holding, 23, the 1989 winner.
He said: ‘It will change people's tactics.
It's an interference.
These guys at the front are professionals and it's stopping the professional side of wheelchair racing coming out.
‘If for any reason the runners were able to go faster than us in the marathon, I'm sure they would organise it differently for them.’
Mr Alan Storey, race director, expressed surprise at the anger of wheelchair participants.
He said: ‘The situation was explained to them and they agreed to take part.
Certainly there was no question of putting them under any duress and no one said there was a problem.’
The wheelchair record for the London marathon is 1:52:52, but speeds are rising.
British flourish at Dutch floral show
By Fred Whitsey, Gardening Correspondent
CURRENT fashion in British gardening is illustrated among the gardens from 30 nations exhibited at the Floriade at The Hague, the dazzling horticulture show held in Holland only once every decade, which was opened by Queen Beatrix yesterday and will run for seven months.
The British garden, corporately mounted by the horticultural trade and partly sponsored by Marks & Spencer, has herbaceous borders in a rainbow sequence above a low matrix of white-flowered ground coverers.
An orangery filled with conservatory plants overlooks placid lawns and a fountain rising from a raised pool.
Roses clamber over arches, and hollies and beech hedges are strategically set out to tease the eye and multiply the number of views.
The Dutch genius as master plant showmen as well as growers has its most lavish expression in the 200 acres of the show, 25 under cover, in which 35,000 different varieties of plants are used.
More than a million bulbs have been planted and half a million annuals will succeed them for the summer.
Bulbs of the future which are on show include daffodils of the ‘split corona’ or ‘butterfly’type with double cups so heavily ruffled as to obscure their identity.
Growers are also presenting new races of the pointed lily-flowered and fringed parrot tulips reduced from their lanky stature to good border plants.
Large-scale production will take 10 years.
New lilies that will soon enter the fast expanding cut-flower trade have still richer red colourings, and new freesias appear in violet and brick-red tones.
Three-tier planting is demonstrated, using shrubs, non-staking herbaceous plants rising from a carpet of non-invasive weed-excluding ground coverers.
Vegetable and fruit growing under polythene covering and the conservation of the environment and energy are two of the show's dominant themes.
Another is the exploitation of marsh-tolerant species of plants, both in cultivation and in the wild.
In the educational section is a display illustrating the history of gardens through six centuries.
The rose gardens demonstrate the use of carpeting varieties and of the miniature kinds as tub plants.
Fishermen fight war of the worms
By Colin Wright
SEASIDE anglers are fighting territorial battles to preserve their supplies of lugworms.
The bait is becoming increasingly scarce as many beaches are designated conservation areas.
Fishermen, refusing to pay up to £36 for 300, are scouring the coast for places to dig.
But many have been chased away by local anglers and cars have been vandalised to deter poachers.
The battle was revealed yesterday by Mr Alan Rodmell after he and three friends were fined £50 each for digging for worms on the protected Budle Bay, Lindisfarne, off the coast of Northumberland.
Mr Rodmell, 36, a former policeman, of Strawberry Gardens, Wallsend, Newcastle; John Wright, 32, of Ridley Avenue, Wallsend; Colin Hutton, 46, and Andrew Hutton, 35, both from Horsham Grove, North Shields, had denied the charge at Alnwick magistrates' court.
They had claimed containers of worms found in their car had been dug in an unprotected area elsewhere and that they had stopped at the bay to gather mussels.
After the hearing Mr Rodmell, said: ‘Great swathes of beach are being taken in and put under the banner of Sites of Special Scientific Interest, which makes things very difficult for us when we need bait.
‘I know people who travel way out of the area to dig for worms and they end up having their vehicles smashed by other anglers.
‘It is amazingly expensive.
It can cost £36 to buy 300 worms which, when you don't have a job, makes a big difference.
I can easily use 200 worms in one session.’
Mr Martyn Howart, North East regional site manager for English Nature, said it was vital that worms were protected to preserve feeding grounds for birds.
‘We allow worm digging where it doesn't seriously conflict with the nature conservation objectives near the causeway.
But we are determined that bait digging will not take place on Budle Bay and we will rigorously protect it,’ he said.
Mr Mel Russ, editor of Sea Angler magazine, said: ‘A lot of anglers are on low incomes and many are unemployed.
It is cheaper for them to get a garden fork and go out digging for their own.’
£100,000 campaign for Easter turkeys
By Elizabeth Williamson
CHICKEN sales are expected to be at least double those of turkey this Easter and in an attempt to close the gap, the British Turkey Federation are spending £100,000 on a national press campaign stressing ‘British turkey get's everyone's vote’.
Tesco will be among the cheapest places to buy fresh turkey.
Prices will be down from £1.19 to 98p lb from next Monday).
At Waitrose turkeys will be 99p lb (free range £1.89 lb).
An increasingly popular choice for small families are the prepared roasts such as Marks & Spencer's turkey breast with chestnut stuffing which feeds 4–6 (£8.42) or the butter-basted turkey breast for three, £4.25.
Medium size Dover sole for £4 lb are the cheapest prime fish this weekend.
Supplies of sea trout, known as sewin in Wales, are increasing and bringing down prices to around £5 lb.
Friday Matters: IN SHORT 
BY SARAH FOOT
Finishing school DECORATIVE painters James Kerr and Alistair Erskine, whose commissions include work at St James's Palace and for the Duke and Duchess of Buccleuch, are sharing their skills.
They have recently introduced two one-day courses: an Introduction to Decorative Paint Finishes covers dragging and stippling, as well as colourwashing and sponging; an Introduction to Painted Furniture covers the basic techniques of antiquing, simple faux finishes and preparation.
Prices are £65 and £75 including lunch and all materials.
Details from Kerr & Erskine, 153 Leathwaite Road, London SW11, tel: 071–228 9436.
Paper pastime CHILDREN who grow bored over the Easter holidays can transform themselves into dinosaurs at London's Natural History Museum.
Artist David Swinton specialises in paper sculpture and will be showing children how to make a mask of a triceratops.
From April 21–23; there will be two one-and-a-half hour workshops at 11 am and 2 pm.
Places are free but numbers are limited to 25.
Details from the Natural History Museum, Cromwell Road, London SW7, tel: 071–938 9123.
At the Tate Gallery, five to 13 year olds are encouraged to play detective to find the hidden details in paintings.
April 13, 15, 22 and 23 at 11 am.
Details from the Tate Gallery, Millbank, London SW1, tel: 071–821 1313.
Something old IF YOU would like to wear a Victorian veil at your wedding, the Royal School of Needlework has 12 for hire.
Predominantly mid- to late-Victorian they are in Limerick, Honiton and tambour lace.
The veils are cleaned and tinted to match the colour of each dress — the process does not harm the lace.
From £65 to £150 per week; details from the Royal School of Needlework, Apartment 12a, Hampton Court Palace, East Molesey, Surrey, tel: 081–943 1432.
Easter alternative AS AN alternative to chocolate eggs, try a simnel cake, said to be an Easter favourite since the time of Edward the Confessor.
Simnel means fine flour and the cake is densely packed with almond paste, currants, citrus peel and spices.
Price £14.50 for 1 kg cake, £18.50 for 1.5kg cake.
Details from Meg Rivers Cakes, Middle Tysoe, Warwickshire, tel: 0295 688101.
Victorian victuals VISITORS to the Westminster Antiques Fair will be able to learn how to cook in a recreated Victorian kitchen, and taste a selection of cakes, biscuits, ice creams, sorbets and other delicacies from the era.
Veronica Shaw of Veronica's Restaurant, London W2, will be demonstrating and giving away recipes at the Horticultural Old Hall, Westminster, from April 30-May 3rd, admission £4.
Details from Penman Antiques Fairs, P.O. Box 114, Haywards Heath, Sussex; tel: 0444 482514.
Letter to the Editor: Tie is staying in place well
SIR — In answer to Martyn Harris's recent suggestion that the tie was a passing fashion fad, may I point out that on March 30 the tie celebrated its 106th birthday, and its popularity is as high as ever.
The Guild of British Tie Makers has carried out extensive research into tie wearing and has discovered that, far from being viewed as a current trend, the tie is considered an essential item in a man's wardrobe.
For the vast majority of men, smart dress for business or formal occasions demands a tie and an outfit appears incomplete without one.
Many fashions such as the kipper tie and the string tie have come and gone, and in recent years there has been an upsurge in the popularity of vivid colours and flamboyant designs.
But there are no signs of flagging.
‘Tieless in Soho’ is only a passing fad — not the tie.
I would suggest that it is the ‘tieless in Soho’ fashion among designers and actors that is a passing phase.
GERRY SOLOMONS Esher, Surrey
CHESS
Untitled Martin sharing the lead
By Malcolm Pein, Chess Correspondent
BEN MARTIN'S incredible run has continued in rounds seven and eight of the Netway Masters in Auckland, New Zealand.
The untitled New Zealander, rated 2320 (345 points lower than top seed Tony Miles of England) has seven points from eight games and shares the lead with Miles and the other grandmaster in the tournament, Ian Rogers of Australia.
The trio scored 6/6 between them in rounds seven and eight and are carving up the rest of the field, none of whom has more than 50 per cent.
Round 7 results: Garbett 0–1 Miles; Small 0–1 Sarfati; Sarapu 0–1 Wallace; Martin 1–0 Dreyer; Noble draw Metge; Levi 0–1 Rogers.
Round 8: Dreyer 0–1 Levi; Garbett 0–1 Martin; Metge 0–1 Sarapu; Wallace 0–1 Small; Rogers 1–0 Noble; Miles 1–0 Sarfati.
Scores after 8 rounds: Miles, Martin and Rogers 7/8; Levi Garbett and Sarfati 4; Small 3.5; Noble 3; Dreyer 2; Sarapu and Wallace 2.5; Metge 1.5.
Bayern Munich are the first team to have qualified for the European Club Cup final after overcoming remarkably tough resistance from Hapoel Tel Aviv.
The Israelis, fielding five international masters and two FIDE masters against Bayern's six grandmasters, went down by the narrow margin of 7–5 after IM Leonid Zaid (a recent arrival from the USSR and one of the few men alive with a plus score against Kasparov) shocked the Germans by defeating Kindermann and Bischoff.
IM Svidler drew with grandmasters Ribli and Hjartarson and IM Gelfer drew with grandmasters Bonsch and Hjartarson.
Bayern won the match on the lower boards, where the Israeli teenagers Kogan and Zoler scored 0/3.
Boxing: Wharton in line for big purse
By Ken Mays
HENRY WHARTON set up the biggest fight in Yorkshire for years when he successfully defended his Commonwealth super-middleweight title by stopping Australian Rod Carr in eight rounds at Leeds Town Hall on Wednesday.
Wharton has a big-money fight with Sheffield's Fidel Castro, formerly Slugger O'Toole, with his title and Castro's British title on the line, after producing awesome punching that cut Carr, put him down for an eight count and forced referee Dave Parris step in after 2min 7sec.
Mickey Duff, Wharton's manager, said: ‘Wharton is the most exciting fighter that has been seen in Yorkshire and Castro is a good fighter.
This will generate a lot of money — we are talking in figures of £150,000 at least.’
Mr Duff has looked at four possible open air venues but is likely to settle for one end of the Headlingley rugby pitch with 2,000 seats around the ring and the use of the stand.
While Duff has designs on a European title for Wharton, his fighter must sort out the problem of appearing to lose interest as he did against Carr when he went to ‘sleep’ in the fifth and sixth rounds and was in danger of losing.
Wharton said: ‘It is something that I must overcome, I had trained for 12 rounds and was thinking of the crowd instead of doing the job I was in the ring to do.’
Britain's world cruiserweight title challenger, Johnny Nelson, of Sheffield, will travel to America for his IBF championship clash with James Warring on May 2.
The fight will take place in Fredericksburg, near Washington.
It was postponed in Paris in January because the American champion was injured.
The European Boxing Union have ruled that Frenchman Jean-Baptiste Mendy can keep his European lightweight title following a row over a dope test which never took place.
He won the crown in Paris last month when he beat Italian champion Antonio Renzo.
LEEDS.
— 12rds C'wealth super-middleweight ch'ship: Henry Wharton (York) bt Rod Carr (Melbourne) rsf 8th. 6rds light-middle: Charlie Moore (Darlington) bt Steve Thomas (Merthyr) rsf 3rd. 8rds feather: Tony Silkstone (Leeds) bt Eddie Cook (Larkhall) pts. 8rds light-heavy: Michael Gale (Leeds) bt Tony Booth (Sheffield) pts. 6rds welter: Steve Howden (Sheffield) bt Ron Hopley (Ripon) pts. 6rds bantam: Jacob Smith (Darlington) bt Andy Bloomer (Ynysybwl) pts.
Racing: Big Leap is Best of Day
By Course Correspondent
BIG LEAP*, who made a successful reappearance in a 21-runner field at Doncaster last month, is napped to follow up in today's Stroud Green Handicap (4.10) at Newbury.
Mohammed Moubarak's gelding was always travelling smoothly and quickened in fine style to beat today's opponent Eastleigh by two and a half lengths.
Eastleigh is now 5lb better off but he went to Doncaster with the benefit of three all-weather runs this year, and Big Leap, having only the third race of his career there, should confirm the form.
Most opposition to Big Leap may come from the Henry Cecil-trained top-weight Sharp Prince, who won nicely on his debut at Chepstow in October and is probably open to improvement.
Sabre Rattler, a beaten hot favourite on each of his first two starts, may make it third-time-lucky in the EBF Beckhampton Maiden Stakes (2.10).
Jack Berry's colt, backed from 6–4 to 13–8 on before finishing third to Touch Silver in the Brocklesby Stakes at Doncaster, then ruined his chance with a slow start when going under by half a length to Key To My Heart at Hamilton Park last time.
Martin Fetherston-Godley's Macfarlane is fancied for the Newbury Trade Stands Handicap (3.40) and Brooke Sanders' Crabby Bill may be good enough off 7st 7lb in the Thatcham Handicap (4.40).
Crabby Bill, who has been running well in all-weather hurdle races at Lingfield Park — winning twice — made a satisfactory Flat comeback at Kempton Park.
Speedway: Dugard is aiming to impress
By Barry Alcock
ENGLAND launch their three-Test series against Australia at Oxford tonight with Martin Dugard, one of their most experienced riders at 22, anxious to prove a point on his home track.
Dugard, who has been an international for five years, lines up in an experimental team against an Australian side weakened by injury.
‘I was very disappointed with my season last year,’ he said.
‘I want to put myself on the map and this Test is a good chance to start doing it.’
England are led by new captain Gary Havelock, of Bradford, with Poole's Marvyn Cox, returning to his former track, their oldest rider at 27.
Simon Cross, the England international and Cradley Heath captain, begins his World Championship comeback after 13 months out with a back injury in Monday's British quarter-final at Exeter.
Dane Ole Olsen, winner of three world titles in the 1970s, and American Bruce Penhall, who landed the 1981 and 1982 crowns, will meet in three special match races in Rick Miller's testimonial meeting at Coventry on Sunday.
Talking TV Sport: BBC engineers armchair joy in election
By PAUL FOX
AFTER a week's exposure to American television's sports coverage it was a relief to watch television at home.
What a remarkable weekend it was.
BBC engineers enabled millions of viewers to share six hours of marvellous sport.
The reason I single out the engineers rather than the commentators or the producers is that they ensured the best pictures of the University Boat Race ever seen, as well as the usual smooth coverage of the Grand National.
The ability to field 15 outside broadcast units plus two helicopters in the middle of the General Election campaign underlines the BBC's strength.
There are not many broadcasters who could undertake four major outside broadcasts like these within 24 hours.
It was a triumph to see the Grand National from so many angles — far better than being there — to have the camera on the winning boat, to watch the two FA Cup semi-finals, one after the other, and to round off the day with Nigel Mansell's win in the Brazilian Grand Prix.
To share this experience with 10, 12, 15 million other viewers — the figures are still uncertain — was a joy.
The BBC made Sunday a special occasion by shunting On The Record with the party leaders to BBC2, and showing the EastEnders omnibus edition in the morning.
In addition to those who backed Party Politics at 14–1 there was one other big winner: the Tote.
Lord Wyatt, the chairman, was about the only one not interviewed in two inserts that must have delighted the Tote's public relations people.
It is a minor quibble from a splendid weekend.
THERE is another festival of sport this Sunday but it requires some channel switching.
BBC1 have the London Marathon in the morning, starting at 8.55am, then it's over to ITV in the afternoon for the Rumbelow's League Cup final between Manchester United and Nottingham Forest, and in the evening BBC2 give more than three hours to the closing stages of the US Masters from Augusta.
Another three major sporting events, another day in the armchair.
Thanks to the League Cup final on ITV we will be spared, this week at least, another look at the European version of American football.
While there may be some interest in this at Wembley, the sight of the empty Barcelona stadium last Sunday showed that the Spaniards have better things to do.
Channel 4 have shown that women's soccer has a bigger audience than American football.
In any case, the result of the Barcelona match was in the Sunday papers.
A sensible sharing arrangement between the BBC and Sky ensures that Monday's FA Cup semi-final replay between Liverpool and Portsmouth will be shown live on Sky with the highlights on BBC1 from 10.10pm to 11pm.
This gives me the chance to have a last word on the World Cricket Cup final.
Sky's live coverage of England v Pakistan had an audience of just over 300,000, the BBC's highlight programme at 10pm had an audience of 5.8 million.
Sky's highlight programme early in the evening was seen by 166,000.
The evidence that the television arrangements were bungled is incontrovertible.
WHATEVER happens in the General Election, sport deserves a more effective voice.
The parties have made promises along these lines.
But this leaves out sports followers.
Such topics as sport's role in the national lottery, the ban on tobacco advertising, the new horse racing authority and the inability to produce British tennis players are issues that should be debated in a sensible forum.
There is a perfectly good way of doing so on television.
Some months ago I suggested that this could be done in a new version of Question Time.
Sadly it has come to nothing.
The coverage of live sport on our screens is usually good; at times exceptional, but television fails to deal with some of the things that matter in sport: all-seat football stadiums, Manchester's application for the Olympic Games in the year 2000, payment in Rugby Union.
These are issues from which the sporting public is excluded other than in a weekly letters column.
People rightly sound off about politics on television and the last two weeks have shown how sharp and articulate they are.
It's time for sports followers to be given their say.
Golf: Like father like son as Palmer is left behind
By IAN RIDLEY
ALL seems right with the world and you are sure God is in His Heaven when the sun shines on the first morning of a major sporting event.
The more so at Augusta, the arrival of which each year seems to signal the happy end of winter hibernation.
The grass is greener than in a commercial for lawn-mowers; something, as at a Test match or at Wimbldeon, hangs in the air or on the hum of the crowd's voice.
It is called optimism.
Wickets have not yet fallen, double faults have not yet been served, bogeys have not yet been made.
By 9.30am yesterday morning, an hour after 90-year-old Gene Sarazen had bisected the first fairway with an open-ceremonial drive, a stain of sweat was already running down the spine of Gary Wolstenholme's golf shirt as he tried to make head and tail of the practice putting green.
A smile was rarely leaving the face of the Amateur champion, a 31-year-old member of the Bristol and Clifton club who works in a solicitor's ofice specialising in debt recovery.
Inside, it was a different matter.
‘It was the most I have ever felt nerves,’ he was later to say.
It was an improvement on last week when he arrived at the place, though.
‘I was about as low as I could be.
I was frightened to death.
I thought I would shoot 80 or 81.’
Instead Wolstenholme should have shot 70 or 71 but finished with a creditable par 72, which included no fewer than five birdies.
He was even joint top of an embryonic leader board in the morning.
‘This is just the most inspiring place,’ he said.
The inspiration began when he stepped on to the tee five minutes early, just taking it all in.
His playing partner, someone called Arnold Palmer, arrived only two minutes before the appointed time with a a veteran's aplomb.
‘I played with your father,’ said the four-times champion by way of introduction to the young man whose dad, Guy, was an accomplished professional.
Forget Lloyd George: Arnold Palmer played with my father.
Indeed my father beat him.
For Guy won a play-off for the Victorian Open in Australia between the two in 1978 at the third extra hole.
Having played a practice round with Nicklaus on Wednesday and been trailed by Jack's Pack, today it was Arnie's Army.
It may be more of Home Guard proportions these days, but it retains its enthusiasm.
Having smilingly watched Palmer acknowledge his footsoldiers, then go through a practice swing that bears little relation to the actual flurry and flourish, Wolstenholme's start was nervy, understandably, and inauspicious.
The drive was some 30 yards behind Palmer's, though as a short hitter he would be frequently so.
Three putts meant an opening bogey.
He just could not stop himself smiling, though.
Then he was smiled upon.
At the par-five second, his third shot hit the pin and dropped to two feet.
He promptly holed the putt.
Another birdie came at the third as he holed from 15 feet, up then down hill, beyond the pin.
Then he made his third three at the seventh, playing a nine-iron to four feet and holing the putt.
The same route gave him another birdie at the eighth.
Suddenly he was three under par, sharing the lead.
Suddenly there were more red figures, indicating below-par scores, against his name than Peter Snow has at his command in an election studio.
Now those Palmer followers asking, not really surprisingly, ‘who the hell is this guy,’ were being answered.
Perhaps the enormity of what he was doing got to him — the difference, perhaps between hardened professional and gifted amateur — or perhaps it was simply that the holes became too tough for him.
Either way, he was caught through Amen Corner.
There was a three-putted bogey at the 10th, a pushed four-wood caused another at the 11th and a similar shot was punished at the 13th as he slipped back to level par.
Thereafter he did well to hold the round together, being helped by Palmer's improvement which included him holing a 75ft putt for a two in a first-round 75.
Wolstenholme even chipped in from 25ft at the 17th for a three.
A missed downhill three-footer at the 18th denied him a red round.
He had practiced putting on his kitchen floor at home during the winter to try and prepare himself for the greens.
‘I did think until today that the kitchen floor was slightly quicker,’ he said.
Then he reached the first green of the tournament proper — rather than the first green of the practice rounds.
The bogey on the last scarcely undermined Wolstenholme's excitement, however.
‘This is reward for many years of hard work, for all the perseverance and the lonely nights,’ he said as he sat on the terrace of the clubhouse revelling in the atmosphere and attention of a successful first round.
The week is costing him around £800, but he is helped by discounted food and drink bills at Augusta and the reduced cost of staying with local people.
‘One thing that is making it more expensive is getting souvenirs in the pro's shop,’ he said.
Caddying for him was his boss, David Powell, a scratch player himself and former Gloucestershire captain.
That ought to be worth a bonus, a debt Wolstenholme could recover.
Then again, you cannot put a price on what Augusta had to offer yesterday morning.
Golf: Cooper's hot irons forge a lead link
By Lewine Mair in La Moye, Jersey
DERRICK COOPER, hitting one sharp iron after another through the hazy morning air, handed in a 66 — six under par — to share the lead with Keith Waters and Barry Lane going into the second round of the Jersey European Airways Open.
Cooper won the 1988 Madrid Open and finished in the top 20 on the money-list the following year.
There were then two lean seasons before suddenly he had another taste of victory in the recent Sunningdale Foursomes.
His resurgence is something he puts down to his coach, Bob Torrance.
‘I knew,’ said Cooper, signalling in the direction of the top of his backswing, ‘that there was something wrong up there.’
But he was somewhat taken aback to learn that it was a severe case of overswinging.
Cooper, who has lopped six to nine inches off his action, made four birdies in his last six holes, with his four at the long 16th the proverbial whisker away from a three.
Where Cooper has been taking instruction on board, Waters has been tossing it aside.
John Allsop, the sports psychologist who travels the tour, has advised ‘Forget technique; think only of hitting the ball.’
Lane, for his part, is thinking, longingly, of high winds.
Last week, in finishing second behind Jose-Maria Canizares in the Rome Open, he returned ‘a 66 in a gale’, while his Scottish Open win of 1988 was similarly forged in wind-tossed conditions.
Though Mark James is not your obvious candidate to flourish in a pro-am format, with rounds taking 5½ hours, yesterday's sunshine stretched his tolerance level.
Round in 67, he was irritated only by the fact that he had left it too late to play a postal part in the election.
‘The Greens will have to do without my vote,’ said he, wryly, in a comment which was maybe a more accurate reflection of his views on the putting surfaces.
Lane, by way of having a metaphorical dig at the greens, would later speak of how the 20-footer he needed for the outright lead had looked ‘good in the air.’
There have been accidents aplenty on this cluttered but charming course.
Yesterday, James's pro-am partner was hit on the shoulder, while Andrew Chandler was caught in the neck by a Peter Smith drive.
As for Willie Aitchison, who was felled by a ball on the knee on Wednesday, this game old caddie was having no difficulty in going along with the hospital's recommendations.
Namely, that he should walk on the injured limb.
Scotland maintained their unbroken record of success against Italy in men's amateur golf when they completed a 12–6 victory at Gullane yesterday.
Scottish champion Graham Lowson was the outstanding performer, winning all four of his matches, while Walker Cup member Garry Hay and Scottish youths champion Dean Robertson won three apiece.
MEN'S AMATEUR INT'NAL (Gullane, East Lothian).
— Scotland 12, Italy 6 (overnight: Scotland led 6½–2½): Foursomes: G Lowson (Auchterarder) & D Robertson (Cochrane Castle) bt L Flori & M Severa 2 & 1; W Bryson (Drumpellier) and C Watson (East Renfrewshire) lost to M Aragnetti & L Bernardini 2 & 1; J Milligan (Kilmarnock Barassie) & G Hay (Downfield) bt E Nistri & M Scarpa 1 hole.
Result: Scotland 2, Italy 1.
Singles: Lowson bt Flori 5 & 4; Milligan lost to Severa 3 & 2; Hay bt Aragnetti 1 hole; Bryson bt Bernardini 5 & 4; Watson halved with Nistri; Robertson lost to Scarpa 4 & 3.
Result: Scotland 3½, Italy 2½.
Golf: Eastbourne defy the form book
By Ted Barrett
EASTBOURNE shook the Halford Hewitt Cup firmament by dismissing Shrewsbury, the cup-holders, 3–2 at Royal St George's in the first round of the 62nd foursomes festival of the Public Schools Golfing Society.
The win, only Eastbourne's third in the past decade, was achieved against a team whose five finals include two cup wins in the last 12 years.
Peter Davies, Eastbourne's captain, told his players on the eve of the event that they were stroking the ball well and that they could upset the odds but added he was booking them out of their hotel.
He may have been joking, but his fatalistic sentiment was in the sane vein as a cruel remark made as Davies's men departed in triumph: ‘We understood Eastbourne were the only team who have not applied for a postal vote in the General Election.’
Eastbourne may also have been stung into action by yesterday's Daily Telegraph in which your correspondent suggested Shrewsbury were a good bet.
The article was declaimed to the Eastbourne team at breakfast.
They survived the closest of calls.
Young blood won the first two foursomes — Chris Bradshaw and Nigel Parsons by two and one, Mark Stewart and Martin Patmore by three and two.
The two bottom matches were won by Shrewsbury so the decisive third was the last to finish.
Robert Meaby, whose brother Brian and the Eastbourne captain had been on the wrong end of a five and four beating in the bottom match, had with Christopher Walker already enjoyed a fair share of excitement, halving the shorter length with a birdie putt after Shrewsbury had chipped in for a two.
Meaby and Walker reached the 17th dormy two, but missed a short putt and slipped to dormy one.
At the 18th both F T Hilldnep and J Mawdsley of Shrewsbury and the Eastbourne pair needed 12-footers for fours.
Both missed and the underdogs were through by one hole.
Robert Meaby says that more young talent is in the Eastbourne pipeline and indeed the addition of a good player or two can work wonders — Rossalls's new recruit David Tonroe, 19, from Hong Kong, has spent two years at university in California, plays to plus one and has already appeared in the Eisenhower Trophy.
His precise chip at the 18th helped toward Rossalls's 3½–1½ win against Dulwich.
1st rnd (Sandwich): Rugby 4, Cheltenham 1; Eastbourne 3, Shrewsbury 2; Repton 5, Westminster 0; Edinburgh Academicals 4, St Paul's 1; Watson's 4, Hurstpier Point 1; Harrow 4½, Haileybury ½; Glenalmond 4½, Bishop's Stortford ½; Fettes 3, Liverpool 2; Whitgift 5, Chigwell 0; Taunton 4, Aldenham 1; Eton 4, Forest 1; Bradfield, 3 Epsom 2.
Amateur golfers will soon be handing in a new kind of card — a ‘flexible friend’, writes Bill Meredith.
The plastic card will carry the player's name, his club and handicap and may be used in Britain and Europe to confirm that he is an affiliated member of the English Golf Union.
Already nearly 400 clubs have applied to join the scheme.
EGU secretary Keith Wright said: ‘At least 600 clubs insist on handicap and club membership certificates, so the EGU card should prove invaluable.’
Yachting: Conner struggles to stay in contention
By Tim Jeffery in San Diego
DENNIS CONNER'S hopes of reaching the America's Cup defenders' finals suffered a further setback when his Stars & Stripes lost to revamped America in a close race in a shifty wind on smooth water.
New Zealand won a place in the challengers' final against Il Moro di Venezia in 10 days' time by defeating France's Ville de Paris in the penultimate semi-final race.
Bill Koch, of America, replaced himself with Kimo Worthington, admitting: ‘I'm not a good light-air sailor.’
It was Buddy Melges, however, who steered in front at the first cross after the start, having been lifted into a handsome lead by the first shift, and stayed there.
The boats were never more than 36 seconds apart until the finish, where Conner took a flyer on the final run to end 2 min 8 sec behind.
Conner's gamble says much about his situation.
He is still smarting after Tuesday's controversial umpire call, which cost him the race against Kanza, Koch's other boat.
If results continue to go against him, he could have only two more shots at making the final.
Koch has denied he would try to manipulate the scoring to achieve an all-America syndicate final.
The Stars & Stripes camp, however, are less sure.
‘We're assuming America will win against Kanza,’ said John Bertrand, Conner's strategist.
If Conner is eliminated, and he has conjured victories from direr situations than this, there is little doubt the American defence will be weaker for it.
Though co-operation between the Conner and Koch camps is non-existent, neutral parties have kept channels of communication open.
The thinking is that Conner, or some of his key crew, could join one of Koch's boats.
‘We are not king makers but conciliators,’ said Bill Packer, a Texas oil millionaire, whose discrete presence has been felt in many Amnerican campaigns.
‘But we have two strong individuals here, and it's not easy to knock heads together.’
Nippon ran past Il Moro di Venezia on the first downwind leg to take a consolation victory in the challengers' section, while New Zealand's despatch of France from their second successive semi-final was chillingly efficient.
But there was little celebration in the Kiwi camp on gaining a finals spot.
‘We've never been a real emotional team, win or lose.
It's part of our thinking not to be on an emotional roller coaster,’ said Rod Davis, the New Zealand skipper.
Conner has announced he will enter the 60ft Class in the 1993 Whitbread Round the World Race, which starts from Southampton in September.
New Zealand's Brad Butterworth, watch captain on the winning Steinlager II in the previous race, will skipper the boat though Conner will sail on at least one of the shorter legs in the 34,000-mile race.
Challengers' semi-final.
Race 8: New Zealand (R Davis) bt Ville de Paris (M Pajot) 3m 30s; Nippon (C Dickson) bt Il Moro di Venezia (P Cayard) 1.53.
Pts: New Zealand 6; Il Moro di Venezia 5; Ville de Paris 3; Nippon 2.
Round-Up: Javer is to blame for trying too hard
MONIQUE JAVER readily accepted the blame for her 6–4, 6–1 defeat by Kimiko Date in the quarter-finals of the Suntory Japan tennis Open in Tokyo yesterday, writes Barry Martin.
Having begun the match in tremendous style, she totally lost her way.
Up 3–1 in the first set, she conceded 12 of the next 13 points and, at one stage in the second set, she lost another 14 consecutive points.
‘When I was up 3–1, I knew I could win and got over-excited.
I was so pumped, maybe too pumped, that I overdid everything.
I made so many errors on my backhand trying to put too much into every shot,’ she said.
Stefan Edberg and Jim Courier both reached the men's quarter-finals comfortably as did Michael Chang and Michael Stich.
Boris Becker was surprisingly beaten by Spain's Jordi Burillo, ranked 230th in the world, 1–6, 7–6, 6–4 in the second round of the Spanish Open at Barcelona.
Ray and Paul Ranson, of Sheffield, yesterday regained the Remington Father and Son Tennis Championship they previously held in 1989.
They beat South Africans Hiralal and Hitesh Soma, who are based in Stoke Newington, 7–5, 5–7, 6–2 in the final at Brentwood.
REMINGTON CH'SHIP (Brentwood).
-Father & son final: R & P Ranson (Sheffield) bt H & H Soma (Stoke Newington) 7–5, 5–7, 6–2.
Mother & daughter final: Y & S Durham (Bexhill) bt J & K Howden (Leeds) 7–5, 6–2.
RUGBY LEAGUE: John Joyner, Castleford's veteran back row forward who made his Great Britain debut against Australia in 1978, is to retire at the end of the season, writes John Whalley.
Joyner, 37, possessor of 16 caps, made more than 600 appearances for Castleford.
But back trouble has restricted him to just eight games this season.
Better news for Challenge Cup finalists Castleford is that Graham Steadman, who has scored 30 tries so far this season, has recovered from a rib injury and is likely to return against Halifax on Sunday.
SKIING: Olympic skiers Jilly Curry and Scotland's Hugh Hutchison took top honours in the mogul competition at the Volvo British/Dutch freestyle international in La Plagne, France.
Curry, from London, outshone allcomers to retain her British title for the third year running.
But Hutchison, a captain in the Royal Engineers, faced a much closer battle between World Cup skiers fighting for the top four places in the men's event.
Thomas Jensen, from Denmark, had the fastest time and Dutchman Robert Binnenweg was best in the air but it was Hutchison's overall control on the steep 250m course that won the day.
Alain Baxter, 19, from Aviemore, won the junior men's giant slalom at the STS British Children and Junior Alpine Championships at Alpe d'Heux.
BRITISH ALPINE CH'SHIPS (Alp d'Heux, France).
— Junior giant slalom: 1, A Baxter (Cairngorm SC) 2m 12,12s; 2, J Ormond (Downhill Only SC) 2–14.68; 3, D Cook (Donwhill Only SC) 2–16.36.
BOWLS: Port Talbot's John Price savoured the sweet taste of revenge at the Tweed Heads Club on Australia's Gold Coast yesterday when he beat Ian Schuback, his conqueror in last month's world indoor singles championship, 21–14 in the Mazda international tournament.
MAZDA T'MENT (Gold Coast).
— Section A: P Belliss (NZ) 21, E Bonutto (Australia) 18 — M McMahon (Hong Kong) 21, I Taylor (Australia) 19 — D Katunarich (Australia) 21, Belliss 13.
Section B: J Price (Wales) 21, I Schuback (Australia) 14 — R Parrella (Australia) 21, M Khan (NZ) 5 — Price 21, A Thomson (England) 7.
SHOOTING: Major Peter Freeman, who has died aged 75, was a former chairman of the British Pistol Club, a shooting council and executive committee member and later a vice-president of the National Smallbore Rifle Association.
Bowls: Relative success for Boyles
By Donald Newby
IAIN BOYLE and his father, Ted, from the Yorkshire club Richardsons, twice climbed back from likely defeat at Melton Mowbray yesterday to reach today's pairs final of the Manchester Unity National Indoor championships.
After falling 20–11 behind in their quarter-final against Terry Scott and David Webb, the 1990 champions from Gateshead, the Boyles scored a three, two, one, two and one to level 20–20 on the final 21st end.
Requiring a single to go through the Malton pair collected a three.
In their semi-final against Roy Johnson and John Wickham, from Teignbridge, the Boyles were in trouble again — trailing 11–6 and later by 17–15 with two ends left to play.
Iain, skipping his father, then extricated them by trailing the jack and adding perfect drawing shots to collect a four.
On the final end he moved the jack again to add another and finish 20–17 ahead.
Tony Allcock, the world indoor champion, also had an adventurous day.
He and Andrew Wills were fully tested in their quarter-final by Dennis Baker and former international John Wennington, from Thornaby, who clawed their way back from 17–11 down to level at 18–18.
On the last end Allcock twice trailed the jack to foil Wennington and win 19–18.
In their semi-final the Benton pair were fully extended for three hours by Newark's Malcolm Edwards and Alan Ward; then Allcock dominated a series of short ends to go through 25–19.
Qtr-finals: Teignbridge 21, Herts Watford 19 — Richardsons 23, Gateshead 20 — Bristol 15, Newark 17 — Bentham 19, Thornaby 18.
Semi-finals: Richardsons 20, Teignbridge 17 — Bentham 25, Newark 19.
Hockey: Depleted Slough eye double
By Cathy Harris
SLOUGH are set to make a strong challenge to complete a league and cup double when they meet non-league Blueharts in the semi-final of the AEWHA Cup at Milton Keynes Sports Club today.
In the other tie, a spate of injuries have hit the Merseyside club, Hightown, while Sutton Coldfield will be weakened by the absence of three Great Britain players, Jane Sixsmith, Lisa Bayliss and Mandy Pickles.
Hightown will be without Chris Cook following recent knee surgery, but defender Lorraine Marsden (hamstring) and striker Tina Cullen (back) are hoping to play after undergoing treatment all week.
The current British training tour to the United States has also deprived Slough of goalkeeper Jo Thompson and midfield player Karen Brown, but the captain, Kate Parker, is confident that her side will win a place in the final.
‘We'd obviously be very disappointed not to beat Blueharts,’ she said.
‘The squad are all fully fit and playing well — doing the double would be a great way to finish the year.’
Hightown also have their sights set on a double — they have already retained their national indoor title and are intent on securing a place in Europe.
Slough, winners of the Ty-Phoo National League for the third successive season, have already guaranteed their place in the European Club Championship next year.
However, because they cannot compete in two competitions, the winner or runner-up in tomorrow's final will secure a spot in next season's European Cup Winners' Cup.
Yachting: Smith triumphs
By David Pelly in Hyeres
LAWRIE SMITH booked a ticket to Barcelona when he wrapped up the British Olympic selection series for the Soling keelboat place in the French Olympic Classes regatta at Hyeres.
Chris Law, who had calculated it was possible for him to stay in the series, led the fleet after a blinding first beat sailed in a wind of 20 knots.
Russell Peters was close behind, with Smith trailing in sixth position.
A broken spinnaker halyard put paid to Law's spirited last-minute effort, while Peters failed to consolidate his position.
That left Smith free to deliver the coup de grace to Glyn Charles, the only other helmsman who still had a chance of beating him.
For the second time this week, Smith covered remorselessly, forcing Charles to lose up to 10 places on the final beat.
Although the other classes have two more days of racing, Shirley Robertson is virtually assured of a Europe Class Olympic place.
Rugby Union: Nottingham give Hare paid coaching post
By John Mason
DUSTY HARE, England's former full-back and the world record-holder for points in a career, is to be Nottingham's director of rugby, a new salaried post.
Sheep farmer Hare, 39, who yesterday was out lambing at South Clifton, near Newark, will take up full-time duties in June and, initially, has a two-year contract worth around £25,000 per annum.
The farm will become a family responsibility.
Hare, a one-time apprentice cricket professional with Notts, a 1985 Lion in New Zealand and Barbarian committee member, picks up the reins reluctantly laid down by Alan Davies after 14 (unpaid) years with the club.
Davies, who was recruited last August by Wales, was last week confirmed as national coach up to and including the 1995 World Cup.
Relegation-haunted Nottingham, who must beat leaders Northampton and Orrell to stay in League One, first discussed the appointment of a paid official in January.
The pros and cons of three possible posts were considered — commercial manager, general manager or director of coaching.
As an unhappy season has progressed, the committee agreed that coaching was the essential ingredient for lasting success.
The new job would also entail a complete reassessment of playing resources and a re-structuring of the club, whether they ended this season in League Two or not.
Hare, whose aggregate points in first-class matches totalled 7,233, said yesterday: ‘It's a challenge and I've always enjoyed a challenge.
I've been a sportsman all my life and after a couple of years away from the game on a daily basis, I'm happy to be coming back.
‘Sheep farming is changing, what with all the new regulations, though the farm stays in the family.
My first duty will be to Nottingham and our aim will be to get back to the top.
We need that for rugby in this area — and we can do it.’
David Roberts, Nottingham's secretary, said yesterday: ‘We feel that this is the best way forward.
Dusty will have overall responsibility for all of the club's rugby from the youth to the first team squad.
‘Growth and recruitment will be the foundations of his wide brief which cannot, by rule, include the coaching of a team.
But he can attend to individual skills and in that respect, knowing Dusty and his firm opinions as we do, we feel we have recruited a winner.’
The first team coaches — honorary jobs — are Neil Mantell and Steve Holdstock while Roger Taylor and Gary Hartley, both of whom have made early playing retirements because of injuries, are also involved in the preparation of Nottingham's teams.
Hare, who will be at Nottingham's home match with Northampton, the Courage League leaders tomororrow, began his international career with his new employers though his first club after leaving Magnus GS, was Newark.
He later moved to Leicester, having won the first of 25 England caps against Wales in 1974.
His 240 points remained England's individual record until overtaken by Jonathan Webb last month against Wales.
Alec Evans, 53, assistant coach on the 1984 Wallaby Grand Slam tour of Britain and Ireland, will decide this weekend whether to accept a £30,000 offer to join Cardiff as director of coaching.
Evans said: ‘It's a big decision to make at my stage of life.
I have to consider my family, the quality of life in Queensland and my club responsibilities.’
Rowing: Redgrave pulls out
By Geoffrey Page
THE absence of Steve Redgrave, the holder, who is concentrating on next week's Olympic trials, and last year's runner-up, Wim van Belleghem, of Belgium, has taken away some of the main interest in tomorrow's Girobank Scullers Head.
Wade Hall-Craggs will now be first away, followed at 10-second intervals by 450 other scullers.
Rorie Henderson starts second and Guy Pooley, his double-sculling partner in last year's world championships is eighth off.
Last year Pooley took the Wingfield Sculls title from Henderson, who won the title and the Scullers Head in 1990.
They are among the national squad scullers competing who are seeking a place in the Olympic team.
Peter Haining, of Scotland, Britain's lightweight representative single sculler last year, starts 21 and also entered are two of the losing Cambridge crew, Max Justicz (52) and Stephen Fowler (54).
American Ann Marden (80), silver medallist in the Seoul Olympics and winner of the women's division for the past four seasons, will be the first woman to start, the next highest woman being British international Alison Gill (363).
She will be followed by Tanya Williams and Britain's 1991 lightweight representative, Sue Appelboom.
Tish Reid, who has been in disagreement with the women's squad chief coach, will attempt to make her point from 374th place.
Judo: No holds barred as Howey sets out to show them how
By NICOLAS SOAMES
KATE HOWEY discovered her instinct for combat at primary school.
When her younger brother was being bullied it was she who leapt to his defence and up-ended his tormentor in a matter of seconds.
Now she has refined those skills with the help of judo and is putting them at the service of her country.
At 18, she is one of Britain's best prospects for an Olympic medal in Barcelona this summer.
With the same courage she showed in the playground, Howey has been competing in senior international events since the age of 15, winning the world and European junior championships as well as senior bronze and silver medals at world and European level.
This weekend she has another opportunity to show her talent, and a special throw which she has been perfecting, when she competes in the British Open at Crystal Palace.
Called morote-gari, which means double hand reap, the throw is in essence a refined version of a rugby tackle.
Howey has got it off to a T: so far, she has thrown many of her top opponents with it, including Emanuella Pierantozzi, the Italian world title-holder, who only just managed to twist out and avoid a score in the last world championships.
All her opponents know it is coming and, in theory, it is the easiest thing in the world to stop — you just step backwards.
But, somehow, Howey gets away with it.
The throw may not win artistic awards, but it does win medals.
‘The basic idea is that you jump towards them, scoop up their legs and take them down hard,’ she explained.
‘It is amazing when it works — in the Scottish Open in February against Eva Webster it went so well that I near enough knocked both of us out.’
Howey is certainly made of stern stuff.
In the Belgian Open in March, she dislocated her collarbone doing morote-gari in the third round.
She shrugged her shoulders, popped it back in, won the fight as well as the following three contests to take the title — and only then told Dr Ken Kingsbury, the English team doctor, of her injury.
It has meant that she has only had two training sessions in the last month, which is scarcely the preparation necessary to face her hardest opponent in the world.
For Pierantozzi, a fearsome if handsome woman, has come to Crystal Palace this weekend in order to challenge her youthful rival once more.
Roy Inman, manager of the British women's team, said: ‘I think Pierantozzi got quite a shock at the worlds in Barcelona last summer, and she wants to try and get the measure of Kate before they meet at the Olympics.’
Howey herself is relatively relaxed about it.
‘I don't mind fighting her because it will be good experience for me.
It will be a bit nerve-racking in front of my home crowd and because as I have had to rest my shoulder I am not very fit.
But I have been working on some things especially for Pierantozzi, and hopefully I will get a chance to try them out.’
Off the judo mat, Howey is reserved and even shy.
As soon as she winds her black belt around her waist, however, her personality undergoes a remarkable change.
Her age and her resilience suggest that she will be around at the top for at least another Olympiad.
But with the confidence of youth she does not want to wait beyond Barcelona for her first Games medal.
Just how high she will climb on the podium in August may be indicated at the British Open on Sunday.
Rugby Union: Barnes leads ambitious mix of old and young
By JOHN MASON
STUART BARNES, the joker with a competitive edge of steel, will lead England on the eight-match B tour of New Zealand next June.
The 30-strong party will be announced on Monday, writes John Mason.
Though the script is not precisely what Barnes, who won his first full cap eight years ago, had in mind for the closing half of a remarkable career, he welcomes the opportunity to set several records straight.
Rugby's poacher turned gamekeeper, while having twice declined England bench selection, has never lightly turned his back.
Simplified, the overwhelming wish has been to play, not watch.
Playing for Bath was, Barnes felt, more constructive than being a track-suited reserve.
All concerned have long since settled differences and Barnes, whose colleagues will comprise a leavening of senior hands amid a group of aspiring internationals, is happy to have an influential role.
The squad, who play two internationals, is being chosen tonight and tomorrow by the national selectors, headed by Geoff Cooke and Dick Best, the Grand Slam management team.
Principal factors in the discussions will be the views of the B team officials — Jack Rowell and Mike Slemen, the coaches, and Kent RFU member Graham Smith, the manager.
Like Cooke and Best, the B gang can point to four wins out of four this season.
First business will involve the unavailabilities, a list misleadingly large in that five or so players have already been ear-marked for England's team in the Student World Cup in Italy in July.
Tarbuck (Saracens) and Pepper (Nottingham), two outstanding flankers, and Mallett, the Bath prop, are in that category as are winger Bromley (Liverpool St Helens) and hooker Beddows (Bath).
Injuries rule out scrum-half Douglas (Newcastle Gosforth) and Lumsden, who would have been Oxford University's full-back last December.
Other uncapped non-travellers, either for business or domestic reasons include Holmes, the Wasps prop, and Blackmore (Bristol).
The final list is of capped players who were sounded out about availability and, for various reasons, have asked not to be considered.
That batch, the most intriguing of all, has included in recent months five members of the Grand Slam squad — Leonard, who is recovering well from a neck operation but must rest, Morris, Pears, Rodber and Heslop.
Nor can Oti, a 1989 Lion, or Buckton, the wise-head in the B back-line this season, travel.
There is still ample talent for England, given sensible selection, to demonstrate that they do possess organised strength in depth and that the national structure, so precarious in other years, has a substantial base.
Hunter, Fallon, de Glanville, behind the scrum, and Clarke, in the forwards, have in recent months established themselves as quality players one step from the national team.
Tony Underwood, Mullins, Johnson, Back and Greenwood have shown that maturity and commonsense have gone hand in hand in their development.
Sims, Ubogu, Baldwin, among the forwards, and Matthews, Thompson and Pilgrim, have also progressed.
Barnes, one of nature's smiling gamblers, on and off the field, has encountered a few false dawns through the years.
He sees the month in New Zealand, where he played against the All Blacks in 1985, not as a final proving ground but as a searching test of known ability and attitudes.
Squash: Devoy's chance for revenge
By D J Rutnagur
SUSAN DEVOY, seven times champion and top seed, and Sue Wright, the English girl who ended the New Zealander's run last year, are lined up for a revenge meeting in the quarter-finals of the Hi-Tec British Open Championships.
In an impressive show of strength yesterday, Devoy beat Hugoline van Hoorn, the Dutch girl who had put out Danielle Drady, one of the leading Australian challengers, in the first round.
Devoy took a mere 26 minutes to clinch her second-round victory.
Wright needed a further 20 minutes, however, to overcome Heather Wallace, a Scots migrant to Canada in whose colours she now plays.
The two girls were closely seeded and at times, the match was very closely fought.
To start with, Wright was sluggish in covering the court.
As a result Wallace, hitting a fine length, was able to close a gap of 1–6 to 5–6 before Wright once again took firm control and seized the remaining points in one hand.
Wright slowed the pace down with telling effect to romp through the second game, but Wallace came back strongly to take the third.
The effort tired her, however, and the fourth game was Wright's for the taking.
The tournament moves to Wembley today and Wright believes that this will prove to be to her advantage because the Perspex court is better suited to her slower style of play.
Looking ahead to meeting Devoy again, she said: ‘I love that court and I'm confident of playing a good match.
Although I beat Susan last year, she's the favourite and the pressure will again be on her.’
The rising hope of English squash, Cassie Jackman, also made the last eight, but dropped the first game before asserting herself against unseeded Linda Charman, who is a vastly improved player this season.
The two girls are close friends and practised together in preparation for this tournament.
In tomorrow's quarter-finals, Jackman will come up against Australian Michelle Martin, the fourth seed.
Soccer: Kumar charged with misconduct
By Richard Bright
SAMESH KUMAR, the Birmingham chairman, was yesterday charged with misconduct by the Football Association over the St Andrews' riot.
Mr Kumar made comments about referee Roger Wiseman, who asked not to officiate again this season after being struck on the head by a fan when trouble erupted at the end of Birmingham's Third Division game against Stoke on Feb 29.
The FA have already fined Birmingham £50,000 and ordered them to play two matches behind closed doors, both sentences suspended until the end of next season.
Leeds manager Howard Wilkinson hopes to make Eric Cantona's transfer from French club Nimes permanent next week.
The club paid £100,000 in February, and must pay an additional £800,000 to make the transfer permanent.
Fulham chairman Jimmy Hill said the Third Division club had an eight out of 10 chance of starting next season sharing Stamford Bridge.
Chelsea chairman Ken Bates, negotiating with landlords Cabra Estates for the club's 12-acre West London headquarters, has tried to reduce his outlay by buying SB Property, the Cabra subsidiary that owns the Bridge.
Part of that deal involves Fulham, whose Craven Cottage ground is owned by another Cabra company and whose lease expires in a year.
Mr Bates hopes to finalise a deal that will reduce his payment from the asking price of £22.85 million to £13 million — and mean Fulham moving in at the end of this season.
England Under-15s will be looking for better finishing when they play Northern Ireland in a Victory Shield international at the Goldstone Ground, Brighton, tonight, writes John Price.
England, who drew against Wales (2–2) at Burnley and Holland (0–0) at Wembley, are expected to give a full debut to Albert Clarke, a striker from the FA National School.
Soccer: FA rule out Rumbelows Cup replay at Wembley
By Colin Gibson
THE Football Association have refused permission for Sunday's Rumbelows Cup final between Manchester United and Nottingham Forest to be replayed at Wembley Stadium.
Instead the Football League have been forced to rearrange any replay for Everton's 39,000-capacity Goodison Park on May 6.
The FA, under their contract with Wembley, have the right to veto matches taking place at Wembley in the six days before the FA Cup final.
This year the final is scheduled for May 9 — only three days after the planned replay date for the Rumbelows Cup final.
Although Wembley were keen to stage the replay of the final, which will attract a capacity crowd of 80,000, the FA refused consent for the match to go ahead.
Andy Williamson, the League's assistant secretary, revealed yesterday that a letter had been sent from Lytham St Anne's requesting permission to use Wembley.
But the FA's reply confirmed that they would not allow the match to take place because they were worried about the effect it might have on the pitch.
Had the Rumbelows Cup final replay been able to be staged on April 22 then the FA would not have been able to prevent Wembley from hosting the match.
However, Manchester United's backlog of League fixtures means that unless they play their First Division game with West Ham that night they could not finish the season by the first weekend in May.
The League felt that it was important, especially as United are chasing the championship, that the First Division programme came to an end on schedule so they moved the Rumbelows Cup replay.
Having altered the dates, and finding that Wembley was not available, the League also discovered that other options for a replay venue were limited.
Bruce Grobbelaar yesterday warned that Liverpool could not use the absence of manager Graeme Souness as an excuse for sub-standard performances.
Mr Souness went into a Cheshire hospital on Monday for a triple heart by-pass operation and Grobbelaar admitted the news was ‘a big blow to the club’.
But after Liverpool's 3–2 home defeat by Wimbledon Grobbelaar admitted the Anfield side needed to be ‘more professional’ in their approach.
With the FA Cup semi-final replay against Portsmouth on Monday, Grobbelaar said: ‘There's no time for feeling sorry for ourselves.
We're pros and we have to act like it.
The manager has his problems but we have ours as well.’
Wayne Harrison, who was once the costliest teenager in English football, was yesterday granted a testimonial by Liverpool which will be hosted by Oldham, the player's first club, on April 28.
Harrison, who was 17 when he went to Anfield for £250,000 in 1985, did not play a senior match and was forced to retire because of a knee ligament injury.
Martin Hayes, Celtic's former Arsenal striker, broke a leg in a reserve game against Rangers on Wednesday.
London Marathon: Tolstikov's prizes bring little comfort in a changing world Ken Mays talks to last year's men's winner from Siberia who is preparing on the coast for his double attempt
By KEN MAYS
YAKOV TOLSTIKOV is among the favourites to win one of the big-money prizes in the ADT London Marathon on Sunday, but however much he makes he will struggle to spend it when he returns home to Siberia.
Tolstikov, last year's winner and joint favourite with South African Mark Plaatjes for Sunday's race, could win about £32,000 to add to his appearance fee if he repeats his success.
But in Kemerovo, where he lives with his wife and three children, the shops are nearly empty.
Tolstikov is a wealthy professional athlete, yet he considers bananas a luxury.
He has eaten plenty of them at the Brighton guest house where the Commonwealth of Independent States team, paid for by race sponsors ADT, have stayed since arriving.
‘There are plenty of apples in my home town but no other fruit, and the team have eaten a lot of fruit since they have been here,’ he said.
‘You can win money but you cannot eat,’ said a member of the Ukrainian-Russian squad who have been in England for the past fortnight.
‘Being in Brighton has been beneficial to all of us, the food is good and we have trained on the Downs,’ said Tolstikov, who could have expected more recognition at home following last year's London win but instead found life harder, not better.
‘Politically there is more freedom now but life has got tougher and though we have had much help from the West, it is still difficult.
I try hard not to show off my privileged position but again it is difficult, because sometimes there is jealousy.
That is human nature.
The economy is very difficult and it is still hard to break the old system.’
After he won last year Tolstikov, who also won the World Cup gold medal because the race was run in conjunction with the London event, had to hand over 20 per cent to the then Soviet federation.
‘I expect that to be the same this time, but a fortnight away from Russia is a long time and things change so quickly,’ said the bespectacled runner.
As a result of his victory last year, in 2hr 9min 17sec, Tolstikov gained more invitations to run outside the Soviet Union and was involved in discussions for a move to an American or Japanese club.
‘But it is a big step to leave your country when you have got used to a system,’ he said.
‘It is hard to change.’
Tolstikov, a former skier who switched to running, just as the Swedish runner, Ingrid Kristensen did, puts his fitness down to his early recreation.
‘It is always good to run against good athletes,’ he said.
Although the weather forecast for Sunday has changed to windy and cloudy with showers, it will not bother Tolstikov.
He has endured all kinds of weather, including the Siberian winter at minus 10 to minus 28 degrees.
‘I am fit and well prepared,’ he said, defusing doubts that he was not as good as last year.
Although no-one has won the race in successive years, he is happy and confident after good preparation in Brighton.
The CIS have chosen the London race as their selection point for the remaining two places in the Barcelona Olympics.
Tolstikov has already been selected.
The race is also being used by Poland, Mexico, Norway and Denmark as their trials for the Olympic Games and though the field is not so strong at the front, it looks to be a proving ground for the visitors, in an effort to beat times already set by their countrymen to enable them to go to Barcelona.
Among the Polish runners is Antoni Niemczak, their fastest competitor at 2–9–41, the fifth best in the race.
He was suspended for two years after he tested positive for drugs when finishing second in the 1988 New York race.
Niemczak can compete in the London race, because the British Athletic Federation have lifted their ban on such competitors who tested positive and served their suspensions.
The women's race looks set for the second successive year to be at the mercy of Rosa Mota, a winner at Olympic and world level as well as the three times European champion.
She has clocked a personal best that is nearly two minutes faster than her nearest rival, Katrin Dorre, of Germany.
Cricket: Unfit wickets hamper S Africa
By Geoffrey Dean in Port of Spain
SOUTH AFRICA's preparations for the two one-day internationals in Trinidad this weekend were disrupted when the Queen's Park Oval's net wickets were ruled unfit.
However, the pitch itself has little grass on it and looks flat.
Sussex captain Alan Wells will lead the Duchess of Norfolk's XI against Pakistan in the traditional tour opener at Arundel on May 3.
Soccer: Merger talks are on again
By Tony Jefferies
THE proposed merger between GM Vauxhall Conference club Redbridge Forest and their landlords, Dagenham, of the Diadora League, is under discussion again.
Norman Sparrow, Dagenham's chairman, confirmed that the two clubs were ‘close to concluding discussions on the issue’ and would then be calling meetings of their respective members to put the results to them.
The question of merging the two clubs has already arisen twice in the three years since Redbridge became tenants at Victoria Road.
On the last occasion, a year ago, the talks were halted amid protests from Dagenham supporters because of what Mr Sparrow called ‘insurmountable obstacles’.
It is believed one of the major problems facing the clubs' proposals then was the fact that they were both in the same league.
Redbridge were promoted last season and Mr Sparrow has confirmed that ‘the obstacles have now been removed’.
Golf: Wadkins and Sluman set the pace with 65s Michael Williams sees the impressive Richardson and Wolstenholme lead Britain's early challenge at Augusta
By MICHAEL WILLIAMS
BERNHARD LANGER, his golf as meticulous as his preparation, added the virtue of patience in the first round of the Masters at Augusta National yesterday.
His reward was a 69, while Lanny Wadkins, that American warhorse, made the early running with a 65, later equalled by Jeff Sluman.
The name of Gary Wolstenholme also remained on the big scoreboards all morning.
He did his late father, Guy, proud with a sparkling outward half of 33 before the more treacherous inward half took its toll and turned the round into a 72.
It was a fine effort, particularly as it was achieved in the company of Arnold Palmer, still a great favourite here, whom Wolstenholme outscored by three strokes.
Steven Richardson also emerged with great credit in his first Masters.
A rare eagle three at the eighth helped him to a 69 alongside Langer and a cluster of others.
Colin Montgomerie, a British Ryder Cup player last year, who was also making his first appearance, had a 72 but David Feherty, who played steadily for 12 holes, ran up a seven at the 13th and had to settle for a 73.
The weather and the course were at their most benign as Fulton Allem, of South Africa, made himself at home on his first appearance at Augusta.
He stood four under par for his first 11 holes, becoming the first to break 70 with a 69.
Langer, champion here in 1985, took 12 holes to summon his first birdie.
He played the first 11 well enough, but the putts refused to drop apart from at the eighth and 10th, where first he faced little chips.
He struck a fine short iron over the bunker and right into the heart of the green at the 12th, and at last a putt found its mark from perhaps eight feet.
Langer promptly reeled off three more birdies.
He took the finest of lines round the trees at the 13th before hitting the green with a perfectly struck long iron for his four and then was in luck at the 14th.
His slightly pulled drive might have run into trouble but was deflected by a rolled up hosepipe.
He was then able not only to find the green with a nine-iron but be close enough for a tap-in putt for his three.
A big drive down the 15th left him with a metal wood to the green and two more putts for his four.
Only the 16th caught him out as he took three putts for his only bogey.
There was a strong hint of a beautiful day to come with a pale blue sky and the sun sparkling off the early morning dew.
There was no wind and the fulfilled promise of a temperature in the low eighties.
As has become the tradition, the tournament got under way when Gene Sarazen, 90 earlier this year, struck the opening drive.
It was so straight that it was hard to tell whether he had found the right side of the fairway or the left.
That was the limit of what, in previous years, had been a ceremonial nine holes.
Sam Snead and Byron Nelson, both 80 this year, were unfit; Snead after a car crash on his way to Augusta on Tuesday and Nelson as a result of a recent hip operation.
Both, however, were in attendance.
Peter Jacobsen despatched the first serious shot of the Masters.
It was considerably less straight than that of Sarazen as it clattered into the trees on the right but nevertheless rebounded on to the fairway short of the bunker from where he managed a four.
Until yesterday, the only hole at Augusta that had never been eagled was the 205-yard fourth.
Even that record has now gone, Sluman holing in one.
As he had also made birdies at the first and third, he was four under par, eclipsing even Raymond Floyd's start.
This elder statesman of golf, 50 this year, had birdies at each of the first three holes, though the promise was not maintained.
He soon ran into two costly double bogeys.
Wadkins, third in the Masters last year and in 1990, had his lowest round yet, beating his 67 in the last year's first round.
He could not remember ever having hit every green in regulation or better.
The ‘better’ one was the 13th, where the shot would have been an iron but became a four-wood because of one of Augusta's rare bad lies.
That came in the middle of Wadkins' best spell.
He had gone 3, 2 at the 11th and 12th, then followed it with a three at the 14th, where he hit an eight-iron to a yard.
The 15th was an obvious birdie hole but Wadkins thinned his drive and, after much deliberation, decided to lay up rather than go for the carry.
If this was a wasted hole, the bonus was still to come.
Wadkins got away with not the best of drives at the 18th but he had a gap, hit a five-iron to 45ft and then holed it across all sorts of slopes and burrows.
If one stroke settled Wadkins, it was his second putt for a four at the first hole.
It was one he could easily have missed but as soon as it went in, any nerves were dispelled.
For Allem, it was a 16-year dream come true.
Two birdies in his first three holes and another at the sixth gave him a flying start but it was not all so straightforward.
He hit a four-wood into the Rae's Creek at the 13th and less excusably missed the green at the 17th.
But Allem would certainly have settled for a 69 before he went out.
Letter to the Editor: Better prepared
SIR — Strangely enough the evening before Capt Courage's letter appeared (April 7) I answered my door to a youth selling household items.
This was the second such call in two years and both took place after dark.
The first caller, smoking a cigarette, implored me to buy something to ‘take him off the dole’.
Eventually I convinced him that I did not want anything.
This last time I was better prepared.
I said I didn't want to buy anything, but if he or one of his colleagues was prepared to dig my garden I would negotiate a price.
I have rarely seen a faster disappearance.
W. N. TODD Leeds, West Yorks
Letter to the Editor: Foolish courage?
SIR — Capt Courage's actions in fulfilling his ‘life-long ambition’ to make a so-called citizen's arrest (letter, April 7) are not a good example to his fellow citizens.
Not only did he needlessly place himself in danger, but no charges were brought against his prisoners.
My use of the word ‘prisoners’ is deliberate.
The legal definition of arrest (with or without warrant) is: ‘The taking or restraint of a person from his liberty in order that he shall be forthcoming to answer an alleged crime or offence.’
STUART HARRINGTON Feltham, Middx