

Discovery offers hope in quest for Alzheimer's cure
By Roger Highfield, Science Editor
A MECHANISM by which Alzheimer's disease, scrapie and mad cow disease kill brain cells has been identified.
A team at St Mary's Hospital Medical School recently identified the first gene involved in a form of Alzheimer's disease, the main cause of dementia in the elderly.
But it has been a mystery how this and spongiform encephalopathies, such as mad cow, kill brain cells.
At a meeting yesterday of the Biochemical Society in Southampton University, Prof John Mayer of the Queen's Medical Centre in Nottingham said his team had shown scrapie causes a protein build-up in the ‘waste disposal system’ of brain cells.
This, in turn, explodes to release a cocktail of digestive enzymes into the cell.
Prof Mayer said this new understanding, the first clear evidence for the mechanism of cell death in these neuro-degenerative diseases, should pave the way for new drugs and treatments.
Prof Mayer believes a similar mechanism kills nerve cells in degenerative diseases such as Gerstmann-Straussler syndrome and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, the human equivalent of mad cow.
These degenerative diseases — spongiform encephalopathies — have been linked to the production of abnormal proteins in the brain.
In today's issue of Science, Dr John Hardy of St Mary's explains how cell death in Alzheimer's is linked to a build-up of beta-amyloid that disrupts calcium metabolism.
Dr Hardy said he and Prof Mayer ‘almost agree’ on the mechanism of cell death, though he was not convinced it is common to Alzheimer's and the spongiform encephalopathies, which are different diseases.
Working with Dr Graham Lennox, Prof Mayer made his discovery through a test to highlight the damage by studying the action of a protein called ubiquitin, which is produced to label damaged cell components so they can be carted away for disposal.
Into scrapie-affected cells they introduced tiny gold particles tethered to a protein that sticks to working ubiquitin.
When they examined the cells under an electron microscope, the gold only highlighted abnormal proteins in the waste disposal organ of the cell, called the lysosome.
The lysosome is called a ‘suicide bag’ said Prof Mayer, not only because it digests any waste materials by the use of powerful enzymes but also because this cocktail can kill off the cell.
The abnormal proteins produced by these degenerative diseases are relatively indigestible, so they build up in the lysosome.
The release of the digestive enzymes leads to cell death.
PoW truth drug used to simulate symptoms
By DAVID FLETCHER
A ‘TRUTH’ drug used on British prisoners by the Nazis is bringing new hope to sufferers from Alzheimers Disease, the conference was told.
Dr Keith Wesnes, director of a drug research company in Reading, described how scopolamine can be used to induce the symptoms of the disease in healthy volunteers.
It causes them to suffer temporary lapses of memory and to have difficulty in concentrating for a short period of two to three hours.
During this time they are given drugs thought to be effective against Alzheimers — which also causes memory loss and lack of attention — to assess their efficacy.
Dr Wesnes said that using volunteers with ‘fake’ Alzheimers Disease enabled a new drug to be evaluated within three months compared with the three to five years for a full-scale trial on ‘real’patients.
Scopolamine is used for travel sickness.
Dr Wesnes said it was a well tested drug which only caused Alzheimer type symptoms when injected rather than being taken orally as a travel sickness remedy…
Drugs evaluated by this method include D-cycloserine which is thought to be involved in the formation of memory.
After showing promising results on ‘fake’ patients, it is now being used in a full-scale trial of more than 1,000 genuine sufferers.
Letter to the Editor: Film fable
SIR — Your agricultural correspondent's report on the goats of Snowdonia and their origins (April 2) is less exciting than the folklore related to me as a small boy by a Welsh shepherd.
According to him, the goats were imported from India to provide additional realism for the filming of the North West Frontier epic, The Drum, in 1938.
They escaped to run wild on the hills around Cwm Buchan.
Brig TIM BEVAN Ottawa
Letter to the Editor: Sad trick played on Brightness
SIR — Britain leads the world in recognising that mammals with brains as large and complex as ours are entitled to the freedom we humans so ardently strive for.
The public dipped deep into their pockets to set free Rocky, a dolphin who had spent all his adult life in captivity.
In January 1991, Rocky was successfully restored to his natural habitat and was quickly followed by Missie and Silver from Brighton.
It was therefore with great joy that most people in Britain greeted the recent news that three Beluga whales, which are closely related to dolphins, had made their own bid for freedom.
They had escaped from Sebastopol and were at large in the Black Sea.
Many of us saw this as an opportunity for mankind to make a small gesture of recompense to the cetaceans (the whale family) for the abuses we had inflicted upon them.
Surely we could return Brightness the Beluga to her own genetic family in the Arctic?
We, the British, had the expertise.
We could mobilise the resources and we had the moral drive.
So plans were laid to do it.
But Brightness has become a money-spinner; the Russians have become capitalists; and the Beluga has become a pawn in an international game.
The Turks allowed a Russian ship into their waters.
On April 6 Brightness was lasooed and after struggling for half an hour was ignominiously hauled from the water.
Brightness's destiny — so we were informed — was to be returned to prison where she will have to perform mindless tricks for the entertainment of rouble-paying humans.
However, she can rest assured that we will not let the matter rest.
There is a rapidly growing number in Britain who regard dolphins in captivity as similar to humans in slavery.
When such practice first occurred it could be justified.
Now we know more, it cannot, and therefore must be stopped.
The spirit that motivated William Wilberforce is still alive in Britain today.
Efforts will continue to be made to set free Brightness as well as all the other whales and dolphins condemned to a life in which they cannot experience the mental stimulation that only the challenges and joys of life in the open ocean can provide.
Dr HORACE DOBBS North Ferriby, Humberside