

Girls aged nine dieting to gain model figures
Reports by David Fletcher, Health Services Correspondent
GIRLS as young as nine are dieting in the hope of achieving the willowy figures of models they admire in fashion magazines and on television.
Many are putting their health at risk in their formative years, Dr Andrew Hill, a chartered psychologist at the Academic Unit of Psychiatry, Leeds University, says in a study of nearly 400 nine-year-olds.
His study, to be presented to the British Psychological Society's annual conference in Scarborough today, found that one in three girls wanted to be thinner, even though many of them were not overweight.
Dr Hill studied 213 nine-year-old girls and 166 boys of the same age at three Yorkshire schools.
He found one in three of the girls and one in five of the boys wanted to be thinner.
A small proportion of the boys — seven per cent— wanted to be fatter, but ‘it would seem their desire to be heavier was not for fatness but for a more athletic and muscular build’.
The nine-year-olds wanting to be thinner not only expressed a wish to lose weight but were already changing their eating habits to try to achieve their desired figure.
Dr Hill said: ‘Children who wished they were thinner reported that they were significantly more likely to refuse food because they were worried about their weight, to try to eat less at meal times and deliberately to eat slimming foods.’
He said the study found surprisingly high levels of discontent with body weight and shape in pre-adolescent girls and boys.
At the age of nine, they were coming under the same social pressures as older children.
‘Increases in the practice of dieting must not be the result.
Attention should be paid to ways of enhancing physical esteem, particularly in girls, and reducing early pressures to aspire to an unlikely body shape.’
He said girls were influenced by a host of pressures, from television advertising, magazines and even their parents' behaviour.
‘We are culturally weight obsessed, and that is damaging.
Parents should concentrate on looking at other ways of increasing their children's self-esteem, not just through their weight, shape and appearance,’ he said.
GPs spread disease by misuse of thermometer
By Peter Pallot Health Services Staff
ONE in 20 family doctors does not clean his thermometer between patients, a sure way to spread disease, according to a survey published today.
Six of 116 general practitioners in Surrey admitted not cleaning their thermometers while others did not bother to use them at all.
The survey, in the British Medical Journal, also found that only eight per cent of doctors knew how to use a thermometer.
Most did not keep the instrument in place for long enough.
Dr Steven Clarke, a GP in Camberley, Surrey, who carried out the survey, says the results highlight wide disparity in the use of thermometers.
Some doctors used the instrument two or three times a day, six per cent did not carry one in their bag and half had used them fewer than 12 times in the past six months.
Doctors who rely on mothers recording temperature in their children could be misled, says Dr Clarke.
One reason doctors take temperatures is to cover themselves against negligence claims, although doctors' legal defence bodies say there have been no such cases.
However, Dr Clarke adds that the secretary of one defence body ‘did qualify this by stating that doctors may be questioned very closely about their reasons for not taking a patient's temperature and, taken with other factors, this may swing a decision for disciplinary proceedings against the doctor’.
Doctor versus doctor in surgery punch-up
By Paul Stokes
A FAMILY doctor blacked the eyes of a partner after a ‘dirty tricks’ campaign was waged against him, a court was told yesterday.
Dr Barney Williams, 52, left Dr William Henry, 48, needing hospital treatment after an incident involving a dance poster in the surgery in Marshfield Road, Chippenham, Wilts.
The town's magistrates were told that tension had built up for a year after a decision to dissolve the partnership.
Partners leaving the five-man practice were claimed to have raided computer records and accounts and waged a campaign against Dr Williams, the senior partner, who is staying with the practice.
Mr Ian Thomas, prosecuting, said feelings were running high between the various doctors just before Christmas.
‘Dr Williams ripped a New Year's Eve dance poster off the noticeboard, screwed it up and put it behind his back.’
When Dr Henry approached him, Dr Williams hit him on the side of the head and sent his glasses flying.
‘Dr Henry is extremely short-sighted and as he bent down to try to find them, he was punched a second time, which caused him to fall back and land on a bench,’ Mr Thomas said.
‘Dr Williams said, ‘You've been spoiling for a fight, now you've got it’’.
He then punched Dr Henry in the face six times.
‘There was a lot of blood on his face, dripping on to the floor.
He was very pale and shocked.
Dr Williams rang the police himself and was clearly worked up.’
Dr Williams, of Foxham, near Chippenham, admitted a charge of assault by beating and was ordered to pay £300 compensation to Dr Henry with £100 court costs.
Mr John Greenwood, defending, said: ‘There was a certain amount of antipathy between the two doctors.
All of a sudden, the other partners carried out an overnight coup and faced Dr Williams with the situation where he was no longer persona grata.
‘Dr Williams became a victim of a number of dirty tricks with nasty little jibes and bits of paper through letter boxes.
Things were put in his tyres to cause a puncture, which had him under the most extreme tension and pressure.
‘On this particular day, he saw a poster contrary to the practice rules about use of the notice board.
He heard a growling noise behind him and realised Dr Henry was there, very angry.
Dr Williams was backing into a corner and just brushed his glasses away.
It was all over very quickly.’
After the case, Dr Williams said the court's decision was ‘a reasonable settlement’.
He said: ‘At the time of the incident, Dr Henry was purple in the face.
He grabbed my tie and I thought he was going to nut me in the face.
I'm not an expert fighter and I didn't know I was going over the top.
It sounds really fruity, but it was just two black eyes.’
Dr Henry was unavailable for comment yesterday.
At the time, he said: ‘It has been a very difficult split.
I suppose that is what happens when you have different personalities involved.’
The partnership is due to break up on June 1.
Trial ends as lawyers find JPs asleep on the bench
By Colin Wright
A TRIAL was halted yesterday after complaints that magistrates had fallen asleep when they should have been listening to evidence.
Lawyers confronted them when the case of two brothers on public order offences resumed in Hull.
They demanded a re-trial claiming their clients had noticed members of the bench had their eyes closed on the opening day of the hearing.
After retiring briefly, Mr David Boswell, Mrs Pamela Kings and Mr Terence Dunn, agreed and the case was abandoned.
A new trial date was set for April 23.
Paul Williams, 28, of Sedgebrook Grove, Hull, and Shaun Williams, 24, of Fellstone Close, Hull, were given unconditional bail.
The JPs, who spent the rest of the day hearing other cases, will now be the subject of an inquiry by the Lord Chancellor's Office.
Mr Andrew Cammish, representing Shaun Williams, had told them: ‘Justice must be seen to be done as well as be done and it is my duty to bring any particular irregularity to the court's attention.
‘Yesterday morning, during the hearing, I formed the opinion, along with my client, that one of the members of the bench appeared to be asleep.’
Miss Elizabeth Shaw, representing Paul Williams, said: ‘I support the application made by my learned friend and I would just like to say that this is genuine.
I noticed, in the afternoon, that two members of the bench had their eyes closed and appeared to be asleep.’
Mr John Astbury, Clerk to the Justices, said yesterday he had heard suggestions on Wednesday that Mr Boswell, 62, had nodded off.
‘The chairman of the bench denies falling asleep and says it was the way he was sitting in his chair,’ he said.
‘The advice I gave the bench and the decision they rightly came to was for a re-trial.’
A spokesman for the Lord Chancellor's Office said last night: ‘The allegation we have received is that one of the magistrates nodded off and we will be investigating.’
A spokesman for The Magistrates Association said: ‘I have never heard of anything like this happening before.’
Boards revive classics
By Paul Marston, Education Correspondent
EXAM boards are finishing new syllabuses for GCSE English which will widen study of literary classics.
The courses will reflect changes made by the national curriculum in order to reduce the amount of internally-assessed coursework allowed in English exams.
Since GCSE replaced O-level and CSEs five years ago, English syllabuses involving 100 per cent coursework have become increasingly popular.
The books that candidates study are chosen by their teachers.
But pupils beginning GCSE courses in September face a cut in coursework to a maximum of 40 per cent, and they will have to study Shakespeare and classics such as the Authorised Version of the Bible, Wordsworth's poems and the novels of Jane Austen, the Brontes or Dickens.
Commentary: The ahem and the falling hem
I ALWAYS thought lesbianism was one of those things you had to be born with, like the ability to do the splits.
Indeed, in America they are arguing furiously about research which suggests that homosexuality is a genetic condition.
Some people, however, seem to believe it can be taught.
This week an irate mother reportedly stormed into a London school and hauled her 15-year-old daughter out of a class in elementary sapphism.
The child claimed that a maths lesson had been interrupted for the purpose.
At the heart of the mother's fury was the fact that the teacher was a self-confessed lesbian — and apparently added insult to injury by assuring the mother: ‘I don't go for young girls.
I only go for older women.’
This incident is bound to re-activate the old controversy about sex education, namely that one person's information is another's propaganda.
Should innocence be preserved, or is it just a wishful euphemism for dangerous ignorance?
Should children be told about so-called sexual deviations, or will that put ideas into heads where there were none before?
Of one thing I am certain — the curriculum has changed since my young days.
There were lesbians on the staff at my school, but they only taught things like hockey and sewing.
None of them ever enlivened maths lessons with a few handy hints about alternative sexuality.
Our sex education was confined to a biology lab smelling of formaldehyde.
We got all the relevant information, but it was delivered in a businesslike manner.
I can't imagine how we would have reacted if our teacher had identified herself as a practising heterosexual and shared the secrets of her lifestyle.
Good grief, we had a practising Buddhist in once to talk to our RE class, and that was embarrassing enough.
Yes, adolescence is the age of flaring, terminal embarrassment.
That contentious lesbian lesson may have been a well-meant attempt to broaden minds, but I'd like to bet that the main result was a room full of scarlet faces.
I'd also bet that none of the girls in the class is one whit more likely to become a lesbian, or to have the pure white robe of her maidenhood smirched in any way.
Presumably, they learn chemistry, yet only a very few will be chemists when they grow up.
Any attempt to increase tolerance — however dotty or blush-making — should be respected.
Sex, when properly understood, is one of the greatest human pleasures, and I have never seen why the older generation should be so niggardly about passing on the information.
The infamous Clause 28, forbidding teachers to ‘promote’ homosexuality, tends to be supported by those who believe there is such a thing as classical sex — one proper, heterosexual way of doing it, which should be drummed in like a correct French accent.
The fact remains that not everyone does it the same way.
Failing to discuss homosexuality reinforces prejudices, and worsens the isolation and anxiety of people with homosexual urges.
ONE important women's issue has gone unnoticed in the past few weeks — the hemline question.
Long skirts are back.
You'll soon be able to walk down Bond Street without spotting a single varicose vein or mottled thigh.
Once again, we're hearing about the phenomenon of the hemline that plummets in a recession.
In the roaring Twenties, the swinging Sixties and the optimistic Eighties, so the theory goes, women bared their knees for joy.
But in the Thirties and Seventies, legs went into purdah.
Politicians who pretend there isn't any recession should look at the fashion pages — hemlines are falling faster than the Dow Jones index.
For women with thick ankles, it is an absolute tragedy.
And it is also extremely worrying for those of us with a wardrobe full of abbreviated skirts, and abbreviated bank accounts to match.
Just when we're strapped for cash, only a load of new clothes can save us from looking dowdy — you wouldn't be alone in thinking that the whole thing is nothing more than a brilliant wheeze dreamt up by the fashion industry whenever times get tough.
But I think it is more a question of psychology.
This week, I went out in a new, ankle-length skirt for the first time.
If I had put a tea cosy on my head I would have been a dead ringer for Mrs Pankhurst, but it affected my behaviour even more than my looks.
When you're wearing a short skirt, you feel young, carefree and hedonistic.
These days, such feelings are out of style.
Long skirts make you feel sober, withdrawn and responsible — and that, whether we like it or not, is the true spirit of the age.
Women miss science jobs
By Roger Highfield Science Editor
WOMEN have been neglected as a source of scientific talent, despite concern over the shortages of school leavers, the Science Policy Support Group claim today.
The independent research group says greater funding is needed to study the problems of women entering science.
A variety of problems face women, said Ms Carlye Honig of SPSG.
‘Some will insist they have never experienced discrimination but simply want a creche,’ she added.
‘Others will talk eloquently about being chased around desks when they went for job interviews.’