

Election ‘92:
THE CONSERVATIVES were on course to secure an historic fourth consecutive term in power early today after the closest general election for 20 years.
Mr Major achieved one of the most remarkable comebacks in modern politics to lead the Tories to what looked to be a narrow overall majority.
With 609 results declared by 4am, Labour had made 44 gains, well short of the advance needed to win power.
Although the Tory majority of 101 secured in 1987 was slashed to under 20 and possibly into single figures, Mr Major seemed certain to be back in Downing Street this morning.
Leaving his count in Huntingdon, where his majority grew by 9,000 votes, the Prime Minister refused to claim victory until all the results were in.
The result upset opinion polls, which had predicted that Mr Kinnock — who had looked increasingly confident — was on the verge of ending Labour's 13 years in opposition and avenging three defeats by Mrs Thatcher.
But Mr Major is likely be in power with the smallest Tory majority since 1951 and is now placed to take advantage of disarray in the Opposition parties and the expected economic recovery.
His relief was tinged with sadness at the defeat of his close colleague and Tory party chairman, Mr Chris Patten, who became the first Cabinet Minister since 1979 to lose his seat.
In the most dramatic result of the night, the Liberal Democrats beat him in Bath by 3,768 votes.
Mr Major said Mr Patten had been ‘the architect of of the campaign that has won us this victory…
It is tragic he has lost in Bath.
He is too fine a politician to be out of the Commons for long.’
Labour unseated eight other ministers, Mr Michael Fallon (Education) in Darlington, Mrs Lynda Chalker (Overseas Aid) in Wallasey, Mr Colin Moynihan (Energy) in Lewisham East, Mr Christopher Chope (Roads) in Southampton Itchen, Mr David Trippier (Environment) in Rossendale and Darwen, Mr Francis Maude (Treasury) in Warwickshire North, Mr John Maples (Treasury) in Lewisham West, and Mr Nicholas Bennett (Welsh Office) in Pembroke.
But despite making gains in the key marginal battlegrounds of the North, the Midlands and London, Labour's much vaunted breakthrough failed to materialise.
A grim-faced Mr Kinnock refused to concede defeat at his count in Islwyn, South Wales, where he secured a record majority for the constituency.
‘The battle is not yet over — and it is a battle,’ he said.
However, the prospect of Labour's fourth defeat in a row since 1979 will place a question mark over his leadership and Labour's longer-term future.
Although Mr Kinnock has modernised Labour and ditched many of its vote-losing socialist policies, he has failed to convince the country to put its trust in him despite the country suffering the longest recession since the Second World War.
Shadow ministers, who had been behaving as if they were about to move into Whitehall, looked stunned and shattered.
They face another five years in opposition and Labour will have another inquest into why it has been rejected for a fourth time.
Mr David Mellor, the Treasury Chief Secretary, who easily held his Putney seat — one of Labour's London targets — said: ‘Mr Kinnock's bandwagon has become his tumbril.’
Mrs Thatcher, who returned from the United States last night, said: ‘Everything we have done in the last 13 years will be conserved and built on into the future.
The country was not prepared to let the achievements go.
Isn't that marvellous?’
Although the final result may not not be known until mid-morning, computer predictions indicated Mr Major was on his way back to Downing Street with a small majority.
After all the criticism of the Tory campaign it was a remarkable achievement for Mr Major 16 months after taking over from Mrs Thatcher when the Tories were 20 points behind in the polls following the poll tax debacle.
As the youngest Prime Minister this century, he is on course to lead the Tories to an historic fourth term in power — something not achieved since the end of the Napoleonic wars.
The result also appears to be a vindication of his gamble to delay the election until almost the last moment in the hope that signs of economic recovery would persuade voters to give him a mandate.
He called the election behind in the polls and kept his nerve despite some polls last week suggesting Labour had a seven-point lead.
Labour's advance — one of the biggest post-war election swings — was checked as the Tories held Basildon in Essex and Battersea in south London.
But Walthamstow, Thurrock and Croydon North West fell to Labour.
In Scotland, early results suggested it would not be the massacre the Tories had feared.
Mr Michael Forsyth, Scottish Office Minister, clung to Stirling with a majority of 703, while the Tories won back Aberdeen South from Labour and Kincardine and Deeside from the Liberal Democrats, a seat lost in a by-election last autumn.
Mr Rifkind, the Transport Secretary, retained his Edinburgh Pentlands seat — a result seen as justifying Mr Major's decision to confront demands for devolution and separation by emphasising his support for the continued union between Scotland and the rest of the UK.
But the Conservatives will have to take stock of the situation in Scotland after the election dust has settled.
The Scottish Nationalists suffered a further setback when one of their leading figures, Mr James Sillars, was ousted from Glasgow Govan, which he had won at a by-election.
While the Tories were holding the line in the South, there was gloomier news in the North.
Pendle, the Lancashire marginal where the poll tax was a major issue in the campaign, fell to Labour with a five per cent swing.
Neighbouring Hyndburn was also taken by Labour.
In the Midlands, the Tories lost Nuneaton, where Labour overturned a majority of more than 5,500.
Other Tory marginals in the Midlands, Cannock and Burntwood and Wolverhampton North East, fell to Labour.
It was a mixed night for the Liberal Democrats, who also failed to make a significant breakthrough.
Mr Ashdown's hopes of holding the balance of power and forcing a minority Government to introduce proportional representation seemed set not to materialise.
The Liberal Democrats' first gain was Cheltenham, where the Tory candidate Mr John Taylor, failed to become the party's first black MP.
They also took Devon North from the Tories.
But Tories regained two seats from the Liberal Democrats, Southport and Ribble Valley, which they lost in a by-election last year.
In Wales, one of their veteran MPs, Mr Geraint Howells, lost Ceredigion and Pembroke North to the Welsh Nationalists, Plaid Cymru.
The Liberal Democrats were averaging just under 19 per cent— a fall of about four per cent on the level of the Liberal-SDP Alliance in 1987.
But they were more successful in the target seats on which they had concentrated their efforts.
The two remaining SDP MPs, Mrs Rosie Barnes in Greenwich and Mr John Cartwright in Woolwich, lost their seats to Labour.
Election ‘92: Black Tory defeated in Cheltenham
By Michael Fleet
AN ATTEMPT by Mr John Taylor to become the first black Tory MP failed last night when the Liberal Democrats overturned a 4,896 Conservative majority to win Cheltenham.
Mr Taylor, selected 18 months ago amid much controversy as Tory candidate in the spa town seat, was beaten by Nigel Jones of the Liberal Democrats, who polled 30,351 votes to Mr Taylor's 28,683.
Even before his defeat some senior Tories in the constituency were blaming the selection of a black candidate for the lost seat, but immediately afterwards one constituency officer insisted they would be asking Mr Taylor to fight again.
The selection of Mr Taylor, 39, was challenged at the time by a section of the local Tory party, with Mr Bill Galbraith, a 55-year-old publisher, leading the criticism with a reference to the candidate as ‘a bloody nigger’.
After his defeat Mr Taylor said he had given 100 per cent commitment to the seat.
‘I have tried my best.
It is too early to say why I lost and I do not know how big a part the race issue played,’ he said.
‘I have made a lot of good friends here and have been very warmly welcomed by a lot of people.
I feel I have let Sir Charles Irving down to some degree,’ he added.
The seat had been Tory since 1970 and had been held since 1974 by Sir Charles, who retained it with a sizeable personal vote.
The Liberal Democrats have considered the seat as winnable for several years and won overall control of the city council last year with 45 per cent of the vote compared to 36 per cent for the Conservatives.
Mr Des Wilson, the Liberal Democrat campaign manager, played down the racial element in the vote that defeated Mr Taylor, saying: ‘We won that seat on the merits of our campaign, not because a few votes for the Tory may have been influenced by the colour of their candidate's skin.’
Mr Taylor said it was difficult to say why the seat went to the Liberal Democrats.
‘I did everything I could do,’ he told BBC television.
‘I was very active and don't think I could have done any more.’
Asked about the ‘race question’, Mr Taylor said: ‘It is not for me to start making allegations.’
Nirj Deva, 43, became the Conservative Party's first Asian MP when he won the Brentford and Isleworth constitutency by 2,086 votes.
Mr Deva said: ‘Choosing an Asian MP reflects the fact that the Tories are a party of one nation.’
Election ‘92: Nine ministers lose their seats
By Colin Randall and Wendy Holden
MR CHRIS Patten, the Conservative Party chairman, was defeated in Bath, where his slim majority of 1,412 was transformed into a Liberal Democrat lead of almost 4,000.
Mr Patten, regarded as one of Mr Major's ablest lieutenants, was unable to conceal his disappointment as the result was announced, indicating that the twin task of spearheading the Tory campaign and protecting his own marginal constituency had proved too much.
Mr Major said Mr Patten was ‘too good a politician’ to be out of the Commons.
Other ministers to fall included Mr David Trippier, Environment Minister, at Rossendale and Darwen, who lost to Labour's Mrs Janet Anderson by just 120 votes and Mrs Lynda Chalker, Overseas Development Minister, who lost the Wallasey marginal to Labour.
Another casualty was Mr Michael Fallon, junior Education Minister, in Darlington.
Mr Colin Moynihan, junior Energy Minister, lost Lewisham East, completing a remarkable husband and wife coup for Labour.
Mrs Bridget Prentice's victory followed that of her husband Gordon over the Tories in Pendle.
Mr Christopher Chope, Roads Minister, lost Southampton Itchen by just 551 to Labour.
Two treasury ministers, Mr John Maples and Mr Francis Maude, lost to Labour respectively in Lewisham West and Warwickshire North.
Junior Welsh Office minister, Nicholas Bennett, lost his Pembroke seat to Labour's Nick Ainger, who overturned a 5,700 majority to scrape in by 755.
Mr Don Foster, a former leader of the Alliance group on Avon county council, ended Mr Patten's 13-year spell as Bath's MP, winning 25,718 votes compared to Mr Patten's 21,950.
Mr Patten said later: ‘The important thing as far as I am concerned is that it looks as if we are going to have a Conservative government.
Chris Patten matters a lot less than John Major.’
Mr Foster said: ‘The people of Bath have rejected the failed policies of the Conservatives.’
Although Mr Patten said it was too early to discuss his political future, the Tories are now expected to find a safe seat in which the sitting member can be persuaded to make way for his early return to Westminster.
Mr Patten congratulated Mr Foster on his ‘handsome victory’ and spoke warmly of his period representing Bath in the Commons.
The Tory flag, he assured local party workers, would ‘fly over Bath once again’.
At Liberal Democrat HQ in London, the 3,768 majority for Mr Foster over Mr Patten brought howls of delight to a party faithful.
Mrs Chalker, whose seat was always considered a possible casualty, lost her majority to Labour with a loss of 1,819 votes.
Mr Fallon, 39, Schools Minister, a former Tory whip, lost Darlington to Labour's Mr Alan Milburn, who turned a 2,661 Tory majority into a Labour lead of 2,798.
Election ‘92: Unions were urged to keep low profile
By Kevin Maguire, Labour Correspondent
TRADE unions were instructed by Labour leaders to ignore Conservative attacks on their links with the party during the election campaign to prevent the Tories ‘playing the union card’.
Mr Larry Whitty, the party's general secretary, asked unions on March 26 not to respond to Conservative attacks, it emerged last night.
He sent an urgent appeal by fax to union general secretaries ahead of a Conservative news conference that day at which Mr Major and Mr Howard, Employment Secretary, claimed unions had been told if they ‘shut up’ today would be ‘pay day’.
In a memorandum headed ‘Tories’ attack on trade unions’, Mr Whitty said the Conservatives planned to make the links an issue to set their own agenda.
‘We should not respond,’ he said.
If a reply was ‘unavoidable’, unions should refer to an attached five-page briefing note giving model replies to questions ranging from Labour Party funding to the minimum wage, and suggested that unions should highlight the financing of the Tories by business.
The strategy effectively neutralised what the Conservatives had hoped would be a vote-winner with an electorate wary about an upsurge in union power under Labour if it could be made an issue.
Claims by Mr Major and others that a Labour administration would be heavily influenced if not controlled by the unions appeared to fall on deaf ears as union leaders kept a low profile.
The TUC withheld its traditional endorsement of Labour, and Mr Bill Jordan, president of the Amalgamated Engineering Union and one of a small group of TUC leaders who met Mr Kinnock every month before the election, even found time during the campaign to take a holiday in the Canary Islands.
‘If Kinnock needed one of us to be hung from Blackfriars Bridge at dawn every day to win, we would have drawn lots,’ said a senior TUC official.
Noriega convicted
By Hugh Davies in New York
MANUEL NORIEGA, 54, one time ‘Maximum Leader’ of Panama, was found guilty in Miami yesterday of selling his country to the Medellin cocaine cartel of Colombia for $4 million in bribes.
After a seven-month trial, Noriega, the first foreign leader to be convicted in America, faces a jail sentence of up to 120 years.
He was found guilty of eight of the 10 charges against him.
The dictator, captured after the invasion of Panama by 23,000 US troops on Dec 20, 1989, was acquitted of counts involving smuggling 700lb of cocaine into America.
Convictions were obtained on charges of money laundering, cocaine manufacturing and distribution, racketeering and the building in Panama of a state-of-the-art drug laboratory.
Noriega showed no emotion at the verdict reached after five days of jury deliberation.
His lawyers will almost certainly appeal.
Sentence is to be passed on July 10.
President Bush described the verdict on Noriega as a ‘major victory’ against the drug lords.
‘Justice has been served,’ Mr Bush said.
A shining example to the Major faithful
By Robert Hardman
HIS WEATHER forecast had been right even if his poll prediction remained unconfirmed.
The early morning mist was lifting above the Great Stukeley lanes to reveal a glorious day as Mr Major arrived with his wife to vote at the village hall.
He had breakfasted lightly on Marmite and toast washed down with a pot of tea.
And whatever the matter in hand, there was still time for a perusal of Wednesday's football results.
Son James had already rushed into the kitchen with the news that Liverpool had lost at home the previous evening.
Given that James is a keen Everton fan, however, the defeat of the rival Reds was a good omen.
‘It's a nice day to win the election,’ Mr Major announced, emerging from the polling station.
Asked by an exit pollster which way he had cast his vote, he replied: ‘I voted for the party that is going to run the country for the next five years.’
According to family tradition, Mr and Mrs Major then carved up the constituency and set about rallying the troops.
Mrs Major's party set off for the northern half of the seat to goad the faithful and stir the idle while Mr Major toured the south.
Huntingdon's pride in the success of its sitting MP was glaring.
At the last election, Mr Major was a social security minister.
Since then, he has held three Cabinet slots and the boss's chair.
Mr Major seemed relieved that everything now lay in the lap of the gods.
‘This is home and it's immensely warm and friendly,’ he smiled.
But there was to be no resting, particularly with Jeffrey Archer keeping an eye on the time.
‘Polling's up by 10 per cent in parts and they've been queuing, yes, queuing in St Ives,’ Mr Archer revealed.
Although Mr Major's tenure in Huntingdon is beyond question, his past success meant that no Tory worker could relax.
With the largest majority in Britain to defend — 27,044 — anything less this time round would be regarded as defeat by these Stakhanovites of the Fens.
Election ‘92: Tories gain against odds in Scotland
By Robert Shrimsley
THE Conservatives confounded all predictions in Scotland, gaining two seats and holding Stirling against a fierce Labour challenge.
Defying the last minute predictions of a BBC exit poll which said they would hold only three seats, the Tories won Aberdeen South from Labour and regained Kincardine and Deesside from the Liberal Democrats.
In Stirling, Mr Michael Forsyth, the Scottish health and education minister and the foremost disciple of Thatcherism in Scotland, fought off the challenge to his wafer-thin majority of 548 to increase fractionally his majority to 703.
A strong SNP showing in Stirling was largely responsible for his success, while the Liberal vote there was dramatically squeezed and fell by eight per cent.
In Aberdeen South the Tories went one better when Mr Raymond Robertson won the seat from Labour's Frank Doran, regaining a seat the Conservatives lost in 1987.
More surprising was the victory in Kincardine and Deesside which Nicol Stephen won from the Conservatives in a by-election last year.
Mr George Kynock reclaimed the seat most Conservatives felt should never have been lost in the first place.
In Edinburgh Pentland Mr Rifkind, Transport Secretary, regained his seat with a slightly increased majority.
In Perth and Kinross, Sir Nicholas Fairbairn was returned with a much-reduced majority.
Sir Hector Monroe, the Conservative with the safest seat in Scotland in 1987 held on in Dumfries with a slight increase in his majority.
In Ayr, the seat formerly held by Mr George Younger, the former defence secretary, with a majority of only 182, his would-be successor Mr Phil Gallie forced a recount in a seat Labour was certain of winning.
Elsewhere Labour retained its firm grip on Scotland as the much vaunted Nationalist revival failed to materialise.
By 1.45 am Labour had already regained 39 of its 48 seats.
The Nationalists suffered an early and bitter blow in Glasgow Govan when Mr Jim Sillars, the party's deputy leader, lost the seat he won from Labour in a spectacular by-election in 1988.
He was beaten by Mr Ian Davison by 4,125 votes.
Labour gained 48.9 per cent to Mr Sillars's 37.1 per cent.
Speaking after the result Mr Sillars said: ‘Obviously the SNP is very disappointed with this result…but it has been a privilege to be your MP for more than three years.’
But he added that voters had fallen for the ‘Labour lie’ that voting Labour would result in a Labour victory in the UK.
He added that there remained the unresolved problem of what to do ‘when Scotland votes Labour but England votes Conservative.’
In Angus East, where Mr Andrew Welsh was the sitting SNP member, the Conservatives forced a recount.
Although the SNP recorded swings in several seats it failed to breakthrough in the Labour seats it would need to win in any significant nationalist revival.
In Glasgow Garscadden Mr Donald Dewar, Labour's shadow Scottish secretary, saw off a strong challenge from Mr Dick Douglas, the former Labour MP who defected first to the Scottish Labour Party, and then to the SNP.
Mr Dewar's majority fell significantly from nearly 19,000 to just over 13,000.
Mr Douglas finished well behind but recorded a seven per cent swing and pushed the Conservatives into third place.
Mr Tam Dalyell held Linlithgow for Labour in the first Scottish result to be declared.
Mr Ernie Ross also comfortably held on to Dundee West for Labour, and Calum MacDonald held the Western Isles.
Mr Gordon Brown, Labour's trade and industry spokesman, swept to victory in Dunfermline East with 62.4 per cent of the vote and a majority of over 17,000.
Mr James Wray held firm for Labour in Glasgow Provan.
Mr John Smith, the shadow chancellor, won comfortably in Monklands East.
Labour also held Kirkcaldy, Clydebank and Milngavie, Edinburgh East, Aberdeen North, Greenock and Port Glasgow, Dumbarton, Glasgow Springburn and Mr Martin O Neill's seat of Clackmannan.
In an election dominated by the constitutional question, only the Conservatives have been committed to maintaining the status quo.
But observers believe that even in the case of a Conservative victory in the rest of Britain the party's low number of Scottish seats would force it to reconsider its position.
Election ‘92: Thatcher flies in for count
By Charles Moore
SUFFERING from a heavy cold, but buoyant in spirits, Mrs Thatcher celebrated election night without restraint early this morning.
Straight off Concorde from the United States following a lecture tour, she visited The Daily Telegraph's party at the Savoy Hotel, and then continued the night at a party in Westminster given in her honour by her old friends Lord McAlpine and Sir Gordon Reece.
She was accompanied by her husband, Sir Denis, and her children Mark and Carol.
Among the company were her former private secretary, Sir Charles Powell, the American ambassador, Mr Raymond Seitz, Lord Palumbo, and other intimates.
The former Prime Minister watched the results with close attention.
There were occasions to mourn, as when Michael Fallon, Education Minister, lost at Darlington: ‘Oh Dear, he ‘s one of us.’
And to rejoice, as when the Scottish Nationalist, Jim Sillars, went out at Govan.
Of the results declared by 1am, Mrs Thatcher said: ‘This proves that the country doesn't want Labour.
‘Now we must build on this and get our message clearly across.’
Mrs Thatcher was critical of Mr Kinnock for thinking that he had victory in the bag before the result was declared.
She had some words of reproach for Mrs Kinnock too.
‘I saw her on television this morning filmed at the polling station.
She was dressed so smartly I thought: ‘Silly girl to be wearing Yves St Laurent.
You don't know the result yet’.’
Already Mrs Thatcher was looking beyond last night's result.
The new government, she said, would have to bring down interest rates.
The first thing was to go to Chancellor Kohl and tell him to co-operate.
‘We helped with the re-unification of Germany.
He must help us with our recovery.’
Asked about the conduct of the Tory campaign, Mrs Thatcher was judicious.
She said it had got off to a slow start but then the true issues had been recognised.
‘John Major began to put across the right message on Europe,’ the former Prime Minister said.
Sir Denis evinced less enthusiasm for the whole electoral process.
‘I'm so bloody glad we're not doing it this time,’ he said.
Election ‘92: Ten held for Ulster poll ‘offences’
By Chris Ryder Irish Correspondent
AT LEAST 10 people were arrested for alleged electoral offences in Northern Ireland yesterday and police searched houses in several parts of Belfast.
The RUC said ‘a handful’ of people were arrested for alleged impersonation at polling stations in other parts of Ulster.
But they said the number was only a fraction of what it used to be.
Thousands of armed police and soldiers were deployed to protect 580 polling stations in Northern Ireland as voting took place to return 17 MPs from 100 candidates.
Sinn Fein complained that their election workers were being harassed and delayed for up to half an hour at checkpoints.
Election ‘92: FT attacked by CBI chief
The decision by the Financial Times to back Labour for the first time since 1966 was attacked by Sir John Banham, director general of the Confederation of British Industry.
The editorial was written by the editor, Mr Richard Lambert, who said the response from readers had been mild with calls running ‘about 3½–1 against’.
Election ‘92: Candidate's wife dies
Enfield North Labour candidate Martin Upham, Chitra Viswanadha, died of a suspected heart attack yesterday morning.
Mr Upham, 45, was at Labour's campaign headquarters when police broke the news to him and was not expected to be at last night's count.
Election ‘92: ‘Lost’ electors miss their vote
Residents on a new estate in Featherstone, West Yorkshire were unable to vote because canvassers ‘missed’ the estate when Wakefield District Council was compiling the electoral register.
A council spokesman apologised and blamed a mix-up between departments.
‘The development is tucked away behind shops and was unfortunately missed in the canvas,’ he said.
Election ‘92: Cold comfort keeps the mission on the road
By Jon Hibbs, Political Staff
NOBODY really noticed, but Neil Kinnock has been nursing a chest cold.
It is a tribute to the efficacy of Daynurse (recommended by his driver), and the restorative powers of malt whisky (a present for his 50th birthday) that the campaign did not take a more visible toll.
Only at the end did his voice thicken: otherwise brimming self-confidence, he overcame lack of sleep, the exhaustion that comes from travelling 8,000 miles in 21 days, and the pressure of being constantly in the spotlight.
‘The test for Neil is whether he could have done anything better to prepare himself for the task ahead.
This time he genuinely believes there is nothing more he could have done,’ said a colleague.
But Labour's early hopes that its leader's superior campaigning skills would make all the difference evaporated in the realisation that electioneering had become a form of trench warfare.
Since battle had been effectively joined last spring, when Major first considered going to the country, the parties had bludgeoned themselves into mutual exhaustion before the final clash of arms.
‘It is a war of position rather than a war of manoeuvre, with both sides dug into opposing trenches unable to break out,’ acknowledged an aide at the end.
Labour thought the breakthrough would come with the party election broadcast on Jennifer's Ear, followed by Mr Kinnock's call to turn polling day into a referendum on the National Health Service.
Briefly the next batch of polls gave Labour a solid lead, but it did not hold and insiders don't really know why.
Somehow the leader's speeches, though full of the passionate phrases, could not summon from Majorism the spectre that made past invocations against Thatcherism so memorable.
Instead 1992 will be remembered as the year a potential Prime Minister greeted a rally in Sheffield with the mating call of the adult male rock star: ‘Yerrralllrright?’
That ‘political event of the decade’ looked good on television, especially when the fireworks finale went off just as John Cole, the BBC's political editor, went out live on the Nine O'Clock News, but it was a strangely soulless event to the 10,000 participants.
Warm-up rants at smaller home-grown affairs in Glasgow, Blackburn and Barry from Gordon Brown, Robin Cook and Tony Blair respectively went down far better with the party activists than the leader's indigestible offerings, giving an intriguing clue to an uncertain future.
Only on Wednesday night, back in his Islwyn constituency, did Kinnock finally free himself from the trappings of self-importance imposed by his minders.
In an electrifying performance that revealed the depth of his personal frustration at the role he had previously been playing, a raw Welshness returned to his accent and a welcome freshness was injected into his rhetoric, underlined by an extraordinary display of physical gestures involving head, neck, shoulders, arms, hands and fingers.
Kinnock sneered at the ‘arrogance’ of the political establishment who pronounced him ‘cocky’, and the ‘experts on political conduct, the brilliant analysts, the completely non-aligned and non-partisan reporters’of the tabloids who ‘accuse me of being inadequate’.
Inside, the walls of the packed Pontllanfraith leisure centre were hung with a miners' banner and posters from the 1987 campaign: outside the speech was broadcast via a video link to hundreds more standing spellbound in a field.
‘We have not been running this campaign as an entertainment for our dear friends in the press and broadcasting media.
We have been running it to get democratic power to serve the people of this country,’ said Kinnock, provoking the most spontaneous and emotional standing ovation seen in three weeks.
It was like a valedictory speech, possibly the last big statement he would utter as Leader of the Opposition, the opportunity to deliver a personal justification of what he did to try and ensure that Labour's values joined together with the popular vote to save the party from the political wilderness.
It was an uplifting finish to a safety-first schedule, in which organised verbal prospects like a press conference, lecture, or major broadcast interview were interspersed on a daily basis with endless and undemanding photo-opportunities.
The tone was set on the first day out of London when Kinnock confided to a class of six-year-olds at Staple Hill primary school in Kingswood, Bristol: ‘Glenys is a teacher in real life: this is just pretending.’
The tally by the end was 29 flights, five train journeys and a boat trip, in order to visit a total of 12 factories or industrial training centres, eight schools, five health units, three old people's homes and one wood.
For the accompanying media corps, swelled by correspondents from the Atlantic to the Urals, there were long hours and early starts, countless mid-air prawn sandwiches, several overnight stays, two hot meals and just one real story — when Kinnock's press secretary, Julie Hall, committed professional suicide in order to save her leader from embarassment in the row over who leaked Jennifer Bennett's name.
So much was at stake that jokes were few and far between.
Only once did Kinnock appear out of his separate cabin in the leader's aircraft in order to talk to reporters, and that was when he thanked them for a birthday card.
Instead his minders offered just enough to keep the hacks occupied, mainly in transcribing undecipherable tape recordings snatched on carefully marshalled visits, whose symbolism was either crassly self-evident or completely obscure.
That adds up to a good campaign in Labour's view: no gaffes, lots of pictures, and a positive message delivered in controlled surroundings.
Election ‘92: Kinnock puts brave face on the setbacks
By Jon Hibbs, Political Staff
NEIL KINNOCK vainly sought to put a brave face on a night of setbacks for Labour as he increased his own majority in Islwyn to a record for the constituency.
He heard he had taken 75 per cent of the vote in the safe Labour seat, but that his party had failed to make a breakthrough in the nation.
Mr Kinnock's voice was choked with emotion as, refusing to concede defeat, he said: ‘Even now as the recounts are going on in a very large number of seats the results of this election is not decided.’
He hailed Labour gains from Plymouth to London and the South East, in the Midlands and the North West, and into Scotland and Wales.
Mr Kinnock said: ‘The battle is not yet over, the battle for the survival of the National Health Service, for proper investment in children who go to local maintained schools, to protect learning and independence in the universities and broadcasting, to secure freedom of information and reform of our democracy, and ensure we shall never again get a government that will use unemployment and recession as its main economic weapon.’
He added: ‘I take this opportunity of dedicating myself to the service of my constituents and in any capacity whatsoever to the people of my country.
I am proud to come from this area, I am proud to be British, I will always be proud to serve this democracy.’
The result, declared at 2am by the chief executive of the local council, Mr Brian Bird, was hailed by whistles, cheers and chants of ‘Kinnock, Kinnock!’
The Labour leader polled 30,908 votes, a majority over his Conservative challenger, Mr Peter Bone, of 24,728 — up 1,781 on the last election.
Turnout was 81 per cent, two per cent higher than the last general election.
In his acceptance speech Mr Kinnock paid an emotional tribute to his wife, Glenys, for her support under the pressure of the last few weeks.
‘She has been the target of such spite that it disgraces those who offer it, and she bears it with a dignity that makes me proud,’ he said as Mrs Kinnock stood behind him, smiling but with tears in her eyes.
Mr Kinnock arrived at the Pontllanfraith leisure centre shortly after 1.15am to be greeted by his agent, Mrs Doreen Moore, with a hug and a kiss.
He shook hands and chatted briefly with some of the several dozen supporters gathered outside in the cold, but refused to comment on the national picture.
‘The night is young,’ he quipped, brandishing a smile for the cameras which contrasted sharply with the drawn and tear-stained faces of his aides.
Earlier, the Labour leader's entourage was taken aback by the exit polls, and pinned their faith on expectations that the swing in the battleground marginals would tilt the balance in the party's favour.
Mr Kinnock was so confident of victory he allowed a camera crew in to his secret hideaway in a converted 17th-century lodge to film him and Glenys listening to the announcement of the exit polls on television.
Despite having 20 minutes to compose himself after being given advance notification of the exit poll result, the tension showed clearly on the Kinnocks' faces as they they struggled to swallow bitter disappointment.
Aides were shocked and distraught.
‘If these figures are true the Tories have lost their authority to govern,’ said one, putting a brave face on an impending disaster with an instant briefing faxed from Party headquarters in Walworth Road.
The Labour leader and his closest advisers had decamped to a country hotel run by the local council while his own terraced house in Blackwood was being used a committee rooms for the duration of the campaign.
The atmosphere in the the Ynys Hywel Countryside Centre at Cwmfellinfach, overlooking his Islwyn constituency, was said to be grim and depressed.
An air of gloom descended over Labour party headquarters at Walworth Road, South London, early today as it became clear that the party's quest for power was on the point of failure.
With more than 500 results declared, early hopes that the Mr Kinnock could enter Downing Street at the head of a minority Government had all but evaporated.
Ironically the biggest cheer came when news broke of the downfall of Mr Patten, Conservative chairman, to the Liberal Democrats.
But an evening which started with Labour confident of taking power, ended with the spin doctors hailing the lost Tory seats as a vindication of Mr Kinnock's campaign.
Election ‘92: Double Labour victory for husband and wife
LABOUR'S husband and wife team Gordon and Bridget Prentice achieved their ambition of ‘his and hers’ seats in the Commons with victories in the key marginals of Pendle, Lancs and Lewisham East, London.
Mr Prentice, a 41-year-old local government officer, knew at 12.30am that he had won Pendle from defending Tory John Lee.
Mrs Prentice, had to wait until 2.20am before she knew that she would be joining him in the House, ousting Tory Energy Minister Colin Moynihan, in the process.
She overturned Mr Moynihan's 1987 majority of 4,814, to win by almost 1,100 votes.
The loss of Mr Moynihan's seat marks the end of a career of one who once seemed to be a young Tory success story.
Diminutive Mr Moynihan, now 36, became an MP in 1983 and was appointed sports minister in 1987.
A double Oxford blue for boxing and rowing, he soon became known for his enthusiasm and commitment to sport, usually a backwater post.
He campaigned vigorously against the use of drugs and injected new life and efficiency into sports administration.
He was particularly linked to the problems of football hooliganism and sparked a storm when he called English supporters deported from the Italian 1990 World Cup ‘the effluent tendency’.
Mr Moynihan blamed his defeat on the ‘collapse of the Liberal Democrat vote, which came from Labour some years ago and has to some extent returned there’.
He said he would be considering his future with his family over the weekend and would possibly be returning to business — his last position was as chief executive of Ridgway's Tea.
‘But my life is in politics’ he said ‘and I look forward to coming back.’
In Pendle, the victorious Mr Prentice attributed his win to the collapse of manufacturing industry and poll tax but said the health service had been a contributory factor.
On overturning a Tory majority last time of 2,639, he appeared to have taken all the Labour gain from the Liberal Democrats.
Despite losing the seat he has held for nine years Mr Lee managed to increase the Tory vote.
Mr Hurd, Foreign Secretary, said he was ‘sad’ that the Conservatives had lost Pendle.
He said that Mr Lee, was ‘very hard hit by the Community charge, there's no doubt about that.’
Election ‘92: Ashdown increases majority
By Jonathan Petre
MR ASHDOWN, the Liberal Democrat leader, last night held his Yeovil constituency with an increased majority, and confidently predicted the return of three-party politics to Britain.
After a high turnout poll, Mr Ashdown retained the Somerset seat with 30,950 votes, a majority of 8,833 over the Tories — an increase of 3,133 on 1987.
The result was announced to cheers from jubilant supporters in the Westland Sports and Social Club as Mr Ashdown hugged his wife Jane, who had carried out much of his local campaigning.
Speaking after the news that the Liberal Democrats had taken Cheltenham, he prophesied that before the night was out there would be many more new Liberal Democrat Members of Parliament.
In his acceptance speech he made three predictions: ‘I believe you will see tonight that Britain will have returned strongly to three-party politics again.
‘Secondly, I believe you will begin to see during the night the cracks opening at last in the moulds that have held British politics in sterile opposition between two major parties for so long.
‘Thirdly, I believe that by the end of tonight you will see an increase in the number of Liberal Democrat Members of Parliament and I give this undertaking to each of them.
They will be both a force for stability and a force for change in the next Parliament whatever role we play.’
In an 82 per cent turnout, Mr Ashdown's Tory challenger, Mr Julian Davidson, polled 22,125, a drop of just over a thousand on the Conservative share of the vote in 1987.
Ms Viv Nelson, the Labour candidate, polled 5,765.
In the National Liberal Club last night, party activists were busy savouring the mathematic soup stirred up by television exit polls as they waited for the results to roll in.
The theme of the evening, in the marbled halls of the party's historic headquarters in Whitehall, was ‘everyone's a minority party now’.
Several of the early declarations were crucial to the Liberal Democrats' chances of improving on the alliance total of 22 MPs in 1987.
Their target seats — 40 or so — which the party was treating like by-election contests, included Torbay, Portsmouth South and Cheltenham.
As they waited for these to declare, the television lights in the club's library lightly grilled nervous Liberal Democrats as the party's organiser, Mr Des Wilson, discussed their prospects.
Election ‘92: Clubland in the mood for political parties
By Peterborough
THERE WAS a fin de siecle air in London's clubland last night — flames danced in the rarely used gas lanterns along Pall Mall as elegantly dressed members of the Institute of Directors, the Athenaeum, Reform and Travellers’ Clubs digested the implications of early poll results.
Along on the Strand, at a private party I found Lord Harris of High Cross, the distinguished economist, diving into a tray of smoked salmon sandwiches.
‘Frankly, it's amazing that Labour didn't make more of the current economic difficulties,’ he said, expressing vigorous dissatisfaction at the intellectual content of the election campaign.
‘Of course, I didn't vote myself.
Peers, lunatics and bankrupts aren't allowed to.
I won't tell which I qualify under.’
Also deprived of his vote (under the peerage restriction) was Lord Alexander of Weedon, chairman of the NatWest Bank.
‘I can't complain,’ he said, ‘as I have a voice in one of the chambers of parliament.
But it's looking close, isn't it?’
As election results were announced on large TV screens, partygoers whooped or groaned, according to their political preference.
The playwright John Mortimer, a Labour supporter, talked earnestly to Sue Lawley, television presenter.
Both declined to predict the evening's outcome.
‘I don't want to appear in any newspaper,’ said Miss Lawley brightly.
Less publicity shy was Stephen Quinn, publishing director of Vogue, the fashion magazine, who had voted Conservative for the first time in his life.
‘If the Tories get in, I'll go out and buy myself a new frock,’ said perhaps the most influential man in British fashion.
Over at Pratt's, the St James' club where it is said that Tory leaders were made and unmade in the old days, you would never have guessed there was an election on.
Members may include Viscount Whitelaw and a string of Tory knights of the shires but the place was deserted.
‘We don't have a television, thank God,’ explained one member.
Meanwhile, Conservative insiders gathered in Green's restaurant in Westminster, a few hundred yards from Conservative Central Office, for dinner and an election session on television sets placed strategically around the room.
The restaurant was subdued as the Conservative Party's young ‘spin doctors’ settled in for a brisk dinner.
Patrick Rock, special adviser to Chris Patten, and baby-faced (much criticised) apparatchiks David Cameron and Steve Hilton affected confidence, and continued to plot the party line given every conceivable outcome.
Over in Covent Garden in the nearby Crush Bar at the Royal Opera House, was living up to its name.
It was a gala evening of performances by the Kirov Ballet and Opera, in the presence of the Princess of Wales.
There was a sea of dinner-jacketed dignitaries and a jovial Sir Peter Ustinov as warm-up man.
Although he announced that there would be ‘no election results while we're here’, it did not stop much speculation over both the opera and the election.
‘It's all slightly confusing,’ said Sir Jocelyn Stevens, chairman of English Heritage.
‘One doesn't know quite what's going to happen next.’
But he was in party mood: ‘I work for whoever's in government.
I don't mind who ends up in power but the waiting and watching is very exciting.’
David Cooper, a partner in a solicitors' firm, was less cheerful: ‘A Labour victory will cost me £250,000 a year.
I have my sponge bag already packed for Monte Carlo.’
Election ‘92: Searching for take off without a yogic pilot
By Jonathan Petre
ON the eve of the election, a rumour rippled through the Ashdown camp that another party had made an informal approach for talks with the Liberal Democrat leader.
Was this the first signs of a coalition in the making?
The truth was both more mundane and more bizarre.
Mr Mark Payne, one of the tour organisers on the battle bus, had indeed received such a request on his mobile phone — from a senior aide in the yogic flying Natural Law Party.
It was not taken up.
The end-of-term jollity was illustrative of the relaxed atmosphere that has pervaded the final week of the Liberal Democrat election drive — a product not merely of the light-headedness of exhaustion but also of the undoubted success of what has been a well-judged campaign.
Irrespective of the final battle, Mr Ashdown has had a good war.
True, he has had less to lose than his counterparts, for whom failure probably means political death.
He has also yet to be fully tested as a politician rather than a campaigner.
Whether he can match the Tories and Labour at political poker will only become apparent in a hung parliament.
But, given the low base from which the Liberal Democrat party began its struggle for recognition, he has achieved a great deal.
Mr Ashdown has always been careful to stress his belief that the revival of the party would require at least two general elections and his campaign was based on the need for long-term growth rather than on hope in the statistical quirk of a hung parliament.
As the campaign progressed, his rallies became increasingly visionary and evangelical as he narrowed his eyes and gazed at horizons no one else could see.
The world ‘hope’ peppered his text, reportedly leading one rather deaf lady to query: ‘What does he mean, where's the Pope?’
Back at Liberal Democrat headquarters in Cowley Street, Westminster, party strategists were delighted that the campaign has passed without a significant hitch.
The programme and strategy mapped out before the election began was followed — down to Tuesday's photo opportunity in a Cornish seal sanctuary — and was undiverted even by the War of Jennifer's Ear.
The strategy meetings planned as a permanent nightly fixture in Mr Ashdown's eighth floor suite in the Royal Horseguards Hotel were often cut short because there was nothing to discuss.
The tactic of confronting the ‘wasted vote’ syndrome did not, as some had feared, backfire, and few would have predicted that the issue of proportional representation would have been splashed across front pages.
Even the logistics involved in transporting journalists and television crews up and down the country by bus and plane and, on one day, over the Channel by catamaran, worked smoothly.
Mr Ashdown has been quick to contrast his 55 walkabouts with Mr Kinnock's ‘three’, and he has put in the long hours with a soldier's determination to ‘get the job done’.
Once, his helicopter returned so late to Elstree Airport that the pilot had to turn off the runway landing lights himself.
Jet lag caught up just once.
Alighting from the battle bus in Cornwall last week, he said: ‘It's great to be back in Devon.’
A dispute still simmers, however, over the distance travelled by the Ashdown bandwagon.
While the official figure is 25,000 miles — equivalent to circumnavigating the globe — some journalists have calculated it to be nearer 15,000, which they suggest would leave Mr Ashdown stranded in East Timor.
Despite the cramped conditions on the battle bus, and the often hairy flights through appalling weather in the Dan Air turbo prop affectionately dubbed Thunderpaddy One, remarkably few nerves were frayed.
Journalists enjoyed easy access to Mr Ashdown, who, as the leader of the third party, did not suffer the same pressures as his counterparts.
Rarely, however, was the press given a glimpse behind the facade.
A spirit of camaraderie soon developed.
When Thunderpaddy One landed at Heathrow alongside Labour's Red Rose One, Paddy's press formed an impromptu choir to serenade Mr Kinnock with a song they had specially written for Mr Ashdown, which opened with the line: ‘When this rotten tour is over…’
Mr Kinnock reacted to the unorthodox welcoming party with good humour, remarking, as he descended the steps with his wife, Glenys, on his arm: ‘My crew are too busy to write songs.’
We felt sorry for them.
Election ‘92: Later results include marginals
By ANTHONY KING
THE RESULTS in more than 40 seats will be declared today.
Most are large rural constituencies with enormous Conservative or Ulster Unionist majorities, writes Anthony King.
However, there are exceptions, including one Inner London marginal, Kensington.
Held for the Tories by Dudley Fishburn since the 1988 by-election, it is vulnerable to a swing to Labour of 7.1 per cent.
One of the country's two most marginal seats, Brecon and Radnor, also declares today.
Richard Livsey, the Liberal, gained the seat in the 1985 by-election, holding it in 1987 by a mere 56 votes.
The largest seat in Wales, it is a classic three-way marginal.
Mr Livsey faces challenges from both the Conservatives, who could take the seat on a swing of less than one per cent, and Labour who need only 2.8 per cent .
Two of the Tories’ West Country seats could be in danger.
Emma Nicholson, the Tories' former vice-chairman, could lose to Liberal Democrats in Devon West and Torridge, and Sir Gerry Neale is at risk from the Liberal Democrats in North Cornwall.
Most of the Northern Ireland seats counting overnight are safe, but South Down — where Enoch Powell ended his political career in 1987 — is on a knife-edge.
Eddie McGrady of the SDLP, who vanquished Mr Powell five years ago, could lose to the official Ulster Unionists on a swing of less than one per cent.
Election ‘92: ‘A lot less tiring than the average day in Downing Street’
By Robert Hardman
IT WAS 9.15 on Tuesday night, the din of a thousand jubilant Tories echoed round a Wembley conference hall and the verdict from the critics was that John Major's final rally address had been a success.
Surely, the perfect end to a day's electioneering?
Not so for the Conservative campaign managers.
They would have been chewing the carpet but for the fact that the floor was concrete.
The idea had been that Mr Major would finish with a rousing personal plea just before 9pm so his speech would lead the Nine O'Clock News with live scenes of Tory euphoria.
But it went wrong.
The audience were slow to take their seats, the warm-up was too long and Mr Major did not finish his speech until well after nine.
The rally ended up nearer the weather than the headlines.
Publicity-wise, it was a flop.
This was just another example of the way in which the Major camp has consistently missed opportunities.
Just as the overall Tory campaign has had its weaknesses, so has its most important subsection: the Major campaign.
The problem has not been the product — as the marketing men might describe Mr Major — but the packaging.
The strength which seemed to be stressed at the beginning of the campaign was his niceness.
Hence, the cosy start with the Dave Allen bar stool amid the faithful, the safely-sealed school visits, and a single walkabout in the cocoon of Mr Major's constituency.
But everyone knew Mr Major was a pleasant person; it is a quality which his opponents have used to patronise him.
What turned the campaign around was playing on another strength: his genuine fondness for getting among the public, even a hostile public.
It was a change of tactic which was slow in coming.
One of the liveliest days of the campaign came during the first week.
Mr Major's walkabout in Bolton became an ugly and menacing crush.
He waded through it with a non-stop grin and managed to turn it to political advantage.
Later, he delivered the first of his high-tech rallies with a punchy speech and the evening was rounded off with a five-point lead in an opinion poll.
And what followed to capitalise on this the next day?
A dreary, themeless photo opportunity inside a DIY store in Bradford.
At the same time, there was a Conservative faction which wanted to put the Prime Minister in closer, more demanding contact with the public to promote the tougher side of his popular appeal.
Eventually, this faction won and the soap box was produced.
Despite some criticisms that it made him look like Michael Foot, it was a media success.
An average day of a punishing walkabout, some rhetoric from the box and, finally, a combative rally speech presented a different, stronger picture.
Ratings rose accordingly.
Similarly, Mr Major was becoming increasingly relaxed.
The first fortnight was plagued by a stiffness which undermined any sense of confidence.
At photo opportunities or on walkabouts, he seemed to see a Private Eye cover picture in every handshake or pram.
Babies were patted, never kissed.
Pets were looked at, never touched.
Inanimate objects were left well alone.
‘Prime Minister out for a duck,’ he muttered as he drew back from picking up a china duck at an Accrington factory.
In the last 10 days of the trail, however, he became much happier to take risks, although babies remained unkissed.
He also grew increasingly accessible, happy to respond to all but the silliest questions, even if some would have preferred an aloofness closer to Mr Kinnock's campaign style.
One factor which has not emerged during the election is fatigue.
Mr Major has remained unstintingly energetic, contrary to the predictions of some who forecast exhaustion.
‘It's been a lot less tiring than the average day in Downing Street,’ he said yesterday.
The daily schedule of an 8.30 press conference followed by a flight, a bus, a walkabout, a lunch with regional media chiefs, a factory visit, a couple of interviews, a speech and another flight has often meant shorter working hours than a parliamentary day.
On the road, Mr Major's sole retreat has been his battle bus.
On board, the mood has been informal and relaxed, not least because of the smell of the endless bouquets given to Mrs Major.
The battle bus was not the great nerve centre of the nation which it might have appeared.
For all the gadgetry, everything stopped when the photocopier was working because it soaked up all the power.
And Mr Major was determined to keep up the morale.
After his Bolton wandering had turned into a rout, some of his staff were visibly shaken.
As the battle bus pulled out of the crowd, Mr Major pointed out of the window and said: ‘There, that's what we're up against.
That's what we're fighting.’
Right up to yesterday evening, Mr Major was insisting that he had enjoyed the campaign.
Indeed, the battle bus spirit in the last week has been at its most buoyant since Day One.
But if he has to do it all over again, there are likely to be two main changes: a tougher approach from the start and a campaign team which knows what time the Nine O'Clock News starts.
Farmer is shot dead in woods
By Paul Stokes
POLICE investigating the death of a farmer in a copse at his estate uncovered a mystery device last night.
An object with what appeared to be a gun barrel pointing from it was found 30 yards from where Mr Peter Jowett's body lay.
Officers found him face down in the undergrowth minutes after his wife reported him missing on Wednesday night.
Mr Jowett had been shot twice in the back from close range.
Members of the Explosives Ordnance Department went to the 1,000-acre New Manor Farm in Winterslow, Wilts to examine the device.
They had been asked to make sure it was safe before a forensic science and firearms team from Huntingdon could examine it in detail.
Detectives want to establish whether Mr Jowett, 43, was killed by a booby trap or in an elaborate suicide.
They revealed he had been seriously injured in a knife attack at his home four months earlier and had urged them to drop their inquiries.
His blood-soaked body was still warm when officers found it near the A30 road on Wednesday night.
He was wearing a green waxed jacket, leggings and Wellington boots.
His blue Volvo estate was unlocked nearby.
His wife Lavinia, 39, had asked estate manager Mr Brian Ealey to raise the alarm at 10.20pm when he did not return to the farmhouse.
Det Chief Insp Dave Sinclair, of Wiltshire CID, said: ‘There seemed to be no sign of a struggle.
It is the middle of the lambing season and he was meant to be lambing.
‘We can't find out why he drove around his own land when he could have walked.
He was only 300 yards from his house.
‘The last time he was seen alive was at six o'clock in the evening by Mr Ealey.
He became concerned when he could not locate him on the premises, because Mr Jowett was due to take over the lambing.
‘We can find no reason or motive at this time.
He did not appear to have any financial or marital problems.’
Mr Jowett needed two hours of delicate micro-surgery after being stabbed in the groin and chest when he tackled a masked intruder at his home on Nov 27.
He told police his attacker had levered beading from a window of his farmhouse.
Telephone lines to the property are also thought to have been cut.
Mr Sinclair said: ‘Police started preliminary inquiries and then Mr Jowett said he wanted us to stop.
‘It seemed a bit odd, but it was an attempted burglary on his premises and an assault on his body and we had to respect his wishes.
‘He wanted no protection or assistance.
He didn't give an explanation why he wanted the inquiry stopped.
‘It was a ferocious attack on his groin using either a knife or a screwdriver.
The hospital contacted us because his injuries were so bad.
Neither Mr Jowett nor his wife contacted us.’
Mrs Jowett and her children Alexander, seven, and Elizabeth, five, were last night being comforted by relatives and a police victim support team.
The Rev Clive Cohen, vicar of All Saints with St John Church, Winterslow, visited the family who he described as regular churchgoers.
He said: ‘The family are absolutely devastated.
They are coping as well as possible, but they are desperately upset.
‘This has been such a dreadful shock for the community.
He was very well known in the area.
It is a dreadful thing to happen.’
The dead man's father Mr Humphrey Jowett, and his wife Elizabeth, who live at nearby Manor Farm, Newton Tony, were on their yacht in the Caribbean.
Blunders led to terror at 17,000ft
By David Graves
POOR work practices by British Airways maintenance engineers at Birmingham airport have been criticised in a report into an incident in which a pilot was nearly sucked out of his aircraft.
Capt Tim Lancaster was saved by his crew when a windscreen blew out as he flew the BAC 1–11 with 81 passengers from Birmingham to Malaga in June 1989.
His co-pilot made an emergency landing at Southampton.
In its report, the Department of Transport's Air Accident Investigation Branch said the windscreen fitting process was ‘characterised by a series of poor work practices, poor judgments and perceptual errors, each one of which eroded the factors of safety built into the method of operation’.
It said the Civil Aviation Authority failed adequately to monitor the airline's maintenance procedures and criticised air traffic controllers for failing to treat the emergency with the urgency it warranted.
The branch had previously disclosed that a BA fitter had used the wrong bolts to secure the windscreen panel, which fell off at 17,000 feet, 20 minutes after take-off.
Eighty-four bolts used to secure the windscreen were 0.026 of an inch below the diameters of the specified bolts and another six were the correct diameter but 0.1 of an inch too short.
Mistakes on an earlier installation had not been spotted and old and new bolts were mismatched.
The report, leaked to BBC local radio station CWR in Coventry, said: ‘A series of clues were available to the shift maintenance manager to draw attention to the use of incorrect bolts but all went un-noticed or unheeded.’
It said there was no back-up procedure to detect mistakes.
A ‘final inspection’ would probably have detected the error, which was blamed on ‘inadequate care, poor trade practices, failure to adhere to company standards and use of unsuitable equipment’.
The report said: ‘A safety-critical task…was undertaken by one individual who also carried total responsibility for the quality achieved and the installation was not tested until the aircraft was airborne on a passenger carrying flight.’
It said the shift maintenance manager, who was likely to be overtired, used spectacles to read small print or figures but did not wear them while replacing the panel.
Turning to the CAA, the report said inspectors had failed to detect any significant engineering problems at Birmingham.
One inspection visit, it said, lasted half a day.
‘The visit, in view of the time allocated, was necessarily superficial and only likely to have picked up gross discrepancies,’ it said.
The report said an air traffic controller in the Bristol sector lacked sufficient training and did not formulate an emergency plan.
‘His training in the handling of emergency situations was probably inadequate.
‘The Bristol sector controller neither complied with the co-pilot's specific request for radar navigational assistance, nor did he advise the flight of its position or give any relevant information regarding Southampton, such as current weather, runway in use, pressure settings etc.’
Safety recommendations included a suggestion that the CAA examine the applicability of self-certification to aircraft engineering safety critical tests in which components or systems were cleared without functional checks.
It said BA should review its quality assurance system; introduce independent assessment of standards and investigate work practices at Birmingham.
The report also said the CAA should review its supervisory checks and consider the need for periodic training and testing of engineers and that controllers should take emergency and refresher courses.
A BA spokesman said he could not comment in detail until the report had been published.
But the airline had seen the draft report and accepted its findings.
All its recommendations had been implemented.
Wellington suspends 11 drug pupils
By Michael Fleet
ELEVEN pupils at Wellington College, Berks, have been suspended over alleged drug-taking.
The pupils at the £3,465-a-term school, boys and girls aged 16 and over, are to be interviewed by police at their homes as the school has broken up for Easter.
They are alleged to have taken cannabis at two end-of-term parties outside the school.
Two of them have also been accused to taking the drug ecstasy.
Mr John Bone, the school's assistant bursar, said that some of the pupils were almost certain to be expelled.
‘Independent schools have great problems with control of pupils using illegal substances because our pupils are in that socio-economic group which makes them attractive to drug-pushers.’
Last year 12 Wellington College pupils were expelled for taking cannabis and LSD.
‘We are determined to uphold the law at Wellington and to keep it a drug-free zone,’ said Mr Bone.
Mother must return sons to US father
By Paul Stokes
A MOTHER fighting for custody of her two young sons has been ordered to hand them back to her estranged American husband from whom she fled a month ago.
Mrs Teresa Leinen, 25, may be parted from Sean, three, and Ashley, one, within five days after the High Court ruled that she broke international laws.
She said: ‘It's a dreadful thought, but there's nothing I can do about it.
I was told I would lose, but it doesn't make it any easier.’
Her father, Mr Christopher Monohan, will take the boys back to the United States where they will live with Jeffrey Leinen, a military policeman with the USAF.
The couple met while on holiday in Greece in 1987 and married after she joined him at his base in South Dakota.
But she filed for divorce in June last year after a series of violent rows.
An injunction was later issued stopping her taking the children out of the state.
She dropped divorce proceedings hoping the ban would be lifted.
But a month ago, she returned to Britain, taking the children with her.
Lawyers for her husband contested her action in the High Court in London on Wednesday and she was given seven days to hand them back.
Mrs Leinen, who is staying with her mother Mrs Ann Monohan, in Stratton, Swindon, Wilts, says she does not have the money to fight the custody battle in American courts.
She said: ‘I can't believe this ruling has been made and I just don't know what more I can do.
‘I'm scared of what may happen when the children go back.
Jeffrey kept telling me he was only seeking custody because he wanted me back in the States.
‘I am devastated.
I can't afford to fight this in the American courts and I genuinely fear for the safety of my children.’
Mrs Leinen is spending her last few days with the children taking them for trips, including to London Zoo and the seaside.
She said her only hope of having the boys returned was if her husband had difficulty in looking after them.
Mrs Leinen made allegations of brutality against her husband.
‘There was another side to him which I didn't see at first.
I was terrified of him, but I found myself in a horrible Catch 22 situation.
‘The USAF do not tolerate domestic violence.
If they had found out about it, Jeffrey would have been kicked out.
We would not have been able to afford to look after Sean and Ashley.’
Briton given top military job in Nato
By PETER ALMOND
A BRITON was given the top military post in Nato yesterday, writes Peter Almond, Defence Correspondent.
Field Marshal Sir Richard Vincent, Chief of the Defence Staff, becomes chairman of the military committee.
It is the first time since 1974 that a British commander has been voted to the post by the 14-member committee.
A Briton heads Nato's Army Rapid Reaction Corps and another is second-in-command to General John Galvin, the American Supreme Allied Commander in Europe.
‘Britain now holds almost all the top military jobs in Nato,’ said a Nato spokesman in Brussels, where the military committee was preparing for today's talks with chiefs of staff from almost all the east European and former Soviet republics.
Sir Richard, 60, who beat a challenge from Belgian Gen Jose Charlier, takes over the three-year post from Norwegian Gen Vigleik Eide.
In his new post, he is chief military adviser to the Secretary General and will have a key role in the implementation of security arrangements with east European countries.
Britons abroad shun the vote
By Colin Randall
MORE THAN two million Britons living abroad have not taken the opportunity to vote in this election.
Despite a £750,000 Government campaign, only 31,942 overseas residents have taken advantage of legislation giving the vote to expatriates who have lived in Britain at any time during the past 20 years.
Even this figure represents a fall of 2,500 on 1991.
About a third of the estimated six million Britons living abroad are believed to qualify under a 1989 amendment to the 1985 Representation of the People Act which allows them to register as proxy voters.
The Tories have been most active in rallying support, running 52 branches of Conservatives Abroad and claiming the support of four in five of those who register.
Labour is scornful of the effort and opposes the use of taxpayers' money to pursue absent voters.
Mr Paul Whelan, the party's organisation officer, claims 10 times as much is spent chasing each expatriate vote as has been devoted to encouraging each unregistered adult living in Britain to claim theirs.
But Mr David Smith, director of the Conservatives Abroad operation, believes the Tory drive is electorally worthwhile.
A mere 84 votes spread over three marginal constituencies — Brighton Kemptown (Lab majority seven), Ealing North (27) and Wellingborough (47)— in 1964 would have blocked the Wilson Government.
Ten years later, 324 extra Tory votes in Caernarvon, Sowerby and Stockport North would have meant no Lib-Lab pact.
The Tories have identified 73 constituencies, 11 of them marginals, where where 100 or more overseas residents have registered to cast proxy votes on April 9.
In Australia, only 1,600 Britons have registered even though two million retain British citizenship and up to a third are thought to qualify under the 20-year rule.
In Spain, there is greater interest — but still only 5,100 registered British voters out of at least 300,000 expatriates.
Mr Smith said: ‘It is more than anything a question of contacting them and getting the forms out.
‘We have had literally hundreds of letters and calls this week from people wanting to register but they can't now, of course, because they are too late.’
‘Superb’ brain for reforms
By Antonia Feuchtwanger
PROFESSOR Raymond Plant, whose work could help to change radically the British constitution if Labour wins the election, has been a Labour Party member for 30 years.
But in political science departments, normally among the bitchier and more partisan realms of academe, they respect the fairness and intelligence of the chairman of Labour's commission on electoral systems.
Under a Labour government, this committee would become an official inquiry into electoral reform.
The party has already accepted the committee's recommendation that a devolved Scottish Parliament should be elected by the additional member system of proportional representation.
The official inquiry would look at PR for the Commons, reform of the Lords, European Parliament elections and regional assemblies.
Prof Plant, 47, will not say how much change he expects by the time he retires — even though, as an expert on the German philosopher Hegel, historic change on a grand scale fascinates him.
The professor is ‘a very practical man’, his colleague Prof Peter Calvert says warmly, in addition to having an ‘outstanding brain’.
Married with three sons, Prof Plant lives in Bassett, Southampton, where he is professor of politics.
On a day when Mr Kinnock was storming Southampton with helicopter and balloons, Prof Plant was quietly having lunch at home after a visit to his department.
‘I was born and bred up in Grimsby,’ he said.
‘I found Anthony Crosland, the MP there, personally very energising.
So was his kind of social democracy.
‘I had intended to become an Anglican priest, but I saw more dark than light.
I went to Manchester to teach philosophy, though I am still an Anglican,’ added Prof Plant.
Prof Plant chaired the Winchester diocese committee on the anti-Thatcherite Faith in the City report.
He now works in a group set up by the Bishop of Ely to work on a better understanding of market forces than that shown in Faith in the City, he says.
Forms of PR Labour would consider
By Antonia Feuchtwanger
UNDER a Labour government, the party's internal working group on electoral reform chaired by Prof Raymond Plant would become an official inquiry into proportional representation.
These are the kinds of system the inquiry would look at:
This is the PR the Liberal Democrats want.
The constituency needs to be large, preferably with at least four seats.
The voter then has four votes.
In the polling booth, the voter marks his favourite candidate number one, his next best number two and so on.
To win one of those four seats, a candidate has to reach a ‘quota’ of votes.
The quota is the smallest number of votes the candidate has to get in order to be sure of getting a seat.
The tellers look first at who receives the first preference on each ballot paper and put into each candidate's box every ballot paper on which he is number one.
Those who are above the quota at this stage are instantly deemed elected.
Any surplus votes they had are re-allocated to the candidate who gets the second preference.
Also at this stage, candidates with the fewest first preference votes are eliminated and their ballot papers shared out to those candidates who appear as second preferences on those papers.
This reshuffling goes on until all four seats are filled.
The STV system is used in the Irish Republic.
Votes are not for a particular person but for a list put up by a party.
Either large, multi-member constituencies are used, or the country is treated as one, as in the Netherlands and Israel.
Seats are divided between the parties according to the proportion of the vote they win in the constituency.
Seats are allocated to individuals according to position on the list (party favourites first).
The pure form, without constituencies, was used in the ill-fated Weimar Republic in Germany between the wars.
Variants include: Italian tweak — In Italy and Belgium, you can either chose the list of candidates your party has preselected for you, or tick your favourite and tweak his or her name up the preselected list.
People Before Parties -Luxembourg, for example, allows electors to give personal votes to candidates from a variety of parties.
Each party gets a block of seats which are doled out to individuals according to their personal following.
A variety of list system.
You have two votes.
One goes to elect a member of parliament on a first past the post, single member constituency basis.
The other goes towards a party list, with no choice of candidate.
It is used to top up the seats awarded in proportion to the overall vote.
If a party wins two constituency seats, but on the overall vote should have five, three candidates are taken off the list.
The Additional Member System is used in Germany, with a five per cent threshold intended to exclude tiny, extreme parties.
This system, used in Australia, is like STV but with ordinary single member constituencies.
You list candidates in order of preference.
The candidate who gets more than half of all the first preferences, is the winner.
If nobody gets an overall majority, the candidate coming last is eliminated and his votes go to the candidates who were second preference.
This is repeated until a winner emerges.
Single member constituencies again.
In the first round, a candidate winning more than the other candidates put together wins the seat.
In the remaining seats, the candidates who got more than an eighth of the total vote go to a second ballot.
The winner is the one with most votes.
This system is used in France.
Post-haste posters
By Ben Fenton
IT MIGHT be fair to assume that the people who made the posters for both Labour and the Conservatives would be experts on the way the campaign has been run.
But the Roblett brothers profess ignorance of the 1992 election issues.
‘Most of the time we were so busy rushing the posters out that we didn't have time to read them or think about what they said,’ said Mr Mark Roblett, 27, the elder of the two brothers whose south London company came to the aid of both parties.
‘During the campaign I never watched telly or saw my family and I never really knew what was going on in the election,’ said his brother Andrew, 26.
The closest they got to an opinion on the two campaigns was when Andrew said that Labour's campaign organisers had been ‘more laid back’ than the Tories, but his brother immediately disagreed, saying that perhaps the Conservatives had shown more flexibility in their poster plans.
Apart from this in-built political impartiality, the speed and low-cost of the Robletts' unique photographic reproduction of posters allowed the two main contenders to place orders one evening and have the finished product displayed at their conferences next day.
The one-off posters featuring slogans that became familiar parts of the electoral joust also appeared on a single billboard in south London for photo-opportunity launches.
Their ability to produce a full-sized poster in less than four hours gave an unprecedented flexibility to the two big parties in the cut and thrust of the campaign.
The cheapness of a photographic reproduction as opposed to traditional litho-printing techniques also helped the party budgets.
‘It would cost them too much to do a one-off in the normal way and we offered a cheap alternative.
‘A snap of their slogan in national newspapers would be worth tens of thousands of pounds to them and our costs are peanuts next to that,’ said Andrew.
The brothers saw their market niche as the one-off poster.
The election arrived just at the right time.
If 1987 was the election of the ‘photo-opportunity’, then 1992 has seen the emergence of the ‘poster-opportunity’.
Yesterday Concord Posterlink, Britain's largest outdoor space-buying agency, put the cost of the political ‘poster-opportunities’ at almost £3 million for the four weeks of the campaign.
International: Japanese revive old ideas for new plane
By Glynn Jones
THE world's airlines say that they have carried a billion of the 5.5 billion people on Earth.
The seers in the industry are beginning to wonder how, if the population reaches 10 billion by 2050, they can find room for yet another billion passengers.
At the world's main airports a plane arrives or departs every 30 seconds.
There is no room to squeeze in more runways, and no large groups of people in the advanced countries would tolerate vast new airports in their back yards.
Japan, with the highest population density, is worst afflicted.
North America and Europe are catching up fast, but it is appropriate that a Japanese company has gone back 30 years for a discarded technology to solve some of the problems.
The concept is propeller-driven vertical take-off and landing — VTOL.
In the 1960s and '70s it was seen as whisking people from a London roof-top to one in Paris in less than an hour.
A succession of weird-looking prototypes were tried.
They had one thing in common.
Their engines tilted upwards for vertical take-off and landing, and then pointed forward, parallel to the fuselage, in level flight.
They did not need runways — the reinforced tops of office blocks would do.
Because there was still enough runway space to go around, they failed to attract the airlines.
Military interest focused on the Harrier, a VTOL plane which used jet propulsion.
After the '70s the helicopter served the wealthy, but it was noisy, not at all the vehicle for mass travel.
VTOL languished, but now it is being resurrected by a Japanese company, Ishida Aerospace, in Fort Worth, Texas.
Dr David Kocurek, chief executive, makes the new plane sound an easy marketing project.
‘What the world wants is a fast and comfortable commuter airliner that can land and take off from helicopter pads and heliports, which are now fairly common in the big cities,’ he said.
So-called commuter planes that carry up to 150 passengers whisper rather than roar because they use the latest propeller technology.
But they need runways, which is the problem.
Dr Kocurek and Mr Tom Boardman, his English chief designer, are creating a plane in which the whole wing hinges through 90 degrees, pointing vertically for take-off and landing.
It would have the quietness of the commuter plane with the advantage of VTOL.
‘The plane will have four engines,’ said Dr Kocurek, ‘but mounted in two pairs on the wings, each one driving a six-bladed propeller.
‘For take-off and landing, each propeller works like a helicopter rotor, pulling the plane into the sky or letting it down on the helipad.
The engines are turboprops, jets geared to drive propellers.’
Known as the Ishida TW68, the plane is in its final design stages, and engineers will soon start on a prototype.
The TW68 will start edging forward the moment its wheels clear the ground.
After eight seconds the wings will be horizontal and forward speed will be about 100 mph.
If an engine fails, it will still climb vertically with a full load, Dr Kocurek said.
The aeroplane is due to fly for the first time in 1995 and, once certified safe, should be flying passengers by 1997.
The TW68 is designed to have a maximum range of 1,000 miles while carrying up to 14 passengers.
International: Turks threaten to bomb Bekaa Valley Kurds
By Amberin Zaman in Ankara
TURKEY says it will ‘seriously consider’ attacking Kurdish guerrilla training camps in the Bekaa Valley unless Syria takes immediate and effective action to end its support for the Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK).
In recent weeks Ankara has taken an increasingly hard line against Syria over the 5,000 Kurdish guerrillas in camps in the Syrian-controlled valley in Lebanon.
Mr Ismet Sezgin, Turkish Interior Minister, who is visiting Damascus next week, said: ‘I am going to warn the Syrians once and for all against their support for terrorism.’
He will demand that the Syrians stop arming the rebels and allowing them to penetrate Turkey across their border, and is also expected to ask them to hand over Damascus-based Mr Abdullah Ocalan, leader of the Marxist PKK.
Mr Suleyman Demirel, Turkish Prime Minister, who is under mounting pressure to curb the PKK's growing military strength, gave warning that Turkey would ‘hit the terrorists even in Baghdad and the Bekaa if need be’.
Western military sources confirmed that Turkey had the military capability to carry out an air raid on the Bekaa.
Turkey could use F-4 Phantom bombers which, according to Turkish military sources, could reach the area in 20 minutes without crossing Syrian airspace.
The Turkish military is believed to be sharing intelligence with Israel, which in 1982 carried out a highly successful raid on the Bekaa Valley, shooting down more than 80 Syrian planes.
A Western diplomat said: ‘Syria is militarily no match for Turkey.
What Turkey has to consider is the diplomatic fall-out.’
Turkish intervention on Arab territory is sure to provoke strong Arab and Muslim reaction.
Anxious to keep the Syrians at the negotiating table for the Middle East peace talks, the West would also discourage such action, Western diplomatic sources said.
‘But Turkey was willing to pay the price [the US arms embargo]when it intervened in Cyprus in 1974.
It might feel the same way again,’ one diplomat pointed out.
The war of words with Damascus follows escalating violence in Kurdish-dominated south-east Turkey, where the PKK has been fighting security forces for the past eight years in a struggle for an independent Kurdish state.
Syria's response that it ‘cannot control what goes on in the Bekaa’ and that Turkey ‘should first try to solve the Kurdish problem within its own borders’has served only to confirm Turkish suspicions about Syrian intentions.
It is no secret that Damascus has been using the PKK as a bargaining chip to press Turkey into complying with its demands for more water from the Euphrates, on which it heavily depends.
Both Iraq and Syria are worried that a huge Turkish dam project on the river will hit their water supply, and have accused Ankara of ‘using the water weapon’.
International: China's editors ordered to toe line on reform
By Graham Hutchings in Peking
CHINA'S official press, a Marxist stronghold since the 1989 Peking massacre, has been ordered to give full support to the cause of bolder, faster reform championed by the nation's elder statesman, Deng Xiaoping.
Leading editors in Peking were told to toe the new line at a conference organised by the Communist Party's propaganda department.
‘At a time when our country is facing a new and favourable situation for economic construction and faster reform, workers in the propaganda field must study Deng Xiaoping's remarks, liberate their thinking…and provide theoretical support,’ editors were told, according to the People's Daily newspaper.
Participants were charged with ‘creating a fine ideological environment’ in keeping with the spirit of Deng's spring reform offensive and a recent party politburo statement calling for opposition to ‘Leftism’— code for hard-line Marxism.
The publicity given to the conference is important because both the propaganda department and the People's Daily, the official voice of the Communist Party, have long preferred stability and ideological orthodoxy to the no-holds-barred economic reforms favoured by Deng.
The organisations' leaders are believed to have incurred Deng's displeasure, and some observers doubt they can survive the new reform campaign.
Nevertheless, what may encourage them to hold on as long as they can is the apparent split among the ‘eight elders’ over the whole question of reform and opposing Leftism.
These eight are the select group of veteran revolutionaries who remain powerful, despite their average age of 84 years.
Of the eight, only President Yang Shangkun, Deng's closest ally and sword-bearer, and Bo Yibo, have come out unequivocally in favour of the new line.
Peng Zhen, at 90 the oldest of the old guard, has publicly backed the call for faster reform, but not the need to oppose Leftism.
A few days ago Li Xiannian, a former President, broke his public silence to support the controversial Three Gorges project to dam the Yangtze, but did not use the occasion to back faster reforms.
The three remaining elders — Chen Yun, Wang Zhen and Song Renqiong, each of whom is believed to be in poor health — have conspicuously failed to put their name to a cause that, according to their past views, could lead to a ‘capitalist restoration’.
International: Federal ‘sting’ hits sale of arms to Iraq
By Hugh Davies in New York
A PLOT by Russians and Poles to sell nuclear equipment and fighter planes to Iraq has been foiled in an FBI ‘sting’ operation, officials said in New York yesterday.
Agents posed as Iraqi arms salesmen to allegedly trap a Californian arms merchant, four officials of the former communist regime in Poland, and five officials of the Russian government.
The American, Ronald Hendron, is said to have told the agents he could deliver Russian and Polish supplied uranium and atomic bomb triggers, as well as AK-47 rifles, grenade launchers, surface-to-air missiles and MiG jets.
US attorney Andrew Maloney, in charge of the case, said the sanctions-busting conspiracy involved shipments of weapons from Eastern Europe via America to Iraq.
Charges against Hendron centre on breaches of UN embargoes against Iraq.
The ex-officials of Warsaw's former communist regime, including an army deputy chief-of-staff, are under arrest in Frankfurt.
America plans to extradite them.
International: Yeltsin fights off attacks on his power
By John Kampfner in Moscow
PRESIDENT Yeltsin consolidated his authority yesterday by persuading Russia's highest parliament to shelve an attempt to trim his powers and by defusing a dangerous row with Ukraine over the Black Sea Fleet.
After backroom lobbying by presidential aides, the organising committee of the Congress of People's Deputies agreed to drop a resolution that would have recommended that Mr Yeltsin should be deprived of his post of Prime Minister and the right to select his Cabinet.
The committee was last night drafting a softer version that would ask Mr Yeltsin to appoint someone else to head the government, a demand that he has refused to contemplate.
Ministers made clear on Wednesday that they would resign en masse if Mr Yeltsin's hand was forced.
Another persuasive defence of economic reforms yesterday by Mr Yegor Gaidar, First Deputy Prime Minister, may have been enough to have seen off remaining threats.
A senior administration source told The Daily Telegraph that the Yeltsin team had informally agreed a ‘sacrifice list’ of minor ministries that it would throw one-by-one to hardliners ‘like bones’if the need arose.
The four days of the Congress so far have witnessed much angry barking by Communists and their allies but few proposals with which to attack the government.
One of Mr Yeltsin's top advisers, Mrs Galina Starovoitova, said that if his powers were challenged, he would go above the heads of Congress and directly to the people with a referendum.
In a boost to the government, trade unionists from the Kuzbas mining region in Western Siberia pledged support for Mr Gaidar's radical reforms and denounced a local hardline deputy.
Earlier, deputies were told of a breakthrough in the Black Sea Fleet conflict which had escalated tensions between Moscow and Kiev to dangerous levels.
Mr Yeltsin and President Leonid Kravchuk agreed during two telephone calls to suspend their respective decrees on taking control of the fleet and to establish a joint conciliatory commission to look into the problem.
The two Presidents would take part in the later stages of the commission's work.
Bilateral talks are being planned for tomorrow between the Russian and Ukrainian foreign ministers, who are due to meet their Belarussian and Kazakh counterparts to discuss ratification of the US-Soviet Start agreement on cutting strategic nuclear missiles.
In the first practical sign of a cooling of passions, the old Soviet flag was restored as an interim measure to about 20 ships of the fleet, which on Wednesday had hoisted the Russian ensign of St Andrew.
International: Democrats' chief wins Albanian presidency
By Adrian Brown in Tirana
THE Albanian parliament elected Dr Sali Berisha, 47, as President last night to replace Mr Ramiz Alia, who resigned last week after his Socialist Party of former Communists was voted out of power.
Dr Berisha, a 47-year-old cardiologist who led his Democratic Party to victory in legislative elections last month, becomes Albania's first non-communist President.
After his election to a five-year term, he said: ‘Albania has been a one-man country for 70 years, and for some years should be a parliamentary country.
I think we need not only a strong parliament but also a strong presidency.’
Outgoing Mr Alia, 67, was a right-hand man of the late dictator Enver Hoxha.
Two years ago, when the hard-line Communist Party still held the country in an iron grip, Dr Berisha, the son of Muslim peasants, was one of the first intellectuals to call for democracy and pluralism.
But critics have accused him of being autocratic and intolerant of dissent.
The incoming government faces a very difficult period, with Albania's economy in shreds.
The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank are expected to impose strict conditions on any aid.
The implementation of economic reforms could prompt strikes and even riots in Europe's poorest country.
Dr Berisha is probably the only person in Albania with the credibility to smooth the way for change.
International: Black Sea sailors shamed by conflict As the power-struggle for control continues at presidential level, the men of the fleet talk to Stephen Mulvey in Sevastopol
By STEPHEN MULVEY
THE RUSSIAN and Ukrainian Presidents struggling for power over the Black Sea Fleet may be pleasing their nationalist countrymen, but the sailors at the fleet's Crimean headquarters feel only shame and humiliation at the spectacle of a historic navy in chaos.
The mood in Sevastopol is anti-nationalistic, with nostalgia for the centralised structures of the Soviet Union and the slowly dying Commonwealth of Independent States.
A glance at the harbour shows the fleet is not yet divided along Russian-Ukrainian lines.
The Soviet navy flag, with red star and hammer and sickle on a white and blue background, is everywhere, but there are no Russian flags of St Andrew or the Ukrainian blue and yellow within sight.
Only about 30 warships out of 300 carried out an order to hoist the Russian flag on Wednesday before it was repealed yesterday.
‘I feel humiliated and insulted.
This country is in a mess, and that says it all,’ said one of three petty officers from the anti-submarine vessel Red Crimea.
He was leaning against a sun-drenched wall, yards from the city council offices where talks between Ukrainian parliamentary deputies and fleet commanders went into their third day yesterday.
‘Yeltsin and Kravchuk are dragging us down to their level, and Admiral Chernavin just gives in,’ he said, adding: ‘I believe the military will seize power.’
The political battle has been smouldering since Ukraine declared its independence in August.
It reached its peak earlier this week when both Presidents set up rival command structures, forcing officers to choose whom to obey and from whom to risk a charge of mutiny.
The petty officers said men of 72 nationalities were serving on the Red Crimea as ‘one big happy family’ and they did not want to be split up.
‘The division of the fleet creates the possibility of conflict,’ said one.
‘That worries us.
Russia will never fight Ukraine, I will never fight my friends, but who predicted fighting in Armenia and Azerbaijan, Moldova, Georgia?’
While some sailors said they had taken an oath to the Soviet Union and would never take another, others said they would serve in any fleet as long as the pay was right.
‘We are professionals,’ said one of these.
‘That is, we are mercenaries.
We have a contract.
We work and they pay us — though not enough.’
Sevastopol, one of the few remaining closed cities on former Soviet territory, with access restricted to permit holders, is not expensive by the hyper-inflated standards of Moscow and Kiev, but supplies are bad.
For most of this year milk has been sold only to families with young children.
Cafes sell cakes made without sugar.
Tea is an uncommon luxury.
Most of its 380,000 population is economically dependent on the Black Sea Fleet, but it is clear that many have run out of patience with the arguments.
‘I just wish the fleet would go away,’ said a taxi driver.
‘Then we might be left in peace.’
International: Tsongas to stay out of the race
By Ian Brodie in Washington
PAUL TSONGAS decided yesterday not to re-enter the US presidential election, despite his strong showing in the New York Democratic primary, where he came second without campaigning.
The announcement was a further boost to Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas, who already has 60 per cent of the delegates needed to win the Democrats' nomination on the first ballot at the party's convention in July.
The Tsongas name will remain on future primary ballots as a ‘ghost’ candidate, but the former senator from Massachusetts called on supporters still working for him to cease their efforts.
Mr Tsongas, a pro-business liberal, argued that to restart the campaign he abandoned three weeks ago for lack of funds would only make him a spoiler.
‘I reject that role,’ he said.
He pointedly did not release the 539 delegates he has already amassed.
But he left open the option of serving as Mr Clinton's vice-presidential running-mate in the general election against President Bush.
Above all, Mr Tsongas stressed the need for his message to be heard.
He campaigned for economic growth through direct government help to industry, financial discipline, individual rights and environmental protection.
His package appealed primarily to upscale white suburbanites, but it has taken hold with other candidates and could be merged with Mr Clinton's platform without either side losing face.
Mr Tsongas announced his second withdrawal from the race in Boston, where he is a corporate lawyer.
He employed the wry, self-deprecation that made him a refreshing presence on the campaign trail.
But he also issued a serious warning to both Democrats and Republicans that the old ways of taking the US into ‘economic ruin and social chaos’ were over.
International: Serbs take key town in Bosnia offensive
By Michael Montgomery in Sarajevo
A BELGRADE-BASED guerrilla group captured a strategic town in the breakaway Yugoslavian republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina yesterday in another victory for Serbs seeking to partition the newly independent state.
The Serbian Volunteer Force, a militia backed by Serbia's government, used artillery and mortar fire to force the mainly Muslim town of Zvornik into submission.
Sarajevo Radio said a newly formed ‘military council’ had ordered all Muslim inhabitants to surrender their weapons, and Yugoslavian federal army patrols were reported in the town centre after the fighting ceased.
Belgrade Radio said Serb forces had ‘liberated’ the eastern Bosnian town, which controls two important bridges spanning the Drina river border between Bosnia and Serbia.
Six thousand civilians are reported to have fled Zvornik.
Unconfirmed reports said at least six people were killed and 15 wounded.
Zvornik was the latest town to fall in a Serb offensive apparently aimed at securing an ethnic state incorporating more than 60 per cent of Bosnia's territory.
Heavy fighting also erupted yesterday in the eastern Bosnian towns of Visegrad and Foca.
Sarajevo Radio said battles were continuing near Mostar in the west between federal army forces and Croat militias seeking to widen their control in parts of Bosnia heavily populated by Croats.
Muslim and Croat leaders now in charge of governing Bosnia as a newly independent country accused Serbia and the Serbian-dominated federal army yesterday of fomenting civil war.
Bosnia's five-member presidency has announced the formation of a republican army after assuming emergency powers to prepare a co-ordinated defence.
The powers allow it to rule by decree and declare a state of war.
International: Euro-Disney chaos fear
By Our Paris Correspondent
Britons were urged to steer clear of Euro-Disneyland near Paris on its opening day on Sunday, as French officials gave warning of vast crowds and nightmare traffic jams.
A strike by drivers on the rail line serving the area will make matters much worse.
‘Why not go in September?’ said M Georges Sarre, Transport Minister.
International: Dictator who sold out country to drug barons faces 120 years' jail After a seven-month trial, Manuel Noriega has been convicted on eight charges.
Hugh Davies reports from New York on the outcome of the marathon case
By HUGH DAVIES
MANUEL NORIEGA, one time ‘Maximum Leader’ of Panama, was found guilty in Miami yesterday of selling his country to the Medellin cocaine cartel of Colombia for $4 million in bribes.
After a marathon seven-month trial, Noriega, 54, the first foreign leader to be convicted in America, faces up to 120 years' jail.
He was found guilty of eight of the 10 charges against him.
The dictator, captured after the Dec 20, 1989, invasion of Panama by 23,000 American troops, was acquitted of counts involving the smuggling of 700lb of cocaine into America on a yacht.
Convictions were obtained on charges of money laundering, cocaine manufacturing and distribution, racketeering and the building in Panama of a state-of-the-art drug laboratory.
Noriega showed no emotion at the verdict reached after five days of jury deliberation.
One of his daughters, however, burst into tears.
The trial has aged and diminished him.
He no longer looks the beady-eyed and pitted-faced thug.
His lawyers will almost certainly appeal against the verdict.
Sentence is to be imposed on July 10, Judge William Hoeveler said.
Legal sources said an underground cell was being prepared for him on a maximum security row at the federal penitentiary in Marion, Illinois, America's most chilling jail.
His was the strangest of trials, with a conviction gained by evidence from some of the sleaziest characters to take a witness stand.
The outcome is a clear victory for President Bush, countering criticism of his failure to oust President Saddam Hussein.
The success in putting behind American bars an odious dictator is all the more remarkable because it also neatly winds up the threads of the Iran-Contra scandal.
The trial's long-awaited ‘smoking gun’ failed to surface.
From the outset there was a fear that the defence intended to home in on Mr Bush's relationship with Noriega, both as CIA director and Vice-President.
But nothing happened.
Cynics believe that the administration may have made a secret deal with Noriega, and some of the defence testimony seems to bear out this theory.
Others say that the outcome of the case confirms that federal prisoner No 41586 was bluffing.
Observers of the seven-month trial are left wondering who edited out the intrigue.
At some point, between the end of the prosecution in December and the beginning of the defence in February, Noriega's lawyers abandoned what was to be a sensational defence: a claim that Noriega was a dupe of CIA-contract pilots running guns to Nicaraguan Contras and returning home via Panama with cocaine.
This would have brought Mr Bush into the case as his Vice-Presidential office was the first in Washington to be contacted from Central America when an aircraft was shot down by the Sandinistas.
The suggestion was that his subordinates might have been running the illegal operation.
Mr Frank Rubino, Noriega's lawyer, then ditched threats to subpoena the Iran-Contra gang led by Oliver North.
Evidence from Cuba's President Castro, video-taped by the defence in Havana, was also abandoned.
In a script worthy of an Oliver Stone conspiracy movie, officials of the government trying permanently to corner Noriega emerged to give the accused his best character evidence.
A former chief of the US Drug Enforcement Administration, an organisation regarded as a firm enemy of Noriega, swore to tell the whole truth and proceeded to laud Noriega for his ‘long-standing support’ and ‘personal commitment’to the drug wars.
The US prosecutors painted the accused as ‘a crooked cop’, co-operating for $4.6 million (£2.6 million) with the Medellin cocaine cartel by shielding US-bound drug shipments as they moved through Panama.
But Mr Bush's old agency, the CIA, suddenly produced the trial's only real, live agent to blow apart a key assertion: that Noriega had fallen out with the cartel after his troops destroyed a state-of-the-art cocaine laboratory in Panama.
The government insisted this was the reason he secretly contacted Castro to mediate a solution that would save him from the drug dealers' retribution.
To the contrary, said white-haired Donald Winters, CIA station chief in Panama at the time, who met frequently with Noriega to trade information about Cuba, Nicaragua and El Salvador.
In fact, he said, the accused met with Castro specifically at the behest of the CIA, to convey American thinking on insurgencies in Nicaragua and El Salvador.
The outcome was so important that Mr William Casey, CIA director, secretly travelled to Panama to be briefed by Noriega.
What began as the trial of the century after the most expensive manhunt in US history, fizzled out in what prosecutors termed a simple drug conspiracy with the leading player working both sides of the street.
Just what happens to Noriega remains to be seen.
Prosecutors must determine if they want to continue to harry him.
A second indictment is pending in Tampa on charges of marijuana smuggling.
Then there is a suit in Miami over a missing $6 billion (£3.4 billion) from Panama's treasury.
His successor, President Endara, says he wants him extradited to Panama for his alleged part in the 1985 beheading of the politician Hugo Spadafora.
But Mr Endara is probably relieved to see him off to a US prison.
His regime is shaky, with 30 government agencies either run by former Noriega cronies or staffed by ex-members of the defence forces.
International: De Klerk in key visit to Nigeria
By David Bamford in Lagos
PRESIDENT de Klerk arrived in Abuja, Nigeria, yesterday at the start of a landmark visit by a South African head of state to Africa's most populous country.
President Ibrahim Babangida is going ahead with two days of talks with Mr de Klerk despite the refusal of the African National Congress to support the meeting.
Officials of the ANC's rival black nationalist group, the radical Pan Africanist Congress (PAC), have also arrived in Abuja and will be holding talks with Mr de Klerk today, according to General Ike Nwachukwu, Nigeria's Foreign Minister.
This follows recent talks between Mr Babangida and Mr Clarence Makwetu, PAC leader.
Up to now, the PAC has refused to meet the Pretoria government or to join the Convention for a Democratic South Africa (Codesa) negotiations on a multi-racial constitutional agreement.
Gen Nwachukwu rejected criticism that Nigeria was acting prematurely in establishing contact with South Africa before the white minority regime had ended.
He said Mr Babangida was meeting Mr de Klerk in his role as Organisation of African Unity (OAU) chairman and to assist in the Codesa process.
Mr de Klerk visited several African countries last year, despite an OAU motion to continue boycotting South Africa.
Mr Pik Botha, South Africa's Foreign Minister, said on arrival in Abuja this week that Pretoria would seek OAU membership.
Preparations for a Nigerian visit by Mr de Klerk last year were put on ice because of ANC pressure on Mr Babangida, diplomatic sources said.
Nigeria's term in the OAU chair is due to expire in a few months, and Mr Babangida is determined to contribute to a South African settlement before leaving office.
International: Iran election feeds debate on ‘Islamic solution’ Iranians vote today for the first time since Khomeini died.
Anton La Guardia visits the college where he preached
By ANTON LA GUARDIA
DISENCHANTMENT with the Iranian revolution may be growing in cities such as Teheran, but at the school where the Ayatollah Khomeini lectured revolutionaries, few doubt that the Islamic system is a success and that its scholars are the best qualified to rule the country.
The rectangular courtyard at the Faizieh Theological School in the holy city of Qom is the school of leadership of Islamic revolutionaries.
Many of the country's senior religious leaders sat at one time or other in the shade of its trees and listened to the Ayatollah Khomeini's lectures on the intricacies of Islamic law.
It was from there that he also issued his first denunciations of the Pahlavi dynasty that laid the foundations of his revolution.
On the school's noticeboard, religious notices have been taken over by election literature and copies of the government's exhortations to take part in today's vote for parliament as a ‘religious and political duty’.
Among the clerics who swept through the courtyard was Dr Ahmad Najafi, a 33-year-old scholar and trained doctor who served at the front during the war against Iraq.
‘When you study the Koran you study everything: morals, politics and economics,’ he said.
‘Islam is politics, and politics is Islam.’
Asked whether clerics really could take authoritative decisions on issues such as oil production, he replied with the practised gestures of a man used to presenting arguments to the sceptical: ‘Islam can solve all difficulties; it was so in the past and it will be the same in the future.’
When he admitted that there were problems in the country, he attributed these to the supposed ravages of the former Shah's rule, the war against Iraq, the Gulf war and the influx of refugees from Afghanistan and Iraq.
The Ayatollah was teaching in Qom when he was arrested in 1963 after condemning a raid on the college by the Shah's security forces.
A year later he was deported to Turkey for his public condemnation of the Shah's agreement to grant diplomatic immunity to American military advisers and their support staff.
He returned 15 years later to set up what he described as the ‘government of God’.
After his death three years ago, the leaders of the divine administration are divided over fundamental issues such as how to run the economy.
President Rafsanjani has slowly opened the doors to the West and its technical resources, a move which has been denounced by revolutionary purists as a deviation from the Ayatollah's policies.
If the Islamic solution exists, no one seems to agree on precisely what it is.
International: Manila bans return of Marcos body
By Belinda Rhodes in Manila
AN EMOTIONAL row broke out in Manila yesterday as Mrs Imelda Marcos vowed to defy a government ban on her bringing home her husband's body for burial at the weekend.
Fearing public disorder and a wave of sympathy which could boost Mrs Marcos's campaign for the presidency, the government announced it would not allow Mr Ferdinand Marcos's embalmed remains to be brought home until after next month's elections.
Speaking on her behalf, Mr Antonio Coronel, her lawyer, said: ‘I am willing to go to jail for it.
‘We are defying the ruling of the Cabinet.
We are bringing the body as scheduled on Sunday,’ he said.’
The people responsible for this inhuman act of preventing a dead Filipino citizen from coming home to find his eternal repose in his own native soil will have to answer to their maker.’
Rules and regulations are firmly in place, however, and it is thought to be extremely unlikely that Mrs Marcos would make any serious attempt to return the body.
All aircraft and ships are banned from carrying it into the Philippines, and the Filipino Consul in Hawaii has to give the go-ahead for any flight containing Mr Marcos's remains before it is allowed to take off.
The Philippines government had previously agreed to allow the return of the late President's body if it were flown directly to his home province of Ilocos Norte and buried within nine days.
Mrs Marcos had said the burial was merely a ‘filial and sacred duty’.
But sources at the Presidential Palace have expressed concern over Mrs Marcos's real intentions.
‘There is just no way we could trust her,’ said one source.
‘This is bad timing in the political season as emotions are running high and could be taken higher,’ said President Aquino's press secretary, Mr Horacio Paredes.
Mrs Marcos said earlier this week: ‘There will be no politics in the nine days — I am not campaigning.
I will be staying put with the President's mortal remains, and you can be sure I will not be in the shadow of Mrs Aquino, using the death for personal and political reasons.’
She was referring to President Aquino's rise to power on a wave of sympathy following the assassination of her husband.
Responding to her alleged intention to defy the ban, Mr Paredes said: ‘How can they enter our airspace without permission?
If they land the cargo, we will seize the plane upon arrival.’
The ban may, however, give Mrs Marcos the perfect opportunity to shed a few tears in front of the television cameras.
International: New Zealand yearns for the yen Paul Chapman reports from Wellington on the search for Asian investment
BY PAUL CHAPMAN
WHILE anti-Japanese sentiment runs high in the United States and Australians resent the extent of Tokyo's stake in property, New Zealand is on an unashamed campaign to draw the mighty yen — and any other currency it can attract.
Miss Ruth Richardson, Finance Minister, has returned from a two-week sweep through the powerhouse economies of Asia in search of a massive infusion of investment funds, taking top businessmen with her.
That New Zealand needs the investment there can be no doubt.
It has floundered in recession for five years.
Unemployment, where a job was once regarded as a birth right, is 10.6 per cent and rising.
Overseas debt is a staggering £16 billion, despite a population of only 3.4 million.
In her gamble to win capital in Asia Miss Richardson considers she has an ace up her sleeve.
New Zealand's economy has probably been through a more dramatic recent revolution than that of any other Western country.
People have been left bemused and angry by a tidal wave of reforms that have made their country a textbook case of monetary theory pushed, perhaps, as far as possible within the constraints of electoral sustainability.
Begun under the Labour government of Mr David Lange and his Finance Minister, Mr (now Sir) Roger Douglas, the reforms set about dismantling the generous subsidies to farming, New Zealand's largest industry.
Tariff barriers came off imports.
State-owned enterprises were privatised.
Despite howls of outrage, Labour was re-elected in 1987 on a promise of finishing the job.
Instead, it looked as though the job would finish Labour.
Within months the party began to self-destruct as the pace of reforms became too much for the Left, and for Mr Lange, to stomach.
When Labour faced the polls in October 1990, it was reduced to a 29-seat rump in the 99-seat parliament, caused, analysts agreed, by the electorate's lack of confidence in the reforms and distaste for the social cost.
Ironically, since the National opposition swept back to power, the pace of reforms has become breathtaking.
Under Mr Jim Bolger, Prime Minister, many of Labour's sacred cows have been desanctified.
In the name of balancing government spending, still heading for a deficit this year, social security and unemployment benefits were cut and eligibility requirements tightened.
An earnings means test was introduced for the old age pension, and the age of entitlement was raised in stages from 60 to 65 years.
Equally controversial has been the recently-introduced Employment Contracts Act that has drastically undercut the powers of the trade unions — to the extent that New Zealand may now be in breach of International Labour Organisation provisions.
It appears the Asians already like what they see.
Investment is moving into the growth areas of forestry and tourism.
One leading businessman said this week that up to 70 per cent of shares traded every day were being sold overseas.
International: France ends role as the South Pacific bogeyman
BY PAUL CHAPMAN
FRANCE'S role as the colonial bogeyman of the South Pacific looks set to end with its decision to suspend nuclear testing, writes Paul Chapman in Wellington.
The tests soured relations for many years between France and the South Pacific Forum, which groups Australia, New Zealand and most Pacific island territories.
France switched its nuclear programme to the South Pacific in 1966, and after 44 atmospheric tests it began underground testing in 1975.
The simmering antagonism came to a head when the French Secret Service bombed the Greenpeace ship Rainbow Warrior in Auckland harbour in 1985.
The ship had been engaged in protests against the tests.
Only last month the French navy intercepted and seized another Greenpeace ship which tried to land to establish a ‘peace camp’ on the main test island of Mururoa atoll, where more tests were due to begin next month.
Mr Don McKinnon, New Zealand's Deputy Prime Minister and External Affairs Minister, was quick to welcome the French decision yesterday, saying it would remove a contentious issue in relations between the South Pacific countries and France.
‘We can look forward to working with France in international efforts to ensure that the temporary suspension of testing by two of the five nuclear weapons states — Russia and France — becomes permanent, and that the other three join them.’
Mr Mike Moore, opposition Labour Party leader, also welcomed the decision but called on the government and the Forum to put pressure on France to make the suspension permanent.
The complaints of the Forum nations centred on fears that the coral atolls at Mururoa and Fangataufa may break up and leak radioactive contamination.
New Zealand regularly sent diplomatic protests at the start of each series of tests.
In Noumea, capital of New Caledonia, the decision was warmly welcomed yesterday by delegates to a meeting of the South Pacific Regional Environment Programme.
Meanwhile, political leaders in French Polynesia called on France to say what it intended to do to ease the economic and social consequences of the suspension.
Up to 1,600 workers are employed at the test sites.
INSIDE CAMBODIA First steps away from brutality Mine victims get a helping hand, writes Hugo Gurdon
BY HUGO GURDON
THE first Class of ‘92 sits expectantly — 40 young men and women ready to go out into the world.
As the government minister calls their names, pride and shyness compete for mastery of their faces.
It is a moving scene.
Some graduates stride to the front of the little hall so easily you would not guess they only had one leg.
These are the first Cambodians to graduate from a rehabilitation programme at Wat Thom, a disused temple in Phnom Penh.
Three charities working there make prosthetics, help amputees to walk, persuade them they are not useless and teach them a trade.
Each of the new graduates receives a sewing machine, a box of carpentry tools or a briefcase full of pens and paper.
Wat Thom can cater for only 120 amputees a year, but small victories are worth celebrating in Cambodia.
Despite October's United Nations-brokered peace accord, landmines still maim about 300 people every month.
Medical standards are often primitive and amputation is regarded as an all-purpose cure.
Mr Andrew Smith, a prosthetist from St Mary's Hospital, Roehampton, south London, who now works for Cambodia Trust, a British charity, said: ‘It's the old World War One system.
‘They think only about saving the guy's life, so they chop the leg off by guillotine, even if he's only lost a few toes.’
Other amputations become necessary because mine victims often have to share beds and can infect each other with gangrene.
Victims make extraordinary journeys to seek help.
When Cambodia Trust began offering limbs and rehabilitation in the capital this year, people travelled hundreds of miles to get there.
A Red Cross doctor, working in north-western Cambodia, recalled a man staggering into his hospital with a shattered leg already black with gangrene.
‘He told me it happened 10 days earlier.
I was furious and shouted: ‘Why didn't you come sooner?’
He said he was sorry, but it had taken him 10 days to walk here.’
The fact that he had to walk reflects the fact that disabled people are often shunned in Cambodia.
Maimed women are hidden.
‘There are so many amputees in Cambodia that you think the attitude would change,’ said Mr Smith.
Only now, with the civil war over and the Phnom Penh government inviting outside influence — in the form of aid — rather than rejecting it, can attitudes change.
Rehabilitation is slow and painful.
Atrophied muscles cannot cope with artificial legs, so patients first have to strengthen them with ‘stump wrestling’ competitions.
‘They have to exercise,’ said Mr Smith.
‘In the past the attitude has been: ‘Right, we've cut off your leg — bye bye.’
We want to get people to forget they are using an artificial leg, then everyone else will forget.’
For a country which has been disabled by a generation of violence, forgetting may be impossible.
But back at Wat Thom, eight men in their late teens and early twenties decided at least to ignore their common disability.
They strung a net between two palm trees and bobbed about in an energetic game of four-a-side volleyball.
It was an unforgettable match.
International: North Korea defector exposes nuclear ‘ruse’
By Robert Whymant in Seoul
THE highest ranking North Korean official to defect to the South yesterday poured scorn on Pyongyang's decision to open its nuclear facilities to international inspection, saying it was a ruse.
‘North Koreans are not so stupid that they will let outsiders see their secret installations,’ said former diplomat Ko Young Hwan.
On the day that North Korea's parliament ratified a nuclear safeguard agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency, the defector said the Pyongyang government was trying to buy time until it could produce its own nuclear weapons.
‘North Korea's ratification of the safeguards agreement is due to the intense pressure from the US and other countries,’ said Ko, in his first interview with a Western newspaper.
To force the North Koreans to allow inspection, Washington and Seoul have even hinted at military action against the hardline Communist country.
‘It is well known among North Korean diplomats that in the near future the North will have nuclear weapons like China,’ said Ko.
When he defected in May last year, Ko revealed the existence in North Korea of an unknown underground nuclear facility suspected of developing nuclear weapons.
A former French translator for President Kim Il Sung, he was first secretary in the Congo at the time of his defection, and was welcomed by South Korea because of his position in the North Korean hierarchy.
One of Ko's three brothers designed weapon systems while another served as an army major in an elite unit guarding the President.
‘The vice-minister of the atomic energy industry told me a nuclear plant was being built to cope with the power shortage,’ said the defector.
‘But North Korean officials believe that only one is for peaceful purposes, while the others are for military aims.’
Paris Life: The great sin of being old and ugly
BY SUZANNE LOWRY
ON THE day Edith Cresson was forced into early partial retirement, a middle-aged woman stood vigil at the gates of the Hotel Matignon, the prime minister's official residence.
‘I just don't like to see a woman pushed out like that,’ she told a television reporter, almost tearfully.
It was one of the few references to the former prime minister's gender that I heard during the whole week of leadership crise.
Many rude things were said about Mme Cresson by opponents and rivals, but being a woman was not held against her, at least not overtly.
During the three days when Cresson was ricocheting between Matignon and the Elysee, arguing her case and fighting to stay in office, she maintained her usual impeccable Parisian tenue de ville, hair and make-up perfectly in order at all times.
Edith Cresson was 58 in January; she is a grandmother but, judging by photographs taken at the outset of her long career, she looks better now than she did then.
Her red hair is like a bronze helmet, she dresses in beautiful suits, usually by her favourite designer, Torrente.
She is slim, healthy and full of energy.
And she is not alone.
Paris is milling with women in this mould; women who either, by dint of their own success or that of their husband's, can afford to have a favourite designer.
They are not necessarily extravagant but devote themselves to appearance as to a very demanding goddess whose exigencies may account for that well-kempt, bad tempered look most of them adopt.
These women, who may be anything from 40 to 70, take care of their forme by eating to various permutations: some don't eat after 5 pm, others never mix protein and carbohydrate.
They go to gym glasses and thalassotherapy weekends.
I hear that a Weight Watchers class in central Paris is like a casting session for Dynasty.
I have always been half impressed, half daunted by these paragons.
They tend to be brittle, competitive and over-obsessed with their looks and who might be looking at them.
Many of the best-dressed seem to be among the most stressed.
I soon found, however, that their grumpiness was just part of the Parisienne package, and indeed it often vanishes on closer acquaintance.
After years of listening to and reading Anglo-Saxon women letting it all hang out, it was refreshing to be among women who so rigorously kept it all in.
But at what price and for how long?
One of their number has just written a book questioning this kind of control and spilling the beans of angst rather as American and British feminist writers did in the Seventies.
Claire Gallois, 55, a blonde, slim, rather beautiful novelist, has written a tract called The Dangerous Years.
The years in question are a woman's fifth decade; the danger is, predictably, of loss of identity, rejection, pain, a failure any longer to see a purpose in what is left of life.
The chill of the eternal wind caused Gallois to attack the temporal culture in which no woman admits her age, in which she can never in public admit any exceptional or painful feeling.
Reaching 50 caused Claire Gallois to turn against this way of conducting things and against the world in which ageing is much more cruel for a woman than for a man.
‘Present society executes her quietly if she does not remain desirable,’ she writes.
‘For many the law of seduction has replaced the rules of a religion.
The great sin today…is to be old and ugly.’
Ageing, she argues, is hardest for women like herself, who have kept their figure and a youthful appearance but have lost sexual attractiveness.
‘Too old to be young, too young to be old’, they are in a kind of limbo.
‘I still have a smooth face, a body without apparent faults…but no one wants to undress me any more,’ she laments.
‘To grow older for a woman is to be more and more wrapped in fog.’
Maybe.
Nevertheless, it seems to me that more than a few Frenchwomen are carrying powerful foglamps, and are doing a good job of raging against the dying light.
The dedication to their appearance of stars such as the luminous, fiftyish, Catherine Deneuve, sixtyish socialites such as Marie Helene de Rothschild or Helene de Mortemart and political wives such as Bernadette Chirac and Claude Pompidou, may be much more than simple vanity and may involve no self-admiration at all.
It is more a standard, a form of self-reliance, a determination that if one has to go in the end, better be correctly dressed.
Thus the soignee appearance of Cresson and other French women politicians blazes a torch and tells others that, while everyone is mortal and while women may have many cards stacked against them, it is possible to face up to the worst as well as the best.
Which is perhaps at least partly why that patient, anonymous woman waited at the gate to wave goodbye to Edith Cresson and why she will probably never read Claire Gallois's book.
MY Mont Blanc fountain pen is en panne and has gone in for repairs.
The filling mechanism is broken and there was much sighing over it in the pen shop.
It may sound too banal to talk about but I haven't owned anything that merited so much fussy concern from experts since I sold my 1964 Jaguar 340.
A fountain pen in Paris fulfils the same sort of emblematic function as a car and may cost almost as much: all kinds of social and identity messages are tied up in it.
To write with a Bic may be practique, but not chic.
I understood this only after I was given the Mont Blanc as a present.
People notice its distinct cigar shape as they might a Cartier watch or a Chanel handbag.
It is the Rolls-Royce of pens; prices start at £130 and rise to more than £5,000.
Virginia Woolf wrote with a Mont Blanc, but these days the company is too discreet, too grand to trade on the identities of its famous customers.
Other marques do.
Waterman sells pens to President Mitterrand, Prince Philip and Queen Sofia of Spain.
Cartier takes pride in its Pasha Signature, which has a gold top with the owner's signature encrusted on its black lacquered shaft.
Elton John owns one, so does Mme Cresson.
Parker boasts the Queen among its ‘owners’ and that Reagan and Gorbachev signed the 1987 arms treaty with one of its pens.
(They were presented with silver versions, engraved with their initials, as a reminder that the pen is mightier.)
For me, my Mont Blanc is a reminder that computers can't do everything and an incentive to improve my handwriting.
It is also a useful weapon in the Paris style war and I feel the lack of it.
Letter to the Editor: Too generous
SIR — I wonder how many readers share your near-reverence for Nelson Mandela (editorial, April 7)?
On the basis of available facts, the Mandelas' cult following in international political circles seems inexplicable.
The popular pair consists of a black African convicted of terrorism, married to a black African convicted (but appealing against the charge) of kidnapping.
One can imagine how gently the western media would have handled the white leader of the South African Conservative party, Dr Andries Treurnicht — and his charming wife — under similar circumstances.
Cynics may suggest that we are required to admire Nelson Mandela because he is fashionably black, but it cannot be that simple.
The Zulu leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi is black but tolerant of the white minority.
If one attempts to judge Mandela by the company he prefers to keep (a reasonable test of a politician) the mystery deepens.
Putting aside his choice of partner, the lady who publicly declared her support for the barbaric practice of ‘necklacing’ those who step out of line, there is his friendship with Col Gaddafi, who is said to have paid the bill for the ANC leader's recent tour of North Africa, as well as contributing $135,000 to Mrs Mandela's defence.
DENNIS COWARD Burnsall, North Yorks
Goodbye and good riddance to the propaganda parade Television coverage of the election campaign has been so much oil on shallow water.
Now, NOEL MALCOLM is looking forward to a shift in the agenda — back to real news
BY NOEL MALCOLM
THE first week of the general election campaign I spent carefully observing election coverage on television.
The technical quality was poor, and the presentation wooden.
Although the allocation of time between the rival parties was fair, it was achieved by concentrating on the daily speech-making tours of the party leaders, and presenting timed extracts from their performances.
But on the plus side, there was only one channel, and the coverage was confined to a single 45-minute programme each night, called ‘Telerevista’.
I was in Tirana, watching the Albanian general election.
When I went to see the director of Albanian radio and television, I tried to describe the difference in atmosphere between a British and an Albanian election campaign.
‘There's no real sense of a public political debate here,’ I complained.
‘We just see one leader being cheered by one lot of people, and another being cheered by a different lot.
The slogans are just ‘Vote for our party’ or (more often)‘Down with the other party’.
No one is really debating the reasons why people should vote for one party rather than the other.’
The Albanian director-general nodded in agreement with these sage remarks.
‘Yes,’ he said, ‘this is something that will take a long time to develop.
And we'll need to have much more television coverage in order to make it happen.’
A few days later I came back to England.
The news programmes were almost entirely preoccupied with the question of who had revealed the name of a girl with an ear complaint.
What was left of their election reporting consisted of brief clips from the itineraries of the party leaders.
The slogans of the main parties could be summed up as ‘Don't vote for the other party’; and the only person rising in the polls was the leader of the Liberal Democrats, whose message could be summed up as ‘Don't vote for negative campaigning’.
My sage remarks in Tirana were coming back to haunt me.
Even more haunting was the trusting innocence of the Albanian director-general, who thought that the way to create a climate of real political debate was to have more television coverage.
‘Have a bit more, by all means,’ I should have said, ‘but please, please make sure you never have as much as we do.’
The problem is not simply one of quantity; that is more a symptom than a cause.
Nor is it a question of quality; our technical standards are higher, our news programmes better illustrated, and our interviewers more competent, than in any other country.
So why is the overall impression left by television's 1992 General Election coverage one of a huge accumulation of shallowness?
The answer is to be found in the strange inter-relationship between politics, the media, and the nature of ‘news’.
News-gathering and news-presenting are the one area in which all the media are constantly competing.
The competition is fierce, and television has built-in advantages (the vividness of images, the instantaneous nature of live coverage, and so on).
The fiercest competition of all, therefore, is between the rival television channels.
When a general election is called, two things happen.
First, the pressure on the television news programmes to produce news — more news, and more exciting news — is hugely increased.
And second, the supply of genuine news about British politics dries up almost completely.
For three weeks we have no proper political events, of the sort that would earn a place on a news programme under normal circumstances.
What we have instead is propaganda.
For the news programmes, this means finding a thousand and one different ways of making bricks without straw.
The political parties are only too happy to help.
They know that they will get their allotted portion of time on the news, whether or not they say or do anything newsworthy.
This ‘fair shares’ system (which, with the proliferation of news channels, is surely nearing the end of its useful life) encourages them to think not in terms of earning that place on the news, but rather in terms of keeping the broadcasters supplied with positive images.
WHILE the parties create one kind of pseudo-news, the media are busy creating another.
Hence those strange items which begin: ‘The agenda shifted today on to health…
’ Is the shifting of an ‘agenda’an event?
The shifting of the San Andreas Fault would be an event; the shifting of the Black Sea Fleet to Murmansk would be an event.
But when they say that ‘the agenda shifted on to health’, this may just mean ‘Mr Kinnock talked a lot about health this morning’, or ‘Mr Major tried to talk about taxes this morning, but we had that yesterday, so we kept asking him about health instead.’
In this vacuum of real news, pressure builds up on the non-news programmes to fill the gap.
There has been an unprecedented number of in-depth political interviews during this campaign; but every one I have seen has been held, so to speak, under the shadow of the next round of news programmes.
The final goal of all the Waldens, Dimblebys, and Days is to hit the headlines on the news broadcasts (or in the next day's papers) by tripping up their interviewee or extorting an apology from him, or convicting him of a contradiction.
This is the pot of gold at the end of every interviewer's rainbow; the quest for it can be so tempting that he will abandon normal argument to hammer away a la Walden at one single point until the politician gives up and gives in.
Something very similar happens on the meet-the-people programmes, the phone-ins and studio debates.
Sentimental producers may like to think that these programmes give the politicians a chance to find out what the people are thinking, and vice versa.
But their real function is to give people a chance to be famous for five minutes, by saying something that will get them on to the next news broadcast.
The last thing most of these people want is to be given reasons for changing their minds.
One encounter sticks in the memory from the Channel 4 Debate.
A young man in the audience made an impassioned little speech to Mr Heseltine about the ‘systematic destruction of the NHS’.
When Mr Heseltine started reeling off the figures about increased government spending, his questioner began to shout back at him: ‘I'm not interested!
I'm not interested!’
That young man, I am afraid, was speaking for the television-viewing nation.
Noel Malcolm is Foreign Editor of Spectator
Leading Article: Black Sea skirmish
THE VIABILITY of the Commonwealth of Independent States always hung on co-operation between Russia and Ukraine.
Now that the two have fallen out, over maintaining a single currency and unified armed forces, the successor to the Soviet Union has dwindled to little more than a name.
The latest row, over which should own the Crimea-based Black Sea fleet, has revealed both the strength of irredentist feeling in Moscow and the depth of animosity in Kiev towards the northern neighbour.
It has been stoked primarily by Mr Alexander Rutskoy, the Russian vice-president, who has warned that it may be time to review Khrushchev's gift of Crimea to Ukraine in 1954, and by President Kravchuk, a Communist Party boss turned Ukrainian nationalist.
Mr Yeltsin, who in normal circumstances might have been expected to restrain the Russian nationalists, is fighting for political survival against a Congress of People's Deputies highly critical of his economic reforms.
In such straits he has little room for manoeuvre.
Seen from the West, the quarrel is ridiculous.
Here are two states, their economies reeling from decades of Communist rule, seeking control of a fleet which neither can properly afford to maintain.
As the chief suppliers of aid to Commonwealth members, the Group of Seven countries might reasonably ask why they should continue to support governments apparently willing to waste money on retaining armed forces at an inflated level.
Western potential for easing tension between parts of the former Soviet Union is easily exaggerated, but there is no harm in reminding Moscow and Kiev that their mutual hostility hardly creates a climate attractive to foreign aid and investment.
Of the two leaders, Mr Yeltsin is far more in tune with Western thinking.
By contrast, Mr Kravchuk and his prime minister, Mr Vitold Fokin, have given little indication that they are serious either about radical economic reform or the establishment of political democracy.
Nevertheless, Western interests lie in ensuring that Russia does not become the overweening power in the region.
The old Soviet armed forces should be split up between the new states, not consolidated under the flag of St Andrew.
That may make negotiation of East-West arms limitation agreements much more complicated.
But it will reduce the likelihood of those forces re-emerging as a threat to the West and favour a better military balance between the former Soviet republics.
The agreement yesterday by Russia and Ukraine to set up a joint parliamentary commission on how to divide the fleet is a welcome sign of flexibility.
If Mr Yeltsin survives his Congress, he should bring Mr Rutskoy to heel and make generous concessions to Ukraine.
Such an act of statesmanship appears the only way to avoid an outbreak of fighting between the two giants of the Commonwealth.
Leading Article: Life in the old box yet
DESPITE the bewildering razzmatazz of modern electioneering — its photo-opportunities, spin doctors, voter metering, and ‘image consultants’— one feature of British general elections remains essentially unchanged.
The way in which polling day is conducted, little altered since secret ballots were introduced, stands as a reliable landmark in a volatile political scene.
Yet the ritual, however familiar, has its shortcomings.
Those who trudged dutifully to the polls yesterday to mark their perforated ballot papers with an ‘X’ in the appropriate box, or who sat through last night's results with only black coffee for company, would have witnessed a tableau of restrictive practices and old spanish customs fit to warm the heart of the most backward-looking member of Nalgo.
Think the whole process through once again.
The clerks handing out ballot papers at your polling station yesterday were selected by the local electoral registration officer: in most instances, they were taking the day off from their town hall desk at the rate of £61.02 each.
The station itself was being supervised by a presiding officer (£96.55) doing more or less the same thing.
He was responsible, when the polls closed, for delivering the ballot boxes (£27 each) to the returning officer — usually the council's chief executive — who also obtains a basic fee (£964.51).
This he uses, at his discretion, to pay the nimble-fingered bank and building society clerks who tot up the votes: one common rate is £11 per assistant counter and £12 per table leader (the returning officer could, at least in theory, pocket the lot and count the votes himself, but this would presumably entail a rather tardy declaration).
These sums, unsurprisingly, are forked out by the taxpayer.
There is an argument, in this high-tech age, for slashing costs by abolishing the whole caboodle: ballot papers, polling booths, town hall declarations and all.
Voters could make their preferences known at home by punching a computer button and — since computers count no less swiftly in the Western Isles than Westminster North — all results could be published simultaneously, guaranteeing an early night for Messrs Paxman, Dimbleby, and Sissons.
Even more alluringly, the entire process could be handed over to private enterprise.
Polling stations would be awash with coffee machines and potted plants.
Eager-eyed staff would bid voters farewell with the cry: ‘Have a nice day.’
Bonus payments would be handed out for pushing up voting levels.
But, on closer examination, the prospect palls.
Maddening, antique and archaically dotty as the present system may be, it provides drama and colour which would otherwise be absent from modern elections.
At £12 per table leader, parliamentary democracy is getting good value.
The Trojan mouse is throwing a party
BY TIM WHITCHER
IT WILL be a big party, it will be a long party, and it will be a very strange one.
Tonight, after five years of bulldozing and construction around the little farming community of Chessy in the flat countryside 18 miles east of Paris, Euro Disneyland will open its doors and 15,000 adult guests from around the world will be turned loose for two days in the vast theme park.
Among the guests who take the runaway train through Frontierland's Big Thunder Mountain or stroll through the Pirates of the Caribbean attraction in Adventureland, there will be an eerie absence of children.
Children have been banned.
This giant jamboree heralds the moment on Sunday when, at one minute past nine — Mickey Mouse time — the gates of Euro Disney will be flung open to the general public.
The 15,000 guests are mainly press and broadcast journalists, investors, tour operators, politicians and other dignitaries and their partners.
The evening will feature a series of banquets in the park's six hotels which will last into the early hours.
Tomorrow they'll be free to roam Fantasyland, Adventureland and all the other Lands and try the attractions before gathering for the big gala in the evening.
As mysterious as the absence of children in a children's theme park is the fact that the exact cast for the gala is also secret.
‘There are security considerations with so many people coming,’ said one of the organisers coyly.
‘We are trying to keep it a surprise for our honoured guests.’
The big question remains: will Michael Jackson be there?
The eccentric American performer is the star of one of the park's attractions: a 3-D space adventure video, made by George Lucas and Francis Ford Coppola.
Jackson's Paris agent confirmed that a visit had been discussed, but explained that ‘the crowds might put him off’.
If Jackson fails to show, the organisers will play the video instead.
HOWEVER, Jose Carreras will be there, singing from the balcony of Sleeping Beauty's Castle.
Cher, The Four Tops, Gypsy Kings and The Temptations are also starring at various points throughout the site.
At the rehearsals for the firework display which will end the gala, the noise monitors recorded 98 decibels.
Forty decibels will wake anyone.
Sleeping Beauty may have a disturbed night.
It will be an expensive party, although Disney will not say exactly how much.
The food, the truckloads of champagne, accommodation, fees for the gala stars and 800 musicians, and air fares for many of the guests add up to a bill of millions for the weekend.
Disney should recoup some of that on worldwide sales of television rights to the gala performance.
And the free publicity the event will gain will be worth a fortune.
When it comes to promotion, the Disney people don't miss a trick.
They have given each guest a limited-edition Disney sweatshirt and insisted that they wear it to gain entry to the gala performance.
Every member of the audience has effectively been transformed into an advertising hoarding.
But this is a game of high stakes — the theme park so far has cost £250 million — and, judging by the roller-coaster performance of the share price on the Paris Bourse, Euro Disney is by no means certain it has put its money on a winner.
Disney's calculations suggest 11 million people will visit the park each year.
But travel trade groups and business analysts put it lower.
They will be there this weekend to judge who might be right.
To help them get the most favourable impression, special staff have been brought in to elevate Disney's standard cuisine of burgers, chips and Mickey Mouse pizzas.
Among the guests are many luminaries of Parisian society who might balk at that sort of food.
And then there is the question of President Mitterrand.
His attendance has been confirmed by Disney but, as one organiser admitted, ‘I can't see him eating a burger.’
Mitterrand, a staunch defender of French culture, may be a reluctant participant at the event, although his original objections must have melted back in 1987 when the American company said that with this, the fourth of its parks (there are two in the United States and one outside Tokyo), it would create 12,000 jobs…
France's ever-vigilant culture police are rather belatedly railing against the transatlantic intruder.
They perceive Euro Disney as undermining French values and Mickey — the French never use the rodent's surname — as some sort of Trojan mouse of American cultural imperialism.
Ariane Mnouchkine, a leading writer and theatre director, has called Euro Disney a ‘cultural Chernobyl’, while in Le Figaro this week her colleague Jean Cau of the French Academy wrote of ‘this horror of cardboard, plastic, atrocious colours, solidified chewing gum constructions and idiotic folk stories that come straight out of cartoon books for fat Americans.
It is going to wipe out millions of children…mutilate their imaginations.’
Some French intellectuals have gone even further and demanded that the whole thing be burned to the ground.
With good reason, Disney believes that most French people do not share these views.
The organisation expects that, in the first few years, half the visitors will come from France.
Nevertheless, it has been the recipient of a great deal of hostility that is nothing to do with Snow White moving in on Babar or Tintin's patch.
American employment and business practices and the disruption of developing an 1,800-acre site have all caused anti-Mouse feeling.
Guy Bourgeot, the mayor of nearby Chessy, was actually elected on an anti-Disney ticket.
Disney has been in a protracted dispute with contractors over costings.
It accuses the company of imposing American business practices and ignoring ‘traditional French negotiation’ in refusing to pay for cost overruns.
Led by Martine Mariez, the head of a building company, they say Disney designers keep changing their minds about work but the company then rejects the bill.
The most publicised case was when a hotel was painted pink as requested, but the California-based Disney dream builders decided it was not quite the right shade of pink.
DISNEY says it has a minor dispute with a few of the hundreds of contractors it has dealt with on the project.
But the companies are considering picketing the gates of the park on its opening day.
The remaining farmers in the district are the latest to complain.
They have been told by the local authority that they cannot grow oilseed rape because the smell might upset Disney guests.
Some of the project's opponents argue that the £220 million of state subsidies it is receiving are illegal and that they will take the matter to court.
The latest item of aggravation comes from the traffic and drivers on the commuter rail line who have threatened to strike for the day because of the extra work caused by the opening of Disney station.
Police are advising people not to go near eastern Paris on Sunday because of the massive congestion that is expected.
‘The things people say about us are often too bad or too nice,’ said Jean-Marie Gerbeaux, the Disney director of communications, with the professional goodwill for which his organisation is famed.
The mouse is still smiling — just.
Peterborough: Kiss and tell
YOU would think that none of the main party leaders would forget today, but past experience suggests otherwise.
Recently Mrs Thatcher, working on her memoirs, was trying to reconstruct her first few days in Downing Street in 1979.
She arranged a meeting with one of her former mandarins, who was able to refresh her memory on many points.
But there remained one crucial detail, not covered by protocol, which neither of them could remember: had Sir Denis accompanied her to Buckingham Palace when she kissed hands with the Queen?
Just in case Sir Denis's memory is equally defective, I can tell the Thatchers that he was indeed at her side that May afternoon.
Peterborough:
FOR one six-year-old in London, at least, yesterday was an unqualified success — school was closed to become a polling station.
‘Can we,’ came the plea, ‘have another general selection next week?’
Peterborough: Gael warning on the parade ground
ALDERSHOT, home of the Army, is to have its first woman commander.
Brig Gael Ramsey will become Garrison Commander of Aldershot as part of her new job as Commander, Headquarters, Aldershot area.
The posting, which places her in command of some 12,000 soldiers across four counties, makes her the first woman brigadier to be appointed to a command role.
Brig Ramsey arrives from the Women's Royal Army Corps (WRAC), where she was the final director before its abolition last week under Options for Change.
She takes up her new duties on May 4.
Colleagues describe Brig Ramsey as a formidable operator who will stand no nonsense from the servicemen under her command — they range from Paras to dentists.
‘She is an excellent choice,’ says one, ‘tough as old puttees, very feminine and immaculately dressed, even off duty.
She likes to shock, she's sexy and she'll charm the pants off them.’
Speaking metaphorically, of course.
The three-year appointment is a breakthrough for Brig Ramsey, 49, who has landed the job at the very moment it is opened up to women.
One seasoned observer says: ‘Running Aldershot itself is not the most exciting of jobs — but this shows the Army is serious about giving women appointments previously held only by men.’
Brig Ramsey, a former ADC to the Queen who mentions in Who's Who that she was educated at ‘16 schools worldwide’, is married to Col Michael Ramsey of the Corps of Royal Military Police.
They have followed each other up the ladder, but whenever he has reached the same rung she has gone one better.
The 200 units under her command should brace themselves for a forthright style.
Brig Ramsey fought like a tigress to save the WRAC's cap badge.
She failed, but left an impression on her superiors.
On at least one occasion, a general telephoned only to be told by an aide that she was just rushing out.
‘Tell him I can't speak,’ barked Brig Ramsey.
‘I'm late for the hairdresser.’
Peterborough:
CAMPAIGNING in Windsor & Maidenhead, where he was Tory candidate, my colleague Michael Trend lifted the tedium by asking voters whither, if Labour won, they would emigrate.
Favourite was New Zealand, followed by Canada, Malta, the Falklands and Frinton (?).
No-one opted for Sweden.
Peterborough:
HAVING shepherded the Tories through the general election, Charles and Maurice Saatchi are lending a hand to Eduard Shevardnadze, the former Soviet Foreign Minister now chairing the State Council of Georgia.
With the Saatchis' help, Shevardnadze (above) has composed an open letter to the West which they will be placing in various journals.
Saatchi people always know the value of mixing it with major international players.
So Robert Lasagna, a Saatchi representative in Italy, has decided to give Shevardnadze a satellite telephone to let him ‘speak to the world’.
Lasagna explains: ‘The West has been behaving in a miserly way towards the Russians.
We thought it was about time Shevardnadze was given a platform.
His open letter asks for help in rebuilding his society.’
Two weeks ago Lasagna travelled to Georgia to meet Shevardnadze.
‘I flew there in a rickety old aeroplane with standing room only.
He is in a castle in the mountains, where the roads were terrible and all the communication lines were down.
He simply doesn't have a phone so we'll be sending one out to him very soon.
We've had Foreign Office permission.’
Obituary of Geoffrey Giles
PROFESSOR GEOFFREY GILES, a leading transplant surgeon, who has died aged 55, was Professor of Surgery at the University of Leeds and Head of the Department of Surgery at St James's Hospital, Leeds.
He specialised in liver transplants and technically complex pancreatic surgery.
His skills in the operating theatre were legendary; he attracted the trust and affection of colleagues and patients alike; and his generous character and wise counsel extended far beyond his professional obligations.
Quiet and conscientious, and operating at times under extreme duress and sometimes forced to make crucial decisions about his patients, he sought neither reward nor publicity for his work.
Giles led the team of surgeons who, in 1988, fought valiantly but failed to save the life of Russell Harty, the writer and broadcaster.
Harty had been admitted to St James's with acute liver failure and hepatitis B infection, and it had been Giles's job to find a donor.
He always rose to such occasions with confident decisiveness and calm authority.
Geoffrey Reginald Giles was born at Coventry on Dec 17 1936 and educated at Bablake School, Coventry, and Manchester University, where he qualified as a doctor in 1960.
After junior hospital appointments at the Manchester Royal Infirmary Giles was elected a Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1964.
He then became registrar at Leeds General Infirmary, before taking up a fellowship at Harvard Medical School, where he did research into organ transplants.
He spent a further two years perfecting his technique at Colorado University.
In 1971 Giles returned to Britain to become senior lecturer in surgery at Leeds University.
In this capacity he played a major part in instituting the kidney transplant unit at St James's; and when he established the liver transplant unit there, it was only the third such centre in the country.
Giles was appointed the first Professor of Surgery at Leeds University in 1973, and continued to occupy the Chair until his death.
He was an inspired teacher, his lectures notable for their outstanding clarity and for his frequent excursions into the historical background of the techniques he was discussing.
His undergraduates were thus given a sense of the progression of medical knowledge, and of how it might develop in the future.
Giles had a remarkable ability to bring out the best in his students and juniors, and by conveying his faith in them he gave them faith in themselves.
Giles was held in high esteem in America and Europe, especially in Berlin, where he worked for a short time.
He wrote more than 180 papers, and was one of the authors of Essential Surgical Practice (1982).
He was also a great supporter of both the Medics' and Dentists' Football Club and the Medical Students' Rugby Club.
Somewhat reserved, he none the less had a marked sense of humour.
He was a keen fisherman of trout and salmon, was interested in football, rugby league and gardening, and passionately fond of reading.
He married, in 1966, Pamela Hoey; they had three sons.
Obituary of Frank Roberts
FRANK ROBERTS, who has died aged 76, was a self-taught electronics engineer whose television microscope revolutionised methods of counting and measuring cells.
He was sitting on the top deck of a London bus when the idea came to him.
Half television, half microscope, Roberts's invention made it possible to magnify living tissues up to 25,000 times, against an ordinary miscroscope's 5,000 times.
Roberts tested his idea at London University.
He clipped a glass slide, smeared with a drop of blood, under an ordinary microscope reversed; and then scanned the specimen in a series of lines by means of a minute and brilliant spot of light.
A photo-electric cell converted the spot's messages into electric signals, which were amplified and further converted into a display on a television viewing screen.
Roberts's discovery was made in 1951 and gave a considerable boost to the research of Prof J Z Young, the celebrated brain expert, who had suggested that some kind of electronic machine might solve the cell counting problem.
The invention also became applicable in other fields, including banking.
The illegitimate son of a maidservant, Frank Roberts was born at Edinburgh in 1915.
He was educated at Guthries, a school for ragged boys, where he was subjected to frequent beatings.
The Army, which he joined as a boy soldier, provided a comparative haven, yet Roberts's subsequent military career was somewhat erratic.
He adopted a number of names and deserted, returning to the colours at the outbreak of the Second World War and obtaining a commission in the name of Melville-Hill.
As ‘Melville-Hill’ he served in Burma, before going absent again in South Africa in 1941.
He later enlisted in the South African Navy, in which he became a chief petty officer specialising in radar.
From boyhood Roberts displayed a brilliant and self-tutored mathematical brain and a rapacious appetite for radio knowledge, much of which he absorbed from the journal Wireless World and in public libraries.
In 1949 he joined Professor Young's team at London University, and subsequently held academic appointments in Canada and America.
Ten years ago, suffering from Parkinson's Disease, Roberts entered a home at Grove Park in London which was run by Moya Mackay, a Roman Catholic missionary nurse from South India.
They fell in love, and after she had obtained the necessary dispensation, married; she then nursed him through his long illness.
Roberts is survived by his wife and two sons by a previous marriage.
Obituary of Sir Peter Hayman
SIR PETER HAYMAN, who has died aged 77, had an eminent career in the Diplomatic Service, which culminated in his appointment as High Commissioner in Canada from 1970 to 1974; but after his retirement, and years of blandly shepherding the press at news conferences in various parts of the world, Hayman fell into dark disgrace and himself became their quarry.
In 1978 a package of obscene printed matter was found on a bus; it was addressed to a ‘Mr Henderson’ at a flat in Notting Hill, which the police then raided and found to belong to Hayman.
The flat contained 45 volumes of diaries recounting his sexual adventures and fantasies, and a mass of pornographic material.
It emerged that Hayman had for some years been connected with the Paedophile Information Exchange (PIE), and had received their contact magazine — carrying advertisements from men seeking sex with children — through the post.
Police interviewed Hayman and various other people identified by the material found in the flat, and a file was submitted to the Director of Public Prosecutions.
A decision was made not to prosecute, ostensibly on the grounds that there was no evidence of any offence, except possibly one of receiving indecent material through the post, and Hayman escaped with a caution.
But the police continued their enquiries into the activities of the PIE, and in 1980 two other members of the group were brought to trial at the Old Bailey.
In the course of the trial Hayman was referred to only as ‘a senior civil servant’, but his name was leaked by the police, surfacing in Private Eye.
‘Humpty Dumpty Haypot’, as Hayman was known by his colleagues, on account of his naked domed head, at once resigned his directorships, from the South Oxfordshire Conservative Association and from various charity committees — though he remained a member of the Travellers' Club in Pall Mall and of MCC.
The next year Hayman was named in the House of Commons by Mr Geoffrey Dickens, the Conservative MP, in a Parliamentary question addressed to the Attorney-General, Sir Michael Havers.
Havers strenuously denied that there had been a cover-up, and Mr Douglas Hurd, then a Minister of State at the Foreign Office, maintained that a full inquiry into the affair had revealed nothing to suggest that national security had been prejudiced.
Nevertheless, the discrepancy between the treatment of Hayman and his fellow paedophiles inevitably aroused indignation.
Peter Telford Hayman was born on June 14 1914 and educated at Stowe and Worcester College, Oxford, before joining the Home Civil Service in 1937.
From 1939 to 1941 he worked in the Ministry of Home Security; he served in the Rifle Brigade until 1945, rising to the rank of major.
In 1949, on the strength of his military experience, he was appointed to the Ministry of Defence; and three years later he was seconded to the UK Delegation to Nato.
The head of the delegation was Sir Frederick Hoyer-Millar (later Lord Inchyra), who was impressed by Hayman's abilities and recommended his permanent transfer to overseas service.
Although Hayman was over-age for recruitment, he was taken into the Diplomatic Service as a first secretary in 1954 and posted the next year to Belgrade.
Rapid promotion to counsellor followed, and in 1958 he was sent to Malta as adviser on press and public relations to the Governor, who had had trouble with Mintoff.
From 1959 to 1961 Hayman served as Counsellor in Baghdad, and was then assigned to another public relations post as director-general of British Information Services, New York.
Hayman was appointed CMG in 1963, and the next year became Minister in Berlin, where he was also Deputy Commandant of British Military Government.
He was appointed CVO in 1965.
The next year he returned to the Foreign Office as Deputy Under-Secretary, with special responsibility for relations with the USSR and Eastern Europe.
A useful initiative taken at this time was the establishment of the Great Britain-East Europe Centre, designed to take cultural relations out of the hands of the ‘Friendship Societies’ which had restricted visitors from the ‘People's Democracies’to contact with groups of fellow-travellers in this country.
Hayman concluded his career as High Commissioner in Canada, and was appointed KCMG in 1971.
With his dome, bushy eyebrows and wide if not always convincing smile, he was a commanding figure.
He had always seemed a solid family man, and until his exposure there had been no hint of scandal about him.
But in 1984 he suffered further humiliation when he was fined £100 for an act of gross indecency with a lorry driver in a public lavatory in Reading.
He married, in 1942, Rosemary Blomefield; they had a son and a daughter.
Obituary of Brig Paul Hopkinson
BRIGADIER PAUL ‘HOPPY’ HOPKINSON, who has died aged 85, commanded the only Indian Parachute Battalion (152) which in March 1944 bore the brunt of the Japanese assault east from the River Chindwin.
The Japanese attack, by two divisions directed at Imphal and Kohima, was a supreme effort to break through into India and came without any prior intelligence from any quarter.
For four days the battalion suffered continuous attacks from apparently limitless numbers, during which it made a fighting withdrawal of 10 miles.
Joined by the rest of the Brigade (two battalions), it continued fighting for the next six days.
Throughout the bedlam of gunfire, screams and shouts of ‘Banzai!’ from the enemy, Hopkinson was everywhere — sustaining his officers and men.
After the first eight days of action — during which 19 of his 31 officers were killed and seven wounded, and the battalion was reduced to 40 per cent of its original strength — he himself was badly wounded leading a counter-attack.
Undaunted, his lower leg and ankle in plaster, Hoppy led what was left of his battalion across mountainous jungle terrain teeming with enemy units to Imphal, where the battalion was re-formed at less than half strength.
As soon as he could discharge himself from hospital Hoppy returned to his command, briefed to harass the Japanese as they began to fall back.
Of the subsequent actions around Ukhrul, Sangshak and Litan, Field Marshal Slim later wrote: ‘They resisted desperate night attacks which were closely supported by Japanese artillery, while by day snipers and shelling took their toll.
‘The 10 days’ delay and the heavy casualties this small force and the RAF who supported them had inflicted on the enemy were of inestimable value at this critical stage of the battle.’
Paul Hopkinson was born on June 29 1906, the son of a former professor of archaeology who became a clergyman and eventually retired as Archdeacon of West Morland.
Young Paul was the third of four boys, the younger brother of Tom Hopkinson, later a long-serving editor of Picture Post and the husband of Antonia White.
Hopkinson was educated at St Edward's, Oxford, which he left at 16 for an apprenticeship in his uncle's engineering firm at Manchester, where he joined the Territorial Army.
He went on to obtain a commission in the Regular Army, which involved sitting the final examination at Sandhurst, although he had not been a cadet.
Despite this, his marks were high enough to win him a sought after place in the Indian Army.
He sailed to Calcutta, attached to the 1st Battalion, the Loyal Regiment.
Calcutta was then beset with unrest, and Hoppy was kept busy on internal security.
He also trained at Jafferpore, where troops lived in tents in the jungle.
Howling jackals and hyenas disturbed their nights, and kites swooped on to the plate of any man foolish enough to leave his food uncovered.
When they played cricket and other games in Calcutta their arms were placed on a table under a guard on the edge of the playing field, ready for instant action.
Hoppy's platoon consisted entirely of ex-NCOs, who had been reduced to the ranks for various offences and were reputed to be extremely difficult.
‘But they never let me down,’ he said.
He liked to recall how bachelor officers and other ranks were all shaved in bed without being woken up in the process.
Hopkinson then joined the 2nd Punjab Regiment, under a rather eccentric Colonel.
After dinner the Colonel gave all the officers tasks, such as playing bridge, winding up the gramophone or reading suitable books.
Once Hopkinson arrived late for breakfast to find the Colonel by himself reading a newspaper.
When Hoppy bade the Colonel good morning he looked up and, after a pause, said: ‘My boy, very few gentlemen ever have any breakfast and none talk at it.’
From 1931 to 1932 Hopkinson was at Wana, Waziristan, an isolated spot where he saw action several times.
He later served in the Nowshera Brigade and took part in the Mohmand operations.
In 1935 he was at Loe Agra, where there was more fierce fighting, and then on the Khajuri Plain and up the Khyber Pass.
In 1941 he qualified as a parachutist and then became a founder member of the Indian Airborne Unit: he was Brigade Major of 50 Brigade, then commanded 152 Battalion, and later 77 Indian Parachute Brigade.
After Partition in 1947 Hopkinson joined the Border Regiment and later commanded the Liverpool-based TA Airborne Brigade.
He retired soon after, became a surveyor and worked on the pipelines for North Sea Gas.
Small and slightly built — he looked more like a scholar than a military man — Hoppy's character inspired immediate trust from all who served with him.
He was winsome and diffident, with a quiet sense of humour.
He was appointed MBE, but those who knew him thought he deserved much more.
Hopkinson is survived by his wife, Janet, a son and two daughters.
PERSONAL VIEW The first casualty of political correctness
BY LYNETTE BURROWS
LAST week, a case came to court in which a mentally unstable man was convicted of stabbing three policewomen and one policeman in a shopping centre.
The women were badly injured and two of them have been unable to return to work.
The policeman, with unbelievable fortitude, was able to disarm the attacker before collapsing from his wounds.
The case made harrowing reading, but far worse was the account of how passers-by behaved.
A woman knelt down next to one of the stricken and bleeding girls and told her she got what she deserved; another tried to prevent first-aid being given to the policeman and taunted his suffering.
Commenting on this barbarity, the prosecuting counsel said ‘Such is our society.’
But is our society really like this?
Is it really the case that ordinary mem bers of the public have a hatred of the police so virulent that it completely overbears normal reactions of shock, concern, and compassion?
If this were the case, then the implications for our society would be enormous and worthy of more than passing comment.
Indeed, it would represent a complete breakdown, not just of law and order, but of all civilised values.
If we had really reached a state where a bloody and unprovoked attack on four unarmed members of our police provoked only glee and pleasure in the public then neither I, nor anyone else, would be living in a country we recognised.
But, of course, this is not the truth of the situation.
The scandal is that a supine and cowardly press has allowed itself to be intimidated into censoring the truth even though it distorts our entire view of reality.
The question, ‘Does it matter?’ answers itself.
Of course it matters if people are deliberately robbed of the means of judgment by suppression of facts which, in any other situation, would be regarded as necessary to make sense of what had taken place.
Only one of the many newspapers I read mentioned the fact that the assailant was black and it was with the most extreme difficulty that I was able to ascertain from reporters and policemen, who all refused to be named, that the callous passers-by were also black.
But it is very important; it changes the whole picture.
Black people, as easily identifiable immigrants, suffer from feelings of alienation and rejection which are often focused on the police.
Though this may be understandable in their case, it is not typical of society as a whole.
However distasteful it may be to some people, this does at least provide a rational explanation for the behaviour of those bystanders, even if it does not excuse them.
The suppression of the truth is always a serious matter because what has to be substituted in its place can do even more damage.
Our media is never too squeamish to expose and pillory offending white people, from lager-louts and football hooligans to neo-Nazis and drunken drivers.
Only in cases involving ethnic groups does it suddenly forget its much advertised opposition to censorship and abandon its crusading zeal to defend the public's ‘right to know’.
It turns out that the public has a right to know only what those who control the media think is good for them.
The expedient normally used to defend this outrageous suppression of the truth is the feeble one that it avoids ‘stereotyping’ blacks as criminals.
The same argument could be used to suppress the reporting of all crime that involved human behaviour (as was frequently the case in the old Soviet empire).
Apart from its wrongness in principle, it is ineffective, since the wrongdoing continues without being subject to public censure, which is the way that society typically brings pressure on individuals and groups to conform to civilised norms.
What is more, it produces further ills.
One of these, often referred to by the police, is the unrealistic fear that many people, particularly the elderly, have of their society.
They take at face value cases such as this one involving the policewomen, and they really believe that they live in a society that has lost all its civilised values.
Another effect of media censorship is that, far from leaving the public unaware of black people being involved in crime, many people now think that they are responsible for just about all the crime they read about.
Blame becomes indiscriminate when it cannot be focused and seen in context, and it is black people who are the ones to suffer most in this situation.
Nobody's interest is served by the suppression of the truth; least of all when it is undertaken in a spirit of cowardice and a refusal to face facts.
What is remarkable is that, in our fearless and free-thinking age, this simple plea of an honest account of events will probably be considered too controversial — and will therefore be censored.