

£5m for sportswoman who lost leg in accident
By Christopher Lockwood
A WOMAN footballer could receive £5 million damages after losing a leg in a factory accident.
Miss Paula McCloskey, 26, also injured her other leg when she became entangled in a mincing machine at the M U P factory in Richill, Co Armagh, in June, 1990, the High Court in Belfast was told yesterday.
Miss McCloskey, who was capped four times by the Northern Ireland soccer team and played hockey and handball, will receive a lump sum of £250,000 under the terms of a structured settlement.
A further £265,000 will be invested in a fund to provide her with a tax-free, inflation-proof income for life.
Her lawyer, Mr Richard McLaughlin QC, said the structured settlement would add up to a total of £4.9 million if Miss McCloskey lives to 78, the normal life expectancy for a woman.
The settlement was the second of its kind in Belfast.
Last month a structured settlement awarded to a brain damaged child amounted to £4.8 million.
Letter to the Editor: Upgrade sport
SIR — Now that our sports-loving Prime Minister is back in Downing Street, is it too much to hope that his Minister with Responsibility for Sport will be upgraded from an Under-Secretary to a seat at the Cabinet table?
Mr Major will thereby be able to compete with his fellow ministers for Government funds for so much of sport which requires assistance.
EDWARD GRAYSON London EC4
Letter to the Editor: London is rude to runners
SIR — As preparations are made for the 12th London Marathon (arguably the largest and best race in the world), Londoners need to recognise and rectify an important problem.
In a nutshell, this city is the world's worst in which to run.
I have run in more than 30 cities, including places that had never seen a runner before.
When I ran in Pinsk in 1985, children in the street started to follow me, until officials told me to use a park.
The same restrictions were placed on me when I was in the southern province of China last year.
But I still believe running is the best way to see a city and get a feel for its people and their culture.
In New York, where I went to school, some extremely busy and stressed people use the streets, but New Yorkers understand that there is a code of ethics governing running.
Pedestrians know that runners have a programme to fulfil, and respect it by getting out of their way.
The same is not true of London.
I have no doubt that there will be special preparations and allowances made by police and spectators for the Marathon, in which I will be competing for the first time tomorrow.
Unfortunately, in the course of preparing for the great race, I have become aware that the message to visiting runners is: ‘Go home — dead or alive.’
Cars and buses pay absolutely no heed to a runner, even in cross-walks designated for pedestrians.
Recently, I had seven near collisions with automobiles during one 12-mile run along the Thames.
On the sidewalks, pedestrians are equally bad, whether they are Londoners or tourists.
If there are six people walking abreast there is little chance that they will create an avenue for you to go through.
I wear a personal stereo so I don't hear their comments, but since I sweat a lot when I'm running I can understand that they do not like it when I get too close.
However, there is no doubt about who is inconvenienced most.
It is the runner who has to jerk his pace constantly to avoid the rude pedestrians.
He finds his run unenjoyable and frustrating, not to mention worrying because of the increasing risk that he might receive a knee injury, or worse.
Please don't tell me to run in the park like everybody else.
Running around in circles and seeing the same old thing defeats half the purpose.
So make London as nice a place to run as it can be to visit.
W. TODD JOHNSON London NW6
Short faces Karpov in his toughest test so far
By Malcolm Pein Chess Correspondent
NIGEL SHORT, England's number one chess player, faces Anatoly Karpov today in the toughest test of his career in the Andalucian town of Linares.
Over the next two-and-a-half weeks, the pair will contest a 10-game match in the penultimate stage of the World Chess Championship cycle which leads to a contest for the title itself in August 1993 against Garry Kasparov in Los Angeles.
Short was a child prodigy and the outstanding product of the English chess explosion of the 70s and early 80s which took English chess from the second division to second place only to the former Soviet Union.
Indeed, he hopes to lead England to gold at the Chess Olympiad in Manila now the mighty Soviet chess machine is defunct.
At 26, he is at the height of his powers and ranked fourth in the world, holds the unofficial title of ‘best in the west’ since only three former Soviets; Kasparov, Karpov and Vassily Ivanchuk are ahead of him in the rankings.
In July 1990, he grabbed the last qualifying place for the World Championship cycle in a hard-fought tournament in Manila by defeating Mikhail Gurevich, one of Kasparov's former trainers, in the final game from a position most players would have given up as a draw.
This determination has added a new dimension to the play of a man who says he is ‘getting more pleasure out of humiliating a guy’ and likes to ‘crush his ego’.
Short has taken the example of the Soviet chess school, where an uncompromising will to win takes precedence.
To qualify to play Karpov, Short had to beat Boris Gelfand, another product of the Soviet school, who refused to allow Praedrag Nikolic of Yugoslavia, his previous opponent, a time out for a family funeral.
Short's preparation has been under way for six months and has been intensive.
He has shied away from too many tournaments and has escaped the pressures of London, including his 10-month-old daughter Kiveli to spend long periods with Grandmaster Lubosh Kavalek, his trainer, in Virginia.
Kavalek a Czech emigre, is well used to negotiating with recalcitrant Soviets.
Technology plays an increasing part in the life of a Grandmaster.
Kavalek has the latest computer software to analyse Karpov's play and has assembled a database of 260,000 Grandmaster games which includes almost every move Karpov has played.
Short spent his last Saturday afternoon in London's Tottenham Court Road buying a Notebook computer on which he will plot Karpov's downfall from his room at the Hotel Anibal, the venue.
Most experts agree Karpov is favourite but at 41 and having been World Champion and failed to regain the title in four matches with Kasparov, his enthusiasm must be waning.
But the lion's share of a 300,000 Swiss francs prize fund is an incentive.
Jon Speelman, England number two, believes the chances are 55–45 in Karpov's favour but I think it closer.
As John Levitt, the International Master, said of Short: ‘His best is much better than Karpov's average.’
Match rules.
The players alternate between the white and black pieces and draw lots to determine who plays white in today's first game.
Players score one point for a win, half for a draw and the first player to reach five and a half points wins the match.
Games are played at a rate of 40 moves each in two hours thinking time followed by 20 moves in subsequent hours.
If after 10 games the score is 5–5 there will be two quick play games played at a rate of 60 moves in 45 minutes and then 15 minutes each in a sudden death ‘blitz finish’.
Karpov, 41 is ranked two in the world at 2,725 on the ELO scale.
Short, 26, is ranked four at 2,685.
In their 15 matches to date there have been 10 draws four wins for Karpov and one win for Short.
The prize fund of 300,000 Swiss francs will be divided five eighths to the winner three eighths to the loser.
Soccer: Jobless pay for battle of inflation
By IAN COWIE
THE annual rate of inflation was reduced by more than half during the three Conservative administrations after May, 1979, but unemployment more than doubled during that time.
Yesterday it was announced that the rate of inflation — as measured by the Retail Prices Index — edged down by 0.1 p.c. last month to an annual rate of 4 p.c.
By contrast, it was 10.3 p.c. in May, 1979.
Despite this downward movement, the Central Statistical Office calculates that £2.47 would be needed today to match the buying power of £1 when Mrs Thatcher quoted Saint Francis of Assisi after her first Conservative victory.
The vast majority who remained in work found their wages more than kept pace with inflation.
According to the Department of Employment, the national average pay for adults in fulltime work in May, 1979, was £89.60 a week, or £4,660 per annum.
That more than trebled under the Tories to £285 a week, or £14,800 per annum.
Single pensioners in 1979 received £19.50 a week and couples £31.20, payments which have risen to £54.15 and £86.70.
At the same time, the slice of people's pay packets that the government pocketed fell sharply — although indirect taxation, such as value adde tax, increased.
The basic rate of income tax was 30p in the pound in 1979 and is now 25p, with a new lower rate of 20p for the first £2,000 earned above personal allowances.
However, the numbers who were unable to share in this prosperity due to unemployment soared from 1.09m to 2.65m people.
And some argue that the underlying position is worse than the figures suggest because of the eight changes made to the method of recording unemployment during the period.
Golf: Odd couple a smash hit MASTERS GOLF
Ian Ridley sees opposites attract a huge gallery as the wild style of John Daly is pitted against the immaculate English demeanour of Nick Faldo
By IAN RIDLEY
AUGUSTA may indeed be august, though less snooty than might be imagined, but somebody there has a sense of humour and mischief at least.
It was illustrated yesterday by the pairing of Nick Faldo with John Daly; Boycott batting with Botham, Captain Fantastic and the Brown Dirt Cowboy.
Daly has been, quite literally, the smash hit of the Masters with the crowds, attracting the biggest galleries.
Given some of the feats he has been demonstrating, it is hardly surprising.
On the opening morning of the tournament, an hour before his tee time, for example, Daly strode on to the practice ground and took his driver out of his bag.
Not for him a short iron to loosen up.
Even the other players stopped to watch.
Daly promptly hit a shot that carried over the 65ft high netting 280 yards away, the wall that divides the West Berlin that is Augusta National from the East Berlin of Washington Drive, with its mile after mile of burger joints.
‘Wow.
I can't even point that far,’ said Gay Brewer, the awestruck 1967 champion practising alongside.
‘I've been trying like hell to do it,’ said Daly.
Daly loves the attention.
‘I wish I could stay out there until dark,’ he said after his first round.
‘I love the fans.
Everything I do is for them.
‘I know it ain't my looks they like,’ he says, self-deprecating of his figure by McDonalds, hair by Flymo.
‘I guess it's my personality.’
So besieged was he after his first round that he sought refuge for a while on the practice putting green.
He must have wished he had been there, protected by the Pinkerton security guards employed here, earlier in the week when a messenger arrived at the course to serve a paternity suit.
Not that he personally knew what it was.
He says he handed it to his lawyer without even opening it.
‘Hell it could be a love letter for all I know,’ he said of the missive from Ms Bettye Fulford of Macon, Georgia.
She had offered him ‘love, companionship and support’ at a time when he had ‘suffered severe depression and other emotional problems and indicated his desire to quit professional golf’, she said.
More practically, she had also been his caddie.
There was little danger of the methodical Faldo, the chalk, offering grip-it-and-rip-it Daly, the cheese, much in the way of companionship, let alone love or support, yesterday.
It was all a considerable change from the previous day and a laugh-a-second round with his mentor, Fuzzy Zoeller, which was watched in admiration by, in playing terms, Daly's female equivalent, Laura Davies.
On the first tee yesterday Daly made some sort of remark and smiled.
Faldo, no doubt consumed by his own game, offered no response.
What was that about golf being a social game?
Daly, urged by some of the crowd to ‘kee-eel’, propelled his ball some 300 yards, though into trees.
That for him was not the problem, however.
Three putts took him back to par, continuing the story of his first round in which he hit 16 greens in regulation but missed seven putts inside 8ft.
‘This course is made for me from tee to green but I've got a lot to learn on the greens,’ he said.
He again pushed his tee shot into trees on the second and made five, which was a par this time.
Then at the third came one of his astonishing feats: he drove the ball 330 yards, through spectators crossing the fairway 30 yards from the green, before chipping up and holing a 12ft putt for birdie.
Another birdie came at the short sixth, a downhill putt of 8ft, but a bogey five at the ninth, taking him out in 36, undermined any move up the leaderboard.
With eights and nines off his card, he was making mostly the same numbers as everyone else, just in a different way and order.
Daly moved briskly in all he did.
Faldo's was more of a grinding movement, to the annoyance at times of a gallery 25 deep in places, five deep even 100 yards back down fairways.
He made eight consecutive pars, missing putts of 6ft and 4ft for birdies at the second and sixth respectively, before a bogey at the ninth gave him an outward half of 37 and took him back to level par overall.
An eagle, gleaned with a 10ft putt at the 13th, got the Hope of Hertfordshire back on track but a bogey five at the 17th pegged him back again.
He finished with a disappointing 72 to go with his first round of 71.
The Arkansas Animal, meanwhile, also made a bogey on the 17th in his second 71, birdies coming at the 15th and 18th, the latter another one of those ‘he did what?’ examples.
What he did was send his drive over both familiar fairway bunkers 313 yards — all uphill.
His wedge shot then landed 50ft beyond the pin and spun back to within six.
‘It's a quiet round of golf,’ said Daly of playing with Faldo.
‘But Nick is all right.
There are so many different types of player.
‘He keeps himself to himself.
That's OK.
I'd rather play with Fuzzy.
I prefer to talk a little bit.
It makes it more fun.’
Fun?
‘I'm pig sick,’ said Faldo.
Golf: Eastbourne enjoy two surprise wins
By Ted Barrett
BRIAN MEABY accomplished what his partner and captain, Peter Davies, called a miraculous shot to turn the tide for Eastbourne and bring off another surprise win in the Halford Hewitt Cup foursomes at Royal St George's.
Rugby, five times the cup-winners, were their second-round victims, Brian's brother, Robert, having been a key factor in the first-round dismissal of the holders, Shrewsbury.
Meaby's crucial thrust came in the decisive bottom match at the 13th after he and Davies had lost the 11th and 12th and fallen back to all-square.
Davies pulled his second shot, pin-high but 60 yards left.
Their opponents, Toby Davis and Richard Inglis, were already on the green for a three, 3½ft from the pin.
Meaby chipped and ran to two inches for a four.
Unsurprisingly, Rugby missed their putt, falling behind when they must have felt they were odds-on to go ahead.
Eastbourne won the 14th and 15th and halved the 16th, to win 3–2.
2nd rd, Deal: Rossall 4½, Loretto ½ — Stowe 3, Marlborough 2 — Wrekin 4, Stonyhurst 1 — Wellington 4, St Bees 1 — Tonbridge 4, Cranleigh 1 — Charterhouse 4½, Lancing ½ — Merchiston 5, Clifton 0 — Blundell's 3, The Leys 2 — Stowe 3, Rossall 2 — Wrekin 3½, Willington 1½.
Sandwich: Eastbourne 3, Rugby 2 — Edinburgh Academicals 3½, Repton 1½ — Harrow 3, Watson's 2 — Fettes 3½, Glenalmond 1½ — Whitgift 5, Taunton 0 — Eton 5, Bradfield 0 — Malvern 3, Uppingham 2 — Kings Edward's Birmingham 3, Ampleforth 2.
Golf: Smart money on Roe
By Lewine Mair at La Moye, Jersey
MARK ROE and Daniel Silva, the latter a Portuguese professional who is sponsored by Nigel Mansell, share the lead on 134, 10 under par, at the halfway stage of the £225,000 Jersey European Airways Open at La Moye.
Just like these links, Roe, 29, has two very different sides.
One of his hobbies is trampolining; another collecting antiques.
‘Mark,’ said his manager, Andrew Chandler, ‘comes across as a chaotic character but look beneath the surface and he's thoroughly well organised.’
In the wake of Roe's fourth place in last week's Rome Masters, Chandler put such a sizeable bet on his charge that the bookmakers reduced his odds for this week from 40–1 to 20–1.
Roe has won before — the 1989 Catalan Open — and shares Chandler's view that he is ready to win again.
All season he has been playing well, putting poorly.
At the start of this week, however, he switched to a heavier putter which has married well with these slower surfaces.
Roe was not among those worrying about the fumes belching across the first tee from a visiting ice-cream van.
Instead, he was troubled at the start by a cold which has been with him since last week.
His head cleared at his second, where he thrashed two drivers on to the green, while he went to two under for the day at his fifth, the short 14th, where he hit a seven-iron to 7ft.
Silva, 25, was delighted to find himself with a gallery of waiters and farm-workers from Jersey's 3,000-strong Portuguese community.
After a poor start, at the 10th, where he missed for his three from a mere 18ins, he did not let the birdies escape at the 11th and 12th.
Silva, who went on to make a 30-footer for an eagle at the second, insists that the confidence he has been given by Mansell's support has counted for as much, if not more, than the money.
Mansell saw that the young professional was lacking in belief and has constantly told him: ‘Go out and win.’
Cricket: Heat is on struggling S Africans
By Geoffrey Dean in Port of Spain
IT WILL be a major achievement if South Africa, whose poor bowling performance in the first one-day international in Jamaica allowed the West Indies to regain their confidence and self-esteem, win either of the final two games of the series, today and tomorrow at the Queen's Park Oval.
A number of factors are conspiring against the South Africans and they profess to be having real problems with the heat and humidity, exacerbated by the fact that Trinidad is experiencing its highest temperatures for a year with bushfires bright in the hills around the Port of Spain area.
‘We are just not used to this heat,’ Mike Procter, the team manager, admitted.
Moreover, although the Queen's Park pitch looks to be true and lacking in pace, there must be serious concern about the South African batsmen.
They gained little out of the nets in Jamaica and have not been able to face any bowling since Tuesday other than the spinners and gentle medium-pacers.
The net wickets at Queen's Park were considered too dangerous and, indeed, the five specialist seamers were allowed to bowl only at unguarded stumps.
The bowling is itself a worry, having looked very ordinary in Jamaica.
Apart from Henry, the direction of all the bowlers was poor and far too much was over-pitched.
Simmons was given a lot of width by the South Africans, who said they had never seen anyone hit the ball so hard since Graeme Pollock.
‘Our bowling was not consistent in the World Cup, nor has it been here,’ lamented Procter.
‘We also bowled far too many no-balls and wides.’
Pringle and Bosch, who both missed Tuesday's game, are likely to play today.
Van Zyl should step down, as may Snell.
West Indies are likely to be unchanged with sell-out crowds of 24,000 expected for both games.
Cricket: Lloyd's hard work pays off Warwickshire
By Mike Beddow
FOUR Warwickshire bowlers shared 244 wickets last summer, yet their batsmen delivered only four centuries.
One figure clearly outweighed the other as the county gained their highest position since the championship pennant was last raised at Edgbaston in 1972.
What conclusion should be drawn from this apparent imbalance between bat and ball?
The most obvious is that with the addition of one top-class batsman, Warwickshire might well have levered the title from Essex.
Both sides won 11 matches — more than the total achieved by five of the previous six champion counties — but a revealing figure was to be found among the bonus points, where Essex harvested 11 more in the batting column.
If this is to identify a Warwickshire weakness, it must be said that the 1991 season exceeded all predictions.
The only disappointment was that after opening up a 50-point lead at the beginning of August, they failed to win any of the next four matches.
It was fractionally too late when they signed off with three victories.
The strength of the side was undoubtedly in a well-balanced pace attack, spearheaded by Allan Donald (83 championship wickets) with support from Tim Munton (71), Gladstone Small (45) and Dermot Reeve (45).
Although Warwickshire won the NatWest Trophy in 1989, it was only a note of encouragement for a county which had under-achieved in the championship for many years.
There was still much hard work to be done.
Andy Lloyd, the captain, has seen it through, first in a somewhat uneasy relationship with Bob Cottam, the former coach, and, last year alongside Bob Woolmer, the new director of coaching.
Woolmer's approach is very much of the modern school.
Attention was given to planning, diet, fitness and mental attitude, the latter under the guidance of a sports psychologist.
The team were superbly prepared and the younger players — many of whom were recruited and brought on by Cottam — made further progress.
Dominic Ostler, 21, was rewarded with a county cap after scoring 1,284 runs.
A forceful, clean striker, he made an unbeaten 94 in a defeat by Essex in May — a result which was to have a significant bearing on the championship — and soon afterwards scored a maiden century against Kent.
Jason Ratcliffe, 22, would surely have reached the 1,000 mark for the first time but for the early-season decision to spread Asif Din's role as a limited-overs opener into championship cricket.
Once Ratcliffe was in the side on a regular basis, he cemented a partnership with Andy Moles.
Of the older hands, Lloyd had his best year for some time — 10 half-centuries but, strangely, no three-figure scores — and Asif fitted into the demands of the team with successive hundreds, from the No 3 and No 6 positions.
Asif and Trevor Penney, the newly-qualified Zimbabwean, will be competing for a middle-order place, though the first chance is likely to go to Paul Smith if he has shaken off last year's injury troubles.
Smith has a second claim with his knack of producing wicket-taking spells at a brisk pace.
Warwickshire have a number of dual-purpose players and no-one has done better than Dermot Reeve, with 2,525 runs and 73 wickets in the last two championship seasons.
Too often the batting finished with Reeve.
More is needed from Keith Piper, a nimble, bouncy type of wicketkeeper who has already scored a first-class hundred.
In summary, Warwickshire's batting is usually adequate as long as the bowlers are able to put a squeeze on the opposition.
On seven occasions last year, the batsmen made first-innings totals of less than 300 but did just enough for the seamers to win the matches.
In the main, Edgbaston pitches help pace and the modest run-scoring record has to be viewed in that light.
When better weather favoured the batsmen in the closing weeks of last season, it was noticeable that Lloyd's side lost some impetus and the title slipped away.
Motorcycling: Battered Gardner ponders his future
By John Coles in Sydney
FORMER world champion Wayne Gardner, though refusing to confirm his retirement, admitted the chances of his returning to racing following his crash in Japan two weeks ago were remote when he visited Eastern Creek during qualifying for tomorrow's Australian Grand Prix.
The Rothmans Honda team member broke his right leg in five places when he went down for a second time during the opening championship round on a wet Suzuka circuit.
‘Making a final decision won't be easy but I can't keep on doing this to my body,’ said Gardner, who suffered multiple fractures to his left leg less than two years ago.
His Queensland team-mate, Michael Doohan, the winner in Japan, set the qualifying pace ahead of defending champion Wayne Rainey, on a Yahama, and Kevin Schwantz, the Suzuki team leader, who is still looking for a first major title breakthrough.
Australian Daryl Beattie, 23, covering for Gardner, set himself up for a top-three finish at the first attempt as a factory-supported rider.
Lawn Tennis: Krajicek repeats success over Stich
By Barry Martin in Tokyo
RICHARD KRAJICEK repeated his Australian Open quarter-final triumph over Michael Stich yesterday, defeating him 7–6, 6–4 to reach the Suntory Japan Open semi-finals.
Jim Courier dismissed Amos Mansdorf by the same score but Michael Chang dropped a set before overwhelming Todd Woodbridge in the final set to win 6–4, 1–6, 6–0.
Stefan Edberg also dropped a set but his greater consistency and ability to take control from the net allowed him to defeat Brad Gilbert 4–6, 6–2, 6–3.
Kimiko Date defeated top seed Amy Frazier 6–3, 6–4 and will face Sabine Appelmans, who reached the final for the second successive year by beating Naoko Sawamatsu 7–6, 6–4.
Jordi Burillo, who delighted his home-town audience in Barcelona on Thursday by conquering Boris Becker in the Spanish Open, quickly returned to a place on the sidelines when he went down to Horst Skoff later the same day.
Burillo, 19, ranked 230th in the world, overcame Becker 1–6, 7–6, 6–4 but was unable to prevent Skoff winning their third-round tie 7–6, 6–3.
Second seed Ivan Lendl, Sergi Bruguera, seeded No 5, seventh seed Alberto Mancini and Magnus Gustafsson, the eighth seed, all advanced to the quarter-finals.
Lendl defeated Thomas Muster, the 15th seed, 6–3, 6–4 and Mancini overcame ninth seed Francisco Clavet 7–6, 6–0.
Gary Drake and Jonathan Smith, past winners of the now defunct junior hardcourt championship at Wimbledon, lead Royal Berkshire into the semi-finals of the Vauxhall Indoor Trophy in Sheffield today.
Their opponents are Ilkley, who include Gary Henderson and Simon Ickringill, stalwarts of Yorkshire's county championship winning team.
Queen's Club meet IFG Hallamshire in the other semi-final.
Long Road, Cambridge, who include Amanda Brown, meet Queen's Club while Hallamshire take on Puma Welwyn, last year's winners, in the women's event.
Julie Pullin, 16, is seeking her second African circuit title in three weeks after beating fellow Briton Lucy Ahl 6–3, 6–4 in the Botswana tournament semi-finals.
She meets South Africa's Estelle Gevers in today's final.
Andrew Richardson, the leading British junior, was beaten 0–6, 7–6, 6–4, by Italy's Francesco Cattinni in the semi-finals of the ITF Junior International in Prato, Italy, yesterday.
Racing: Rodrigo to strengthen Sangster Classic hand
By HOTSPUR (J A McGrath)
RODGRIGO DE TRIANO may consolidate owner Robert Sangster's enviable position as the first Classics approach by winning the Singer & Friedlander Greenham Stakes at Newbury today and looks a must for those seeking to land the £80,000-plus Tote Jackpot pool.
Mr Sangster's filly Musicale overcame several obstacles to retain her unbeaten record in yesterday's Gainsborough Stud Fred Darling Stakes and is now a best-priced 6–1 favourite for the 1,000 Guineas on April 30, although Coral's reacted extremely cautiously by offering just 3–1.
Musicale was blocked for a run in the home straight and it was not until Pat Eddery secured an opening just over a furlong out that the filly looked likely to cut down Lord Huntingdon's Wiedniu.
But once clear Musicale strode away to score by one length on tacky ground.
Mr Sangster said: ‘When he came back, Pat asked me ‘How's your heart?’
He said forget that run as she would have won by eight lengths on good ground.’
Central City and Culture Vulture dead-heated for third, a further two and a half lengths away but neither looked like troubling Musicale.
Mr Sangster said he will meet Frankie Dettori at Newmarket next week to discuss the signing of a riding contract which many thought had already been agreed.
‘If Frankie had already signed, then he would have been aboard Musicale today,’ said Sangster.
Now it is up to Rodrigo de Triano to similarly retain his unbeaten record in today's Greenham Stakes and Mr Sangster is particularly hopeful.
‘The ground is sticky but I wouldn't put anyone off,’ the owner said.
‘The colt has thickened out well during his winter break and should improve enormously for this outing.’
Peter Chapple-Hyam, his trainer, says that Rodrigo de Triano, winner of the Middle Park Stakes, has only really come to himself this week.
‘I think he will win, but it has only been when he has had the sun on his back in the last couple of days that he has really come on.’
This year's Greenham will be a fascinating trial as Magic Ring, trained by Paul Cole, has reportedly worked impressively at home but will be tested fully over seven furlongs on ground that yesterday proved a stumbling block to many.
In France yesterday, Criquette Head's Hatoof was beaten by Francois Boutin's Kenbu in the Prix Imprudence at Maisons-Laffitte but lack of early pace may have caused this surprise result.
Cardoun landed the Prix Djebel to remain on course for the 2,000 Guineas for which he is now a 14–1 chance.
Seattle Rhyme, winter favourite for the Ever Ready Derby, has been taken out of Epsom betting after David Elsworth expressed doubts about getting the colt to post for the Classic.
Racing: Granville Again cruises home
By Tony Stafford
GRANVILLE AGAIN, travelling well when falling two out in last month's Champion Hurdle, stylishly underlined his credentials to be considered a most unlucky loser that day when taking yesterday's Scottish Champion Hurdle at Ayr.
His defeat of four rivals in the Ayr race represented some consolation for his Cheltenham misfortune — but owner Eric Scarth is already looking forward to dethroning Champion Hurdler Royal Gait next March.
‘I think he'll be finished for this season, but we'll bring him back for another crack at the Champion next season,’ he said.
‘Peter [Scudamore]says he's the best hurdler he has ridden,’ he added.
Fidway had run a close fourth in the Champion Hurdle, yet was no match for Granville Again here.
Peter Scudamore's mount took it up from Jinxy Jack two out and sprinted clear on the flat, landing the odds by five lengths from Gordon Richards' horse, with Fidway two lengths away in third.
At Ayr today, Tom Troubadour, denied a run when slightly injured just before the Ritz Club Trophy Chase at the Cheltenham Festival, should be fresh and well for the William Hill Scottish National, which appears a more comfortable assignment.
An overnight weights-rise of 9lb puts Tom Troubadour nicely in at 10st 1lb and he can continue the winning sequence which has brought stylish victories in handicaps at Newbury.
The majority of Tom Troubadour's opponents are coming to the end of much busier campaigns, and the novice Merry Master may prove the main threat.
Racing: Avila Best of the Day
By Course Correspondent
AVILA*, who holds the 1,000 Guineas engagement, is fancied to make a winning debut in the Bridget Maiden Fillies Stakes (4.0) at Newbury today.
It appears significant that this unraced filly — who has been working well — is the sole survivor of five John Gosden entries in the fillies' classic and none of her rivals has a similar entry.
Henry Cecil does well at this track — he had two winners here yesterday — and Pabouche, also considered a potential classic candidate, may improve his record in the Burghclere Stakes (2.0).
Rodrigo de Triano, the 2,000 Guineas ante-post favourite, is reported in good shape for the Singer & Friedlander Greenham Stakes (3.0) and Brighton winner Two Left Feet carries confidence for the Ladbrokes Spring Handicap (3.30).
Yachting: Italians join New Zealand in final trial
By Tim Jeffery in San Diego
ALTHOUGH Ville de Paris and Nippon have been eliminated after the final races of the America's Cup challengers' semi-finals, they are both already setting their sights on the 1995 Cup.
Marc Pajot, skipper of Ville de Paris, says that Jacques Chirac has pledged continuing support from the City of Paris, together with Yvon Jacob, of Legris Industries, who stepped aboard as principal sponsor of Pajot's second Cup campaign.
Both eliminated boats, however, could not quite match the quiet efficicency of the way New Zealand and Il Moro de Venezia, of Italy, progressed through the Louis Vuitton semi-finals.
In a preview of the final trails, which start on April 19, Rod Davis' New Zealand raced against Il Moro, skippered by Paul Cayard, in Thursday's concluding semi-final match.
Although Il Moro led for the first two legs, New Zealand showed her fearsome ability to climb to windward when she squeezed up from underneath Il Moro to take the lead at the third mark.
The next time they returned to the windward mark, Paul Cayard tried to shoot the mark as Dennis Conner had done in the defenders' trials on Tuesday.
But possibly because he had noted how Conner had lost a protest in mirror-image circumstances, he dropped his jib.
But, like Conner, he brushed the buoy and was penalised.
Conner is still furious about losing Tuesday's protest.
His place in the defenders' final is in jeopardy because of it, for Bill Koch's America beat her stable-mate, Kanza, on Thursday, to boost the chances of the two Koch yachts meeting in the final.
‘Four years' work and $12 million could go down the tubes,’ said Conner.
‘If we don't make the final, Cy Gilette [the umpire]will have our blood on his hands for the rest of his life.’
Had Conner beaten Kanza on Wednesday, the defence semi-final would have been halted, with Conner and Koch each having a place in the final.
But now, because of complex permutations resulting from an equally involved scoring system, the odds are stacking up against Conner.
He knows his Stars & Stripes cannot match Koch's boats for speed.
‘We just wave them by,’ he said in a moment of candour.
His only chance is to outsmart Koch's crew in shifty winds.
Challengers' Louis Vuitton Cup semi-final.
— Race 8: New Zealand (R Davis) bt Ville de Paris (M Pajot) 3m 30s; Nippon (C Dickson) bt Il Moro di Venezia (P Cayard) 1m 53s.
Race 9: New Zealand (R Davis) bt Il Moro di Venezia (P Cayard) 2m 20s; Ville de Paris (M Pajot) bt Nippon (C Dickson) 0m 24s.
Final pts: New Zealand 7; Il Moro di Venezia 5; Ville de Paris 4; Nippon 2.
Bowls: Allcock pipped at post
By Donald Newby
TONY ALLCOCK, the world indoor pairs champion, failed in a marathon effort yesterday to emulate his international colleague Andy Thomson, who captured national singles and pairs titles last year.
Thomson, singles winner for the past three years, is not at Melton Mowbray in the Manchester Unity Championships to thwart Allcock this year — he is playing in Australia — but there were others.
After negotiating two rounds of the singles, Allcock and his Bentham partner Andrew Wills confronted Iain Boyle and his father Ted in the pairs final.
Bentham dropped a sixth on the first end, then a two on the next and spent more than three hours trying to catch up.
Skip Iain saw him and his fathe to the title by 21–16.
After wins over Malcolm Thomas and former holder Roy Cutts, Allcock completed a round-the-clock stint on the green last night with a 21–10 quarter-final singles victory over Richard Vinter.
He now meets fellow international John Evans, while Mervyn King plays Mick Langley.
Pairs final: E and I Boyle (Richardsons Molton) 21, A Wills, A Allcock (Bentham) 16.
Point-To-Point: Alner poised to extend his lead
By Hugh Condry
A TREBLE at the Axe Vale on Wednesday put Robert Alner 19–12 ahead of Philip Scholfield for the Daily Telegraph Men's Championship and the Dorset rider could stretch his lead still further at the Portman this afternoon.
Ponteus Pilot should be a banker for him in the Members race, and his other prospects include Seven of Diamonds in the Open.
Though Alner has failed to finish on both occasions he has ridden Seven of Diamonds this season, the horse won at the two previous meetings on this afternoon's course, when partnered by Malcolm Batters.
Leading woman rider Alison Dare, who took her tally of winners to 11 at the Heythrop on Tuesday when Le Kingdom was promoted to first place after finishing a head behind Green Archer, will also be at the Portman.
She rides Russki or Hazeleels Delight in the Ladies race, has the choice of two in the Intermediate and Sleep-line for Pine in the Maiden.
James Tarry, third in the Men's Championship with 11 wins, will be at the Bicester, where True Bloom might win the Land Rover qualifier, even if last Saturday's Uttoxeter winner, Radical Views, comes under orders.
Holcombe Bill ran at the Axe Vale on Wednesday and so may miss the Dartmoor's BMW qualifier, which would brighten the chance of Bishopric.
Floline may again prove just too good for Electress in the Members.
Popular Welsh jockey Tim Rooney expects to resume at the Llandeilo Farmers after being out of action since a fall with his first ride of the season.
Roscoe Boy, who won on his return a fortnight ago, has had a recurrence of foot problems and will not meet his engagement in the Puckeridge Ladies race.
TODAY'S FIXTURES.
— Belvoir, Garthorpe, Leics (5m e Melton Mowbray) 2.0; Bicester with Whaddon Chase, Kingston Blount, Oxon (4m ne Watlington) 1.30; Dartmoor, Flete Park, Devon (2m n Modbury) 2.0; Llandeilo Farmers, Erw Lon, Dyfed (10m n Carmarthen) 12.30; Llangibby, Howick, Gwent (2m w Chepstow) 2.0; Middleton, Whitwell-on-the-Hill, Yorks (6m sw Malton) 2.0; Percy, Alnwick, Northumberland (3m e town) 1.30; Portman, Badbury Rings, Dorset (5m se Blandford) 1.30; Puckeridge & Thurlow, Horseheath, Cambs (3m e Linton) 2.0; United, Brampton Bryan, Herefords (10m w Ludlow) 2.0; West Kent, Penshurst (4m sw Tonbridge) 2.0; West Somerset Vale, Kingston St Mary, Devon (3m n Taunton) 2.0.
London Marathon: Glitter of gold and Olympics opens the race, warns Brace
By KEN MAYS
STEVE BRACE, Britain's leading runner in the ADT London Marathon tomorrow, has warned race favourites Mark Plaatjes and Yakov Tolstikov that it's anyone's race for the the £32,000 first prize.
‘Tolstikov was an unknown as far as last year's race was concerned, yet he went off and won it,’ said Brace, who has already been selected for the Barcelona Olympics.
‘In my mind there is not an out-and-out favourite to cross Westminster Bridge because it's the most open race of all time.
‘So many runners are depending on this race to qualify for the Olympics, especially the Portuguese, who have been in invincible form in half-marathons, and I would not be surprised if the winner is someone no one has heard of.’
Brace, from Bridgend, is the only one of Britain's three-strong team for Barcelona who will be running.
Paul Davies-Hale and Dave Long are giving it a miss, but Brace forecasts a good run from first reserve Paul Evans.
‘I'm both for and against the selection policy but I believe that Evans could put egg on the selectors' faces on Sunday.’
Brace, from Bridgend, is open about his commitment to the race, calling it ‘glitter of gold’— money rather than medals — and that is why so many of the other runners want to do well.
Twice winner of the Paris event, seventh last year in London and then sprinting away in the final 200 metres to win the Berlin marathon ahead of Plaatjes, Brace has collected more money than he could have ever earned in his chosen profession of teaching.
‘My first priority is to feed my wife and two children, but the German win has given me respite of about 13 months to consider medals rather than money.
‘I'm sure that the majority of runners have to get money because you cannot survive without it, and only a few are in a position to do otherwise.’
Brace, who gave up teaching and his rugby career in Bridgend to run, said that even though there is a large elite field in tomorrow's race, only 25 per cent are a danger.
‘The Poles, Mexicans and Brazilians are all treating it as their final Olympic trials and though at this moment there are no pacemakers, they'll all be watching each other and it could be the most interesting race since it began in 1981.’
With so much money being paid out throughout the running world a lot of the top names have gone elsewhere, such as Rotterdam, Los Angeles New York or Boston, but victory in London is still a lucrative prospect with about £235,000 on offer.
That is apart from the massive appearance money ADT has put up.
For Brace, who engaged only in jogging before he was struck by the marathon boom, it will be his 26th venture over the 26 miles 385 yards course.
Jan Hurak, from Poland, who was third last year, does not believe that anyone will run away from the field, as the Russians did last year.
‘I cannot see anyone doing that this time and providing it is a reasonable pace I will be at the front.
I am looking for a 2hr 8min pace and I prepared to take it up if it falls below that.’
While the men's event appears wide open, the women's raced is centred around last year's winner, Rosa Mota, from Portugal.
‘Rosa will be the pacemaker,’ said British record holder Maronique Marot, the French-born Leeds athlete.
‘Everyone will be watching her to see what she does and although I do not think she is very fit, she has to be the favourite to win.’
Mota, winner of Olympic and world titles, as well as three European championships, said: ‘Of course, I want to win London again and hopefully the Olympic marathon, but on the day you either feel good or you feel bad.’
Andrea Wallace, one of Britain's top cross-country athletes and a mother of two, running in only her second marathon, believes that if she is still there at 20 miles, she has a chance of gaining a medal.
‘I am really a baby at this distance and I am pretty nervous.
I don't know much about marathon running and I shall try and stick as close to Mota as possible.
‘If I am struggling around the 15 miles mark then my determination will be just to finish, but it is my ambition to break 2hr 25min.’
Of the 35,000 who have been accepted, about 26,000 are expected to be at the start and these will include one of Britain's most famous athletes, David Bedford, who has slimmed down for his first big race since he retired 11 years ago.
Bedford, who has slotted training between his jobs with the British Athletic Federation and the International Athletes Club, is running for charity.
So too is Adrian Dodson, Britain's best hope to gain a boxing gold medal in the Olympics in Barcelona.
The race will be started by Terry Waite near his Blackheath home.
Yachting: ‘Dutchmen’ put Britain on top
By David Pelly in Hyeres
ON a day when conditions were typical of what is expected at Barcelona in July, British Flying Dutchman crews proved they are no longer the lame ducks of the Olympic team by finishing first, second, fourth and fifth off Hyeres yesterday.
There is a now a real battle for the team place between Adrian Stead and Will Henderson, and this is bound to further improve their level of competition.
But there was an element of luck in yesterday's performances because the British crews decided to defy political reality by going hard left on the first beat and were pleasantly rewarded by a massive windshift in their favour.
The other outstanding performance of the day was a win in the Finn class by Stuart Childerley, who now lies equal first overall with Germany's Tim Stade with one race to go.
Childerly does not normally excel in light and shifty conditions, so it is an impressive achievement.
London Marathon: Frei out to show all-round excellence
By JEREMY BACON
HEINZ FREI, the world record-holder from Switzerland, is expected to become the fourth foreign winner in five years of the BSAD-ADT London Wheelchair marathon tomorrow.
Frei's best of 1hr 27min 53sec is nearly five seconds faster than that of Hakan Ericsson, the second favourite from Sweden who won the event two years ago.
The Swiss competitor is a talented athlete having recently returned from the Winter Paralympics in France where he took part in the cross country sledging.
He won the 10,000m and 1500m gold medals at the Seoul Paralympics and is due to take part this summer in the Barcelona Games.
The race build up has been disrupted by the controversy over an attempt to impose a minimum time limit of 1hr 50min, because of road closures.
But yesterday organiers decided competitors could go as fast as they like.
Britain's best hope is David Holding, the third fastest entrant who, at 20, became the youngest winner of the race in 1989 when he won a tight finish to beat off the challenge from the experienced pair of Canadian Ted Vince and Chris Hallam of Wales.
Since then the Kettering accountant has established himself as the British No 1 and holds four national road race records.
His victories include wins in 1989 and last year in the Great North Run.
A further British man to watch for is Ian Thompson from Redcar.
Though he only finished 12th last year in 2–8–02 he has since recorded two sub 1–51 marathons and is tipped for a top six place.
Rose Hill could do well in the women's event now that last year's champion from Denmark, Connie Hansen, has decided not to take part this time.
The Milton Keynes competitor achieved her best performance, 2–12–14, in Dublin two years ago.
All the women competitors are home-based and another likely contender for honours is Tanni Grey from Cardiff.
She has been the Great North Run winner in 1990 and 1991 as well as the British track holder at all distances from 100m to 800.
For the first time the race sees a husband and wife pairing in Yvonne and Barry Holloway from Lymington in Hampshire.
Hockey: Slough at the double
By Cathy Harris
SLOUGH moved a step closer to achieving a League and Cup double when they qualified for today's final against Hightown by convincingly beating Blueharts 11–1 in the semi-final of the All England Women's Hockey Association Cup at Milton Keynes Sports Club yesterday.
In the first semi-final Hightown beat Sutton Coldfield 3–2 to secure a place in next year's European Cup-Winners' Cup.
Sutton Coldfield fought back to 2–2 in the 57th minute, but England striker Tina Cullen made the game safe.
Great Britain will meet Holland, the world champions, in their opening match at the Barcelona Olympics, according to the draw announced by the International Hockey Federation.
They play South Korea second, and New Zealand in their final group game.
Boxing: Foreman runs show
By JOHN HISCOCK
ALEX STEWART professes to be unworried by the thought of meeting the people's favourite, the massive George Foreman, in the ring tonight in Las Vegas, writes John Hiscock.
‘The only thing he's got over me right now is mental conditioning and experience,’ said Stewart, 27, the London-born heavyweight who lives in New York.
Foreman, 43, has been made the overwhelming favourite to earn his 26th win since he began his unlikely comeback five years ago.
Stewart has seemed distinctly ill-at-ease in preparing for the fight.
Those who saw him freeze into immobility against Mike Tyson before crashing to the canvas in the first round in July 1990 believe they are seeing now a repeat of the same symptoms.
Foreman has not made things easier for Stewart by his jocular jibes.
‘I fought here 22 years ago, about the time this kid was about to get potty-trained,’ he said.
Stewart, who has 26 knockout wins in 29 fights, gave Evander Holyfield the fright of his boxing life in 1989 and also wobbled Michael Moorer last year before Moorer knocked him out.
Hockey: Bucks set to bridge the gap
By Chris Moore
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE have not won the Norwich Union County Championship since 1982, but with the arrival of John Shaw, the talented Southgate forward, their 10-year wait for another title may be over.
Shaw, will join nine players from Slough, including Simon Nicklin, the young Great Britain half-back, as Bucks line up against Lancashire in today's quarter-finals at St Albans.
Victory would earn them a semi-final place against Surrey or Kent tomorrow.
After the preliminary rounds, the competition only starts in earnest today, though the Royal Air Force may find themselves outclassed by a strong Somerset team.
Somerset have produced a powerful squad, with Gary Mason in goal, 12 more players from Firebrands and Stuart Blan, of Teddington, in defence.
Unfortunately, Yorkshire and Durham, the other two northern survivors, have been drawn together in the quarter-finals, with the odds favouring the White Rose county.
But under the new format, fitness and all-round strength will play a big part, for, with the final tomorrow afternoon, the new county champions will have to win three matches in two days.
Soccer: Colchester through to final
By Peter Ernest
ROY McDONOUGH, now nearing the end of his initial season as player-manager of Colchester, last night led his team to the final of the Vauxhall FA Trophy for the first time.
The GM Vauxhall Conference leaders drew 1–1 in front of 1,650 crowd at Macclesfield's Moss Rose ground to complete a 4–1 aggregate semi-final win.
It booked their place at Wembley on Sunday May 10 and brought the club's dreams of a non-League double a step closer.
John Timmons scored for the home side after 19 minutes before Jason Cook equalised just before half-time.
Colchester now await today's outcome of Witton's second-leg game against the Merseyside club, Marine, of the HFS Loans League, who held their Conference rivals 2–2 last week.
Witton, like their opponents, are also attempting to reach the final for the first time and today's clash at Marine's Rossett Park ground is all-ticket with a crowd limit of 2,500 being set by the police.
After clinching the Bob Lord Trophy against Runcorn in midweek, Wycombe travel to Altrincham today hoping to relieve Colchester of the leadership for the first time since they went top five months ago.
Wycombe will make up their game in hand at Moss Lane this afternoon and go three points in front if they beat struggling Altrincham.
Wycombe and Colchester are both on 75 points.
Soccer: Phillips bucks the trend
By Peter Keeling
A FREE KICK goal two minutes from the end by Jimmy Phillips gave Middlesbrough their first victory, 2–1 over Tranmere, in five League games and improved their Second Division play-off hopes at Prenton Park.
It was an exciting finish to the game because after dominating 70 per cent of the play, and leading through Proctor's 14th-minute goal, it looked as though Middlesbrough had failed again when Tranmere's record-breaking scorer Muir equalised in the 86th minute from a centre by Malkin.
A hat-trick from Jim Gannon led Stockport to a 4–1 victory over Exeter at Edgeley Park and second place on the Division Three table.
Hodge equalised Gannon's second-minute goal in the eighth minute, and it looked as though the game was heading for a draw.
Then Gannon struck in the 81st minute and added the third with a penalty after Exeter's Kevin Miller was sent off for a second bookable offence in the 89th minute.
Preece sealed the match a minute later.
England's Under-15s gained their first win of the season, 3–0, against Northern Ireland before a crowd of 3,944 at the Goldstone Ground, Brighton.
Captain Howell, a midfielder from nearby Worthing, put the home side ahead with a superb dipping volley from the edge of the box and scored the third in injury time.
Striker Murphy tapped in Ellis's cross from close range for the second goal after 28 minutes.
England would have increased their margin of victory but for the heroics of Irish goalkeeper Linton who made several outstanding saves.
Soccer: Chelsea fail to complete payment
By Christopher Davies
CHELSEA'S battle with their landlords escalated last night when Cabra Estates gave notice that a winding-up order is to be issued against the club.
The club failed to meet a Thursday midnight deadline set by the High Court for payment of £22.8 million to Cabra for the purchase of Stamford Bridge.
Although negotiations are continuing between Ken Bates, the Chelsea chairman, and John Duggan, his counterpart at Cabra, the latter has made it clear that he is unhappy with the alternative deal proposed by the club.
A statement from Mr Duggan said: ‘Chelsea have failed to complete the purchase.
As a result, Cabra will now take action to enforce the court's decision.
‘It has been reported that the completion date has been deferred due to Chelsea appealing to the House of Lords.
No such deferral has been granted.
Cabra has today advised Chelsea that a winding-up petition is to be issued.’
That may be little more than a technicality because Mr Duggan added that Chelsea have submitted outline proposals to Cabra and their advisers which may resolve the outstanding issues.
But he said: ‘Cabra have indicated that the basic proposals are inadequate and unacceptable and have requested further clarification as to the terms of the outline proposals which, at this time, have not been received.’
Fulham, whose lease on Craven Cottage, which is also owned by Cabra, expires in May 1993, are also involved.
They plan to share Stamford Bridge with Chelsea from next season if Mr Bates reaches an agreement with Cabra.
Alan Smith, the Arsenal striker who has yet to sign a new contract with the club, is still part of manager George Graham's plans even though he is unlikely to start today's game against Crystal Palace.
Smith, 29, who has a year to run on his present deal, has had preliminary discussions with Mr Graham but Ken Friar, Arsenal's managing director, said yesterday that he had not yet been formally offered a fresh contract.
Mr Graham said: ‘I want Smith to stay and he will be here next season.
I hope he will sign a new contract because I believe he is probably the best target man in Britain.
‘I left him out of the team in the middle of a winning run and Kevin Campbell came in and did well.
But you could toss a coin between them when it comes to judging the difference.’
The partnership between Campbell and former Crystal Palace striker Ian Wright has produced seven goals in five games, making Arsenal the First Division's top scorers.
Soccer: Man Utd v Nottm Forest Referee: George Courtney
In tomorrow's Rumbelow's League Cup final, United (Div 1, top) are unlikely to risk captain Bryan Robson's calf injury, but Webb is fit again.
Forest (Div 1, 8th) are without Tiler (knee), captain Pearce (knee) and Chettle.
Leading scorers — Man Utd: McClair 22.
Forest: Sheringham 20.
This season (Div 1, March 18): Forest 1 (Clough), Man Utd 0.
Verdict: United to win.
Soccer: Wolves v Cambridge Referee: David Allison
Wolves (11th) may give a debut to central defender Simkin in place of Madden (thigh), injured against Ipswich in midweek.
Striker Bull looks for his 200th goal.
Cambridge (2nd) may recall midfielder Wilkins and striker Claridge, who faces a late fitness test on his back.
Leading scorers — Wolves: Bull 21.
Cambridge: Dublin 18.
This season (Sept 17): Cambridge 2 (Wilkins, Taylor), Wolves 1 (Bull).
Verdict: Wolves to win.
Soccer: Sunderland v Charlton Referee: Jim Parker
FA Cup finalists Sunderland (Div 2, 21st) aim to end a run of four League defeats, but Bracewell (broken nose) is out so Mooney returns.
Charlton (6th) hope that Lee will be fit as they push for promotion.
Leading scorers — Sunderland: Byrne 21.
Charlton: Leaburn 14.
This season (Sept 17): Charlton 1 (Webster), Sunderland 4 (Gabbiadini 3, Owers p).
Verdict: Revenge for Charlton.
Soccer: Ipswich v Newcastle Referee: Alf Buksh
Ipswich (Div 2, top) should be unchanged, with defender Whelan deputising for Linighan, who will have an exploratory knee operation.
Newcastle (19th) recall Wright in goal, Ranson in defence and forward Clark.
Kristenson (knee) returns to squad after 8 months out.
Leading scorers — Ipswich: Kiwomya 18.
Newcastle: Peacock 18.
This season (Sept 17): Newcastle 1 (Quinn p), Ipswich 1 (Kiwomya).
Verdict: Ipswich to win.
Soccer: West Ham v Norwich Referee: Peter Foakes
West Ham (22nd) recall Martin to central defence, while Gale, Foster and McAvennie are dropped.
Breacker returns from suspension and Rush is included.
Norwich (17th) are without Culverhouse (thigh), Crook, Phillips and Fleck, while Power has a stomach ailment.
Leading scorers — West Ham: Small 18.
Norwich: Fleck 18.
This season (Sept 14): Norwich 2 (Gordon, Fox), West Ham 1 (Small).
Verdict: West Ham to win — just.
Soccer: Sheffield Wed v Manchester City Referee: David Elleray
Wednesday (3rd) will be without the injured Shirtliff in defence, so Warhurst stands by to deputise.
City (6th), who have not won away in the League since November, are without Quinn (hamstring and dislocated finger), with player-manager Reid likely to recall himself.
Leading scorers — Sheff Wed: Hirst 19.
Man City: White 17.
This season (Sept 14): Man City 0, Sheff Wed 1 (Williams).
Verdict: Wednesday to win.
Soccer: QPR v Tottenham Referee: Gurnam Singh
QPR (12th) may give a debut to reserve striker Doyle, while Peacock returns from suspension.
Wilkins, their captain, is still out (rib).
Spurs (15th) can recall Durie (ankle) in place of Walsh and have Bergsson back from Icelandic duty.
Leading scorers — QPR: Bailey 11.
Spurs: Lineker 32.
This season (Sept 14): Spurs 2 (Lineker 2), QPR 0.
Verdict: QPR to win.
Soccer: Oldham v Luton Town Referee: Robbie Hart
Oldham (16th) welcome back their captain, Milligan (ankle), but Ritchie's back problem means a late fitness test and he faces surgery next week.
Luton (20th) should be unchanged from the side who beat Wimbledon last week, with Kamara recovered from a back injury.
Leading scorers — Oldham: Sharp 11.
Luton: Harford 13.
This season (Sept 14): Luton 2 (Harford 2), Oldham 1 (Marshall).
Verdict: A draw.
Soccer: Notts County v Coventry Referee: Keith Burge
Top scorer Bartlett (ankle) returns for Notts County (21st), who have not won a League game this year.
Coventry (19th) may recall goalkeeper Ogrizovic (ankle), who has missed four matches out, to replace Sealey.
Leading scorers — Notts Co: Bartlett 9.
Coventry: Gallacher 10.
This season (Sept 14): Coventry 1 (Furlong), Notts Co 0.
Verdict: A draw.
Soccer: Leeds Utd v Chelsea Referee: Neil Midgley
Leeds (2nd) can regain the leadership with a win.
Whyte has recovered from the ankle twisted in last week's 4–0 defeat at Manchester City.
Chelsea (11th) recall captain Townsend from suspension, in place of Burley, while Matthew (ankle) returns to the squad.
Leading scorers — Leeds: Chapman 19.
Chelsea: Wise 12.
This season (Sept 14): Chelsea 0, Leeds 1 (Shutt).
Verdict: Leeds to win.
Saturday Profile — Peter Schmeichel: Big Dane gives United attack a kick start
By COLIN GIBSON
GOALKEEPERS, Brian Clough once said in praise of Peter Shilton, can be the difference between champions and also-rans.
Tomorrow afternoon at Wembley, where Mr Clough's Nottingham Forest face Manchester United in the Rumbelows Cup final, they might discover how right he is.
United manager Alex Ferguson reckons the £600,000 he spent on Peter Schmeichel represents a bargain.
Schmeichel, 27, is everything you would expect of a Dane.
He is big, blond, assertive and aggressive.
He is also establishing himself as one of the best goalkeepers in English football.
Schmeichel is much more than a shot-stopper.
His vision and his ability to distribute the ball accurately have added another option to United's potent attack.
‘Our goalkeeping coach, Alan Hodgkinson, has no doubt that Schmeichel is the best in the country,’ said Mr Ferguson this week.
In United's progress to the top of the First Division and to tomorrow's final, Schmeichel has kept 23 clean sheets and on only five occasions has he been beaten more than once.
Mr Ferguson said: ‘People are saying that Peter could be the best at Old Trafford since Harry Gregg.
That's a tremendous compliment to the boy's achievements in his first season in English football and I'm convinced he can become even better.’
Mr Ferguson has been a fan of Schmeichel for four years, but it was not until last summer that he could persuade Denmark's top club, Brondby, to accept an offer.
‘We tried to sign him in the summer that we bought Jim Leighton from Aberdeen, but the money Brondby were asking was out of the question,’ said Mr Ferguson.
‘But we didn't forget about him.’
Last season United watched Schmeichel regularly as Brondby won the Danish title for the fourth time in five years and reached the semi-finals of the UEFA Cup.
‘The reports we received on him were excellent and his contract was also coming to an end.
It also helped that he was desperate to play for Manchester United.’
English football can be a culture shock, and there was an element of risk in Schmeichel's decision to move.
He had become Denmark's most popular footballer, outstripping the likes of Michael Laudrup, and suddenly every boy in Copenhagen wants to play in goal.
Hans Christian Blm, leading sports writer of Denmark's most successful tabloid, believes his newspaper measures Schmeichel's popularity in sales figures.
‘Whenever we have his picture on the front page, our circulation increases,’ said Blm.
‘He is the most recognisable sportsman in Denmark.’
With most United matches televised in Scandinavia, his fans can easily track of his progress.
The Danish Press Agency have engaged a Manchester journalist to send reports purely on the goalkeeper.
Schmeichel's first club was Hero, where he played centre forward.
‘When the goalkeeper did not turn up one day, I was the biggest so I went in goals,’ he said.
The team were managed by Sven Aag Hansen, who was later to become his father-in-law.
‘If Peter had a problem it was his temperament.
He was tough to handle,’ said Hansen, who would have been delighted to see the Dane acting as peacemaker in the volatile Manchester derby at Old Trafford this week.
But the intensity still exists in Schmeichel's pre-match preparations.
‘Don't even bother speaking to him for 24 hours before a match,’ was the advice of a Danish team-mate.
It is a part of his search for perfection, according to Mr Ferguson, who is delighted at the way Schmeichel has adapted to life in England.
‘When goalkeepers come to England they often have a problem with the physical side of the game and dealing with the vast number of crosses,’ said Mr Ferguson.
Within six matches Schmeichel had been exposed to the Wimbledon approach and survived.
‘It takes some getting used to,’ said the Dane.
‘Forwards hit you at every opportunity and my problem was to remember to expect physical contact.
But I like the competitive edge in English football.’
And United believe they have acquired one of the most secure and dominant goalkeepers in the League.
‘He gives the whole defence confidence,’ said Mr Ferguson.
‘They know that even if a forward gets past them, the striker is faced with this massive Dane racing out to confront him.
‘I think Neville Southall has been the best goalkeeper in England for a long time, but now he has been joined by others like David Seaman, Tony Coton and Chris Woods.
‘I would put Schmeichel in that group and at 27 he still has a lot of time to improve.’
It seems United's future is in good hands.
Soccer: Aston Villa v Liverpool Referee: Martin Bodenham
Villa (9th) recall Atkinson (virus) and Small stands by to replace Staunton (hamstring), who is doubtful.
Liverpool (5th) take a squad of 18, including Barnes, Rush, Houghton and Burrows, who all have injuries, but Rosenthal and McManaman (knee) are out.
Leading scorers — Villa: Yorke 16.
Liverpool: Saunders 23.
This season (Sept 14): Liverpool 1 (Walters p), Villa 1 (Richardson).
Verdict: Villa to beat a preoccupied Liverpool.
Soccer: Arsenal v Crystal Palace Referee: Ray Bigger
Fitness tests will determine whether Arsenal (4th) recall full-backs Dixon and Winterburn, but O'Leary (hand) returns to the squad.
Palace (7th) are without Rodger (ankle), while McGoldrick (knee), Young and Humphrey (both hamstring) face late fitness tests.
Leading scorers — Arsenal: Wright 25.
Palace: Bright 20.
This season (Sept 14): Palace 1 (Bright), Arsenal 4 (Campbell 2, Smith, Thomas).
Verdict: Arsenal to win.
Soccer: Wembley win may unlock League door for Ferguson
By Colin Gibson
ALEX FERGUSON leads Manchester United out at Wembley tomorrow hoping that the Rumbelows Cup final can be the key to English football's greatest prize.
United have shown signs of nerves in the last few weeks as the First Division title race approaches its climax.
Now Mr Ferguson hopes that a victory over Brian Clough's Nottingham Forest will reassure his side and act as a timely impetus in the championship campaign.
If United had beaten City in a volatile Manchester derby last Tuesday, they would have travelled to Wembley comforted by the knowledge that, by the end of today's League programme, they would still have been top.
But United embarked on what Mr Ferguson dubbed ‘kamikaze football’ against City and ended up hanging on desperately for a point.
Now he sees the prospect of victory in the Rumbelows Cup as an important stepping stone to ‘the big one’.
‘If we win we would have one trophy in the bag and with it a place in Europe.
That might ease the championship run-in for us,’ said Mr Ferguson.
Victory tomorrow would offer United compensation for losing in last season's final to Sheffield Wednesday and would fill the last gap in the Old Trafford honours board.
While Nottingham Forest are aiming for a record fifth League Cup success, it remains the one domestic trophy United have never won.
They have lost twice in the final, last season against Wednesday and in 1983 against Liverpool.
The Rumbelows Cup carries the reward of a European place this season thanks to Manchester United's victory in the European Cup-Winners' Cup final against Barcelona in Rotterdam.
Should United beat Forest and then go on to win the championship, the UEFA Cup place will go to the team finishing third in the First Division, sparking off a League scramble between Manchester City, Sheffield Wednesday, Liverpool and Arsenal.
It is within United's reach to complete a most remarkable two years between May 1990 and May 1992 by landing all three domestic trophies and the European Cup-Winners' Cup.
‘I said last year that we had to try and continue the success we started by winning the FA Cup,’ said Mr Ferguson.
‘It's important that this club win at least one trophy every season.’
Forest, who have monopolised this cup in the last four seasons, will be more vulnerable because of the absence of Stuart Pearce's leadership and, more importantly, full-back expertise.
If there were one team in the First Division that Forest would not have wanted to face without Pearce it would be Manchester United, who have, in Lee Sharpe, Ryan Giggs and Andrei Kanchelskis, three of the best wingers in the country.
Bryan Robson, so crucial to United's championship campaign, will also probably be missing, as he will not be risked at Wembley unless he is 100 per cent fit, which seems unlikely.
But while Pearce might be irreplaceable for Forest, United have learnt to live without Robson, whose likely replacement at Wembley is Neil Webb, the former Forest midfielder who has been left out of United's last three games.
Soccer Diary: Blocks placed on Wassall's sprint jackpot
By COLIN MALAM
IT IS to be hoped Nottingham Forest are on a decent win bonus for the Rumbelows Cup final.
Otherwise defender Darren Wassall may begin to wonder if he might make more money by doing something else at Wembley tomorrow.
Until Forest reached the final, Wassall had been one of the 16 footballers vying for the title of the Football League's quickest player in the final of the Rumbelows Sprint Challenge, to be staged immediately before the big match with Manchester United.
Wassall must have been in with a chance of winning the £10,000 first prize because he was the fifth fastest qualifier, with a time of 11.92sec for the 100 metres.
Vance Warner, one of Forest's youngsters, will replace him in the race.
Kevin Bartlett, the Notts County forward, is favourite with a time of 11.40sec.
Students of form, however, lean towards Keith Curle, the Manchester City defender, who won his regional heat in the relatively slow time of 12.10sec but had plenty to spare.
The finalists, who will run two heats and a final in boots and full kit, are: Kevin Bartlett (Notts Co, 11.40), John Williams (Swansea, 11.57), Michael Gilkes (Reading, 11.77), Paul Fleming (Mansfield, 11.88), Louie Donowa (Birmingham, 11.96), Leigh Jenkinson (Hull, 12.03).
Junior Bent (Bristol City, 12.06), Efan Ekoku (Bournemouth, 12.07), Adrian Littlejohn (Sheff Utd, 12.08), Iffy Onuora (Huddersfield 12.09), Keith Curle (Man City, 12.10), Rod McDonald (Walsall, 12.18), Tony Witter (QPR, 12.19) and John Goodman (Millwall, 12.40), and late replacements Vance Warner (Nottm Forest) and Michael Brown (Bolton), who stands in for the injured Stuart Storer (12.17).
TOMORROW'S pre-match entertainment also includes the finals of the Nationwide Football Against MS ‘Keepie Uppie’ competition.
Fittingly, Scotland's Daimien Black, 14, is hot favourite to win a test of ball-juggling skill that originated in his country.
Black, from Invergordon, near Inverness, won the Scottish qualifying competition by keeping the ball up 5,211 times during an astonishing 56-minute demonstration of his prowess.
Simon Johnson, 13, from Reading, became the English finalist with a score of 2,338, while Philip Lee Marshall, 16, from Holyhead, will represent Wales with 2,223.
A lot will depend on how the boys react to the pressure of scoring the most bounces in 10 minutes in front of a big crowd.
REFEREE Peter Jevons threw a dictionary, so to speak, at Jeremy Tanner, 21, after booking him during a match between Derbyshire village side West Hallam and local rivals Alvaston.
The referee's report said: ‘His facial expression was one of vindictive superciliousness coupled with a fixed glare.’
Jeremy, who pays to play for two sides every weekend, handed over the £5 fine after club officials checked the meaning of the words.
VERTICAL, horizontal, angular fibre soil erosion materials are not the average fan's idea of a talking point, but they could hold the key to better pitches.
VHAF, as it is known in the trade, is being given a rigorous fitness test by the Football League Playing Surfaces Committee.
It has already helped preserve the goalmouths at Luton's Kenilworth Road ground.
The beauty of VHAF erosion systems, as The Groundsman magazine explains, is that ‘natural grass grows through a loosely-made carpet laid just below the surface of a problem area.
‘The rootzone is protected under the warmth of the polypropylene carpet and, although the grass can be kicked off during play, the roots are not damaged so that it recovers during the growing season.’
MUSICAL entertainment at the Rumbelows Cup final is to be provided by the band of the Royal Corps of Transport.
Their mascot is a donkey, and they will have him (or her) with them as they play at Wembley.
By chance, all this will be taking place on Palm Sunday.
‘If a guy with a beard and a long, flowing robe is riding the donkey,’ said a Football League spokesman dryly, ‘he will still need a ticket’.
Squash: Martin finally in the clear
By D J Rutnagur
THE switch from traditional courts to the Perspex fish-tank is not always easily made, and world champion Rodney Martin, of Australia, played patchily on the opening day of the Hi-Tec British Open Championship at Wembley Conference Centre last night.
England's Del Harris, however, was too erratic to capitalise on Martin's fluctuating form.
The best he could do was to save a match point and take the third game.
The quality of play was not the highest, but the rallies were lively and, with errors abounding, the four games spanned 70 minutes.
The first, which took 20 minutes, saw Martin open up a 6–2 lead only for Martin to recover to 6–6.
After two blank hands at 7–6, Martin won three rallies in a row.
While the count of errors in the second game was even, Martin led by four in winners.
Whenever Harris looked like pulling back, Martin piled on the pressure.
He overturned a 2–5 deficit to go 6–5 in front and served for the match at 8–7.
Harris foiled him with a cross-court volley into the nick and Martin lost his lead by misdirecting an audacious winner.
Harris conceded the first point in setting with an error, but then reeled off three classic winners, a volleyed kill and two drives which flashed past Martin in midcourt.
In the fourth game, Harris, probably due to growing fatigue, made liberal gifts of points.
In the quarter-finals today, Martin meets Finland's Sami Elopuro, the highest-ranked European, who won a laborious 86-minute match against Australian Rodney Eyles.
A controversial decision by the referee in refusing a let to Peter Marshall, England's No 1, ended his gallant fightback against an inspired Tristan Nancarrow, of Australia.
After Nancarrow had deprived Marshall of a 7–0 lead in the decisive fourth game, Marshall saved two match points and served for the match twice, only to be foiled twice by a drop shot.
Nancarrow, on his third match point, at 9–9, played another drop which was not that tight and Marshall, closing in to drive it deep, was obstructed and asked for a let.
Mike Wootton, who had refereed the match impeccably, declined.
Marshall smashed his racket against the wall, while an elated Nancarrow, who now meets top seed Jansher Khan, tossed his into the crowd.
England's No 3, Chris Walker, was brusquely eliminated by Jansher, and Scotland's Mark Maclean withdrew with a blistered foot.
Speedway: Dugard leads one-sided win
MARTIN DUGARD rode unbeaten on his home track as England outclassed Australia 73–35 in the first Test at Oxford last night.
The former British Under-21 champion won all six of his races in a solid show from a youthful-looking English team.
Gary Havelock, their newly-appointed captain, was the second highest scorer with 14.
Injury-hit Australia could manage only one race advantage and look set for further poundings when the series moves on to Peterborough on May 29 and Reading on June 1.
American Football: Monarchs face ordeal by Fire
LONDON Monarchs, who have lost two of their three World League games, must beat Birmingham Fire, of Alabama, who have won twice, at Wembley tonight to maintain their challenge for a play-off place.
Monarchs, the champions, surrendered eight turnovers, a World League record, in the 13–7 defeat at Barcelona Dragons last Saturday.
They are conceding almost twice as many points per game as they did in 1991 and quarterback Stan Gelbaugh is not moving his offense as efficiently as last year.
Polo: England meet Chile in semis
ARGENTINA beat England 10–5 and the United States beat Mexico 13–8 in the World Championships (Limited Handiap) yesterday at the San Cristobal Polo Club, Chile.
This left Chile topping Group A with the US second and Mexico third.
Argentina won Group B with England second and Guatemala third.
As a result, Argentina face the United States and England play Chile in tomorrow's semi-finals.
England took a 2–0 lead in the first chukka through James Lucas but Argentina took control of the game in the second chukka.
Swimming: Arnold's starring role for Nova Centurion
ELIZABETH ARNOLD gave Nova Centurion a fighting chance of winning the Mycil Women's British Club Team Championship in Sheffield last night when she finished second in the 800m freestyle.
Arnold chased Samantha Foggo, of Newcastle, all the way and, at the 400m mark, the Nottingham swimmer made her move.
But Foggo was clearly not prepared to surrender her national No 1 position without a fight and held on bravely to finish 1.61sec ahead in 8min 53.19sec.
Alex Bennett, 14, also of Nova Centurion, shaved 0.05sec off the British junior record for the 50m backstroke set five years ago.
Her time of 31.15sec puts her in today's final, helping her club maintain the pressure on Portsmouth Northsea, the defending champions.
Leeds made a good start in defence of their men's title when Stephen Akers won the 1500m freestyle in 15min 37.77sec.
But they failed to place a swimmer in the final of the 100m backstroke whereas rivals Barnet Copthall, fourth in the 1500m thanks to a 16min 25.87sec swim by Malcolm McCallum, have a competitor in every final at the half-way stage.
Table Tennis: Chen plays a crucial part
CHEN XINHUA, the England champion from Yorkshire, played a crucial role for England at the European championships in Stuttgart last night.
England started in the team tournament with a 4–2 victory over Austria to open up a chance for bronze or silver medal.
Chen won the third game against Qian Qianli and the final encounter against Dietmar Palmi 21–10, 21–14.
Alan Cooke and Carl Prean combined well to take the doubles.
England women's team were beaten in their first match, 3–0 by Yugoslavia.
Rugby Union: Underwood highlights historic air force link John Mace examines the contribution of RAF personnel to English rugby success
By JOHN MACE
RORY Underwood makes his last appearance of the season at Twickenham today when he plays for the Royal Air Force against the Army in the crucial final match of this year's Inter Service tournament.
A win or draw for the Army will give them their 29th outright title while victory for the RAF will result in the 10th triple tie of the competition.
The Army's hope of fielding their two internationals, Tim Rodber and Rob Wainwright, have been dashed because Rodber has been advised to rest a neck injury.
Wainwright will play despite having returned from representing the Barbarians in the Hong Kong Sevens suffering from an upset stomach.
Underwood's recent retirement from the international scene as England's most capped player highlights the distinguished contribution made to English rugby, both on and off the field, by the RAF.
It is particularly fitting that Underwood should have chosen to step down in a year when the president of the Rugby Football Union is Peter Yarranton, himself a former England player and RAF pilot, who will be at today's game.
Underwood's position as England's leading try-scorer, with 35 to his credit, has a two-fold RAF connection because when he scored against Ireland in 1990 the record he overtook had previously been held by another RAF pilot and winger, Cyril Lowe, who totalled 18 between 1913 and 1923 when winning 25 consecutive caps.
The RAF can thus boast that it has held England's try-scoring record since 1921, the year Lowe broke the previous best.
As Lowe's international playing career was drawing to a close, another RAF pilot who was destined to have a considerable influence on the style and development of English rugby began his.
Wavell Wakefield not only organised, selected and captained the first RAF side to win the Inter Service tournament but also led England during the golden era of the 1920s.
He won 31 caps — a record which stood for 42 years.
Wakefield was one of rugby's first great tactical thinkers and this fact, allied to his outstanding ability, contributed hugely to one of England's most successful periods.
In 1950, as Lord Wakefield of Kendal, he became president of the RFU.
The tradition of first playing for England and later becoming RFU president was continued by yet another pilot.
Air Chief Marshal Sir Augustus Walker, as he became, was capped in 1939 and made president in 1965.
Since the Second World War, in addition to Underwood and Yarranton, nine serving RAF players have represented England: Bob Weighill, Lewis Cannell, Ted Horsfall, Bob Stirling, Ken Wilson, Peter Glover, Peter Larter, Chris Williams and John Orwin.
Squash: Marshall falters on the hard road to greatness
By D J RUTNAGUR
PETER MARSHALL's double-handed style has carried him to the top of the British rankings, and many observers were looking to this week's British Open Championship at Wembley Conference Centre to provide proof of his potential at world level.
The last Briton to win the title, six-times champion Jonah Barrington, believes that Marshall, 21 next month, could be the next.
But the Leicestershire player had to be satisfied with gaining a bit more experience at the top level as he went down 3–1 to Tristan Nancarrow, the world No 8 from Australia, in the second round yesterday.
Marshall, who led 7–0 in the fourth before losing eight points in a row and bowing out, blamed loss of concentration.
He said: ‘I'm very disappointed.
I thought I would win this match.’
Marshall's defeat will not affect Barrington's judgment of him.
‘He is the most remarkable player of the day, a total one-off,’ he said.
‘His technique will probably never be seen again.
There have been one or two double-handers but not at the highest level.
‘He also has an exceptional mental attitude.
From a very young age he had an extraordinary in-built ability to focus.
Scarcely a point he plays isn't played to the limit.
Most players like to have some relief but they know with him that no matter how much he is hurting he will go on.’
Marshall has made an almost mapped-out rise since he began playing the game at the age of eight at his father's club at Kegworth.
He has been national champion at under-10, 14, 16 and 19 level, and World Young Master.
It was taking up the game at such a young age that caused him to hold the racket with both hands, rather than playing tennis, which he did to county standard at the age of 12.
His perseverance with the technique illustrates his single-mindedness, his belief in his own ability.
‘It started right from when I had coaching and went to national squads,’ he said.
‘People were saying, ‘You won't get anywhere playing like that’.
I took no notice of it.
I believed I would be OK.
I was quite determined.
I probably quite enjoyed the idea that I was going to prove a lot of so-called experts wrong.’
He has, though, had to adapt his style the more he has progressed in the game.
‘Reach can be a disadvantage,’ he said.
‘Under pressure I try to play a one-handed lob and drop shot.
I am doing that more and more now when I am stretched and I think I am improving in that area.’
He will not, though, totally eschew the double-handed style.
‘Deception is an advantage.
Even people who have played me before can still struggle.
It is something different and playing the game these days when everything is so fast, anything slightly different and unorthodox is good.’
In a sport in which fitness is so crucial — Noel Coward once said it was ‘not exercise, it's flagellation’— Marshall has worked the hardest of his career, some four hours a day, building up strength not weight.
The six-footer is a beanpole 10st 12lb.
Bryan Beeson, a defeated opponent at the national championships, said: ‘I was feeling like death and he actually seemed to be enjoying the rallies.
‘When he get's going it's like striking gold just to get the service from him.’
Marshall said: ‘Half the mental battle in the game is stamina.
Most players are pretty close in fitness but you must think you are stronger than the other bloke.
‘You may be just as tired as him but mentally you must get it into your brain that you are not going to stop until you drop and if your opponent knows that he might stop.’
Marshall's own self-analysis mirrors Barrington's of him in many ways.
‘This is the most difficult phase for him,’ said Barrington, who was a role model for the younger Marshall.
‘It is the time when attention to detail must be absolutely remorseless.
Other attractions can dilute your attention in a world with plenty of distractions but discipline has to be almost total.
‘Everything around playing has to be organised very carefully and he has to be mature in choosing the right time to play off the court.
His preparation must be like an Olympic athlete's.
‘His game still has a way to go, which is fortunate because most players his age have grooved techniques and there is not a lot more to come.
His one-handed work has come on tremendously.
‘Anyone with his all-round abilities, plus his cerebral content, has got to go close.
I know the top five in the world have tremendous respect for him and are aware of the danger of him taking over.’
Barrington's words about dedication and organisation certainly apply to Marshall, who has played in Germany, Wales, Spain, Switzerland, England, Scotland and Ireland since February.
Affable off court, he toughens visibly on it, engaging in barbed banter with his opponent with a vehemence that surprises.
‘I am pretty competitive and it's a competitive game.
I like the one-on-one,’ said Britain's brightest hope.
Rugby Union: Capital mission for Orrell's title drive
By John Mason
TITLE-CHASING Orrell make the first of two ‘do or die’ league trips to London in nine days when they face Wasps at Sudbury today.
They return on Easter Monday to oppose Harlequins.
The comparative comfort of a home match with lowly Nottingham a fortnight today to complete the league season is of no consequence for the moment.
Orrell's basic requirement is to go on winning for three more games because if they do not, either Northampton or Bath, each with a match to play after today, will nip in for the prize, just as Wasps did on the final day of the 1990 league season.
Orrell, who view their match in hand with mixed feelings, travel to north London with a squad of 18 and will delay a final choice until their arrival.
The conundrum is whether Bob Kimmins is sufficiently match-fit to join Charles Cusani in the second row.
Though frequently bothered by recurring back trouble, Kimmins did return last week for the runaway win over Vale of Lune.
Orrell are content to keep Wasps guessing but it seems likely Kimmins will play — a line-out challenge for Kinsey, O'Leary and Ryan.
An Orrell scrum of Hynes, Hitchen, Southern in the front row and Manley, Ashurst and Gallagher at 6, 7 and 8, would suggest a busy afternoon for Messrs Probyn and company opposite.
What happens after the packs have settled their differences will decide the issue.
Orrell have Morris, England's scrum-half, in full battle order, which should mean plenty of work for Emeruwa, White, who will be on the open side, and Ryan, the acting captain, at No 8.
Wasps, though, can point to a mighty league record — in four seasons they have been champions, second (twice) and third.
While this year's run of four successive defeats does not ring true, they also possess some senior citizens who relish upsetting preconceived ideas.
Orrell will do well to heed the challenge of Bates, Davies, Clough and Lozowski.
If they do not, Bath, who tackle luckless Rosslyn Park at Roehampton, and Northampton, at Nottingham, will strengthen claims to the prize valued most in the first-class club game.
Dusty Hare, who becomes Nottingham's director of coaching in June, will be at Beeston today.
The club, led by Chris Gray, the Scotland lock, and at reasonable strength after an injury-ridden winter, have ruined the title hopes of Gloucester and Bath in other years at this time.
Though relegation beckons for Nottingham, victory over Northampton is not out of the question.
Hunter cannot play for the Saints but Bayfield is in the second row.
London Scottish, away to Waterloo, have already won promotion from League Two and either West Hartlepool or Newcastle Gosforth will join them.
A win by Richmond, relegated last April, at Roundhay will assure them of promotion to League Two.
Unbeaten Aspatria and Hereford clash in the top League Four (North) match while League Four (South) leaders Basingstoke, playing their final match, and Havant test their nerves with away games, respectively, at Weston-super-Mare and Sidcup.
Rugby Union: Returning trio lift Swansea
By Edward Bevan
SWANSEA, the Division One leaders of the Heineken League, should consolidate their position today with a win over Maesteg, the bottom club who have yet to win a League game.
Back for Swansea are Mark Titley, Scott Gibbs and Simon Davies, who were at the Hong Kong Sevens with the Barbarians last week and missed the Schweppes Cup tie against Dunvant.
With four games remaining, Swansea lead by a point from Llanelli, who play Cardiff at Stradey Park.
Despite making changes from the team who beat Pontypool last week, Llanelli should maintain their challenge.
Bridgend, who are in third place, two points behind the leaders, play a much-improved Neath at the Gnoll.
With Luc Evans, their versatile young Welsh international away on a world tour, Bridgend include David Thomas, who recently returned to the club from Bristol, at outside-half.
For the Gwent derby against Pontypool at Rodney Parade, Newport have chosen four former Pontypool players, including Kevin Moseley and Roger Bidgood.
Rugby League: Wigan to deepen Bradford gloom
By John Whalley
DESPITE forecasts last August that this would be the most competitive rugby league season in history, the only issues likely to be left in doubt tomorrow night are who will accompany Swinton down into the Second Division next season and the final line-up for the Premiership competitions.
Wigan and Huddersfield should be officially crowned champions of the First and Third divisions respectively, with Leigh and Sheffield effectively clinching promotion to the First.
As Bramley are already promoted to the Second, with Ryedale York and Workington doomed to the Third, the six clubs in contention for the First Division's second relegation place are the only sides anticipating a nervous Easter.
Bradford Northern, one of the uncertain six, will try to ruin Wigan's championship party this afternoon but, after their 71–10 thrashing by the champions in the Silk Cut Cup semi-final two weeks ago, they have little hope of playing any other role than that of sacrificial lambs.
Wigan need only a point for a remarkable third successive championship and their fourth title in six years, but with Andy Gregory and Joe Lydon fit, their vast following will expect a stylish celebration.
With 18 successive victories behind them, Wigan should deliver.
Northern will have the experienced Roy Powell, who missed the semi-final, in their pack and also play hooker Brian Noble, who has had 14 stitches inserted in a facial wound.
They need two wins from their final three matches to stand a real chance of staying up.
Although Featherstone, Hull, Halifax and Widnes are also under the threat of relegation, Salford are Bradford's closest rivals in the fight to escape demotion.
But they should account for Hull KR.
Sheffield Eagles could be second division champions if they defeat London and Leigh lose at Workington but victory would assure Leigh of promotion.
Both Eagles and Leigh will go up in any event if Oldham lose at Ryedale York.
Golf: Woosnam puts case for his successful defence
By MICHAEL WILLIAMS
IAN WOOSNAM, so out of form coming into the Masters, nevertheless began to put up an heroic defence at Augusta National yesterday and was within a stroke of the lead as he came into the finishing holes in his second round.
By that time Woosnam had advanced from his overnight position of three under par, after a first round of 69, to seven under, one behind Craig Parry, of Australia.
Woosnam had had three birdies in his first five holes and the only shot he dropped in going out in 34 was to take five at the ninth, where he drove into the trees.
A big move was also made by Fred Couples, America's leading money-winner this season, when he went out in 32 and then made further birdies at the 10th and 13th.
However, a six at the 14th brought him back level with Woosnam.
Meanwhile, both Severiano Ballesteros and Jose-Maria Olazabal had bucked their ideas up.
A 68 put Ballesteros safely through to the last two days but a distressed Olazabal, despite a 69, faced an anxious wait to see if he would make the cut.
It was, for all that, quite a struggle for Ballesteros before he at last got his game together over the closing holes for a halfway total of 143, two ahead of Olazabal, who was one over par for the 36 holes.
Ballesteros had birdies at each of the two opening holes and three in his last four for his 68.
In between he was, for much of the time, all over the shop, scrambling pars more than hunting birdies.
A dreadful second shot from the perfect position in the middle of the 10th fairway had to be retrieved with a deft bunker shot; he was deep in the trees at the 11th, where he took five, and bunkered at the 12th, though again at no cost to him.
A possible chance of an eagle, or certainly a birdie, went begging at the 13th, where he took three to get down from nowhere but from then on he became a different player.
A six-iron second shot reduced the 15th to an easy birdie, he narrowly missed for a two at the next and then finished three, three with first a seven-iron and then a nine-iron which landed close to the flags.
After that first round of 75, on which Ballesteros blamed his putting, this was a distinct improvement and so was Olazabal's 69, though one would hardly have known it.
Such was his hurry to get into the clubhouse from the 18th green that he was almost bowling people over in his haste and later he admitted to feeling ‘very down’, still trying to get over his first round of 76 when ‘everything went wrong’.
It was better yesterday, with no bogeys and three birdies at the third, eighth and 15th, where he argued with John Scrivener, chairman of the R&A Rules committee, over a free drop he did not get.
Olazabal maintained his ball was lying in a depression caused by a chair leg but got no sympathy.
Nor did it matter.
He still played an exquisite little downhill chip to a yard and holed the putt.
The 35 players who beat par in the first round set a record, beating the 33 who did it in 1991.
With the absence of any wind and the greens softer than they would have been but for the rain of Tuesday, the course was, as Jack Nicklaus put it, ‘there for the taking’.
Nicklaus, now 52, was one of 12 players to break 70 with a 69, a score matched by not only Bernhard Langer and Steve Richardson, of the Europeans, but also Woosnam, who began his defence of the title much better than he had expected.
Indeed, he went so far as to say that he was almost dreading stepping on to the golf course, full of grim forebodings on the practice ground and no better on the practice green.
When he ventured forth, he felt he remained very tentative, lagging the eight and 10-foot putts he had for birdies on the second and third greens.
Still, no damage was done as he went through the turn in 36.
However, 33 home turned a potentially ordinary round into what even Woosnam admitted was a ‘good one’ though he refused to be deceived by it.
‘I'm still not comfortable,’ he said, ‘and certainly not playing well.
If I can manage another 69 in the second round perhaps I will feel a bit better, but not yet.’
Nick Faldo, keeping a keen eye later in the evening back at his hotel on the sporadic and very fleeting general election results, did not seem unduly perturbed by his 71.
However, he could not get going again yesterday either, out in 37.
After birdies at two of his first three holes, the 71 was disappointing.
It became more of a defensive round, seldom in positions from which he could attack the hole and three-putting both the 11th and 15th.
The first hole in one ever to be recorded at the fourth gave Jeff Sluman the early momentum and his 65 caught Lanny Wadkins, who has now been under par in seven consecutive rounds at Augusta.
An already small field was further reduced when Larry Nelson was disqualified for using non-conforming clubs.
Two of three decorative diamond shapes on the faces of his Merit PL irons had been found to be illegal by the United States Golf Association but their faxed message to the manufacturers arrived after Nelson had begun his round.
Farmer's Diary: Back up in town, for all the fun of the country fair
By ROBIN PAGE
I HAD to go to London recently — I still hate the place.
I went to take part in a farming discussion at the Country Living Fair, held in Islington.
On leaving the Underground at the Angel, Islington — a place I had previously thought existed only on a Monopoly board — I was confronted by a huge anti-hunting poster: ‘If This Appals, Hound Your Local MP’.
The thing was paid for by the International Fund for Animal Welfare: animal welfare is obviously a good cash-flow business.
I had considerable sympathy with the sentiment expressed in the poster.
I think fox-hunting in Islington would be quite indefensible: with all those cars and buses, the hounds and horses would be in great danger, as would the huntsmen themselves and the foxes.
The Islington foxes must be poor mangy specimens.
As I walked to the fair I noticed a polystyrene cup, a discarded baby's dummy and a chicken leg; hardly a balanced diet for a fox.
At the fair itself there were country crafts and country foods, with the stallholders doing a roaring trade.
Urban dwellers clearly have a longing for the countryside, particularly the non-muddy Edwardian Lady variety.
The discussion which I was involved in concerned food —‘quantity versus quality’— and was chaired by Radio 4's Derek Cooper.
The whole notion of quality food production is an interesting one; most British food, however it is produced, is of good quality, but the discussion was really about supplying minority, specialist middle-class markets with farm-smoked ham, semi-organic milling wheat, free-range eggs, and so on.
One of the speakers was Sir Simon Gourlay, president of Conservation Food Producers.
I was stunned: evidently this was the same Sir Simon Gourlay who, before his knighthood, was president of the NFU.
In my view, in his earlier incarnation he was one of the least inspired and least convincing defenders of the prairie farming and agro-chemical lobbies.
Now he appears to have performed a spectacular U-turn.
If only it had come while he was still Emperor of Agriculture House…
The ‘quality’ food argument usually misses the point.
Most farmers, particularly small farmers, are not concerned with ‘quality’ or ‘quantity’.
All they want is survival and a fair deal.
By following the policies of successive governments they have dug themselves deeper into debt; they have no money to invest in new methods of husbandry, milk-bottling plants or sausage-making machines.
At every turn they are faced by the bank manager and bankruptcy.
At one time they could turn to the Government's agricultural advisory service, but now this charges for its help and is too expensive to consult in many cases.
As a result 5,000 farmers are going out of business every year and the suicide rate for farmers has never been higher.
So the choice is not, should I become organic, or shall I go into parsnips?
It is what do I sell to pay off my bank manager and my creditors?
The irony is, of course, that British farmers are also tied down by European quotas.
For instance, although we are not self-sufficient in milk products, British dairy farmers have quotas imposed on them to compensate for French and German over-production.
As a result, £6 billion worth of foodstuffs that could be produced in Britain are imported — at a time when land is still being taken out of production for ‘set-aside’.
Is this really what the politicians mean by the free market?
The truth is that British agriculture policies defy logic and fairness — they seem more appropriate to the pages of Alice in Wonderland than real life.
Leaving the fair was like entering the world of Alice.
On the farm the animals wake at dawn.
In Islington strange creatures appear on the streets at midday.
A youth tried to sell me a Socialist Worker and seemed confused when I told him that in my experience the words were diametrically opposed.
Then a group of lesbians were complaining about education — close to a group of feminists.
Then came that anti-hunting poster again: ‘If This Appals, Hound Your Local MP’.
What I found appalling was £1 million being spent on an emotive, misleading campaign.
Surely it could have been better spent on real conservation schemes, or even helping some of those small farmers facing bankruptcy and eviction?
In The Country: Haring after the poachers Farm thefts and other rural crimes are rising.
R. W. F. Poole goes on patrol with a man who is helping landowners to fight back
By R W F POOLE
DAVE DUNN was yawning a bit.
He had been up all night shadowing a team of poachers, until they had been manoeuvred into the welcoming arms of the constabulary.
It was a misty Sunday morning and we were bumping along the Ridge Way, near Wantage.
The mobile telephone bleeped and a crackly voice said:
‘Gordon here; we've got coursers on the farm.’
‘Roger, Gordon; we'll be with you in about 10 minutes.’
Dave spun the truck round and we crashed and bumped along the rough track.
As we drove, Dave talked into his CB radio, alerting the local gamekeepers.
Gordon Pill, the farmer, met us at the bottom of the hill.
He had two farmworkers and his gamekeeper with him.
Three gamekeepers from the next-door estate arrived, one muttering that he had had only one bite at his Marmite sandwich when the alarm came.
You may think that there were quite a lot of us, but illegal hare coursers are not well known for verbal or physical reticence.
The police had been telephoned.
We gathered in the strip of trees beside the road.
One field away, two men were walking across the plough with lurchers on leads.
A battered estate car was keeping pace with them on a farm track.
Dave shinned up a handy conifer.
The poachers were hull down on the plough.
So far they had been doing nothing more than ‘just walking the dog, Guv’.
We waited.
‘Right!
There's a hare up!
They've slipped!
Let's go!’ and Dave came down the tree in a way that made my eyes water.
We raced round and up the track, blocking the estate car.
The driver sounded his horn frantically.
One man managed to catch up his dog, but the other dog was well locked on to its hare.
Hare and dog disappeared into the scrub at the far end of the field.
Kevin, Wayne and Doug were the soft end of the illegal coursing business.
They were cheerful rogues out for a bit of sport at someone else's expense.
‘You rotten buggers, coming and catching us.’
Doug appeared, having retrieved his dog.
‘I think I'll get a poodle — lot less trouble.’
The hare?
‘What f---ing hare?
This f---ing dog catch a f---ing hare?
You got to be f---ing joking.’
Dave and the keepers have no powers of arrest.
Once the three men had given their names and addresses they were free to go, and there was no sign of the police.
Dave kept them talking — boasting about their dogs and how they would be back again next week.
They told us that they were good poachers: they never poached deer, or cut fences, or ran their dogs near in-lamb ewes.
A police Land-Rover came bumping down the track: ‘You rotten bastards, keeping us talking.’
The police took what may or may not have been three different names and addresses and cautioned the men.
They had been caught, in flagrante, in breach of Section 30 of the Game Act 1831 (trespassing in pursuit of game).
They were very relaxed about it.
They knew, we knew and the police knew that the chance of such a case finding its way into the overloaded court system was minimal.
We all knew that they would be back next weekend.
These lads were the blunt end of a much nastier problem.
The rolling open downlands of Berkshire and Hampshire are well stocked with hares and are ideal coursing grounds.
Easy motorway access and four-wheel-drive vehicles bring urban gangs with their dogs.
There may be 40 or 50 men.
They just sweep across country.
They cut fences and drive across crops.
These men are accustomed to physical violence and intimidation.
Their activities have nothing at all to do with sport and everything to do with telephone-number betting.
So desperate has the situation become that 18 estates have banded together and called in Dave Dunn.
Dave runs Countrywatch (UK), specialists in farm and estate security.
Dave served in both the New Zealand and British Armies and then the enforcement branch of the New Zealand Wildlife Service.
He emphasises that Countrywatch is not a vigilante organisation: its operatives always work strictly within the law and in liaison with the local police.
They are skilled in surveillance techniques.
Violence is avoided and talked down whenever possible.
He is cagey about what his services cost, saying that fees vary with the size of the job.
Norman Carlisle farms 2,000 acres on the downs.
His problems have increased greatly over the past eight years.
He has been threatened by gangs, his fences have been cut, his ewes scattered.
‘New Age Travellers’ have squatted on his land and things are so bad that he dare not leave the farm for a day.
He is an enthusiastic client of Countrywatch.
For the rest of the morning we quartered the area.
There was one report of coursers, which turned out to be mistaken.
Dave seemed rather disappointed.
He said that every weekend until recently there had been at least three incursions, most of which he had intercepted.
We got out the ‘spy in the sky’.
Besides farming, Gordon Pill builds Thrusters — Australian-designed two-seater microlight aircraft.
He often does aerial reconnaissance for Dave.
There was a bit of head-scratching as they pushed, squeezed and levered me into the passenger seat: ‘The biggest bloke yet’.
Microlights take a bit of getting used to (1,000 feet looks an awfully long way down), but they are marvellous viewing platforms.
In 10 minutes we had spied the whole Countrywatch patch.
All was quiet.
Countrywatch's efforts were beginning to pay off.
It is sad that Countrywatch looks like becoming a growth industry.
There has been a tremendous upsurge in rural crime during the past 10 years.
Vandalism is increasing.
Farm thefts and poaching are now highly organised and big business.
The police lack the resources and the expertise to tackle the problem.
And some forces appear to lack the will, as well.
Country people may well have to look to themselves in the future, and to the skills of men like Dave Dunn.
In The Country: NATURE NOTE
By ROBERT BURTON
THERE IS more to camouflage than meets the eye.
This is not being facetious; the subject is not straightforward.
There has, for instance, long been a debate over whether a zebra's stripes make it easier or harder to see.
Many animals are lighter underneath than on the back, or ‘counter-shaded’.
The idea is that the shadow cast under the body is offset by the lighter underparts, so the body appears flat and merges into the background.
Counter-shading is more pronounced in animals that live on or in water.
A fish the right way up is hard to see.
The moment it turns on its back the silvery belly is obvious.
The white underside of a puffin or penguin swimming on the sea merges with the sky and makes it harder for fish to spot danger overhead.
The theory is less applicable to land animals, but it is supported by the paler back of a sloth that lives upside-down.
On the other hand, while I was watching a treecreeper, I noticed that, as it climbed obliquely around the trunk, its white throat and breast became very conspicuous.
It would have been better for it to have a uniformly brown plumage.
Yet our attention is drawn to tree-creepers mostly through their jerking movements.
Whether camouflaged or not, the best way to remain unobserved is to keep still or move stealthily.
This would make the sloth's countershading redundant.
Outdoors: Marathon man keeps in trim Michael Kerr on the extraordinary staying power of ‘an ordinary runner’
By MICHAEL KERR
SNIP, snip, snip.
Snip, snip, snip.
Maurice Rhodes is training for another marathon.
Five days a week, 8.30 till lunchtime, he's on his feet in his barber's shop, shortening the back and sides of the thin-on-top.
It's good for the legs.
It must be.
It's almost the only training Maurice does, and he averages 18 marathons and 10 half-marathons a year.
He has run 165 marathons, 76 half-marathons, nine 61-milers, 13 30-milers and 13 25-milers — and he didn't do his first marathon until shortly before his 60th birthday.
He'll be 70 in September.
‘But don't get the wrong idea,’ he tells me on the phone.
‘I'm nothing special, you know.
I'm only an ordinary runner.’
And so to Shipley, West Yorkshire, to the ordinary runner's shop.
By the time they retire in December, he and his wife Shirley will have put in nearly 100 years here between them.
Neither shows it, but the squashed chairs and the scored benches tell the story.
The shop's youngest fixture is a nearly-clothed pin-up.
Along one wall stretch Maurice's medals: medals for marathons, for half-marathons, for fell runs and flat runs, medals from Split, New York and Melbourne.
Maurice, in black-framed glasses, white coat, black trousers and Hi-Tec trainers, is putting the finishing touches to one of his regulars.
‘Is that short enough, sir?’
It is.
Maurice flicks away the stray hairs, settles the next customer into the seat (‘A good bit off the top, Morrie’), and tells how it all started.
He'd never run as a youngster; cycling was his sport, then a bit of motorcycling after his service in the RAF.
Later he'd enjoyed waterskiing.
In 1982, his brother, then 62, entered the Bradford marathon.
‘My sister-in-law asked me if I'd run too.
I said, ‘Good heavens!
I couldn't run a marathon.
Not a chance.’
But he did.
He hung his medal in the shop, decided it would be nice to have a few more, and has been pounding out the miles since.
But not in training.
‘I keep going to train, but I don't get on with it.
You see, when you run every week nearly, you don't need to train.’
Nor does he believe that abstinence makes the heart grow stronger.
‘I eat reasonably.
If I fancy a drink I have a drink.
If I fancy a cigar I have a cigar.
I've got a friend of 84 or 85; the first thing he wants after a marathon is a drink of beer and a cigar.
So it can't do much harm, can it?’
Nor can his late nights: he often sits till three in the morning watching a film on TV.
Today (a wet Monday) he was up as usual at 6.30 and had a few cornflakes and a pint of coffee.
He's ‘full of cold’— he had to miss the York marathon the other day — but you'd never know.
A final snip and his last customer's done.
‘Short enough, sir?
Any hair-cream?’
Maurice lets the man out, and Shirley locks the door.
Now, what else did I want to know?
Well, how does he do it?
How does he run, so far, so often?
Isn't it time he started acting his age?
‘You do get people saying you'll drop dead.
But I don't force myself.
I don't like to run and gasp.
I never race anybody.
I'm not a good runner, I'm not a fast runner, I just like to get to the finish if I can.’
In New York in 1983 he got there in three hours 54 minutes — his fastest marathon.
‘And I was the last man off of 17,000 because I was still in the bus when they all went to the start.’
He'll never be among the winners (top runners finish in about two hours 10 minutes), but he likes to complete a marathon in under four hours 25 minutes.
He jabs at a picture in an album Shirley has produced: ‘4:52:34 — that's a very slow one.
Don't know what went wrong that day.’
Another picture, a better race: ‘That's that boxer [Terry Marsh].
He finished 20 minutes behind me and I had two torn hamstrings.’
THERE are shots of Maurice, laundry-fresh at the start, Maurice climbing, Maurice glistening a little, but still smiling, under the clock in London, Athens, Rotterdam.
In most he's wearing Reactolite glasses turned black by the sun — a Roy Orbison in shorts; Only The Lonely meets The Long Distance Runner.
The glasses save him squinting and spare him wrinkles, he explains.
He takes off his workaday specs to prove it: smooth as a baby.
Well, almost.
He's beginning to feel the odd twinge lower down, especially in his knees.
But it's not that that's keeping him away from tomorrow's London marathon.
He did apply, with 80,000 others, but there's room for only 35,750.
He has no complaint: ‘I've been five years and I think it's only fair that someone else should have a chance.’
He talks ruefully of having ‘missed’ 11 marathons the year before last.
So he does sometimes find it hard to throw himself out of bed?
Oh no, he wasn't malingering.
Shirley, who books his races, keeps his times, files his cuttings, went to Melbourne for six weeks to her sister's, and he was lost without her.
Without Shirley, he probably wouldn't have done a ton of marathons and collected his first medal from the Hundred Club.
Without Shirley, he probably wouldn't have got the second, awarded after his 150th, in 1990.
(’ They gave me that 'cos I'm an elderly man.’)
And without Maurice, Shirley, two months ago, probably wouldn't have won her first honour.
On her side of the shop hangs a notice: ‘I finished the Malta ½ Marathon in 2.55.
Oldest Foreign Lady.’
She shows it off with a giggle.
‘I'm 58 next month.
It's a bit crazy starting now.’
Outdoors: Slow motion in the wrong direction
By JONATHON PORRITT
IT'S AMAZING how much a government can get away with during an election.
All EC governments had undertaken to give the European Commission, by April 1, detailed plans for achieving the EC's target date for stabilising carbon dioxide emissions: by the year 2005 for us, and 2000 for the rest of them.
April 1 being one of those ‘wobbly Wednesdays’, no-one saw fit to comment on the fact that no such strategy was handed over by our Government, and that all the Commission received from us was a pristine copy of the Government's White Paper on the Environment, first published nearly two years ago — and notoriously short on specific targets.
Environmental organisations are near to despair in the face of such skilful procrastination.
The final preparatory committee for June's critically important Earth Summit ended in almost total failure precisely because politicians the world over refused to act on the advice of their own scientists.
The Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change has constantly warned governments that the business of reducing carbon dioxide emissions (by 60 per cent over the next two or three decades) cannot be put off any longer.
Our Government's own advisers concur, and have been uttering increasingly urgent exhortations for change.
Yet nothing happens.
Scientific data is shovelled in by the barrow-load, emissions of ministerial concern belch forth from every conceivable government orifice, yet nothing happens.
In the depths of the worst recession for 60 years, carbon dioxide emissions in the UK actually increased by 2 per cent over the past two years.
Unless something happens, energy use in Europe is expected to rise by 25 per cent by the year 2000, with carbon dioxide emissions up by 20 per cent.
Global warming is one area of ecological concern where the solutions are good for the economy, by being good for the consumer and good for businesses alike.
Even if we were pledged to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 30 per cent by 2005 (as the Liberal Democrats are arguing), instead of just stabilising them, nobody need lose out.
Not even the politicians.
Last month, Friends of the Earth surveyed more than 13,000 people on their views on energy efficiency.
More than 90 per cent of them said they would support new legislation to ensure higher energy-efficiency standards in household appliances.
Such legislation would outlaw any models which fell below a certain standard.
Yet all we get are promises of some vague labelling scheme, which will do almost nothing (by itself) to reduce energy consumption.
The Dutch government intends to outlaw up to 60 per cent of all new fridges and freezers simply because they are not efficient enough.
Instead of accepting that this is the way the market is inevitably moving, our own Association of Manufacturers of Domestic Electrical Appliances (AMDEA) has condemned the proposal as ‘a technical barrier to trade’.
It is pressing the UK Government to block the Dutch proposal.
It's precisely this kind of own-goal anti-environmentalism that Michael Heseltine inveighed against so passionately in his ‘green renaissance’ speech to last year's CBI Conference.
Britain's manufacturing base is declining not just because the Conservative party seems to care so little about it but because of so many companies' wilful refusal to respond to changing market signals.
It couldn't matter less what the AMDEA happens to think about global warming; the reality is that changes in the European Community will force all European manufacturers to meet higher standards.
The only question is whether we do it now or lose out altogether by supposing we can do it later.
Mr Heseltine is right to lecture recalcitrants like the AMDEA.
But there's a small issue of beams and motes here.
All too often his own officials negotiate for lower European standards for fear of any possible impact on UK firms.
Over the past few months, for instance, our Government has single-handedly ensured that the new directive on efficiency standards for boilers ended up far weaker than initially proposed by the commission.
That so few boilers in the UK would have met the tougher standards would have provided an excellent opportunity for new, cost-reducing investment.
Missing the April 1 deadline was the latest in a long line of opportunities wasted and challenges deferred.
I wonder if it will be any different now?
Outdoors: History and the hook
By DAVID PROFUMO
FISHERMEN in general may put their faith in St Peter, but the patron saint of fish-hooks — and therefore of anglers in particular— is St Zeno of Verona.
Tomorrow is his Feast Day, but little is known about the life of this fourth-century divine; he was renowned as a preacher and energetic founder of nunneries, and raised the funds to build the basilica in Verona where a statue depicts him holding a fishing-rod.
Legend has it that he used to angle in the Adige river and that when the waters flooded, many years after his death, they were stopped from breaching the walls of his church by prayers to his memory.
The fish was of course a familiar ecclesiastical emblem, originating with the cryptogram of the early disciples, and then elaborating on the analogy of ‘fishers of men’.
Although the sons of Zebedee were evidently netsmen, Christian iconography has drawn on angling to depict anything from the means of grace by which God draws our souls up into Heaven to His ensnaring of the monstrous Leviathan.
The metaphor is explored by Donne and Bunyan, and Walton used the pun on angling as a secret reference to the Anglican church.
With no justification, Gervase Markham called angling ‘the Sport and Recreation of God's Saints’; that was in 1614, but already the act of delicate deception that remains central to the pastime had been used to illustrate both the wiles of Satan (who baits his hooks with sin) and the grim harvest of Death (who swaps his scythe for float-tackle).
Indeed, the hook as a symbol of deadly temptation has entered the language: addicts, paramours and dupes of all kinds fall hook, line and sinker to the cunning and the dangerous.
The hook is the epitome of angling, and is the origin of the very term; it does not derive from the deployment of a rod.
The Old English ‘angul’ means a fish-hook, from the Aryan ‘ank’(to bend): the geometrical sense is from the same stem, signifying a bent line.
It is probable that the hook was initially a weapon, a spin-off from techniques of spearing, and gradually replaced the more primitive ‘gorges’ that relied on wedging rather than penetration.
The hook proper can trace its pedigree to the wire ‘bricoles’ of the Bronze Age, with thorns and even spiny insect-legs included in its ancestry.
It is as simple and as revolutionary a milestone in human culture as the invention of the wheel.
The eye and the barb were to follow, with many ingenious designs and technical refinements.
Elaborate and efficient our equipment may be today, with super-thin nylon, electronic reels and fish-sonars, but at the business end of all tackle is a bend, an angle in a piece of wire.
And that is why a brief prayer to St Zeno never goes amiss, when you go fishing with a hook.
At Home: A good wash and brush will get you back to the groove
By TOM BRYANT
IF I tell you that this is the perfect time to go out and buy a record deck, you will no doubt put me down as the sort of person who invested heavily in Betamax video, eight-track tape and the Sinclair C5: a sucker for doomed formats.
The death rattle of vinyl is everywhere: there are no record-pressing plants left in Japan, most large stores here plan to phase out albums, much music is released on CD only.
Even so, I am teetering on the brink of spending £300 to replace the turntable I foolishly ditched as an anachronism a few months ago.
Leaving aside the occasional inept vinyl-to-CD transfer or wilfully bizarre remix, digital sound and I co-exist quite happily; my main reason for a return to the vinyl frontier is a hankering to hear certain pieces of music from my retired record collection.
Some, such as jazz guitarist Larry Coryell's 1971 album Barefoot Boy, on the defunct Flying Dutchman label, probably sold around six copies on vinyl (mainly thanks to side one, where someone had irresponsibly convinced Coryell he could be the new Jimi Hendrix); a CD re-issue is out of the question.
But if I want to hear the long, late-night groove on side two, I have to play the album.
Hence my hanging around what one assistant haughtily dismissed as the ‘antique section’ of hi-fi stores.
Antiques they may be, but one good reason for choosing a record deck so late in the day is that, unlike CD, the technology is tried and tested and not susceptible to the great leap forward, leaving you with an obsolete model.
Some decks have been in production virtually unchanged for two decades (the sublime Linn Sondek, for instance).
And although there is less new material to play on your deck, second-hand shops are bulging with whole collections that have been turfed out by over-zealous digital converts.
You do risk crackles and pops, but many will have come from a good home — and you can always get them washed.
Some dealers have machines — the best of which is the Keith Monks model — which will give your discs a brisk scrub for around £1 each.
(Write to the British Audio Dealers Association for a list: PO Box 229, London N1 7UU.)
The process does work on genuinely dirty records but, unfortunately, cannot provide the Lazarus touch for discs that have been played on decks that use a small chisel as a stylus.
Inspect carefully before buying second-hand.
After many hours of listening solely to CD, I was also surprised at the sound quality of records played on decent equipment.
The clarity and precision associated with CDs is there in abundance, and the more expensive the turntable, the less the clicks and scratches seem to matter — a stylus that is tracking accurately tends not to make a mountain out of a molehill in the groove.
Of course, you may have one of the new stacking systems that are so confident vinyl will not figure in your life that they neglect to include a phono point to plug in a turntable.
Never fear, because QED (0784 246236) have introduced a ‘Discsaver’ black box that juggles with the output signal of the deck so it can safely be fed through the ‘Aux’or ‘Video’input of such thoughtless systems.
It costs £29.95 (using a PP3 battery; power supply £17 extra).
But how much should you spend on a deck?
Once you have heard the likes of Linn, Roksan and Pink Triangle in action, it is easy to go mad and find yourself coveting deck /arm /cartridge combinations costing over £2,000.
However, lower your aural sights a little and £200 — £300 will get you a perfectly adequate operator.
Just don't expect it to do anything fancy like lift off the arm at the end of the record; such mechanisms usually degrade the sound, and are best avoided.
I have whittled my own shortlist down to four models: the Thorens TD166VI /UK with Rega arm (£269), Systemdeck IIX (£248), the Rational Audio Aura 01 (around £195 including a Linn K5 cartridge) and the Rega Planar 3 (£250).
The Sound Organisation (4 Pickfords Wharf, Clink St, London SE1, 071 403 2255) often have overhauled examples of the latter in stock, a perfect way to make what may well be your last vinyl upgrade at a reasonable price.
Most machines come minus a cartridge, but you don't have to spend a fortune — Audio-Technica produce a perfectly acceptable one for £19, although that is rock bottom: there are genuine improvements to be had by budgeting for four times that amount.
The odd one out in my list is in many ways the most beguiling.
The Rational Audio Aura 01 is a Czech-made deck with a parallel tracking arm (which moves across the record on rails instead of pivoting from one end), bizarre retro-styling and an idiosyncratic sound.
I have had it a week and, the inevitable Skoda jokes notwithstanding, Mr Coryell has never sounded better.
At Home: Predators on the doorstep Mark Edmonds discovers how certain dealers obtain valuable antiques at knock-down prices
By MARK EDMONDS
IN FEBRUARY the High Court in London heard how a Sussex-based antiques dealer knocked on the door of an elderly spinster's Knightsbridge flat and talked her into parting with an art collection worth more than £30,000.
The dealer, Robert Barrett, paid £1,400 for the paintings and heirlooms handed over by Miss Audrey Prinsep, a member of a distinguished family that has produced a number of eminent painters.
Judge Diamond ruled that Barrett had obtained the pieces through fraudulent misrepresentation and ordered him to return them.
He was forced to pay costs and £2,965 compensation for the paintings he had already sold.
Although Barrett described himself as an ‘antiques dealer’, the way he handled Miss Prinsep had more in common with the foot-in-the-door techniques employed by what the Sussex police wearily refer to as the ‘knocker boys’.
The knockers — as their name implies — eschew legitimate business opportunities such as antique fairs or auctions in favour of work on the doorstep.
Their modus operandi is to cajole their victims into parting with valuables which subsequently they hope to resell for much higher prices.
The knocker boys usually set off in groups of three or four, targeting a particular area that is likely to throw up worthwhile items.
When presented with ‘antiques’, an established knocker will have no difficulty sorting the wheat from the chaff: 20 or more years on the knock has provided the experienced ‘boy’ with a knowledge of antiques which he will supplement with a useful home library of reference books and subscriptions to price guides and the trade press.
During a recce, the deaths column of local newspapers often prove invaluable — the newly-widowed are particularly vulnerable.
As Barrett proved when he targeted Miss Prinsep, the electoral roll is another favourite reference.
‘Old-fashioned names like Mavis and Maud will be of particular interest to a knocker,’ says Detective Constable Simon Muggleton, of the Sussex Police Antiques Unit, ‘because they help to pinpoint the age of the potential victim.
‘Untidy, uncared-for gardens are another giveaway which may indicate that an old person is living in a house alone.
Elderly people in particular should be very careful about giving away too many details about their circumstances, since the knocker boys have proved they have no qualms about who they con.’
Once the knocker boys have decided to hit a particular area, they will check into a good-class hotel and begin a leaflet drop.
The leaflet will target likely homes, inviting would-be vendors to ring in to the hotel for further details.
When the calls come in — often from people only mildly curious about what their items might fetch — the operation begins in earnest, with the knocker boys changing into smart suits and affecting Cork Street accents.
A common ruse involves masquerading as the Queen's cousin /picture keeper /chief valuer.
‘Would you mind,’ asks the knocker at his most oleaginous, ‘if Her Majesty borrowed some of these paintings for a charity exhibition we are holding locally?’
A receipt is then issued for a ‘deposit’ against the items, usually bearing a false address.
Unsurprisingly, in these circumstances the knocker boys tend not to come back.
Other ploys include paying an exaggerated price for a worthless item, only to return two days later to clear out a pair of Chippendales for £25 a piece.
‘Perhaps people are being nave,’ says Simon Muggleton, ‘but these guys have the patter and the manners and they can be very convincing.
We can only stress that no reputable antiques dealer would ever conduct business on a doorstep.
Whatever the temptations, if you genuinely want to sell an item, take it to a reputable auction house and have it properly valued.’
Traditionally the knocker boys — descended from former London barrow boys who left London in the 1950s, originally to make inroads into the town's fruit and veg business — have been based in Brighton.
Over the years they have carved out a powerful position within the town's antique trade.
The most successful knockers have moved upwards and onwards, opening apparently legitimate shops in the best part of town.
‘Put it this way,’ says D c Muggleton, ‘Sixty-five per cent of all the antique dealers in this town are known to us.’
In the face of their present-day notoriety in the town, the knockers are now spreading their net beyond Brighton in the hope of exacting antiques from the vulnerable and gullible.
Their patch has extended to embrace sleepy villages in Hampshire, Dorset, Kent and Berkshire.
Meanwhile, back in raffish Brighton, their Daleyesque lock-ups and ‘shops’, nestling uneasily between tea-rooms and boutiques in the more louche fringes of the town, serve simply as warehouses.
Later, items prised away on doorsteps end up either in the Lanes — a cluster of antique shops with a bijou veneer, much frequented by visitors to Brighton — or, if they are not snapped up by local dealers, at markets in London.
Despite a recession which has ravaged the antiques trade, the knockers are flourishing.
‘There is still a lot of money to be made,’ says Muggleton.
‘Some of the flashier knocker boys have huge houses in the best parts of Hove, drive expensive cars, drink champagne and eat at the smartest restaurants in town.
‘And when you look at some of their shops and you see the same old wooden table that has been sitting out the front for months priced at £10, or £20, you realise the money has got to be coming from somewhere else — and we know it's coming from knocking.’
The efforts made by Sussex police — and the three other UK forces that have set up a specialist antiques squad — are hampered by the fact that knocking in itself is not illegal.
(The Prinsep case was unusual in that the family were prepared to take out a private prosecution in the hope of retrieving their property.)
‘Knocking is certainly immoral,’ says Muggleton, ‘but without witnesses we have difficulty proving that the knocker boys have employed fraud.
We have to rely on other resources, such as the network of informers that we have built up within the trade.
And unless we move quickly in response to these tip-offs, it is likely that treasured, valuable possessions will simply disappear.’
Next week: Leslie Geddes-Brown tracks down stolen antiques
At Home: Never, ever let them in
MRS X, a housewife who lives in a small village in the South-East, became a victim of Brighton-based knockers less than a fortnight after the death of her husband, who was a keen collector of china, silver and oil paintings.
‘They caught me when I was off my mark,’ she says.
‘I was terribly upset about my husband dying and I wasn't 100 per cent.
‘I was depressed, and when they arrived at my house and said, ‘We're very sorry to hear about your husband’, I believed they were genuine and let them in.
My husband may have come across them before.
But he'd always refused to sell any of his antiques.
‘One of them asked to go to the lavatory.
When he came downstairs he offered me £90 for a small china ornament.
I knew it wasn't worth anything like that — even so, I refused to sell.
Then they tried to persuade me to part with the silver and everything else that had belonged to my husband.
They told me that it was of no use to me any more and that I'd be better off letting them have it.
Eventually they left.
‘A week later I was burgled.
I lost everything.
All the antiques, all the paintings.
The police said that the men who'd come round were probably behind the burglary.
They found the paintings in one of those rough antique shops in Brighton.
‘The man, who was known to the police, was one of the knockers they'd been keeping an eye on.
Although he said he'd bought them from another dealer, the police proved he'd been handling stolen goods.
He was given a two-year suspended sentence.
‘I've certainly learned my lesson.
I've got burglar alarms and three guard dogs.
I feel a lot safer now.
My house is now secure, thank goodness, and most of my property has been returned.
But my message to anybody else who gets a knock on the door from somebody who calls themselves an antique dealer is never, ever let them in.’
Parents: When they play into wrong hands What can you do if you take an instant dislike to the friend your daughter or son has just brought home from school?
As Dorothy Wade found out, most experts believe that childhood mistakes are an important part of growing up
By DOROTHY WADE
PARENTS' disapproval of their child's friends can begin at a surprisingly young age.
When Jonathan, aged three, the son of professional parents, went to a respectable church nursery school he quickly became firm friends with a rowdy boy called Jason, who had a broad Cockney accent and a permanently dripping nose.
‘I knew I was just being snooty,’ says his mother in some embarrassment, ‘but I wondered why Jonathan was attracted to the child with the most disadvantaged background.
We went to Jason's birthday party and the kids sat and ate mountains of gooey cake, chocolate bars and ice-cream for about two hours while all the adults smoked over them.
I just felt that these people didn't share my values.’
From the moment children leave the cosy nest of home, even if only to go to nursery school, parents lose the power to choose and control all their children's friendships.
Learning to play with other children and to form close friendships with some of them is a vital part of growing up.
But what should parents do if they believe their children's friends are having a bad influence on them?
Many parents are tempted to intervene: but most experts counsel caution.
If parents' distaste for a child's friend is really caused by social and class differences it would usually be unfair of them to interfere.
Dorothy Einon, the child psychologist says, ‘It can be very difficult for parents to stand back.
It is very difficult not to want the best for your child.
But you have to titrate your desires with allowing a child to make his own friendships.’
But of course parents do get anxious, about little problems and large: that their children will eat too many sweets and watch too many unsuitable videos at another child's house: that their child will be egged on to get up to pranks, truant from school or worse.
David Fontana, psychologist and the author of Your Growing Child, says, ‘Sometimes the parent does have good reason to worry…if the friend is rough when he comes to the house and breaks toys, then you have to think of your own child.
If he has too many bad experiences with other children, it may put him off social interaction.
‘But often it may be that parents are just being overprotective.
It is good for a child to broaden his outlook and mix with children who don't share his advantages.’
SOMETIMES the intensity of a friendship makes parents fear their child could get hurt.
From the age of about seven or eight, children, particularly girls, tend to form inseparable friendships.
As Carolyn Douglas of Exploring Parenthood explains, there is a reason for such friendships.
‘The task at this age is to move outside your home, but the world seems very big.
Some children are tempted then to recreate the very close relationships they have had within their families.’
Clare, 11, had a best friend at school called Sylvia.
Clare and Sylvia did everything together, wore the same clothes and had the same hair-style.
Then Clare was off school sick with flu.
By the time she came back Sylvia had moved her desk and found a new best friend.
Clare was devastated and swore that she would never go back to school again.
Her mother was so concerned that she rang a parents' help-line.
It is obviously devastating for a parent to watch a child go through misery, but Dorothy Einon points out that children learn how to give and take from such experiences.
Another mother, Sally, was worried about the bullying nature of the friendship between her son, David aged 11, and his ‘best friend’, Colin.
When Colin came to play at David's house the boys would ring the neighbours' doorbells and run away, and throw things into their gardens.
‘I was very unhappy,’ says Sally.
‘This boy behaved in an underhand way, setting up situations so that he wouldn't get into trouble, but David would when he had left.
‘I used to make a lot of comments to David about this friend.
I was quite uninhibited and very disparaging about him.
But in the end David just got defensive.
It all made him very unhappy.
He felt his loyalties were divided.
He was constantly being put down by his friend, and it didn't help for me to be putting his friend down.’
Sally tried to talk to the boy's mother, but she dismissed it all as harmless pranks.
Finally, the boys' school came to the rescue.
They, too, had noticed that the relationship was an unhealthy one, and contrived to put the boys in different classes.
This did the trick: the boys now have a more distant friendship and David is much happier.
Again David may have learnt a valuable lesson — children need to learn how to select friends who are good for them.
Maria Callias, a psychologist who has studied peer relationships, says that parents can help children avoid getting into a pattern of unhealthy relationships.
‘You could help the kids be more effective in getting more pleasure and more value from their friendships.
Help them to stick up for themselves and see that it is not worth being treated badly just in order to have a best friend.
But rather than focussing on ending the bad relationship I would try to encourage the child to develop other friendships.’
It is usually the teenage years that create the biggest parental conflicts over friends.
Teenagers are fiercely independent, but the risks of being led astray are much greater — drug addiction, unsafe sex or even death from dare-devil exploits.
Jacqueline, a mother of five children, aged 0 — 20, believes in taking firm action to keep teenagers on the right path.
‘Both my elder daughters fell under influences that were unwelcome to me in their teens because of school,’ she says.
‘My eldest daughter Catherine's behaviour became unacceptable to the family: she was always disappearing with these friends and coming home in the early hours.’
Jacqueline made it clear that she disapproved and eventually told Catherine to move out.
‘Her dreadful friends started to take advantage of her, persuading her to spend her savings on them, and finally stole from one of her flatmates.
This was the turning point.
She came back home after that.’
Catherine settled down to her studies and is now beginning a university degree.
When the next daughter also began truanting, disappearing from home and lying about who she was with, Jacqueline stepped in.
‘I would just go out and get her.
It didn't take long to get her under control.’
‘If you have an aim for your children, I think it is a waste of time to just let them dilly-dally with any old person.
My constant message to my second daughter is that there is more in life than some of her friends aspire to.’
Carolyn Douglas points out, however, that if teenagers are involved in destructive friendships there must be underlying reasons.
‘For those children who get caught up in totally anti-social behaviour there is no point in just looking at the friendships.
You have to look at what's happened before.’
The best thing to do is set firm guidelines.
‘These children may be provoking you with their friendships to get you to act.’
Mother's View: Surviving (just) as five go on holiday
By KIRSTY MCLEOD
NOW that we have come back — with our half-used tubes of Factor 20 sun-cream, the remnants of a jar of Arnica (for bruises), and the broken paper umbrella that decked my son's wiener schnitzel for our last supper — I can give the lie to all those Doubting Thomases who said that five small boys on skis was a recipe for disaster, not a holiday.
On the last day of term, I had met up with my son's headmaster.
‘Have a good break,’ he greeted me.
I replied that for better — or worse — we were taking a posse of his pupils to the Alps.
His face assumed the poleaxed expression I have grown used to recently.
I could see him wondering whether to warn the bursar he might be one or two fees short next term.
Happily we have all returned, without even visiting the sinister Plaster Rooms in Innsbruck Hospital.
In the most potentially serious accident, a ski-rack came off worse than the out-of-control 10-year-old who hit it.
It has been an exhausting, exhilarating week.
Physically I have been pushed harder, made to ski faster and longer than ever before.
On the other hand, five boys in one huge farmhouse bedroom made for a self-regulating, self-sufficient little kingdom.
Apres-ski, their demands on us were minimal.
Even more so, when the local village boys organised football, England v Austria, with barn doors as goals.
Our repayment was to leave these happy rural innocents hankering after the tacky charms of Gameboy (the mobile computer game).
Two adults in our party had barely skied before.
One was preoccupied with her son, veteran of the ski-rack encounter.
As the most experienced grown-up, I had calculated I would hold my edge till the second day.
Then, spurred by the thought of Wurst and chips for lunch, my son and godson overtook me.
By the end of the week, two of our first-year novitiates could ski faster than I. My son and his friend Julien duelled nonchalantly with ski-poles as they bombed downhill.
But the fact that a child can slide down a mountain more quickly than you can does not mean he can catch lifts, follow pistes, order lunch, or even find the Herren plonked with Austrian efficiency at the summit of each skiable peak.
Like a distracted mother duck I shepherded my brood of brightly-anoraked ducklings.
If one of them had tunnelled into a snowdrift, his ski-sticks unfindable, another had slipped and was dangling over the edge of a snow-capped tunnel.
When two fell off the lift, I flapped until they were under my wing once more.
Having gathered them up, I found the rest of the brood had taken off down the mountain.
The lifts had stopped.
When they started them up again, I learnt some new German swearwords from the operators.
As dusk fell, we were last off the peak.
The boys were thrilled.
Besides children (’ Er kommt!
Er kommt!’ passing German skiers would shout reassuringly), we lost gloves, hats, goggles, poles and sunglasses.
What the boys never lost was nerve.
Watching the children together gave reassurance that childhood is not all one-upmanship and go-for-the-jugular.
The boys were solicitous of each other 's confidence: the quick were sensitive with the slow.
The children's bedroom seemed to me like a microcosm of maturer communities: the same shifting alliances, occasional irritations, necessity for tolerance and need for periods of privacy.
My son took to this dormitory life with all the fervour of a new convert — hoarding food (it tastes better after lights out); waking at dawn to pull on whoever's clothes came to hand.
Some things do not change.
The boys' watched transfixed, even when dirndl-clad Hausfraus cavorted on Austrian TV.
On being challenged, the cry went up: ‘We'll watch it.
We'll watch anything.
At least it's telly…’
Gardening: Leaves everything to be desired Fred Whitsey recommends acer trees for the best displays of foliage
By FRED WHITSEY
MAPLE trees, just now unfurling their leaves, are one of the few species known not by their common name but the official botanical one.
Acer is a name in everyday use among those who loiter in garden centres and whose thoughts are always on making the garden at home a better place.
They will spend heavily on an acer, and the impulse proves an investment.
I have noticed that it has always been the acers that have aroused the greatest number of inquiries from readers visiting The Daily Telegraph's garden at the Chelsea Flower Show (preparations for this year's are already advanced, by the way).
For my own part, having a little woodland garden, this is one of the two plants which I am forever poking in where I can find a place for another.
(The other is the camellia.)
Not that acers insist on an acid woodland soil, not even for the most exotic species with unpronounceable Japanese names; I have even seen them as cut plants on patios.
However, they are likely to get the best start in life if they are given an ample helping of peat-like compost in the hole.
You have to distinguish between the Norway species, grown as a street tree, and the common wild sycamore, both of which have large leaves, and the garden kinds originating in China and the eastern regions of North America, which have much smaller leaves and an elegant bearing.
Then you have to divide them up into those which make slender trees and others which remain as bushes with a fountain-like outline.
All look particularly good planted to contrast with evergreens.
Whatever the size, an acer is grown mainly for the leaves — for their shape, their poise and their colouring — and not for the flowers, which are insignificant.
Though there are exceptions, the leaves are mostly palmate or shaped like an outstretched hand.
Sometimes the lobes, as the divisions are called, are so intricately re-divided that they are commonly compared to fine lace.
When they are green they are a fresh colour.
When they are copper or purplish they have a rich tint.
As the chlorophyll disappears during the autumn, the leaves turn fiery red, garnet or umber.
These qualities are revealed in the tree-like species grown principally for the striped markings on the trunk, the so-called snakebark type.
In the Acers davidii, capillipes and pensylvanicum, the markings are ivory on green.
In one named Senkaki, the bark is coral coloured; Acer griseum peels to reveal a tortoise-shell-like layer beneath.
At present, the most keenly-sought tree-like Acer is one called October Glory, a form of the Canadian red maple.
In autumn it glows like a beacon, especially if planted where it can be seen with the late sun shining through its leaves.
The greatest number of forms is to be found in the group loosely called the Japanese type, Acer palmatum.
Some of these have leaves that are exquisitely variegated.
In Butterfly, for instance, they open coral and as they mature turn green with a cream margin; in Kagiri-nishiki the leaves are pale green, edged in pink.
Usually these are seen as bushes, perhaps 5 ft or 6 ft high, but in old gardens they might be 15 ft, always with several branches arching from the base.
I have yet to see one that surpasses the brilliance of Osakazuki in the autumn.
Every year in October we say it is the finest thing in the garden.
The lace-like type that come within these groups are very slow in growing; one we have, which is reputed to date back to the early '20s if not beyond, stands less than five foot tall but measures eight foot across.
This is the bronze-leafed sort, condemned to bear the unwieldy name of Acer palmatum dissectum atropurpureum.
It becomes a bonfire in autumn, but strangely does not burn so brightly as the green-leafed type distinguished as viridis.
So appealing a plant do I find this that I have planted a ‘fairy ring’ of eight where the hurricane left a space.
A good source of acers (they list more than 30 forms of palmatum) is Hillier Nurseries, Ampfield, Romsey, Hants SO51 9PA (0794 68733).
For a catalogue, send two first-class stamps.
Gardening: CUTTINGS
By FRED WHITSEY
Pot up the small young plants as ‘plugs’ and grow them on in a frame or a greenhouse — or even in a wooden box covered with polythene.
Complete rose pruning.
Even though some bushes may have well advanced young shoots they will still respond with strong new growth.
Take advantage of wet soil to put mulches in places, especially round newly-planted stock.
Make sure to tread the soil firm round all newly planted trees and shrubs, also fruit trees.
It will help insure against drought stress.
Lift and transplant bulbous plants where they are becoming overcrowded.
Scatter slow release fertiliser round all plants that have been heavily pruned to encourage them to renew themselves.
Plant leek seedlings by making 8 in deep holes with a dibber or crowbar, dropping one into each and filling with water.
Give roses, bushes and climbers on walls and fences, a dose of special rose fertiliser.
A suitable high potash alternative is tomato food.
Plant pansies for summer flowering.
They need a site with plenty of old compost or humus-based fertiliser worked in.
Spray with simazine-based weedkiller the cracks between paving spots before weeds have a chance to reach any size.
Give the same treatment to gravel and ash paths.
Guides to garden visiting from this weekend onwards: Gardens of England and Wales: £2 from bookshops, £2.75 posted from National Gardens Scheme, Hatchlands Park, East Clandon, Surrey GU4 7RT (0483 211535).
Scotland's Gardens: £2.50 postage from Scotland's Gardens Scheme, 31 Castle Terrace, Edinburgh EH1 2EL (031 229 1870).
Historic Houses, Castles and Gardens in Great Britain and Ireland: £6.95 from bookshops).
Gardening: In the pink for Spring
This is the scheme for the first part of my evolving jigsaw, with details of the plants required.
A. Rhododendron ‘Praecox’ Not for the coldest gardens or for alkaline soils, but generally worth growing, given shelter from wind and early morning sun.
Makes compact and upright evergreen, five feet tall.
Prepare wide planting hole with leaf-mould and garden compost, and apply this as an annual mulch during a wet spell in early spring.
May be clipped after flowering, but no pruning, and no other feeding necessary.
B. Helleborus x orientalis Easy perennials that like a hearty, fertile soil.
For best display, cut away old leaves in late winter, as flower stems appear, and mulch with well-rotted manure, homemade or proprietary compost.
Makes broad clump, 18 in tall.
Available in many colours.
C. Cyclamen coum Hardy cyclamen whose rounded leaves — which may be plain green, marbled grey, or silver — appear in autumn and last until late spring.
Small, buxom flowers appear from mid to late winter.
Best bought when in growth, rather than as dry bulbs (corms).
Corms should be two inches below ground, indented side upwards.
Prepare the ground with leaf-mould and a little bonemeal, and mulch with leaf-mould during a wet spell each summer.
D. Anemone x hybrida ‘Honorine Jobert’ Good form of Japanese anemone, a tall (3 ft-plus) but self-supporting perennial with white, yellow-centred flowers for several months in late summer and autumn.
A vigorous spreader on fertile soil.
Feed with compost or general organic fertiliser in spring.
Cut stems to ground in winter.
E. Hosta ‘Halcyon’ Choice perennial with arresting blue, paddle-shaped leaves in summer, joined eventually by stocky stems of lilac flowers.
Makes a broad clump, 12 in tall; feeding as for hellebores.
F. Daphne mezereum Deciduous shrub, four feet tall, with flowers on bare, erect branches.
Amazing fragrance.
Add compost and bonemeal when planting, and feed with leafmould /compost or blood, fish and bonemeal in spring.
No pruning necessary.
Red berries in late summer; comes readily from seed, so as berries are ripening, wash off pulp and sow immediately in cold frame.
Gardening: In the pink for spring Stephen Lacey begins a new monthly series
By STEPHEN LACEY
HERE is a splash of pink for early spring.
Planting a garden is like tackling a giant jigsaw.
Some people have a clear idea of the end picture, and choose their pieces purposely.
Others buy their plants on impulse, pop them in where there is a gap, and hope Mother Nature will sort out the mess.
By inclination I belong to the second category, but I have learned that it makes all the difference to lay a firm foundation at the outset.
Each month this series will suggest a planting plan for one section of our jigsaw.
You can either reproduce it in its entirety; adapt and expand it to accommodate your impulse purchases; or simply extract from it, to put into other planting schemes, the plants that take your fancy.
I kick off with an idea for a shady border under a deciduous tree.
Like all the plans I will suggest, it is not imaginary; this is part of a long, north-east facing border in my own garden.
The type of soil and quality of light set the parameters for every plan.
The plants here have a dense but high canopy of leaves over them during the summer; so, apart from the odd shaft of sunlight, the conditions are overcast but not dark.
The soil has a tendency to become dry in summer, but a large quantity of leaf-mould, plus composted bark from the garden centre, has improved its ability to retain moisture.
It is acidic, hence the rhododendron; gardeners with limy or heavy clay soil could substitute yellow-flowered Mahonia japonica, and go for a lively contrast.
The principle I work on is that passages of colour are more rewarding than the dot effect.
So most of the plants here flower simultaneously; other sections of the border take over later.
The anemone and hosta, however, keep some interest going in summer; I have also interplanted Cyclamen coum with another species, C. hederifolum, for a further carpet of pink and white flowers in autumn.
Gardening: This year's camellias open for business
By FRED WHITSEY
THIS season garden centres are heavily stocked with camellias, and you can see them in flower, since these evergreens bloom from their early days.
You can choose for colouring from white, through countless pinks, to bright and even deep red.
The open flowers can run from singles to doubles, though some have an engagingly tousled centre, even the stylish anemone type.
They can be simple and like wild roses, suitable for woodland gardens; or formal for town gardens.
They do need an acid leafy soil, but they score over rhododendrons through being much more tolerant of dry summers, as the past three seasons have demonstrated.
As foliage plants their effect lasts the year through: nothing can dull the high natural polish on their leaves.
I use them wherever I can as a flattering background for later-flowering plants.
F.
W.
A coloured catalogue of camellias, costing £1.50, is available from James Trehane & Sons, Hampreston, Wimborne, Dorset BH21 7NE (0102 873490), which has this season opened an educational display of camellias at the nursery.
Motoring: The Golf: a good drive Volkswagen's new hatchback is a match for its main rivals, says John Langley
By JOHN LANGLEY
AFTER selling some 13 million Golfs since 1974, Volkswagen is no doubt justified in describing its European bestseller as ‘absolutely status-neutral’.
Almost everyone, it seems, loves the Golf.
The third generation version, which has just gone on sale in Britain, looks likely to continue the success story.
It is safer, greener, more comfortable and more refined.
It cleaned up the European Car of the Year award for 1992 against some formidable competition, though only two out of the seven British judges gave it top ranking.
As it happens, I was one.
Some British colleagues thought it was overweight and underpowered, so after trying a right-hand drive 1.8GL version recently, I looked up with some trepidation what I had said about the car on my voting form six months ago.
‘Despite the new Golf's unadventurous styling,’ I wrote, ‘Volkswagen deserves an accolade for putting its commercial weight and influence so heavily behind safety and environmental concerns…consistent emphasis on durability and reliability…inspired engineering of the VR6 version…‘
Not much wrong with that, I told myself smugly.
But I have to admit that with the exception of the quick GTi and certainly the new 2.8-litre VR6, the latest Golf is not the kind of car to set the pulses racing.
It is, though, a satisfying sort of car that most motorists could happily live with.
Resale values should be good, too.
Volkswagen has fitted bigger engines to compensate for the extra weight of the stronger and safer structure of the latest version.
Even this 1.8GL model, with the more powerful 90 bhp engine, is no ball of fire, and the standard 1.4-litre 60 bhp model looks distinctly sluggish compared with most rivals.
The clue to the GL's satisfying performance is that it develops its maximum torque at a modest 2,500 rpm, pulling strongly from low revs, making it an easy-going cruiser without the need for constant recourse to the five-speed gearbox.
It gave me 33 mpg.
Paintwork and interior finish are above average: I liked the thick, supportive seats, the excellent head-room and the general lack of fuss.
The ‘feel good’ factor may only be jolted when you come to a ‘Y’junction and curse that thick rear side panel, obstructing the over-the-shoulder rear three-quarter view.
Surprisingly, there was also an occasional rattle from behind the fascia, and a subdued whine from the final drive.
The standard form, priced at £12,386, includes a catalyst, sophisticated central locking system and power-assisted steering.
Optional extras include anti-lock brakes (£776), electric sunroof (£135), rear-seat head restraints (£130) and metallic paint (£165).
Motoring:
VOLKSWAGEN GOLF 1.8GL £12,386. 90 bhp, 112 mph, 0–60 mph 12 seconds; 30/35 mpg.
The unusually smooth driveline and comfortable ride add to a general sense of well-being.
Apart from the built-in safety features, its most impressive aspect is the feeling of all-round quality and solid engineering.
Motoring:
FORD Escort LXi 1.8 £11,259: 105 bhp, 116 mph, 0 — 60 mph 9.8 seconds; 28 /36 mpg.
An economy version of the more glamorous (and expensive) XR3i ‘hot hatch’.
Has a lot more sparkle than the Escort replacement, thanks to the new 16-valve ‘Zeta’ engine, notable not only for its sheer performance but for smoothness and flexibility.
Motoring:
ROVER 216SLi £12,495: 116 bhp, 120 mph, 0 — 60 mph 11 seconds; 29 /36 mpg.
Honda engineering and 16-valve engine under a Rover skin have produced a highly successful formula, with good quality, lots of driver appeal and a touch of class above the average in this category.
Motoring:
FIAT TIPO 1.6 SX £10,715; 86 bhp, 111 mph, 0 — 60 mph 12 seconds; 30 /38 mpg.
Rather like an Italianised Golf, with a very roomy galvanised body shell, wide-opening doors, comfortable ride and fair performance and economy.
A former Car of the Year winner, it has done well on the Continent but has been under-rated here.
Motoring:
VAUXHALL ASTRA 1.6 GLS £11,159; 100 bhp, 118 mph, 0–60 mph 10.5 seconds; 30 /41 mpg.
Runner-up to the Golf in the 1992 Car of the Year awards.
With many similar safety features, this latest Astra offers sharper performance with good build quality and economy, though it does not ride as smoothly as its major rival.
Motoring:
CITROEN ZX AURA 1.6 £11,154; 89 bhp, 112 mph, 0 — 60 mph 11 seconds; 30 — 39 mpg.
Possibly the most appealing ‘driver's car’, with outstanding roadholding and ride.
Build quality seems significantly better than on some previous Citroens.
The 1.9-litre diesel at £11,236 gives an excellent combination of economy with performance.
Classic Cars: Very avant the garde
By JOHN DIAMOND
THE ART of bluffing your way in the classic car game is a simply learned one, and consists of little more than memorising one derogatory generalisation about each make of car.
Thus, when the Triumph Stag comes up, you just say, ‘Pretty enough, but there's always that overheating alloy head to worry about, isn't there?’
For the Rover P4 there's ‘A solid car if you don't mind buying a quart of oil a week’.
And as soon as any Citroen from the D-series onwards is mentioned you simply say, ‘But have you seen what it costs if the hydraulics go?’
You'd be right, of course: Citroens which have lost the use of their hydropneumatic systems are sorry beasts, best taken to one side and shot in the neck; and I'll admit I was once charged £300 for a new water pump for a CX model, but this is no reason to dismiss them.
There are better-engineered cars than those made by Citroen in Paris and, for a while, in Slough, but there is no mass-production company that was so regularly ahead of the research- and-development pack — from the 5CV in the '20s, with its coil ignition and its removable cylinder head, onwards.
The Traction Avant — driven famously by Maigret — wasn't the first front-wheel-drive car, but its demountable engine/drive system made it workable, sort of.
True, it bankrupted the company, and you need a couple of sessions at the gym before you can park one, but that's beside the point.
By 1954, when many British saloons had no suspension to speak of, Citroen was offering hydropneumatic suspension on the 15CV.
There is still a cult following for the Leger and the Normale, and though I sympathise with it, it's among the D-series fanatics that you'll find me swapping gasps.
Yes, I know it looks like an inverted yacht and that the garde that the D series was avant never materialised, but a production-line car which combines such a ridiculously optimistic view of the public's aesthetic sensibilities with so much understanding of daily long-distance driving has to have a lot going for it.
The DS 19 which came out in 1956, with its self-levelling suspension and power-assisted controls, wasn't substantially different from the last one made in 1975, which was then still reckoned to be crankily experimental.
There are still those who say they can't get used to Citroen steering and that the suspension makes them sick; there are many more who say getting used to any other sort of steering after driving a D- or C-series car is much the more difficult adaptation to make.
You can pick up a Paris-built Light 15 in reasonable condition for about £5,000.
A DS19 should cost about the same, but unless you're buying for a museum, avoid the early models.
They are prone to rust and restoration is almost impossible.
What's more, the engine is much the same as that in the 1935 15-series cars, and Citroen's engines were never as far ahead of their time as the rest of the car.
If you're in the market for the product of Citroen's '70s Maserati connection, you will already know more about the model than I can tell you here.
Briefly, for those who want to search for one of these rarities: beautiful, very fast, start saving at £14,000 and go for the carburetted rather than the injected version.
And don't buy one with the front headlamp glass missing: they're almost impossible to replace.
Food and Drink: THE RECIPES
GREEN PEA AND MINT SOUP 110g /4oz butter 1 medium onion, chopped fine 900g /2lb frozen peas 1 tsp salt 1 tsp sugar 2½ pint chicken or vegetable stock 1 bunch fresh mint leaves To finish Creme fraiche or single cream and mint leaves FOR best results use good quality small frozen peas.
Melt the butter in a deep saucepan and add the chopped onion.
Cook until the onion softens before adding the peas and chopped mint leaves and stems.
Allow the mixture to cook for about 5 minutes over a low heat, then add the salt, sugar and stock.
Bring to the boil and simmer for 10 minutes.
Process in a blender or processor until smooth; then rub the soup through a sieve to remove the pea skins.
When ready to serve, reheat the soup to boiling point and pour into a heated tureen.
Top with a spoonful of Creme fraiche or single cream and some whole mint leaves.
ROAST SHOULDER OF LAMB BOULANGER 8 medium potatoes, peeled 4 small parsnips, peeled 4 medium carrots, peeled 1 tbsp olive oil 1 medium onion, chopped fine 1 tbsp chopped fresh tarragon or rosemary 1½ pint stock Salt and pepper 5 — 6 lb shoulder of lamb HEAT the oven to 190 C /375 F, gas mk 5.
Slice the potatoes, parsnips and carrots into quarter-inch rounds and place in a large bowl of cold water for 20 minutes.
Heat the oil in a frying pan and cook the onion until soft and beginning to brown at the edges.
Tip the onions and oil into a large ovenproof dish about 3 in deep.
Drain the vegetables well and arrange in the dish; add the herbs and season with salt and pepper; pour the hot stock over.
Trim any excess fat from the lamb, leaving the skin untouched, and rub the joint with salt and pepper.
Now place the lamb, skin side down, on the vegetables.
Cook in the oven for 1 hour before turning the joint over and basting the vegetables with the pan juices.
Roast for a further hour; the meat should be golden-brown and cooked to the pink side of well done.
If you want the meat to be cooked through, or it is not crisp enough, cook for another 20 minutes.
Remove the meat from the oven and spoon any excess fat from the vegetables.
Turn up the oven to 200 C /400 F, gas mk 6, and, while the meat rests, return the vegetables to the oven to crisp the top.
Serve with green beans or lightly boiled spinach.
OEUF A LA NEIGE AU CHOCOLAT 4 egg whites 170g /6oz caster sugar Custard 4 egg yolks 2 tbsp caster sugar 1 pint single cream 3 in piece vanilla pod 85g /3oz plain chocolate 1 tbsp brandy (optional) START with the custard.
Warm the cream and vanilla pod to boiling point, leave for 15 minutes.
Split open the pod and scrape all the tiny black seeds into the cream, discarding the pod.
Now beat the yolks with the sugar and re-heat cream, adding two tbsp of hot cream to the yolk mixture.
Combine the yolks and cream, and cook over a low heat, or in a bain-marie, until the custard thickens slightly.
Do not let the mixture boil, and stir constantly while it cooks.
Meanwhile, melt the chocolate and allow to cool slightly.
Now stir the chocolate gently into the sauce and, when it is fully incorporated, strain the custard into a bowl.
Lay a piece of damp greaseproof paper directly on the surface of the custard and allow to cool.
Beat the egg whites until stiff and then, a little at a time, beat in the sugar.
Continue beating until the mixture is very thick, glossy and stands in stiff peaks.
Put into a deep frying pan with about 3 in water and bring to the boil.
Turn down the heat so that the water simmers gently, and poach spoonfuls of meringue in this for about 60 seconds each side.
The meringue will disintegrate if cooked too long and collapse if not cooked enough.
Try one first as a test.
Poach all the mixture a few spoonfuls at a time, draining the cooked ‘islands’ on a folded tea towel.
Place in a shallow dish and cover with cling film until needed.
To serve, pour the custard, having added the brandy if used, into a serving dish and carefully float on the islands.
Scatter with a few crystallised flowers if available.
Food and Drink: GOOD VALUE GUIDE
Langan's Bistro (0273 606933) 1 Paston Place, Brighton This is a sibling of the Stratton Street institution: the same airy, stylish room hung with jolly pictures, but easier to get into.
Tables are better spaced and the efficient French service more welcoming, though it's time it grew out of the 75p cover charge.
Cooking is unflashy but accomplished: straightforward roast chicken and skate with capers are enlivened by successful local initiatives like seafood strudel or halibut with couscous.
House wine £6.75; several of the grander bottles are now marked down.
Chef Mark Emmerson.
Open Tues — Sun 12.30 — 2.30 except Sat, Tues — Sat 7.30 — 10.30 C4 S5 V5 £40 (three-course lunch £13.50 including coffee) St Quentin (071 589 8005) 243 Brompton Road, London SW3 Smart South Ken canteen opposite the Oratory has always been terrific value; now it's got cooking with the flair to match its friendly, highly efficient French service and jolly brasserie decor — all mirrors and panelling.
Bargain set menus change with the market and are the best choice: Connaught-trained chef whisks up ultra-light leek terrine layered like lasagne, heaps of appley duck with green pasta tower, and neatly balanced fish casserole a la Dieppoise; there's also a meaty crab tart (£3.95) and a choc pave as rich as the neighbourhood.
Good wines start at £7.80 — robust Chinon £9.70.
Chef Richard Sawyer.
Open daily C6 S8 V7 £39 (set three-course lunch £12.50, three-course dinner £15.25) Castle Hotel (0823 272671) Taunton, Somerset Stylish cooking of outstanding local produce brings out the best of British classics in this smart, smoothly-run hotel.
Generous helpings of ideal winter food presented with restraint: Lancashire hotpot for expatriates, braised ham hocks or ox-tongue that explode the full flavour of the meat and relish its texture, fine dry dumplings crowning a pile of luscious silverside.
Puds with flair include almond blancmange and bread-and-butter pudding; the long, shrewd wine list starts at £6.90.
Chef Phil Vickery.
Open daily C6 S5 V6 £58 for three courses (lunch £13.50 for two courses, £14.90 for three; set dinner £22.50)
Food and Drink: Spring some lamb on the family Thane Prince's Easter feast
By THANE PRINCE
BECAUSE Easter is, this year, in the latter part of April, spring lamb will be more easily available than usual.
Pale in colour and mild in taste, it is quite different from late-season lamb.
This meat has been grazed on the summer grass and herbs and so develops a more complex flavour, darker colour and, while remaining tender, a slightly coarser texture.
One feature of lamb is that any part of the meat is suitable for either roasting or grilling, depending on the cutting.
My only hesitation when praising this excellent meat is that I have found few who like to eat cold lamb, and while curried leftovers are an option, I suggest buying a joint that can be eaten at one sitting.
By choice, I will always pick a shoulder of lamb — the meat is sweeter and, because the shoulder contains more fat, the cooking meat is constantly self-basted.
For today's recipe I would trim as much surface fat from the underside of the lamb as possible.
Always discard lamb fat, as the strong taste will taint a dripping pot.
My lunch has been planned to allow a morning spent at church, hunting for Easter eggs or admiring the daffodils.
Make the soup and dessert the day before and serve some green beans or spinach with the lamb.
All recipes serve 8.
Food and Drink: Welcome to a light battering John Whitley savours a fish supper in Guiseley and survives a welcome at Langan's that is worthy of the late owner
By JOHN WHITLEY
ASK any tourist in the North of England which is the smart restaurant to eat in and you'll be told Harry Ramsden's.
Put the same question in the South and the answer will be Langan's Brasserie.
These two institutions have made themselves universally known as the automatic check-in points for people who like a bit of a show — canteens for gossip column readers in search of local colour.
The showbiz appeal of Guiseley may not be instantly apparent, but it's television soap operas that pull in the coach parties: this is Emmerdale Farm and James Herriot country.
But Ramsden's (illustrated) didn't have to wait for television to make its name.
Ever since Harry started frying there in 1931, at the end of the tram line from Leeds, there's been a steady flow of customers.
His successors have cleverly traded on his reputation for robust, no-nonsense Northern philosophy to build an empire — there's a Ramsden's in Heathrow now and smaller fry planned for Bristol and Edinburgh.
The menu is sharply to the point: three kinds of fish — haddock, plaice, halibut — dipped in the secret Ramsden batter and fried in beef dripping, airy and crisp, plus sliced bread and butter and a pot of tea-bag tea.
Wannabe Ian Bothams should order Harry's Challenge — a giant haddock fillet (£9.95): the fish tastes bouncy and fresh in spite of being frozen at sea and transported from Grimsby, and there's a serving of hideously verdant mushy peas on the side.
Precision and consistency are the keys to success: the half-dozen friers in the long kitchen discreetly tucked behind a panelled wall are obviously highly disciplined.
This control is carried through into the dining room, a pleasantly airy space with 280 seats and a no-smoking section that has big windows looking towards Ilkley Moor.
It's as unlike the usual fish-and-chippery as it's possible to get if you're buying from Magnet Southern's: the lad's even blown his brass on carpets and chandeliers.
Cloth-capped queues shiver outside (there's no booking), but the friendly waitresses in Nippy costume serve the food without pressure — unless the coach is waiting.
This is the North's answer to Disneyland — try a taste of Tykeworld.
It's also consistency that has kept Langan's humming for so long.
Transatlantic tourists and suburban groupies may be willing to fork out the £1 cover charge for sporadic glimpses of Michael Caine and Jason Donovan, but grown-ups are kept loyal by cooking that is honest and robust and hardly ever hiccups in spite of turning over almost as many portions as Ramsden's.
Take the joky Southern version of fish and chips (£10.95): two vast, juicy cod fillets from Rye encased in Yorkshire pudding batter and served with properly chunky, floury chips and a topping of deep-fried parsley as an Oriental touch.
It gives its own accent to the Ramsden classic without being at all effete or patronising.
Bangers and mash (£8.25) are equally yeoman-like: giant specially-built sausages on an EC mountain of spud, with onion sauce trickling alongside.
The more international brasserie dishes on the elegant and rather over-long menu reflect this straightforward approach: nothing flashy or too sauced and a strong injection of Britishness.
An old favourite is the spinach souffle (£4.95), light as a politician's promise (though the anchovy sauce seems to have lost its bite).
The king prawns (£11.95) are about as elaborate as you'll get: four giants climbing a stylish mound of nutty black pasta interleaved with strips of courgette and carrot.
Even when Peter Langan was still around and threatening an imminent breach of the peace, this was always one of the most comfortable restaurants: stacks of paintings, a cheering bustle and bright lighting that somehow managed to appear discreet.
Although there are now far too many centre tables and a head waiter who manages to imitate the late owner's rudeness without any of his Irish charm, the service is as chummily swift as ever and the house wine a modest £7.75.
With such a carefully organised operation it's puzzling that Langan's should be so unwelcoming.
They don't actually make customers queue outside in chilly Mayfair, but the greeting system obliges everyone who lacks star quality to stand, cap in hand, under the supercilious gaze of a giggle of girls who fiddle ineffectually with placement lists on a trolley.
It's enough to make Harry Ramsden choke on his chips.
Harry Ramsden's (0943 874641) Guiseley, Yorks Manager Andrew Harding.
Open daily 11.30 — 10.30 C4 S6 V6 £14 with tea Langan's Brasserie (071 491 8822) Stratton Street, London W1 Chef Richard Shepherd.
Open Mon — Fri 12 — 3, 7 — 11.45; Sat 8 — 12.45 C6 S4 V6 £45
Ratings out of 10 for Cooking (C), Setting (S) and Value for money (V); price given for average two-course meal for two with a bottle of house wine or equivalent.
Set meals are for one.
Food and Drink: Classic cases of mistaken identity Oz Clarke finds that some new Safeway offerings are not quite what they seem
By OZ CLARKE
THE IMPROVEMENT in Safeway's wines over the past few years is a continual source of pleasure to me, and each time they show their wine range to the world I turn up expecting just a little bit more.
The first thing that struck me was that of about 100 different offerings at least half a dozen times I'd been stopped in my tracks by absolutely classic flavours.
Yet when I looked at the bottle, the label told me that the wine had a decidedly non-classic provenance.
Take their Domaine Grange Du Pin Syrah 1990.
This is grown in the Coteaux du Languedoc, the hillier part of the unfashionable Midi.
Farmers complain about no-one buying their wine and cheap imports flooding the markets.
They've had a cushy subsidised existence for too long.
Government grants, which have supported the production of plonk that drains straight into the EC wine lake, are being systematically cut, and the only way these guys will survive is to make a product the public wants.
Enter Grange du Pin.
The Syrah is a splendid grape from the northern Rhone, where it makes fabulous high-priced wines at Hermitage and Cote-Rotie for £10 — £20 a bottle.
Syrah should be deep, smoky, but not too tough and with a thrilling rough stamped fruit of raspberries and blackberries.
And that's what you get with the Grange du Pin for £3.55 a bottle.
The Viognier grape is just about the world's rarest great white variety.
It is grown in tiny quantities in the northern Rhone at Condrieu and Chateau-Grillet, where it makes utterly delicious whites at £15 — £30 a bottle.
The flavour should be almost viscous for a white wine, rich and succulent for a supposedly dry wine.
The fruit should be round and fat, as ripe apricots and muscatels licked with cream, and the fragrance of spring flowers should waft from the glass.
So try the Viognier '91 from the Ardeche, at £4.49 a bottle.
(Safeway can't get it in store till June.)
The Cabernet Sauvignon is the great grape of Bordeaux.
At top-flight level they use new oak barrels to age the juicy ripe grapes from low-yielding vineyards, and the resulting wines cost between £12 and £25 a bottle.
Try Domaine Richeaume Cabernet Sauvignon from Provence at £7.99, or the Safeway ‘91 Cabernet Sauvignon oak-aged from Languedoc at £3.99.
Provence reds have been notoriously tough and rough.
Even efforts with their best grape varieties seemed to produce wines that could never shake off a legacy of bitterness.
But the influx of outsiders with a vision of the wine they wanted to create has shown what the region can do.
Richeaume is in the hills inland from Marseilles and is farmed organically.
This ‘89 Cabernet is wonderfully rich, with a deep plum and blackcurrant intensity, and tannin too, but there is spice and ripeness in abundance to eclipse that.
The Cabernet Sauvignon from Languedoc is made by a company that was struggling to make ends meet by blending plonk until a few years ago.
The son of the family went to California, learnt what made the Californians tick, and swore he could do as well, if not better, back in France.
The key is single variety wines, labelled by grape name, and the judicious use of oak.
The result is one of the most affordable classy oak-soft reds on the market.
The new ‘91 vintage isn't here till late May, but will be hard to beat at £3.99.
Other wines difficult to beat at the price include three wonderfully good dry whites from Hungary that I'll be writing about later.
They also have that extremely rare bird, a good red Bergerac at a fair price (£2.89).
This '90 has the earthy flavour I would expect from Bergerac, but is soft and ripe, almost creamy in texture, so it really works.
The white Bergerac Sauvignon ‘91 is also very attractive, clean, easy, grass-green wine.
Given the difficulties of the ‘91 vintage in Bordeaux, the Chateau Canet ‘91 is impressive — grassy fresh and with a crunchy green fruit (£4.29).
But the Bordeaux that really grabs me is the oak-aged Blanc de Bordeaux ‘90.
The greenness of the Sauvignon is there, but it's a soft, ripe flavour, rounded out by oak in a most stylish way, at £3.99.
There are disappointments: the South African estate wines and the Caliterra Chilean wines.
But then I find the excellent floral fruity Safeway German Kabinett '90 (£2.99), the absurdly good but almost unheard-of Portuguese white by Bairrada Reserve (£5.49), and the brilliant blackberry-wild Ridge Zinfandel ‘89 from California (£8.49).
And I reckon the odd lapse is forgivable.
Travel: The amazing multi-storey dream park
By MARK EDMONDS
THIS week the English Tourist Board announced the winners in a new competition intended to restore a sense of pride to our tourist centres, and tempt back visitors from abroad.
The ETB's Car Park awards were presented in London on Tuesday at a glittering ceremony attended by the Duke of Gloucester.
The award winner in the urban category was Bridgefoot Multi-Storey in Stratford-upon-Avon, which may turn out to be just the attraction the town needs to woo back Shakespeare-mad Americans jumpy about international travel in the wake of the Gulf War.
Mr Keith Pavey, the architect responsible for the project, says, ‘Car parks are a much-maligned building type and it is rare to have the opportunity to design one that stands alone and is not part of an office block, shopping centre or other development.’
Mr Pavey says the secret of his project's success lies in its unobtrusive design.
‘We've tried not to pretend it is something it's not.
It is a unquestionably a car park.’
Travel: Sent off automatically
ASKING directions will never be quite the same.
A new ‘self-service’ tourist information machine has been officially unveiled.
By the summer, two ISSU — Information Self Service Unit — machines will be fully operational in Ireland, one in the Tourist Board's Dublin office.
The system is based on a map with touch-screen information points giving details of historic sites, accommodation, things to do…and local toilets.
Travel: Low wages, but bags of clout Power and perks keep the hotel porter in business.
Mark Edmonds learns some tricks of the trade
By MARK EDMONDS
AN INDUSTRIAL tribunal in West London heard recently that lazy and undisciplined porters at an airport hotel had come to regard the lobby as their own personal fiefdom.
Four porters who worked at the Heathrow Penta Hotel refused to meet or greet guests, deliver keys to rooms or move luggage if a guest transferred to a new room.
Rotas and overtime were all organised by the porters themselves who were operating what amounted to their own business within the hotel.
The case was an extreme example of the extent to which hotel porters and concierges — to the detriment of guests — enjoy a much greater influence over the running of a hotel than their status would suggest.
‘Those men had become very powerful,’ says Heathrow Penta personnel manager Anna Perry.
‘They had manipulated matters to such an extent that we could not infiltrate the empire they had built up.
Whenever a new manager was brought in to take charge of them, they refused to co-operate: in the end we just had to take the porters on.’
Porters at the Penta — in common with concierge staff throughout the hotel industry — receive only a very low rate of basic pay, about £132 a week before tax.
‘It is not very much,’ concedes Anna Perry, ‘which makes me wonder why so many of these porters had been with us for so long.
They must have been attracted by the fringe benefits.’
Tips are an obvious source of additional income, although porters must be careful not to solicit them.
While an outstretched palm is likely to result in instant dismissal, a deft manoeuvre with the help of a room key —‘Here is your key, sir, do have a pleasant stay’— is a different matter.
At the Penta the porters had worked out a neat scam with the airline crews who regularly booked into the hotel.
The crews' allowance for baggage handling was carved up by the porters: if the crews objected, their baggage would remain in reception.
More widespread are the commission arrangements with theatre agencies and tour companies.
A 10 per cent kickback is the norm, though a spokesman for Frames Rickards, one of the largest London-based coach tour companies, was cagey about the arrangements his company had struck with London's concierges.
‘These arrangements are confidential, but we can confirm that hotel porters are very useful to us.
We sell a lot of our tours through the concierges and we see nothing wrong with that.
Sometimes the hotel managements know about it and sometimes they don't.’
Arranging taxis and car hire is another potential source of revenue.
Some concierges have deals with individual taxi or mini-cab drivers who are able to jump the rank outside.
The current backhander from central London to Heathrow for instance amounts to about £5 a cab.
In some cases the hotels are party to the commission arrangements: the Savoy, for instance, pays its own concierges commission every time they book a car through its own limousine company.
Concierges also stand to make money out of sports tickets.
Again 10 per cent is about the average.
Dealings with touts will attract a premium, which explains why London concierges always look forward to Wimbledon fortnight and Cup Final Saturday.
Imaginative porters can also top up their salaries through complicated deals with nightclubs and restaurateurs who are keen to have them recommend their establishments.
Restaurant PR Elizabeth Crompton-Batt says she makes an effort to ensure that all concierges are kept informed of new openings: ‘We certainly write to them and sometimes they come along to launch parties.’
In the main, most hotels seem happy to let their concierges work the system to their advantage, providing their more entrepreneurial traits do not get the better of them, as they did in the case of those at the Heathrow Penta.
A spokeswoman for the Savoy Group said that anything a concierge earned on top of his basic salary was ‘entirely his affair.
We don't see any conflict of interest.
A concierge is not going to risk his reputation on recommending a poor restaurant.
The last thing he wants to be bothered with is having to deal with complaints from dissatisfied guests.’
Travel: A fistful of bother for your bank
By MARK EDMONDS
THE mighty dollar — accepted by Indian rickshaw-wallahs, Russian food distributors, Filipino masseuses, Cuban customs officials and even London taxi-drivers — is no longer the all-powerful international currency that travellers should never be without.
Whatever the buying power of the greenback elsewhere, to Lloyds Bank in London it is about as useful as a Russian rouble, an Indian rupee or a Mexican peso.
On returning from a recent trip to the States, one Telegraph staff member presented seven single-dollar bills culled from various back pockets to Lloyds' branch on the Isle of Dogs.
While the cashier was prepared to exchange his five- and 10-dollar notes — which amounted to more than $100 — single dollar bills were not apparently acceptable.
A Lloyds spokesman explained that, while each case would be ‘treated on its merit’, the bank preferred not to cash single dollar bills.
‘If the customer holds an account with us, we will try to help.
But we really don't want to get involved in exchanging single notes.
It is not worth our while because we cannot redeem them for as much as they would get for five- or 10-dollar bills.’
This is all very odd, since the other banks we contacted had no such qualms.
‘Bring them round to us,’ said a chirpy spokeswoman from Barclays.
‘We'd be delighted to help.
A lot of our customers request small denomination notes because they are useful for tips, bus fares and so on.’
Lloyds may be the only bank turning up its nose at the dollar bill, but the others aren't wild about some large-denomination European notes which often have to be shipped back to their country of origin rather than recycled through the system.
It's not a bad idea to make sure you change larger notes before you return from your holiday since — depending on where you've been — you may lose out by as much as half a per cent on an exchange rate.
Vulnerable currencies — and denominations of note — are listed in the table below.
Travel: Complaining?
Join the queue
By DAVID CHURCHILL
EURO Disney may be officially opening tomorrow, but tens of thousands of guests and Disney employees have been trying out the rides this week.
Alas, the Disney magic dust has not yet reached every corner of the French theme park.
The level of service is markedly different (lower) from US standards; there was considerably more litter around; and the themed restaurants rang with Parisian voices exclaiming: ‘Where's the wine?’
(Disney has decreed no wine is to be served in the park).
Indifferent service was noticeable: it was always going to be hard to persuade the Euro ‘cast members’(as staff are called) to adopt the ‘Have-a-Nice-Day’ grin.
But my request — at three information points — for a Disabled Visitor's Guide were met with a Gallic shrug and an emphatic ‘Non’.
But the biggest problem is the horrendous queues for rides.
Even with fewer guests than the park is able to cater for (some 20,000 this week; 35,000 are expected daily thereafter), the most popular rides such as Big Thunder Mountain and Star Tours had waits of an hour or more.
The main reason is the shortage of real attractions.
Euro Disney at present has some 36 rides and attractions, compared with 45 for the Magic Kingdom in Florida and 53 at Disneyland in California.
If you're heading for the Paris Disney during the Easter holidays, how can you beat the queues?
First, get to the park an hour before the official opening time.
(You can find this out by calling Guest Relations on 010 33 64 74 30 00).
It will take at least half an hour to park your car and get to the ticket booths.
To avoid queues at the entrance, Disney will normally let guests into the Main Street area about half an hour before opening.
If you go to the end of Main Sreet, you'll then be ready to hurry to your chosen ride well ahead of most guests.
Second, decide what you really want to see.
Most popular are: Big Thunder Railroad; Pirates of the Caribbean; Phantom Manor; the Michael Jackson film in CineMagique; and Star Tours.
The children's rides in Fantasyland (Dumbo, Peter Pan and Pinocchio) all attract long lines because they are slow to load.
Third, visit popular attractions during lunch (12 to 2), or when the afternoon or evening character parades are on; these are entertaining for very small children, but a bit slow for adults.
Fourth, stay late.
Most people head exhaustedly for their hotel a couple of hours before the park closes.
When the park stays open late during the summer, you should be able to do most rides without lengthy queueing during the last couple of hours.
Travel: Slovenia's in business
By MARK EDMONDS
THIS week Thomson Holidays resumed package tours to Lake Bled, Slovenia — less than a year after the civil war prompted an emergency evacuation of British tourists from their hotels last June.
‘We have looked at the situation carefully,’ a spokeswoman said, ‘and we are confident that our clients will not be in any danger.’
The decision of the EC and the US to recognise the three former republics of Yugoslavia — Slovenia, Bosnia-Herzegovina and Croatia — as sovereign states coincided this week with air raids in Bosnia which left six dead.
‘Lake Bled is further north and there is no indication that the violence is likely to spread.
The response we've had indicates that our clients are confident they will not come to any harm.’
In February, when the Foreign Office removed Slovenia from its list of dangerous destinations, specialist operator Yugotours began to resume operations in the state.
Yugotours' Alison Clarke reports that bookings for the ski season which ended in March were heavy, which she says bodes well for the summer.
Travel — Ferries:
SPAIN AND WESTERN FRANCE (Brittany, Normandy) Plymouth–Santander (Brittany Ferries): two return crossings weekly; duration 24 hours.
Standard return, two adults with car: £358 — £534.
Route served by: The Bretagne, a marvellous ship for cruising.
Luxury cabins have TV, fridge, trouser-press and hairdrier.
Two cinemas (comfortable seats, but poor legroom).
Self-service restaurant offers pasta, pizzas, traditional roast, sandwiches and salads.
Rolls and croissants are baked on board.
The ‘hospital’, with doctor on call, hairdressing salon, numerous lounges and generous deck-space confirmed impression of a luxuriously-appointed ship.
Every Brittany Ferries ship has a lift and cabins for disabled.
Plymouth–Roscoff (Brittany Ferries): up to three return crossings daily, reduced winter service.
Duration: 6 — 7½ hours.
Standard return, two adults with car: £174 — £296.
Route served by: Quiberon, Bretagne.
Loading was unduly protracted for the Quiberon, but disabled passengers were well looked after.
The buffet was ordinary for £8 a head.
The ship has been largely refurbished and the cabins are adequate, but spartan; our shower flooded the bathroom.
Poole–Cherbourg (Brittany Ferries Truckline): up to two return crossings daily.
Duration: 4¼ — 7 hours.
Standard return, two adults with car: £148 — £260.
Route served by: Barfleur (new this year).
This service is described as ‘without frills’, but those who have sailed the route on the old Tregastel should find its replacement (due on April 16) more spacious and comfortable.
Southampton–Cherbourg (Sealink Stena Line): 1 to 2 return crossings daily.
Duration: 5 — 8 hours.
Standard return, two adults with car: £160 — £268.
Route served by: The Stena Normandy.
Jolly cabaret in the Odeon-like theatre made us forget we were at sea; a friendly, comfortable ship with pleasant, fairly roomy cabins.
Portsmouth–Cherbourg (P & 0): up to four return crossings daily.
Duration: 4¾ — 7½ hours.
Standard return, two adults with car: £160–£275.
Route served by: Pride of Winchester, Pride of Cherbourg — twin ships, same design, similar service.
Our cabin, designed for four, had ample hanging-space, trouser-press, hair-drier and tea-making facilities, in addition to shower room.
The Captain's Table provided an agreeable meal, with attentive service.
Portsmouth–St Malo (Brittany Ferries): 1 — 2 return crossings daily.
Duration: 9 — 10¼ hours.
Standard return, two adults with car: £179 — £300.
Route served by: Duchess Anne, Armorique.
Disabled passengers should travel by Duchesse Anne if possible, instead of Armorique, which has restricted passageways.
Otherwise the two ships offer adequate but not exciting service and facilities.
Portsmouth–Caen (Brittany Ferries): up to three return crossings daily.
Duration: 5¾ — 7 hours.
Standard return, two adults with car: £158 — £282.
Route served by: Normandie (new this year), Duc de Normandie.
The Normandie, due on May 18, promises luxury afloat.
The Quiberon (see Plymouth–Roscoff entry) will be taken off this route once the Normandie starts sailing.
Portsmouth–Le Havre (P & O): up to three return crossings daily.
Duration: 5¾ — 7 hours.
Standard return, two adults with car: £160–£275.
Route served by: Pride of Le Havre, Pride of Hampshire — twin ships, similar facilities and standards.
Crossing in Force 9 winds led me to lament the absence of a grab-rail in the shower.
The Captain's Table buffet at £11.50 disappointing for the price; maybe the storm had taken its toll of the kitchen.
Newhaven–Dieppe (Sealink Stena): up to four return sailings daily.
Duration: 4 hours.
Standard return, two adults with car: £174–£282.
Route served by: Champs Elysees, Versailles.
Soon to be all change on this route: the French company, SNAT, pulls out towards the end of April.
Sealink Stena intends to start a new service in the first week of May.
It has plans to upgrade the entire service during the year.
In Force 7 to 8, the Versailles rolled a bit, though not uncomfortably.
Cabins were 71 steps down, making life difficult for disabled passengers.
NORTH-EASTERN FRANCE (Pas-de-Calais, Nord), BELGIUM and HOLLAND Folkestone–Boulogne: up to six returns daily.
Duration: 65 minutes.
Standard return, two adults with car: £118 — 268.
Route served by: SeaCat, Apr–Sept.
Following Sealink's withdrawal from the route, Hoverspeed takes over today (April 11) with its fast SeaCat. 432 aircraft-style seats reinforce the illusion of travelling on a jumbo jet.
Difference: you can take a walk outside.
Dover–Boulogne (P & O): six daily.
Duration: 1¾ hours.
Standard return, two adults with car: £118–£268.
Route served by: Pride of Walmer, Pride of Canterbury — the latter provides adequate but not top-notch service (pleasant Club Class lounge).
Beware the Pride of Walmer, in service on this route until the end of May, when she changes her name and goes to Stranraer.
She reminded us of olden-day ferries best forgotten.
Dover–Boulogne (Hoverspeed): three daily.
Duration: 55 minutes.
Standard return, two adults with car: £118–£268.
Route served by: SeaCat.
In Force 4 winds, with the tide running, we knew we were at sea.
SeaCat stays in port when waves exceed 10 feet.
Note: SeaCat has no lift from car deck to passenger lounge.
Arrangements can be made for ‘pre-boarding’ disabled passengers and their vehicles.
Dover–Calais (P & O): up to 20 returns daily.
Duration: 1¼ hours.
Standard return, 2 adults with car: £118 — £268.
Route served by: Pride of Dover, Pride of Calais, Pride of Kent, Pride of Bruges.
Couldn't fault Pride of Calais (or her sister ship, Dover): spacious and comfortable, a good-looking restaurant and cafeteria.
The quiet Club Class, with newspapers and service of tea and coffee, is well worth £5.
The Pride of Kent is currently being ‘stretched’; Pride of Bruges is a smaller ship.
Dover–Calais (Sealink Stena): up to 18 returns daily.
Duration: 1½ hours.
Standard return, 2 adults with car: £118 — £268.
Route served by: Stena Fantasia, Fiesta, Stena Invicta, Cote d'Azur.
Invicta is the pick of the bunch: Grill Restaurant offers varied menu, with swift service; three good courses for £9.95.
Yellow Cab Cafe has chicken and chips for £2.90.
Dover–Calais (Hoverspeed): up to 19 returns daily.
Duration: SeaCat 45 minutes, Hovercraft 35 minutes.
Standard return, two adults with car: SeaCat £130–£284, Hovercraft £202 — £294.
Route served by: Hovercraft Apr — Sept only, SeaCat all year.
Hovercraft from Dover Western Docks, SeaCat from Dover Eastern Docks.
Dover–Ostend (P & O, operated by Regie voor Martiem): up to eight returns daily.
Duration: 4 hours.
Standard return, two adults with car: £188 — £268.
Route served by: Prins Albert, Reine Astrid, Prinses Maria Esmeralda, Princesse Marie Christine and, due soon, the jumbo Prins Filip.
In my opinion, the least smart of all the ferry lines.
The Prins Albert is not an elegant ship, small by today's standards, but with plenty of seating.
This route is dubbed ‘The Most Enjoyable’, but I wonder why.
Our deluxe cabin was adequate, but low on ‘luxe’.
Crew exceptionally friendly and helpful, but three-course lunch for two, with a bottle of wine, was overpriced at around £45.
Dover–Ostend (P & O Jetfoil, operated by Regie voor Maritiem): foot passengers only; up to five returns daily.
Duration: 1 hr 40 min.
Standard return fare per person £56 — £62.
Route served by: Jetfoil.
Ideal in good weather; not such a good idea when rough.
Really heavy seas can force cancellation of services.
Ramsgate–Dunkirk (Sally Line): five returns daily.
Duration: 2½ hours.
Standard return, two adults with car: £107 — £226.
Route served by: Sally Star, Sally Sky.
Well-deserved reputation for food.
Eat as much as you like at the smorgasbord, dinner for £10.75, lunch £9.25; children under 14 £5.50/£4.75, under four free; full breakfast £5.75/£3/free.
Both vessels have brasseries serving breakfasts, snacks and main dishes like steak and kidney pie (£3.25); terrace cafes serve drinks, sandwiches, pastries and ice-creams.
Sally Sky nothing special, though deck space was excellent and lounge comfortable.
Children's play area and supervised creche are in addition to the usual facilities.
Lift from the car-deck on Sally Star goes to all floors; on Sally Sky to the main passenger deck only.
Sheerness–Vlissingen (Olau Line): two returns daily.
Duration: 7 — 8½ hours.
Standard return, two adults with car; £174 — £220.
Route served by: Olau Hollandia, Olau Britannia.
Both vessels large and luxurious, though rather shiny and glitzy for my tastes.
The Olau Hollandia has a pocket-sized swimming-pool in the bowels, luxurious cabins aloft and couchette-style below.
Luxury suites have TV, two bathrooms and dressing-room; cost £84 by day, £140 at night.
Good carvery (£8.25) fell short on lukewarm hot dishes.
A la carte restaurant (with fresh strawberries for £4), cafeteria, casino and the usual offices complete an impressive ensemble.
Annoyingly, youngsters were playing games in the lifts, and we had to resort to the stairs.
Harwich–Hook of Holland (Sealink Stena): two returns daily.
Duration: 6½ — 9¼ hours.
Standard return, two adults with car: £188–£272.
Cabins (£20 — £84) obligatory on night crossings.
Route served by: Stena Britannica, Konigin Beatrix.
A royal stateroom on Stena Britannica made this our best-ever crossing: TV, trouser-press, fridge, fruit, large sofa and comfortable twin beds, more like a hotel room and at £84 certainly worth the extra cost (though standard cabins are also pleasant).
Marvellous value in the restaurant: as much as you like of cold and hot dishes, gravadlax and roast beef, for £8.60.
Duty-free shop better than most: Dutch gin (Jenever) at £4.10 a litre.
Felixstowe–Zeebrugge (P & O): two returns daily.
Duration: 5¾ — 9 hours.
Standard return, two adults with car: £126 — £276.
Route served by: Pride of Flanders (formerly Nordic Ferry) and Pride of Suffolk (formerly Baltic Ferry).
Originally designed as freight ships, these may not be the most glamorous vessels afloat, but are pleasantly spacious.
Cabins are basic: one up, one down, a washbasin, but no room to swing even a kitten.
The Club Class lounge (not quite ready when I viewed it last month) will offer seclusion and extra comfort for £6 — £8: a good way to escape school parties.
Restaurant serves an excellent three-course meal for about £11; full breakfast in the large cafeteria is £3.75.
Hull–Zeebrugge (North Sea Ferries): once nightly in each direction.
Duration: 14½ hours.
Standard return, two adults with car: £284 — £340 (fare includes dinner and breakfast).
Cabins for handicapped passengers.
Route served by: Norland, Norstar.
This overnight crossing is ideal: ships sail at 6 pm, allowing time for a drink before dinner, a visit to the cinema, disco or gambling tables afterwards, then a night's sleep, and breakfast before disembarkation at eight the next morning.
Restaurants do not provide a memorable gastronomic experience, but no-one goes hungry.
There is a special early dinner sitting for families with young children.
Hull–Rotterdam (North Sea Ferries): once nightly in each direction.
Duration: 14 hours.
Standard return, two adults with car: £284 — £340.
Route served by: Norsea, Norsun.
Special treat: reserve a de-luxe cabin, with TV, sofa, well-stocked fridge, fruit basket, flowers and, of course, shower and WC; worth the extra cost (from £158 return).
Last month, we used a cabin for the disabled: it was close to the lift from the car-deck, and had wide doors, a pull-down in the shower, grab-rails and an alarm button.
Catering is uniform on all North Sea Ferries vessels.
‘The AA Guide to Ferries 1992’(free from AA outlets) provides a useful review of facilities and services on board UK car-passenger ferries, though some new vessels are omitted.
Travel — Ferries: Ferry firms keep their heads above water With the Chunnel coming, ferry companies know they must smarten up their act if they are to keep custom.
How well are they doing?
Peter Orr, who made 16 crossings last month, reports
By PETER ORR
IF, despite all impediments, the Channel Tunnel opens in 1993, then this is the last year for Channel ferries to make hay.
Although initial predictions were that 80 per cent of foot passengers and 70 per cent of car traffic would switch from ferries to Tunnel, recent estimates have been less enthusiastic.
Most vulnerable to competition are the short sea-crossings; ferry lines operating in the western Channel or North Sea remain sanguine.
‘The Channel Tunnel does not hold any fear for us,’ says North Sea Ferries.
Brittany Ferries ‘do not anticipate any long-term effect on our business’; ‘not a major threat,’ asserts Sally Line.
Reservations are up on 1991, and everyone in the ferry business predicts a bumper year.
Despite the encouraging figures, the Chunnel has prompted ferry companies to smarten up their act, and offer better deals.
On board, crews have become noticeably more customer-friendly; with a few exceptions, passengers' needs and wishes are now paramount.
The ships themselves offer a more comfortable ride these days: of the 16 trips I made in blustery March, only one was anything like rough.
Thanks to stabilisers, and effective modern remedies for seasickness, real discomfort is rare.
Although occasionally an older vessel may substitute for one in dry dock, many venerable craft have been pensioned off.
Where will you find the Maid of Kent, St Eloi or Chantilly?
My Sussex cousin, a frequent traveller to Dieppe, has a recurring nightmare, in which she arrives at Newhaven to find the Chartres, like the Mary Celeste, still in service.
Hovercraft, nearing the end of their long life which began in 1959 with SRN1, will be replaced by SeaCats.
Upgrading and refurbishing of ships is widespread.
Some ferries have been ‘Jumbo-ised’— cut in half, and an extra bit stuck in the middle — and most are roomier than their predecessors, though deck space seems to have diminished with the years: action now takes place indoors.
Live entertainment, piano bars, cinemas and even gambling tables are common.
Duty-free sales will be phased out under EC regulations, but shopping is still big business afloat.
Business-class lounges, with fax machines, photocopiers, computer stations, are an innovation on some Sealink Stena sailings; for 1992, P & O offers Club Class on all its routes.
Children are wooed with playrooms, cartoons or video games.
My wife Kay recently acquired a disabled sticker for our car, and we found provision for disabled passengers greatly improved.
Given warning, ferry staff will arrange for vehicles with handicapped passengers to stop by the lift.
On ‘E’ tariff weekday sailings with Brittany Ferries, disabled drivers' cars are carried free.
The Trade Secretary recently quashed a scheme by P & O and Sealink to pool services on short routes, but the proposal may surface again.
Meanwhile, big new ships are on the way: the 27,000-ton Normandie and 20,500-ton Barfleur will join the Brittany Ferries fleet this year.
Sealink Stena is to take over the Newhaven — Dieppe service and P & 0 hopes to introduce sailings from Portsmouth to Bilbao in 1993.
One thing is certain: having wooed and won passengers, ferry companies are determined to see their relationship outlast the pre-Tunnel honeymoon.
BEST AND WORST
PETER ORR'S AWARDS FOR 1992 Best Ships Pride of Calais (P & O), Stena Britannica (Sealink Stena), Bretagne (Brittany Ferries), Olau Hollandia (Olau), Norsea (North Sea Ferries) Best food Sally Line Best attention to disabled P & O Most improved service Sealink Stena Friendliest crew Prins Albert (Regie voor Maritiem) Fastest crossings Hoverspeed (Hovercraft and SeaCat) Best hotels Holiday Inn Garden Court, Calais; Pullman, Bruges Best restaurants La Matelote, Boulogne; La Petite Auberge, Le Havre; Le Channel, Calais; Au Bon Coin, Dunkirk Best bed-and-breakfast M et Mme Guilbert, Benneville, near Caen Best on-shore attraction Nausicaa, Boulogne Most attractive port Roscoff (Brittany Ferries) Ships to avoid Quiberon; Prins Albert; Pride of Walmer 
Travel — Ferries: On THE SHIPS
Brittany Ferries, The Brittany Centre, Wharf Road, Portsmouth PO2 8RU; or Millbay Docks, Plymouth PLI 3EW.
Reservations and inquiries: Portsmouth 0705 827701, Plymouth 0752 221321.
Routes: Plymouth–Santander; Plymouth — Roscoff; Portsmouth — St Malo; Portsmouth — Caen; Poole–Cherbourg.
Hoverspeed, Maybrook House, Queens Gardens, Dover CT17 9UQ.
Reservations: Dover 0304 240241, London 081 554 7061, Birmingham 021 236 2190, Manchester 061 228 1321.
Routes: Dover–Calais; Dover — Boulogne; Folkestone — Boulogne.
North Sea Ferries, King George Dock, Hedon Road, Hull, North Humberside HU9 5QA.
Reservations: 0482 77177.
Routes: Hull — Zeebrugge; Hull — Rotterdam.
Olau Line (UK), Sheerness, Kent ME12 ISN.
Vehicle and passenger bookings 0795 666666, inclusive holiday bookings 0795 662233.
Route: Sheerness — Vlissingen.
P & O European Ferries, Channel House, Channel View Road, Dover, Kent CT17 9TJ.
Reservations: 0304 203388.
Routes: Dover — Calais; Dover–Boulogne; Dover–Ostend; Dover — Ostend (Jetfoil); Portsmouth — Le Havre; Portsmouth — Cherbourg; Felixstowe–Zeebrugge.
Sally Line, Argyle Centre, York Street, Ramsgate, Kent CT11 9DS.
Reservations: 0843 595522 or 081 858 1127.
Route: Ramsgate–Dunkirk.
Sealink Stena Line, Charter House, Park Street, Ashford, Kent TN24 8EX.
Reservations: 0233 647047.
Routes: Dover–Calais; Newhaven–Dieppe; Southampton–Cherbourg; Harwich — Hook of Holland.
Travel — Ferries: ON THE SHORE
These are convenient overnight stopping points in England.
For Plymouth: Copthorne Hotel, Armada Centre (0752 224161).
For Southampton and Portsmouth: the Travelodge at Eastleigh, on the Twyford road, just off A355.
Family room (excluding meals) £29.95.
Reservations: 0800 850 950.
For Newhaven, Abbot's Lodge, on A259 at Seaford.
B & b for two, £50 (0323 891055).
Roscoff is the most charming of French ports.
Hotel Talabardon, opposite the fine church, has superb Paimpol oysters.
The Hotel Mercure, within a stone's throw of the Cherbourg ferry terminal, offers modern, anonymous comfort, and a very reasonable meal for about FF100. (010 33 33 44 01 11).
Ten miles from St Malo, the Pointe du Grouin has superb coastal views and Cancale oysters.
B & b for two around £50 (010 33 99 89 60 55).
For passengers from the Caen night crossing, a boulangerie opposite Ouistreham's church opens early, as does a small cafe nearby.
At Benneville, south-west on N175, Joseph and Marie-Therese Guilbert provide simple but splendid, dinner, bed and breakfast in their 200-year-old farmhouse.
(010 33 31 77 58 05).
Don't linger in Le Havre's ferry terminal: across the road the Musee des Beaux-Arts Andre Malraux has joyous pictures by Dufy.
Reserve a table at excellent La Petite Auberge at 32 rue Ste-Adresse. (010 33 35 46 27 32).
Signposting to the ferry in Dieppe leaves something to be desired; not so the food at La Marmite Dieppoise, 8 rue St Jean: menus from FF125 (Tel: 010 33 35 84 24 26).
Twenty miles south of Boulogne, try The Hotel de France, 2 rue Coquempot, Montreuil.
B & b for two around £36 (010 33 21 06 05 36).
From June, motorists will be able to avoid central Calais by taking a direct road from the ferry terminal to the A26 Autoroute, a toll-motorway with fast connections to Paris, Bruges, Brussels and onwards.
The Holiday Inn Garden Court has b & b for two around £50, but rooms will accommodate up to four.
(010 33 21 34 69 69).
Reserve a table at Le Channel, 3 boulevard Resistance: menus from about £8. (010 33 21 34 42 30).
The Hotel Ambassadeur at Wapenplein 8A, Ostend is comfortable and friendly: b & b for two around £43 (010 32 59 70 09 41).
Courtesy coaches run between Dunkirk's ferry terminal, town centre and hypermarket.
Au Bon Coin, 49 avenue Kleber, is a splendid fish restaurant (010 33 28 69 12 63).
The Breskens Ferry (eight guilders per car) runs frequently, takes 20 minutes to cross the Western Scheldt, and offers a short-cut to Belgium from Vlissingen.
Travel — On Home Ground: The performer who makes it all white on the night
By PADDY BURT
AN OXFORDSHIRE reader expresses astonishment that so many of the hotels featured in this column border on Fawlty Towers.
Honestly, I don't invent the singing waiters, acrobatic chefs, undiscovered Kenneth Branaghs and owners who tell the same joke twice.
I just report on what I find.
England is full of eccentrics; if you want to meet one, book into a small hotel.
Take David Moore, of the Old Rectory near Redditch.
He's an actor manque if ever there was one.
In fact, he's a young acoustics engineer summoned last year from Paris to run the family hotel.
We are the only dinner guests this Friday evening, so the bespectacled Mr Moore has ample opportunity to demonstrate his wide-ranging talents.
‘The whole evening will be a celebration of white,’ he declares mysteriously just before 7.30 dinner.
Alarm bells ring.
‘Please tell us why.’
‘A white first course.
Definitely a lot of white in the second.
A white pudding.
But the candles are pink, I'm afraid.
Now I'll get off my bottom and get it for you.’
We had received the full blast of his whimsicality the minute we arrived at the ancient wood-frame rectory, modernised in 1812 (according to the brochure) by the great-grandson of Sir Christopher Wren.
Mr Moore bounces us up the stairs, throwing open the door of a small room painted buttermilk yellow in the converted stable.
‘You can have a four-poster if you like.
No problem,’ he says.
We decline.
The four-poster has no bath, only a shower.
Anyway, this room, with its wormy beams, eaved ceiling and snug adjoining bathroom, is most attractive.
‘There's the phone,’ he says, pointing.
‘The code for America is 0101 and it will make me very rich.’
We won't be dialling the States, thank you.
Instead, we wander down to the conservatory, where a lone table is laid, its pink candles flickering.
And dinner's very white.
First, there's a cauliflower and almond soup and we are issued with instructions on how to eat it.
‘The trick is to cover it with black pepper, and when that's gone, cover it again.’
It's good.
The main course is a substantial dish of chicken with a creamy coconut sauce accompanied by a baked potato and bowl of crispy veg.
The pudding, a sort of syllabub, is also rich.
The only disconcerting thing about eating David Moore's food —‘never cooked before July 1991 in my life; you just need lots of cookbooks and a fertile imagination’— is that he can see you from his kitchen window.
Try scribbling notes while your host watches.
Afterwards it's collapsing time in the drawing room.
Will we ever want to eat again?
We retire early to bed, wishing there was a television set in the bedroom or, more particularly, a drawing-room specifically for the guests.
At breakfast, his home-made marmalade's on the table and we nibble to the strains of Vivaldi.
He wants to know how I discovered the Old Rectory.
When I tell him (truthfully) that I can't remember, he asks me again.
His family home has tree-lined grounds, including an ancient mulberry, and the snowdrops are out.
Once it must have been very much on its own, but now there are modern houses within spitting distance.
As we get into the car, he nags because I haven't put my seatbelt on.
‘You're extremely bossy,’ I tell him.
‘I am, rather, aren't I?’ he says, pleased as Punch.
The Old Rectory, Ipsley Lane, Ipsley, Redditch, Worcestershire B98 0AP (0527 23000).
Paddy Burt paid £107.20 for dinner, bed and breakfast for two, including a bottle of wine.
Travel — On Home Ground: SHREWSBURY FACTS
Brother Cadfael may be fictitious, but he was ‘born’ in Shrewsbury as his creator, Ellis Peters, lives nearby.
For a small market town, Shrewsbury has managed to give the world a very motley crew, from Charles Darwin to Private Eye magazine — the Eye's begetters first started working together on the Shrewsbury School magazine.
Charles Darwin has the 20th-century honour of having a shopping centre named after him.
In fact, Shrewsbury is a first-rate shopping centre, not just for modern precincts but old-fashioned shops, too.
Tanners Wine Merchants on Wyler Cop is a good place to visit: it looks as if it might be trade only, but isn't: march round the back, through the yard and go in.
The offices are so old-fashioned that one was used as Scrooge's office in a recent film version of A Christmas Carol.
The 12th-century church of St Julian's now houses a craft centre: you can buy shoes, hand-painted silk scarves, yarns and threads, or watch several dozen craftspersons at work.
Spring and summer are the seasons for visiting Shrewsbury.
In 1988 it was voted Engalnd's Most Beautiful Floral Town; the late Percy Thrower is another of its famous sons, and was Parks Superintendent for many years.
He designed the flower garden known as the Dingle, hidden away in the Quarry park.
Lord Clive, a k a Clive of India, was born here and later became a local MP and Mayor of Shrewsbury.
His old house on College Hill is now the Clive Museum.Behind the beautiful Georgian brick exterior lie remains of 15th- and 16th-century buildings.
Down Wyle Cop towards the English Bridge are two excellent inns.
The Lion Hotel boasts a bar that was the last men-only bar in town, staying that way till the '60s.
Further along is the Lion and Peasant.
Its front is Georgian, and inside it looks rather ordinary, but they do an excellent pub lunch and in winter there are roaring log fires.
In the centre of town, on Princess Street, the Golden Cross still has an original shove-ha'penny board in its tiny, atmospheric bar.
The Shrewsbury Biscuit isn't quite as famous as the Bakewell Tart, but is on sale in most of the bakers; you can buy a recipe at the Tourist Office.
It's a large, sweet shortcake-like creation, stuffed with sultanas.
Don't dip it in your damson gin, another local treat.
Recommended b & bs include the College Hill Guest House, 11 College Hill, Shrewsbury SY1 1LZ (0743 365744): central, but in a quiet street, from £15 per night.
The non-smoking Roseville is a five-minute walk from the centre at 12 Berwick Road, Shrewsbury SY1 2LN (0743 236470).
The Lion Hotel, Wyle Cop, Shrewsbury SY1 1UY (0743 353107) is an old-fashioned THF hotel with modern facilities, from £40, while the Prince Rupert in Butcher Row, Shrewsbury SY1 1UQ (0743 236000) is a very smart and central five-star hotel, from £38.50 per night.
Travel — On Home Ground: Ring for a change Robin Neillands tries his hand at campanology
By ROBIN NEILLANDS
ONE thing they don't tell you beforehand is that bell-ringing is hard on the legs.
Climbing the 60, narrow, twisting steps from the nave to the ringing chamber left me worn out — but when I staggered through the door the chamber was packed.
This was the weekly practice night for the bell-ringers at All Saints Church, High Wycombe, and Patricia Newton's team was ringing away for all it was worth.
Perhaps because there are so many bell towers in England (5,205, compared with 167 in Wales and 15 in Scotland), not to mention about 40,000 ringers, bell-ringing is a peculiarly English institution.
Most churches have six bells, some have a full octave of eight and about 90 churches, mostly cathedrals, have 12.
The heaviest, at an impressive 4,195 kg, is the tenor bell in Liverpool cathedral.
Other countries use bells to summon people to church but only the English go in for that cascading sound from a ring of six or more bells —‘change ringing’.
Bell-ringing, or campanology, has a language all its own.
A group of ringers is a ‘band’, their leader the ‘tower captain’.
The collective name for church bells is a ‘ring’, while a ‘peal’ consists of 5,040 or more changes during a single session.
(This is where those names like Stedman Triples and Triple Bob Majors come in.)
There were about 20 ringers at All Saints on practice night — men and women, boys and girls — of varying expertise.
Half of them seemed to have met their partners at practice or come from bell-ringing families.
‘It's fun,’ said Catherine, the youngest ringer at 11, ‘and all my family do it.’
Sheila, who had been ringing for over 20 years, told me that her father and grandfather had both been ringers.
‘Whenever we go on holiday we always see if there is a tower in the neighbourhood, and go along on practice night.’
Ticking off another tower is known as ‘tower grabbing, and you always seem to end up in the pub afterwards’.
After this build-up, I had to have a go.
Bell-ringing requires technique, but even at its simplest it is great fun, not least because it is faintly alarming.
There you are at one end of the rope with a bell at the other — and when you pull you're not sure what is going to happen.
Strength, it turned out, isn't a prerequisite (lucky thing, since tenor bells can weigh the same as a Mini); in skilled hands the bell does most of the work, but a full ringing circle demands that the ringer first gets the bell moving and gradually increases the swing until the bell is balanced or ‘set’ with the mouth uppermost, ready to be rung on.
With practice, the ringer can swing the bell in a controlled fashion through 360 degrees, producing the right ‘dong’ at the right point among all the other bells whirling away in the belfry.
Those who get hooked have a lifetime of companionship and challenge to look forward to.
Change-ringing combinations are almost endless, and the instruction books look like circuit diagrams for a missile.
The first hurdle, a quarter-peal, will take about 45 minutes to ring, but to complete the theoretically-possible 479 million changes on a ring of 12 bells would take about 27 years, non-stop.
Eventually I left them to it and went off into the night, the bells keeping me company through the streets.
Contact your local bell-ringing group via the nearest reference library or bell tower, or through the weekly The Ringing World,(editor, David Thorne, Penmark House, Woodbridge Meadows, Guildford GU1 1BL, 0483 69535).
A 10-day course for novices is to be held at The Old Rectory, Fittleworth, Pulborough, Sussex, RH20 1HU (079882 306) from June 26 — July 6; the price is from £405 including full board.
Travel — On Home Ground: Old bones with a tale to tell Mike Gerrard goes in search of Shrewsbury's fictional detective, Brother Cadfael
By MIKE GERRARD
PEOPLE travel from all over the world to look at a scrap-metal merchants in Shrewsbury.
It's not what they hope to see, but it's more or less on the spot of what once was the herb garden for the monks of Shrewsbury Abbey.
The site of the garden has taken on special significance since A Morbid Taste for Bones, by Ellis Peters, was published in 1977.
This became the first in a long line of medieval whodunnits featuring an unusual detective, a 12th-century Benedictine monk named Brother Cadfael: when he isn't tending his herb garden, Cadfael is using his knowledge to solve a seemingly endless series of murders and mysterious disappearances.
The books have been translated into 13 languages and now stand at 18 titles plus various spin-offs.
Also spinning off from the success of the Cadfael phenomenon, Shrewsbury Tourist Office conducts guided tours of the town, ‘In the Footsteps of Brother Cadfael’.
While you can buy a 50p leaflet and walk round the town yourself, looking for the small metal footsteps that have been placed in significant sites, it's much more rewarding to go with one of the town's Cadfael experts, like Esme Green.
‘Vile,’ is the first thing Esme says to me, referring not to the freezing weather but the correct pronunciation of the Welsh Brother's name: Cad-vile.
We begin with a walk through the town centre, full of timbered houses and medieval street names.
‘Fish Street,’ says Esme, ‘did have 19 fish shops in it at one time.
Can you imagine the smell?
And in Butcher Row there were 29 butchers, including a Master Butcher who features in the books.
There was also a market here, so it was a pretty lively place.’
As we stroll towards Shrewsbury Castle, we halt at the church of St Mary's.
‘Parts of the old Norman church still remain,’ Esme explains, ‘so would have been here in Cadfael's day The church features in Sanctuary Sparrow and again in Eye Witness, where the blind old Welshman, Rhodri Fychan, begs by the west door.
‘Ye Gateway House at the entrance to Council House Square is the last timber-framed house to be built in Shrewsbury.
The date on it used to be 1623, but I see they've changed it to 1610, though I don't agree with either of those dates.
‘The Square itself would have looked nothing like this in Cadfael's day, but for me it's got a lot of atmosphere and history.
I can really see Cadfael rattling round in his black cloak, taking a short cut on his errands round the town.
On the corner of the Square in his day would have been St Michael's Church.
Now it's the poll tax office.’
The historic detail in the Cadfael books is so accurate, and the fact and fiction so skilfully mingled, that many people believe that Brother Cadfael was a real figure.
‘You have to break it gently that he was fictitious, but I don't think it always sinks in.
You can remind people several times during a tour that he didn't actually live, then when you get to the end they'll ask you where he's buried.’
The Abbey, across Shrewsbury's English Bridge, is the highlight of the tour.
At one time the abbot's vineyards stretched all the way to the River Severn, from beneath the castle walls where 98 corpses hung after the siege of Shrewsbury described in One Corpse Too Many.
Now vines are as rare as hanging corpses, since Thomas Telford drove the A5 right into the heart of the town in 1836, through what had been the cloisters, with the present-day church on one side of the road, and the former infirmary and herb garden on the other.
The Benedictine Abbey of St Peter and St Paul was founded in 1083, about 50 years before Brother Cadfael's time; three huge columns and a wonderfully preserved Norman archway survive from those days.
Esme Green explained: ‘This is where the bones of St Winifred were brought from Holywell, which is detailed in the first book, A Morbid Taste for Bones.
Interestingly enough, that's the only book as far as I know which veers from history.
In reality the bones were brought here, but in the book the story has a twist.
At that time the bones of a saint were important: the Abbeys would vie with each other to see who could claim to have the best holy relics, because bones performed miracles, which brought in the visitors.’
Brother Cadfael tours run all year round but must be booked in advance, to ensure that an expert guide is available.
The tour lasts about 60 — 90 minutes.
The guide costs £12, covering up to 20 people.
Bookings at Shrewsbury Tourism, The Music Hall, The Square, Shrewsbury SY1 1LH (0743 50761/52019).
LAST WORDS:CLASS MONITOR
By HUGH MASSINGBERD
HOW do you respond when, as he raises a glass to his lips, someone says ‘Cheers!’?
A stuck-up snob, hoping to be taken for a member of the ‘upper class’ having carefully studied Nancy Mitford's Noblesse Oblige, will remain silent.
Similarly, on being introduced to someone who says, ‘Pleased to meet you’, our would-be ‘gent’ will again keep his lips firmly sealed.
The result, in both cases, will be to create an awkward atmosphere of embarrassment, the negation of good manners for which the gentleman is supposed to stand.
Manners, above all, should be about behaving the same way to everyone you meet; a person who sucks up to the nobs and snubs those he regards as his ‘inferiors’ is manifestly not a gent.
Yet one must also beware of the sort of patronising attitude nicely expressed in the film of The Go-Between, when the silly sprig of the Big House observes, after an exchange with the lusty Alan Bates, ‘I think I put him at his ease, don't you?’
For my part, when the dread stock phrases are uttered, I tend to murmur ‘Your good health’, and ‘How do you do?’.
On both counts, these self-conscious pomposities score pretty low.
Perhaps the only answer is to send up the whole pantomime.
In future I will go for a rousing chorus of ‘Absolutely, Cheerio, Cheery-bung, Bottoms up, Chin-chin, and a touch of the Pip-pips to you too.’
That should break the ice, if not the glass…
Saturday Night and Sunday Morning: Politeness is the paparazzo's passport Serena Allott talks to celeb-snapper Richard Young
By SERENA ALLOTT
RICHARD YOUNG is the grandfather of the paparazzi.
For 17 years now he has been hovering — camera at the ready — on the edge of parties, outside nightclubs or in restaurant doorways.
‘And I've loved every second of it.
It's the best job in the whole wide world.
‘When I left school I was nowhere, but someone up there put me in the situation I find myself in now.
I always wanted to be in show business and here I am — part of show business.’
True: he is as recognisable — and as ubiquitous — as the celebrities he photographs.
They are used to him and familiarity has bred content with the way he operates.
‘I don't go to photocalls or to anywhere I know a mass of photographers are going to be.
First of all I'm not going to make any money out of work like that, and second of all that sort of thing becomes a pigsty.
‘Young people have no idea how to present themselves — they push and shove.
You've got to be polite.
That's such an important factor for the paparazzi.’
Dependent on opportunity, Young leaves nothing to chance: his working life is planned months in advance and at present he has three clear days before August.
Although he likes, when possible, to keep the weekends free, all too often there is work that has to be done.
As Young points out, we are moving towards the busy part of the year.
There are rock concerts, for a start: the tribute to Freddie Mercury, Michael Jackson coming into town.
‘All that kind of thing takes up weekends.’
Most Saturdays, assuming he has been working the night before, Young is up by 10 am for breakfast with his wife and three children: two teenage boys and Hannah Harley, four, named after his beloved motorbike.
During the week he has a grapefruit and a banana for breakfast.
‘George Harrison taught me that — I was at his house, and I noticed that all he had for breakfast was fresh fruit.
It's a healthy start to the day.
But my once-a-week treat is to have a smoked salmon bagel.’
By 11 am Young is out running: twice round Wormwood Scrubs and then a series of exercises, ‘step-ups and all kinds of keep-fit stuff’.
Given popular perceptions of the paparazzi, Young is surprisingly clean-living: a non-drinking, non-smoking, fitness fanatic.
By early evening, he is ready to start work.
He is retained by the Daily Express and occasionally its diary editor will have dispatched him to cover a party or reception.
But if the evening is free of specific engagements, he sets off on a well-worn route by 8.30 or 9 pm.
Young starts the evening at Langan's, often with fellow photographer David Bennett.
‘We sit down, have a coffee, talk to the owner Richard Shepherd, who's a great friend.
On the way in we look at the first five tables — if we don't spot anyone, if we don't get told about anything happening, we politely disappear after 20 minutes or so.’
‘Polite’ features large in Young's description of his working life.
Early on he learned — the hard way — that it was the passport to success.
Inside a restaurant, he would never photograph anyone without permission: ‘I never take liberties; if it's not cool, I don't do it.’
On the street, however, people are fair game.
‘Although if I knew them and I wanted a nice picture — smiling, arms around each other— I would call out to them, but not before I reached the third frame.’
On leaving Langan's, Young works his way west to San Lorenzo.
He waits outside the restaurant, either in his car or in the Lebanese restaurant opposite.
He is on the lookout for cars — smart, chauffeur-driven cars.
Recently he spotted a Mercedes, just as its wary driver spotted him and ducked his head.
Young scented a picture: peering through the windows of San Lorenzo he spotted Dustin Hoffman and his brood.
On leaving the restaurant the family obliged, apparently, by posing in the pouring rain.
Young moves round the corner to Toto's in Walton Street, checking the cars, hoping the drivers — most of whom know him — will give him a whisper of what's going on.
Then he visits La Famiglia before driving back up the King's Road and on to the Caprice.
‘We look through the blinds there — they keep them open for us now — and there's always someone.
Ronnie Wood's wife Jo had her birthday party there.
Then we think, ‘Shall we go to Christopher's?’
We sit in the bar there and have a drink and someone might discreetly tell us who's upstairs.
‘It's 11.30 pm or midnight by now and they're all turning out of Harry's Bar, so we go down there.
We might see Fergie, although I don't know about now!
We might go to Mark's Club down by Berkeley Square and see Diana Ross or somebody.
‘By 12.45 am restaurant time is over, so we look round the nightclubs.
In London it's only Annabel's or Tramp — the rest don't happen for the certain crowd, the newspaper-worthy crowd I'm looking for.’
It's Annabel's first.
The doormen know them and, aware that they won't do anything stupid, leave them alone.
They might even give them a tip.
Young stays there until something happens: he might get a picture within half an hour, although he has hung around until 4 am.
‘By about 2 am we might say, ‘Let's go now, let's go past Tramp.’
We might get the nod there and stay or we might find nothing going on.’
The night's work over, Young drives to the Express's offices, captions his film and leaves it on the picture desk.
‘I get home about 3.30 am, take a bottle of Evian water and the papers up to my office and tune into Bob Harris on Radio One.
‘I'll look at the papers — at the pictures — for about half an hour and drink the water: I do that religiously, it cleanses the soul.’
Peterborough: Family ceilidh
SCOTLAND'S clan MacGillivray will hold its first international gathering there in August.
MacGillivrays from Australia and America are expected at the five-day shindig, to include treks, lectures and whisky swilling.
Ishbel McGillivray —‘There are 74 ways of spelling the name’— whose intriguing signature (below) enters my scrapbook, is dusting off the clan's tartan picnic rugs.
‘About 70 MacGillivrays have signed up,’ she says.
‘One woman is bringing the family tree, 30ft long.’
Students of Scottish history shudder at the name.
‘It's a verrrry brave family,’ declares Mrs McGillivray.
‘But we've never gone looking for trouble.
Scores of us fell at Culloden.’
Still talked about in the glens is Angus MacGillivray, an ancient who was called in to settle a territorial dispute with a neighbour.
‘He declared for our family, swearing by the soil under his feet and the head under his bonnet,’ says Mrs McGillivray.
‘But the neighbours were suspicious and found he had soil in his shoes and a cock's head under his bonnet.’
And his punishment?
‘Och, buried alive.’