

Pilgrims urged to take less Holy water
By Tom Ross
PILGRIMS to Walsingham are being asked by clergy to reduce the amount of Holy water they take from the Anglican shrine because of fears that the well will dry up.
A four-year drought in East Anglia and extra demands for water from a burgeoning local population have lowered the water table.
Father Roy Fellows, administrator of the shrine, said rationing was necessary to conserve supplies.
The well, dug 900 years ago and fed by springs, was deepened by seven feet last summer to 34 feet, but it is still in danger of drying up.
On average, 250 pilgrims visit the shrine every weekend from Easter to September.
Sometimes numbers reach 1,000.
Some pilgrims have taken as much as five gallons of water, Fr Fellows said.
They will now be asked to use only small bottles.
‘The low water table affects everyone here, from the farmers to the river authorities,’ he added.
‘We are therefore asking pilgrims to be restrained in their use of Holy water.’
Walsingham arrived on the pilgrim's map in the 11th century when the Virgin Mary was said to have appeared to Lady Richelda, a citizen of the Norfolk town.
Lady Richelda is believed to have been told by the Virgin Mary to build a replica of her house in Nazareth.
There she found a spring.
‘The water is associated with the legend of the shrine, so we have a service at the well each day,’ said Fr Fellows.
‘It has a symbolic role to play.’
Some worshippers believe the water has healing properties when drunk or sprinkled over the sick.
Walsingham is a holy town to both Anglicans and Roman Catholics and has two shrines, but the well is based in the Anglican one.
When the Anglican shrine was built in 1931, on the site of the 11th-century building, the well was rediscovered.
The other shrine, a mile out of town in Houghton St Giles, is the 14th-century national Roman Catholic shrine of Our Lady of Walsingham, and is known as the slipper chapel.
Pilgrims take off their shoes and walk from the slipper chapel into Walsingham to the Anglican site.
Mrs Kitty Heslop, a member of the York Union of Catholic Mothers and a veteran pilgrim to Walsingham, was unimpressed by suggestions that the well might dry up.
‘Take my word for it, I've been going for 30 years since the well was a bucket in a hole in the ground, and there is plenty of water,’ she said.