

SHOPPING DIARY Top crocks
By ELIZABETH WILLIAMSON
MARKS & SPENCER is bursting into bold colour this spring with pottery hand painted in Portugal.
Unlike much similar pottery, the ranges are dishwasher proof.
The Siena range is grape, lemon and plum patterned, there is another yellow and blue on a white ground grape and vine design plus a plainer yellow, blue-banded Calypso design.
Patterns and plains interplay in ranges which include huge platters, capacious cups and saucers, bowls and the jug, illustrated right, which costs £14.99.
From major branches of Marks & Spencer.
Cook's friend A USEFUL book for cooks is David Mellor's The Complete Cook's Catalogue, which provides an annual update on choosing kitchen equipment.
A selection of the best of old and new products includes basic tools, electrical equipment, pots, pans, tins and moulds from around the kitchen world, as well as the craftsmen made products upon which Mellor built his reputation.
The detailed appraisal of stainless steel pans, chopping boards, food processors, tools, knives and scissors is enlivened by smaller, genuinely useful gadgets.
The catalogue costs £1.50 from David Mellor branches or £2 by mail from 66 King Street, Manchester M2 4NP (061–834 7023).
Fashion: GREEN — AND FIT TO BE SEEN Jane Mulvagh on how a family crisis prompted Europe's largest clothing manufacturer to plan an environment-friendly label
By JANE MULVAGH
KLAUS STEILMANN is chairman of the Steilmann Group, Europe's largest clothing manufacturer with a net turnover of 1.04 billion Deutschemarks, and currently president of ELTAC, the association of leading European textile and clothing manufacturers.
It is significant that such a mainstream and commercial manufacturer is hoping to launch an environmentally sensitive label.
A family drama five years ago awakened Steilmann to the ecological crisis — his daughter had taken a strong dental painkiller and was close to death because of an allergic reaction.
Steilmann wondered why such allergies were so much more common among the younger generation.
Environmental pollution seemed to be the only explanation.
‘I realised I could influence the situation by saving resources and helping to keep the environment as clean as possible.’
Steilmann, working in conjunction with leading scientists and investing, to date, DM 5 million, is using a new manufacturing process.
If consumer research questionnaires are encouraging, and the process can stand up to ecological criticism, it will be launched next year.
The most important area on which to concentrate was the massive amount of water required by the production of textiles.
The new dyeing process, both for uncut cloth and finished garments, is sealed in a closed system where the finite quantity of water is constantly recycled and never released back into the environment.
The system is not a new invention.
The Danish Green Cotton label Novotex, available at Next, was the first in Europe to invest in such a plant.
Now designer Jeff Banks has used the system in a new range, Good Goods, exclusive to Tesco.
The 40-piece collection is made from ‘green cotton’, picked by hand to avoid chemical defoliants, and which does not rely on formaldehyde in the finishing process.
In partnership with the small dye company Kekko, Steilmann has managed to reduce by 70 per cent the amount of dyestuff used.
Natural dyes, pioneered in Italy, are, as yet, too expensive for the mass market and use too much water.
Potato starch, rather than harmful chemicals, is being used for scouring in the finishing process.
Across Europe there is a general movement away from pollutive scourers; in Britain this year, for example, 30 per cent of textile and clothing manufacturers will be using biodegradable agents and, by next year, estimate Friends of the Earth, this will rise to 80 per cent .
Only natural fibres are being experimented with and Steilmann's debut collection consists entirely of cotton denim, a mass market material.
The capsule collection of less than 20 pieces has been designed by his oldest daughter Britta.
FEARFUL that an eco-collection could be tarnished with a ‘muesli bar’ image, she purposefully chose ‘to show an avant-garde range that didn't look too eco because the consumer is not ready to do something for the environment at the expense of looking good’.
Britta had anticipated harsh design criticism but the fashion buyers and the press are pleasantly surprised.
The denim collection, offered in a wide range of single block colours from anthracite to blush pink, is short, sassy and young.
Targeted at the 14–40 market, it includes Alaia-inspired jackets, gilt-buttoned cardigans, Audrey Hepburn-style shifts, leggings, jeans, shorts and scoop-neck T-shirts.
Klaus Steilmann expected and has encountered criticism from environmental quarters and sceptics.
Radical Greens argue that the very rockbed of fashion, built on obsolescence which depends upon bi-annual change at the very least, is at odds with environmentalism.
They consider that unless the farming methods are tackled, no clothing industry can claim that its product is ecologically sound.
Cynics will claim that the group is merely pursuing niche marketing, particularly in a country where the green issue is so hotly debated.
But Steilmann is the first major manufacturer to tackle this issue in Europe; in America Esprit has launched its Ecollection and Levi has developed Nature jeans.
The company's prime concern is that when the collection is launched it is utterly free from criticism by even the most rigorous green scientists.
Katharine Hancock, trading manager of Friends of the Earth, says: ‘We welcome this kind of move from a mainstream manufacturer.’
Nevertheless, Steilmann does not seem eager to introduce this method of manufacturing into his many other clothes lines.
‘The world has never been changed overnight.
But I am convinced that a certain group of consumers will respond, especially the young.’
Letter to the Editor: Hunting fraternity helped to win
SIR — Peterborough's comments on the British Field Sports Society's election campaign (April 8) are unwarranted.
The results speak for themselves: Labour lost rural seats and could not take key marginals.
A £1 million campaign had been mounted against pro-field sports candidates.
It failed.
Many of our best supporters increased their majorities, and a new team of MPs committed to country sports has been elected.
Our opponents have money but little active support.
We have over a million shooters and hunt supporters who used their vote.
Peterborough suggested that we were ‘the only group to have fought a less impressive campaign than the Conservative Party’.
Until Thursday Labour might have shared that joke.
Perhaps it is time to recognise that the country-sport vote and lobby should also be taken seriously.
JOHN HOPKINSON Director British Field Sports Society London SE1
Letter to the Editor: Champions' vote
SIR — Having read each of Sebastian Faulks's ‘Essex Watch’ articles, may I point out that Essex Man noted that Kinnock is an atheist and that Major is a cricketer.
Essex are the county cricket champions.
Essex Man is no fool.
He voted for the cricketer.
WALTER ABLETT Chelmsford, Essex
Peterborough:
THE Earl of Pembroke's uncle, David Herbert, has sauntered into print with a volume of avuncular advice to his great-niece, Jemima — pictured with Pembroke and the author (left).
Relations and Revelations: Advice to Jemima, to be published in August by Peter Owen, is written from Tangier, where Herbert, 84, enjoys a colourful reputation as an engaging eccentric.
‘I've met a great number of very interesting people,’ he murmurs.
‘I had a first cousin called Lady Ursula Talbot who had an enormous nose.
She suddenly decided to have it chopped off.
It was the best thing that happened to her.
She went on to have two husbands and three lovers.’
Warming to his theme, Herbert, who keeps a bad-tempered parrot called Red Cross in his garden, continues: ‘I remember my parents going to stay with the Duchess of Portland.
When they arrived at the station there was a hired Daimler waiting, with a note on the windscreen.
It said: ‘I'm so sorry to send a hired car but the first eleven foremen are playing the first eleven chauffeurs and there's no-one else to drive you’.’
Letter to the Editor: Fore-bear
THE Canadian city of Winnipeg is planning to celebrate its connection with Winnie the Pooh, little known outside the esoteric realm of A A Milne specialists, by putting up a statue of the small bear.
The story begins in 1914 when Lt Harry Colebourn of the Canadian Veterinary Corps arrived in England with a small black bear which he named Winnie after his home town.
When posted to France he donated the bear to London Zoo where it was admired by Milne, who was inspired to name his fictional creation after the little fellow.
Now the the Winnie the Bear Commemorative Statue Committee is raising £18,000 for a Pooh statue in the City zoo.
‘Had Father brought Winnie back to Winnipeg we might never have had the Pooh stories,’ says Fred Colebourn, Harry's son.
‘I'm proud that this will be done, not only in Father's memory but to remind us of how the stories came to be.’
A PARTICULAR pleasure over the weekend was reading the latest issue of New Statesman and Society, once the publication one turned to for eloquent exposition of left-wing politics.
From the cover cartoon of John Major, labelled ‘Yesterday's man — the vanishing Prime Minister’ it is filled with ill-chosen invective.
Written before the election result in the clear expectation of a Labour victory, it even predicts Major's resignation honours.
Letter to the Editor: Wicked way
OLIVER Cromwell may be the local boy made good in Huntingdon but he is still unmentionable in Drogheda, as Lady Antonia Fraser recalled in a Lenten talk at Our Lady of Victories, west London.
Looking for the mound from where he stormed the Irish town while researching her biography of Cromwell, she asked a local priest for directions.
After crossing himself and pushing two nuns into a car, he was about to leave when Lady Antonia's companion intervened: ‘Excuse me Father,’ he said, ‘this lady is the daughter of the good Lord Longford — you know, Lord Longford — and she is making a study of the wicked usurper, Oliver Cromwell.’
With that, she recalls, ‘we were shown the way to the wicked usurper's mound straight away’.
OVERHEARD in a Maidstone Garden Centre.
Small boy to his father: ‘Wouldn't it be useful, Daddy, if they invented a 99p piece.’
Peterborough: Battle sights
THE FIRST Eurocentric war museum is to open on the site of the Battle of the Somme in July.
Called the Historial de la Grande Guerre, the exhibition of uniforms, armaments and assorted billy cans hopes to emphasise the similarities between nations.
German and British researchers have been drafted in to help their French colleagues achieve the right balance — a little known detail is that Germany was France's main supplier of manufactured goods before the war, albeit under the guise of French names.
The museum will gather together documents from all sides in the hope of presenting a balanced view for students.
‘It's quite amazing what turns up when one is least expecting it,’ says Laurie Milner of the Imperial War Museum, who has been collecting material here.
‘I even discovered a German Imperial Dragoon tunic which had Queen Victoria's cipher on the epaulettes.
She was its colonel-in-chief.’
AN American credit card company is making overtures to an unusual customer — an eight-year old cat.
According to New Scientist, the cat, from West Seattle, has been offered a credit limit of $10,000 and a cheque for $220 towards a a five-piece luggage set and diamond studded his ‘n’ hers watches.
Smiling publicans pull the customers
By Virginia Matthews, Consumer Correspondent
A CONGENIAL publican is more important to pub customers than the beers on sale, the opening hours and the prices charged, a survey discloses today.
Hospitality and good local gossip can overcome even the most savage brewery price increases and keep the bar full in a recession, it says.
Only 14 per cent of the 1,000 people surveyed by Mintel said price influenced their choice of pub, while 26 per cent said the landlord was the biggest attraction.
The Publican magazine welcomed the findings, saying a landlord's role in creating a welcoming atmosphere was ‘central to the success or failure’ of any establishment.
Mr Andrew Palmer, the editor, said ‘establishing eye-contact’ with waiting customers was just one of the qualities needed to be a success behind the bar.
‘There are those in the licensed trade who see their role in life as dispensing beer, but their real job is to dispense atmosphere,’ he said.
‘Enjoying banter with the regulars and making a special effort to make newcomers feel welcome is a tough job when the hours may be 11am to 11pm.
But this has always been a job for the sociable.’
Mr Bob Greybrook, landlord of the Green Dragon, Young's End, Essex, and a finalist in the Publican of the Year contest, said understanding the intricacies of new catering laws, such as the Food Safety Act, was another key skill.
‘It might be a reflection of the uncertain economic climate, but people want familiarity at the moment.
Now is not the time to rip down the wallpaper or tear down walls.’
he said.
‘There have to be rules about behaviour and hours, but they can be enforced without making enemies.’
Turnover in the country's 67,450 pubs is static or slightly declining at around £16.6 billion a year.
As a result, publicans are finding they needed to offer something extra to attract custom.
Twenty-six per cent of the drinkers polled by Mintel said that the congeniality of the landlord would influence their choice of pub, ranking it third, after location within walking distance and the availability of food.
Although only six per cent of 18 to 19-year-old pub goers say they prefer a congenial publican, putting the availability of real ale at the top of their list, a friendly welcome becomes markedly important as drinkers get older.,
Among the 35 to 44 age group, 27 per cent say a congenial publican is important, while among the 55-pluses, 35 per cent say the same.
Two-thirds of the drinkers surveyed said the location of a pub was the main reason for visiting it and 32 per cent prefer a pub that serves food at most times of the day.
A quarter of them said a pub would need to be full of ‘my type of people’ to warrant a visit.
No-smoking areas, plenty of seating, a childrens' room, live music and lower prices were also popular.
But despite the attempts by brewers to attract women and families, pubs are still dominated by men and young people, Mintel concludes.
Less than one in two women visits a pub regularly, compared with two-thirds of men.
Nearly 90 per cent of 18 and 19-year-olds are regulars, compared with less than one-quarter of the over-65s.
The typical customer is likely to be a skilled working class male under 34.
Way of the World: Health notes
By AUBERON WAUGH
ONLY a few days after the fourth Conservative victory in a row, it is slightly depressing to read that health authorities have allocated millions and millions of extra pounds to a campaign to persuade family practitioners to hand out free condoms to their patients, whether or not they are at high risk of contracting the new American disease.
One can understand why people at risk should wish to have these things, but not why they should expect to be given them free.
Condoms are not expensive, and there is a limit to the number anyone could wish to use.
They are much easier to buy, in most cases, than to collect from the doctor.
My own guess is that there was no significant demand for free condoms; nobody is going to go to the trouble of collecting free condoms who would not be prepared to buy them for himself.
All the doctors are achieving with their uncontrollable itch to boss, patronise and distribute public money is to establish an idiotic certainty in our morally confused age that condoms ought to be free because they are something the government wants us to use.
By the same token, I cannot help wondering what will be the result of a survey among half the 2,500 members of the British Psychological Society to establish how many of them have had sexual relations with their clients.
Obviously, I do not know the answer, nor do I trust the American claim that only one in 10 therapists over there has taken advantage of the opportunities afforded.
But it occurs to me that if they are having sex with their patients (or clients) regularly, this may well be the only useful thing they are doing for them.
The new pseudo-science of ‘counselling’, which seems to have taken over from the greater absurdity of analysis, may not be as destructive as its predecessor but it, too, has many of the characteristics of an enclosed cult like the Plymouth Brethren or the Moonies.
I should say it demonstrably does more harm than good.
Perhaps the Health Service should stick to dispensing free condoms.
Way of the World: Things that go bump
By AUBERON WAUGH
WHAT are we to make of a claim by the Surrey Wildlife Trust that more than a million wild animals and birds are ‘probably’ killed every year on the roads of Britain?
Perhaps we should fence off all the roads, down to a depth of several feet and a height of many yards.
Although this might discourage rabbits and deer — even the occasional burrowing lizard or jumping kangaroo — it would not prevent a bird from alighting on the road.
If roads were contained within a perspex tunnel and regularly patrolled by wildlife wardens, armed with splints and bandages and trained in every kind of veterinary first aid, I suppose it might go some way towards reducing this tragic toll.
But nothing will really be solved until we have a government with the moral courage to ban driving entirely.
Until that moment arrives, we must go on running over these creatures with as brave a face as we can muster.
Surrey Wildlife provides a list of all the squashed corpses which have been spotted on the county's roads over the years: grey squirrel, rabbit, hedgehog, blackbird, stoat, roe deer, badger, magpie, rat…
We experienced motorists can take all these beasts in our stride.
It is the occasional unknown specimen which can prove unnerving, the creature which has never been seen before in any swamp or tropical rainforest, mountain cave, zoo or bestiary…
Golf: Couples' nerve holds to clinch the Masters
By Michael Williams at Augusta
FRED COUPLES gave the appearance of being the coollest man in town yesterday when, with a final round of 70, he won the Masters at Augusta National, beating the evergreen Raymond Floyd by two strokes.
It was for Couples, already top of the world rankings, his first major championship and he did it in the same accomplished manner that has already marked two earlier victories on the American tour.
Indeed, he has now won three of his last six tournaments, in two more of which he has been second.
His total of 275 was 13 under par, four outside the record, and he also failed narrowly to become the first man to score in the 60s in every round.
Couples's task was made all the easier by a sad collapse of Craig Parry, who had led after three rounds but flinched, it seemed, from the prospect of becoming the first Australian to win the Masters.
His putting completely deserted him, three-putts on three successive greens early in this last round and in the end nothing better than a 78 which dropped him far back down the field.
There was sympathy too for Floyd, who at 49 had the chance of becoming the oldest champion and now runner-up for the second time in three years.
Hard though he tried, Floyd could make nothing of the inward half and Couples, having gone to the front with a birdie at the ninth, was never caught again.
Nick Faldo, who after an outward half of 33, had closed to within two strokes of the lead, was in with a fine chance but he could not maintain it.
A bad drive down the 10th, from which he was lucky to make five, stopped him in his tracks while his double-bogey five at the 12th was the last straw.
Even so, Faldo, with a 71, still finished top European, overtaking Ian Woosnam, who had shared the lead after two rounds and was still sharing it after three holes in the third on Saturday when a storm interrupted play for three hours.
It broke Woosnam's concentration and also impaired his confidence.
He was never the same player again, still in with a chance going into the last round but then fading away with a 75.
He had certainly not been confident when he arrived in Augusta and in the end his suspicions about his form were confirmed.
But at least he went all four days and was there on his merits when he presented Couples with his green jacket.
Couples, who won $270,000, did not start well.
He hooked badly off the second tee, was unplayable and took six.
He was also badly bunkered at the fifth to drop another shot.
It was, however, his last serious error.
There was another error, much later, at the 12th where he was very lucky to see his tee shot somehow stay on the steep bank above Rae's Creek.
From there he chipped up and saved par.
But for me it was Couples's play of the long 15th that marked him down as a most worthy champion.
He had slightly pulled his drive and was half blocked out by some pine trees.
Leading at that stage by two strokes, the conservative thing to do was lay up and settle for a five.
Instead he went flat out for the green and hit a magificent draw, or even a hook, on to and over the green.
He was not rewarded with the birdie four he deserved but it did not matter.
Two more solid pars followed, while at the 18th he made another despite driving into one of those two fairway bunkers.
Sandy Lyle had set the fashion for getting home in two from there when he won in 1988 and though Couples did not, like Lyle, make a birdie, he was only a whisker away from it.
Despite a grim weather forecast the previous day, with the threat of thunderstorms, it turned out to be a sunny day — and it was quickly blessed with a record-breaking inward half of 29 by Mark Calcavecchia.
It began with a three at the 10th, where he hit a four-iron to 20ft and holed the putt.
But the fireworks were reserved for the last six holes, each of which he birdied.
All nine of the European professionals in the field had made the cut and the biggest disappointment was Severiano Ballesteros, who, for the first time in his 16 appearances in the Masters, involving 60 rounds, failed to break 80.
Incredibly for him, he took 81 with two sevens.
He finished last of the Europeans, two behind David Feherty, who had a 70 for his best round of the tournament.
Jose-Maria Olazabal finished on a better note with a 70 and was five under par for the last three rounds, which partially made up for his first round of 76.
Colin Montgomerie finished one ahead of Olazabal after a last round of 70 and thinks he has benefited much from his four weeks in the United States.
So, too, has Steve Richardson, who had a 71 for a total of 285.
Because of a three-hour storm on Saturday, the third round was not completed until early yesterday morning, Parry completing a 69 for a one-stroke lead from Couples, two from Floyd and three from Baker-Finch.
Woosnam, who was playing with Parry, salvaged a 73 which left him sharing fifth place with Price, four off the lead, which was rather better than it might have been.
Having played so well for the first two rounds and then the first three holes of the third, by which time he was tieing for the lead with Parry at 10 under par, Woosnam came to grief immediately after the Saturday storm.
Resuming at the short fourth hole, he promptly took a double bogey five, leaving a bunker shot in the sand, and then following it with a six at the fifth, where he hooked into some bushes and had to go back to the tee.
At 8 am yesterday, Woosnam resumed play on the 14th green, having refused to hole a putt of 4ft the previous night in case he missed it.
Nearly 12 hours later, he did sink it and then made a four at the 15th to keep in touch with Parry.
But the true test of the Masters is always the last round and, even more so, the final nine holes — Amen corner and all that.
Golf: Little big man shows his stature Ian Ridley watches the champion weather the storm with mixture of shots to mount a spirited defence
By IAN RIDLEY
THE MASTERS champion said before the event that he didn't know what he was going to do with himself until he relinquished his title.
The answer quickly emerged: make a spirited attempt to hold on to it.
Ian Woosnam came to Augusta National playing, in his own words, like a 24-handicapper, though those of us in that category just wish we could spray the ball similarly around the practice ground or putt it so waywardly.
This was in contrast, of course, to such as Jose-Maria Olazabal, who was the European in form.
Silly game, golf.
Woosnam feared that he would miss the cut, then have to sit around watching re-runs on TV of The Lucille Ball Show until it was time to help slip the green jacket on the new champion.
His performance yesterday morning after his weather-weary display late on Saturday proved his quality, on a course designed to discover just that.
‘I've a feeling it's inside left,’ said his caddie Phil Morbey as Woosnam, sleep still in his eyes, emerged with the dawn patrol for that four-footer on the 14th.
Down it went, an inside left as good as Denis Law.
The birdie at the long 15th was almost routine.
On Friday half the field of 82 beat par there; on Saturday, post-cut, 35 of the 63 did so.
To the 24-handicapper the green looks like a canal bank, so narrow is it, so much water is there surrounding it, but to these plus men it was score-making territory.
Before the fourth round, that was.
Woosnam should further have improved his score at the 17th but putted feebly one just longer than a 5ft 4in Woosie.
At 9.15 am, after his sand save on the 18th, he said: ‘I'm going for another kip.’
To wake up a Woosnam who has struggled on some dull courses and slow greens recently, it took a demanding course and fast greens, even if neither were as demanding nor fast as perhaps in previous years.
That has been a measure of the little big man; the best brought out the best in him.
Having answered his own question of whether he would make the cut, he proved himself capable of denying the one that he was a one-major wonder.
Having seen Faldo retain the title in 1990, Woosnam was aware that lightning could strike twice, metaphorically on this course as well as literally, as it had done on Saturday and threatened to do again yesterday.
As he strode down the 18th in the morning alongside Parry, the pair looking like the leaders of the Lilliput Open, he appeared every inch of his 64 (to Parry's 66) a champion.
They were certainly striking a blow for short people.
This week Woosnam was averaging 288 yards with his driver, Parry 257.
The problem for short people was to see them over all the people standing in front in the gallery.
Why is it that when you have been guarding a place as the players loom into view, Luciano Pavarotti comes and stands in front of you?
Other questions abounded on a delicious day.
Was it Parry's match?
Was Freddie ready?
Was Ray Floyd about to follow the lead of George Foreman, who beat the British-born heavyweight Alex Stewart the previous night, and fortify the over-40s?
The back nine of that final round would again decide.
They are deemed by many players as the less difficult half, that if a good score can be put together here, it can be enhanced on the back nine.
That, though, is to negate the mental difficulty of the latter stretch, especially through the watery Amen Corner holes, so named because if you put a ball in the drink, you can say Amen to your chances.
It is here, where the azaleas bloom in a sort of pinky and purply show, that the cheers of the crowds ahead echo through the pine woods to put further stress on the leaders.
It is here, when Woosnam drove into the creek at the 13th last year, that the stress told, too, on a heckling crowd desperate for a home win.
The impeccable behaviour, as it was certainly through three rounds this year, was momentarily abandoned in the drama.
It is here that a massive scoreboard confronts the players, the numbers changed slowly, tantalisingly, by hand.
Elsewhere, the boards are easy neither to find nor follow, but that seems to heighten the anticipation and drama of it all.
The numbers are in green for par and above, for ‘go’ as in you might as well go home, and red for below par, for ‘stop’as in you can stop here for the last two rounds.
Had he missed the cut, Woosnam would not even have had that to watch on Saturday, since the network went off the air with about an hour's play left in a move that would have angered Great Britain.
He was grateful he had no need to tune in.
He was back in the picture himself.
SOCCER COMMENTARY Barons who ensure herd is not heard
By Bryon Butler
ONE of the oldest, emptiest and most quoted lines of sporting twaddle is that professional football is ‘The People's Game’.
It isn't and hasn't been since players first received silver for kicking a ball more than a century ago.
‘The People’, endearingly, believe it to be true.
Among those who glibly encouraged the notion was J B Priestley, who wrote of football turning its fans into ‘a new community, all brothers together for an hour and a half…an altogether more splendid kind of life’.
One herd, one democracy, one voice; the true apogee of the game.
It is a notion which professional football has always been happy to promote.
There is profit in the fallacy.
But the truth is that the game at this level is as feudal in its structure as any mediaeval polity.
Its superiors and vassals are clearly defined.
The highest court of all is still the Football Association with their brocaded traditions, honest principles and missionary zeal.
But the real power is in the tightly clenched fists of the Lords of the Manor — the club chairmen and their directors.
The players are necessary for public ceremony and ‘people’ are needed to provide homage and revenue.
The barons have yet to devise a way of providing football without footballers and loyal fans are required to pay admission money, just as law-abiding citizens must pay their taxes.
Several admirable but narrow-banded supporters' organisations rail and rattle at the iniquity of it all and occasionally they are even permitted to have a say at the distant end of a long table.
But, of course, they are not listened to.
One herd; but never heard.
When was the last time the game's robber barons made a decision of their own free will to improve the lot of the supporter?
When was the last time, without duress or obligation, that a club chairman asked his directors: ‘What can we do to improve the lot of our fans?’
Right now, with grudging resignation, the lords of football's manors are beginning to spend more than £400 million on their grounds.
But only because of the awful calamity of Hillsborough and only because a man of the intellect and vision of Lord Justice Taylor was asked for his opinion.
Remember his report?
‘Football supporters are invited by clubs for entertainment and enjoyment.
Often, however, the facilities provided for them have been lamentable, not merely basic but squalid — safety and comfort has not been regarded as a priority — a prevailing stench of stewed onions — in stark contrast to the different world, only yards away, in the board room and the lucrative executive boxes.’
Taylor even mentioned ‘primitive’ lavatories — a long-running source of complaint.
More than 30 years ago BBC Radio carried out a ‘Which?’ -type survey of football ground toilets.
A reporter was delegated to sample them, ‘live’ on the air, and his echoey despatches would begin: ‘I'm standing…
’ He should have been voted broadcaster of the year.
Significantly, too, Taylor also mentioned the bleak relationship between boardroom and terrace.
‘It is legitimate to wonder,’ he wrote, ‘whether the directors are genuinely interested in the welfare of their grass-roots supporters.
‘Boardroom struggles for power, wheeler-dealing in the buying and selling of shares and, indeed, of whole clubs sometimes suggest that those involved are more interested in the personal financial benefits or social status of being a director than of directing the club in the interests of its customers.’
Taylor might have been wildly and dangerously wrong, of course, but on the whole he has got where he is (he is now Lord Chief Justice) by getting things exactly right.
He heard evidence from nearly 200 witnesses after the Hillsborough disaster — and ‘The People's Game’ was a phrase which did not occur to him.
But it is not only brick toilets and eau d'oignon which separate masters and serfs.
The Government, local authorities, police, sponsors, advertisers, pools companies, kit makers, and television all have their say in running the game.
And what's next?
A game on the telly every night of the week?
Pauses in the action for ‘a word from our sponsors’?
Players in make-up or lacey blouses?
Terraces, yes, but only if supporters stand on their heads?
There is still scope for this funny old game to become even funnier.
What might happen, however, if the fans really got their act together?
What kind of strength might they have if they harnessed the determination and cunning which went into the anti-bond protests, the bright and imaginative minds which contribute to fanzines and the patience and good humour shown when visiting supporters are ordered to stand in the rain for half an hour after the final whistle?
What if they formed a truly national organisation which was properly funded (an opportunity here for an enterprising sponsor), muscularly motivated and articulately led?
We know what CAMRA did for real ale and there is even a chance — isn't there?— that Greenpeace will save us from ourselves.
Soccer: McClair takes first prize RUMBELOWS CUP FINAL
United halfway to completing Ferguson's spring shopping list
By Colin Gibson
Nottingham Forest0 Manchester United1 MANCHESTER United filled the last remaining gap in the Old Trafford trophy cabinet, as far as domestic competitions are concerned, at Wembley yesterday by winning the League Cup for the first time.
But having collected the first item on Alex Ferguson's spring shopping list they hope it will prove to be the lever to rid themselves of a 25-year burden.
With the greatest respect to Rumbelows, and the 76,000 packed inside Wembley, United hope that their success yesterday will soon be dwarfed by the achievement of lifting the First Division title for the first time since 1967.
But the efficiency and the ease with which they brushed aside Nottingham Forest's disappointing challenge at Wembley will be the source of great encouragement for Mr Ferguson's side.
From the moment that Brian McClair, the first player Mr Ferguson signed when he took over at Old Trafford, put United ahead after 14 minutes there appeared only one winner.
The goal was the perfect illustration of the reasons why Manchester United are close to establishing themselves as the country's outstanding side.
This competition has eluded United since its inception in 1961, and after last season's defeat by Sheffield Wednesday there must have been doubts that they would ever win it.
But those worries were dispelled when Pallister, freed from defensive duties, delivered an incisive pass to the feet of McClair, who decided to use Giggs to prise open the Forest defence.
The young Welshman shaped as though to shoot and in doing so committed Walker.
A huge gap appeared in the heart of the Forest area and Giggs simply squared the ball to McClair and invited him to score.
Despite the arrival of Williams, handed the ultimately impossible task of replacing the injured Pearce, McClair calmly claimed his 23rd goal of the season.
From then on United were in command.
After the street brawl against Manchester City last Tuesday this seemed like a gentle Sunday afternoon stroll in the North London sunshine.
Given that this competition — which Forest have monopolised in the last four years after playing in three of the last four finals, winning two of them — offered Brian Clough's only route to Europe next year they appeared unusually indifferent.
Although Keane continues to develop into the most potent midfield player in English football he found himself short of powerful reinforcements yesterday.
Gemmill found the occasion a little too grand for him, while Black's performances have been buried under the weight of what appears to be an inflated transfer fee.
It meant that Ince, who again succeeded in filling the void left by the absence of Robson, and Phelan could hunt down Keane and eventually run him out of the game.
United might have faced further distractions had Pearce, consigned to a watching role alongside his manager, been maurauding along the left flank.
But without Pearce there was never the pace in a Forest side, who looked distinctly foot-weary, to test Schmeichel.
Clough jnr was generally an irrelevance; once more, it seems that he struggles when faced by defenders who can react faster than he thinks.
The only Clough contribution came after just six minutes when he released Keane.
The Irishman's shot thudded into Schmeichel's chest.
A curling free-kick in the last quarter of the game, when Forest stirred from their slumbers, drifted into the side-netting from Clough.
But that was about it.
For an instant, 10 minutes from the end, Clough must have thought his chance was coming when Sheringham wrestled his way past the otherwise dominant Pallister.
Sheringham crossed low towards the unmarked Clough but the opening disappeared as quickly as it appeared, Schmeichel diving bravely to whip away the ball.
And that was about Forest's contribution to an afternoon when they were content to file back and hope that United's desire to win the trophy with a flourish might leave them vulnerable.
But United were patient.
They were prepared to ferry the ball from blue shirt to blue shirt and in the process frustrate Nottingham Forest.
Had it not been for a diving goal-line clearance from Laws, who replaced Charles after 23 minutes, McClair might have had a second.
Hughes created another moment of panic between Marriott, playing only his seventh game in the Forest goal, and Wassall.
They collided, Hughes sensed McClair was in a better position to punish the error, but Laws recovered.
Sharpe, a member of United's triumvirate of wingers, emerged as a substitute for Kanchelskis, who had been asked to exploit the absence of Pearce, and almost scored with his first attack.
The arrival of Sharpe's creative instincts were a measure of United's attacking strength.
It was a dimension to their play Forest could never match.
The celebrations that marked United's third major Cup — four if you count the European Super Cup — in two calendar years could just be a rehearsal if they land the First Division title in the next three weeks.
Soccer: Tribute to missing captain
By William Johnson
STEVE BRUCE yesterday described lifting the Rumbelows Cup as the proudest moment of his life, then suggested the honour of being the first Manchester United captain to do so should have gone to Bryan Robson.
Robson was ruled out after a week-long struggle to overcome a niggling calf injury in the hope of helping United put right their Wembley disappointment in last year's final, when they surprisingly succumbed to Second Division Sheffield Wednesday.
Robson is now even more determined to assist United in the overriding ambition of bringing the League title to Old Trafford for the first time in 25 years.
Alex Ferguson, United's manager, regards Robson's presence in four of his team's remaining six League matches as a realistic target and the captain is confident of playing in the first of them, at home to Southampton on Thursday.
That fixture gives United the opportunity of regaining the League leadership from Leeds, who have only four matches to play.
Robson said: ‘At the start of every season you set out to win a trophy.
We've done that.
Now we can concentrate on the one we are really after.’
Mr Ferguson, who has now guided United to three trophies in 5½ years since taking over from Ron Atkinson, thought United missed Robson less than Nottingham Forest missed Stuart Pearce.
Brian Clough's assistant, Ronnie Fenton, agreed.
‘He's half the team,’ said Mr Fenton of the injured England captain, ‘but Brett Williams did a good job in his place.’
Mr Fenton claimed Forest were the better team but Mr Ferguson was hardly likely to agree.
‘We were far too complacent last year and knew if we under-performed against a team like Forest we would have been totally thrashed,’ Mr Ferguson said.
Brian McClair, who scored the only goal, was named man of the match.
Soccer: Moran shrugs off omen FA CUP
Liverpool slip up again as they prepare for Portsmouth's shooting and shouting in semi-final replay
By William Johnson
WHEN Ronnie Moran was first thrust into the Liverpool manager's chair 14 months ago, the team he inherited from Kenny Dalglish proceeded to lose three successive matches before getting back on an even keel to prepare for the arrival of Graeme Souness.
Mr Moran, Anfield's longest-serving stalwart, found himself unexpectedly entering a second term of caretaker command last weekend when Mr Souness disclosed that major heart surgery was necessary to keep a 38-year-old frame in peak condition.
The Liverpool players have again given their temporary manager a less than encouraging welcome, losing from a winning position at home to Wimbledon on Wednesday and then surrendering meekly 1–0 at Aston Villa on Saturday.
Their third match under Mr Moran's guidance is the FA Cup semi-final replay against Second Division Portsmouth tonight but any hint of deja vu was countered by him declaring: ‘I don't believe in omens like that.’
He added: ‘We are going into a Cup semi-final.
The players won't need much lifting for that.
If I have to lift them for a match of that importance then I might as well walk out of the job.’
Liverpool have been without five of the powerful line-up Mr Souness selected for the first match against Portsmouth in the intervening League games.
Only McManaman, with a serious knee injury, will still be on the sidelines when they return to Villa Park tonight.
A shaky defence will be strengthened by the return of David Burrows and captain Mark Wright, while their attacking options will increase considerably when Ian Rush and John Barnes are recalled.
All four trained on Saturday morning and again yesterday.
The condition of England full-back Rob Jones was less clear, though.
He took a blow on his right leg and missed the second half against Villa.
Liverpool's defeat, which threatens to prevent them finishing in the top five for the first time since their initial season back in the First Division 30 years ago, was again due to the unpredictable goalkeeping of Grobbelaar.
Having ensured that a sterile first half ended goalless by making a tremendous reaction save to thwart Olney, Grobbelaar, who has been walking a selection tightrope all season, then allowed a far from ferocious low shot by Daley at the end of a thrilling 50-yard burst to slip under him and into the net.
Mr Moran resisted what must have been considerable temptation to rebuke Grobbelaar in a manner similar to Mr Souness's outburst after the recent defeat at Sheffield United.
Instead, he left Grobbelaar's critics in no doubt that there will be no dramatic changes in that department tonight.
Soccer: Smith knows the score
By Brian Oliver
SHOOTING and shouting will be the key factors for Portsmouth at Villa Park tonight as they attempt to finish with a bang in a season which, after promising so much, could end in double disappointment.
Jim Smith, the manager whose shrewd tactical plan stifled Liverpool in last week's 1–1 draw at Highbury, has called for a 10 per cent improvement from his players in tonight's replay — and more of the same from the supporters.
Mr Smith has pinpointed the area from which he wants a better return.
Colin Clarke, Martin Kuhl and Alan McLoughlin wasted six scoring chances between them at Highbury, and Mr Smith said: ‘I've watched the match video over and over again and realised how many chances we missed.
The improvement must come in finishing.’
Clarke, rested for Saturday's low-key 2–0 win over Grimsby which keeps alive faint hopes of a place in the play-offs, will lead the forward line alone once more, as Mr Smith relies on the same game plan of tight marking in defence and overcrowding the midfield.
That means when openings do materialise — and Mr Smith believes there will be plenty against the current Liverpool side — the pressure will be on winger Darren Anderton, and midfield goalscorers Chris Burns, McLoughlin, Kuhl and, if he plays, Warren Aspinall.
Aspinall, who scored against Grimsby, is a contender, with Darryl Powell and possibly Steve Wigley, for the place vacated by the injured Mark Chamberlain.
Left back John Beresford is expected to recover from a hamstring strain, and if he fails a late fitness test Ray Daniel, impressive on Saturday in his first start for 11 months, will take his place.
Mr Smith, whose team are 6–1 outsiders for the Cup, agrees with the bookmakers in rating Liverpool even stronger favourites tonight than they were for the first meeting.
The players are hoping for another lift from the supporters, who gave their team a tremendous welcome and out-sang Liverpool's followers at Highbury.
The 10,576 crowd on Saturday, as subdued as the players, was 7,000 short of the number of tickets Portsmouth have sold for tonight.
‘The supporters were magnificent at Highbury,’ said Mr Smith.
‘They gave the team so much strength.
To be honest, we weren't sure we'd sell all our tickets for the replay, but they all went by Thursday and if we get the same backing, we must have a chance.’
Young defenders Kit Symons and Andy Awford were more positive.
They both predict a Portsmouth win, Symons opting for 1–0.
Portsmouth could not have had an easier preparation than they had against a flimsy Grimsby side.
Portsmouth (probable): Knight; Awford, Beresford, McLoughlin, Symons, Burns, Neill, Kuhl, Clarke, Aspinall, Anderton.
Soccer: Coventry walking tightrope again
By Dave Horridge
Notts County1
Coventry City0
THE danger of trying to limp to safety on goalless draws was graphically illustrated by Coventry's last-gasp defeat which could have them hanging on to the last day of the season before knowing their fate.
They were two minutes away from their sixth barren scoreline in manager Don Howe's 15-match reign when Thomas's shot took a violent deflection off Sansom to leave goalkeeper Ogrizovic moving to his left while the ball sailed inside his right hand post.
Ironically, it followed the one spell in which either side promised a goal with Notts County's Cherry making the only serious saves from Furlong and Flynn.
With Coventry having scored only nine goals since Mr Howe took charge it is obvious where their problem lies and it is hard to see how they can solve it.
When neighbouring Aston Villa endured a similar run recently Ron Atkinson remained confident he had the players to end it.
Mr Howe has no such reassurance, particularly with Gallacher absent for five games and no immediate sign of a return.
As he readily admits: ‘We just cannot score goals.
We still have a six-point buffer but I expect us to have to go to the last day of the season.’
In terms of the Midlands' representation in the Premier League the game was wasted as Notts County's victory is unlikely to save them while the three points would have gone a long way to ensuring Coventry's place.
Neil Warnock, County's manager, conceded: ‘The winning goal was the first break we have had since Christmas but it is highly unlikely to keep us up.
‘This has been the most disappointing season of my managerial career as it was my ambition to lead Notts County to the Premier League.’
Coventry have four games in which to extend their 25-year tenure in the top flight with Mr Howe admitting they are short of confidence.
Next Saturday they have a home game with Everton, who are also struggling to score, and receive West Ham, a fixture Mr Howe describes as ‘interesting’.
He will be hoping his team can perform their annual Houdini act but cannot produce the answer as to who will provide the goals.
Soccer: Cantona skill finds favour with the fans
By Colin Malam
Leeds3 Chelsea0
ERIC CANTONA seems to have found his spiritual home at Elland Road.
After six appearances and three goals for Leeds, the former enfant terrible of French football has been taken to flinty Yorkshire hearts as though he were one of their own.
The fans have created a special Anglo-Gallic chant for him, and they call for his reinstatement when he is not in the team, as was the case here for all but the last six minutes.
In that short time, though, he sealed the love affair with a sensational goal.
Given some space by Strachan's quick throw-in, Cantona bamboozled the Chelsea defence with his footwork before volleying a cross-shot into the roof of the net on the run.
‘A very special goal,’ Leeds manager Howard Wilkinson rightly called it.
It was just what his team needed at the end of a game in which they had laboured to overcome an unambitious Chelsea.
Conceivably, it could even be the spark to provide the super-charged finish to the season Leeds need to beat Manchester United to the title.
While the Mancunians, a point behind but with two games in hand, face four League games in seven days beginning on Thursday, Leeds have 15 days in which to complete their programme, away to Liverpool and Sheffield United and home to Coventry and Norwich.
But back to Cantona.
The reason he did not start this game was that, as Mr Wilkinson put it ‘he did not get a kick’, when Leeds were beaten 4–0, their heaviest defeat of the season, by Manchester City a week earlier.
‘The goal Eric scored makes him attractive to me,’ said the Leeds manager.
‘And the fact that he never got a kick at Maine Road, and the sort of game he watched today, makes English football very attractive to him.
It's crazy, isn't it?’
Many Continental footballers, tired of regular walk-overs in their own game, have been attracted by the weekly, varying challenge that English football presents, and this is what Mr Wilkinson was referring to, presumably.
Cantona has become so attractive to Leeds that they are expected this week to offer him a two or three-year contract, and Nimes, his French club, a further £800,000, when the striker's loan period expires at the end of the season.
On Saturday, Mr Wilkinson's generosity extended to the referee, Neil Midgley, whose decision not to send off Chelsea's Steve Clarke for a blatant professional foul on Gordon Strachan was the worst of many questionable rulings.
What the Leeds manager appeared to be saying was that, while it was a matter of opinion whether Mr Midgley used his discretion correctly, he was glad to see a referee not sticking rigidly to the letter of the law.
‘Would he have said that if it had been 0–0?’ asked some hard-bitten locals pertinently.
Although Rod Wallace opened the scoring from Strachan's pull-back 10 minutes into the second half, nervous, unconvincing Leeds could not be sure of victory until both Lee Chapman and Cantona scored in a hectic final three minutes.
Chapman eventually forced the ball over the line after Cantona had surprised him by passing instead of shooting when McAllister, released from emergency duty at right-back, crossed from the left.
Then came Cantona's piece de resistance.
Soccer: Greene has four-goal party as Wycombe open up gap
By PETER ERNEST
DENNIS GREENE, Wycombe's £15,000 signing from Chelmsford in February, scored all his team's goals in the 4–0 win at Altrincham to put them three points clear of Colchester in the race for the GM Vauxhall Conference title, writes Peter Ernest.
Martin O'Neill, Wycombe's manager, said: ‘The result has given us a real chance of the championship as long as we can keep the momentum going.’
Greene, 25, who completed his hat-trick before half-time, added his fourth goal in the 73rd minute to give Wycombe their seventh consecutive Conference victory.
Wycombe and Colchester each have seven games left to decide who goes into the Fourth Division next season.
Tomorrow Mr O'Neill hopes to field an unchanged side for the trip to Macclesfield while Colchester entertain Slough.
It was at Macclesfield on Friday that Colchester clinched their place in the Vauxhall FA Trophy final, where they will meet Witton Albion at Wembley on Sunday May 10.
On Saturday, Witton beat Marine 4–1 to complete a 6–3 aggregate victory in their semi-final clash at the Merseyside club's ground.
Witton's scorers were Karl Thomas, Jim McCluskie, Mike Halliday and Mike Lutkevich.
Soccer: Dismissals hit new high
EIGHT sendings off in the Barclays League on Saturday took the season's tally in domestic competitions to 246, passing the record high of 242 in 1982–83.
The total comprises 211 dismissals in the Barclays League, 16 in the FA Cup, 13 in the Rumbelows League Cup, three in the ZDS Cup and three in the Autoglass Trophy.
Five clubs top the list of ‘sinners’ each with six dismissals — Chelsea, Tranmere, Darlington, Doncaster and Lincoln.
Soccer: Bassett deepens Everton gloom
By Christopher Davies
IF THE league had started on Jan 1, Arsenal and Sheffield United would be battling for the Championship, not Manchester United and Leeds.
They are the two most successful sides of 1992 and if Dave Bassett's improving United are the surprise packet of the year, Everton, who they beat 2–0 on Saturday, must rank among the biggest disappointments.
Howard Kendall's first full season back in charge has gone badly and he said ominously after the latest home loss: ‘Certain players are not playing to their strengths.
After a few years in management, you know who they are, and it will be put right.’
On the evidence of what was seen at Goodison Park, neither side has any outstanding strengths or glaring weaknesses and the whole puzzling equation simply comes down to a matter of confidence.
How else could United manager Dave Bassett call up a faithful old servant from his Wimbledon days like Alan Cork and see him kill off Everton with his first goal for the club?
Cork's late strike made sure of a top 10 place for the first time since promotion —‘and a nice bonus, judging from the long faces in our boardroom,’ grinned Mr Bassett.
Sheffield Wednesday did their hopes of European football next season a power of good by beating Manchester City 2–0 with goals by Hirst and Worthington.
City player-manager Peter Reid offered no excuses.
He said: ‘It was a game where we were second best in every department and we got the result we deserved.
Only the hard work of my back four and my goalkeeper kept the scoreline down.’
Alan McDonald was sent off for a second bookable offence as Queens Park Rangers lost 2–1 to Tottenham.
Referee Gurnam Singh was the focus of attention afterwards and Rangers manager Gerry Francis said: ‘I don't want to say much about the referee, otherwise I'll get in trouble.
But it has been said before we should have professional referees — the sooner it's sorted out the better.
‘I'd like to see the best refs take the best games.
Like players, referees should have to work their way up to this level.
Not many people want to be refs — there's a lot of hassle and not much money.
A bit more money would attract more people into it and raise the standards.’
Rangers had taken the lead through Sinton before Gray equalised in the second half, Gordon Durie grabbing the winner 11 minutes from time although Spurs manager Peter Shreeves admitted his team were lucky to win.
Coventry slumped to a last-gasp 1–0 defeat at Notts County which could have them hanging on to the last day of the season before knowing their fate.
They were two minutes away from their sixth barren scoreline in manager Don Howe's 15-match reign when Thomas's shot took a violent deflection off Sansom to leave goalkeeper Ogrizovic moving to his left while the ball sailed inside his right hand post.
Oldham's 5–1 win over Luton was their best of the season although David Pleat refused to concede his team were relegation certainties.
He said: ‘We're not down yet — there's still five games to play.’
Soccer: Graham builds for future success
By Paul Newman
Arsenal4
Crystal Palace1 ARSENAL, back to the form which earned them two championships in three years, will use the rest of what has been a disappointing season for them to lay the foundations for future challenges.
They were in irresistible form on Saturday, their status as the First Division's leading goalscorers providing ample evidence of attacking flair allied to their now restored traditional defensive solidity, and thrilled the country's biggest crowd of the day — an impressive 36,016 — with football of the highest quality.
The season's climax is far from irrelevant for Arsenal.
They will earn a UEFA Cup place if they finish third and Manchester United win the League to add to yesterday's Rumbelows Cup success, and manager George Graham, who had to leave David O'Leary out of his 13 on Saturday because of terrorist threats towards the player and his family, is already chasing more illustrious ambitions.
He said: ‘I'm not easily satisfied.
We're working at things which the players might not appreciate at the moment but they will in 10 years time when they look back on what they have achieved.
Arsenal will be the place to come to win things.’
The man most responsible for the demolition of an ordinary looking Palace side is the perfect testimony of Mr Graham's ideals.
Paul Merson is playing with a maturity which augers well for a rich future to an England career that started so well in Czechoslovakia last month.
He scored his first senior hat-trick and stole the thunder of Ian Wright, who was anxious — too anxious, said Mr Graham — to impress against his former team-mates.
Not that Wright was anonymous.
He set up Merson's first with a bit of right wing trickery after Palace had had the audacity to take an eighth minute lead and then laid on Campbell's stunning left foot volley, Arsenal's third, all in the first 16 minutes.
Merson added his third in the 63rd minute.
Steve Coppell, the Palace manager, pointed out that Arsenal remain the only team they have not beaten since they returned to the First Division.
‘We used to have the same problem with Shrewsbury.
I think I prefer losing to Arsenal.’
Soccer: Gascoigne on his way back
PAUL GASCOIGNE could be in line for a long awaited comeback in Tottenham's last game of the season against Manchester United at Old Trafford on May 2.
It would probably be Gascoigne's last appearence as a Spurs player before his proposed £5.5 million transfer to Lazio, subject to a medical on his damaged knee ligaments.
‘It's a calculated decision for everyone involved, but Paul could play in that game,’ said Tottenham manager Peter Shreeves.
Soccer: Charlton succeed in the face of hardship SECOND DIVISION
Big-spenders are overshadowed by the club with no home and no money
By CHRISTOPHER DAVIES
WHILE expensively-assembled Blackburn and Derby faltered in the Second Division promotion race, Charlton, who have no home or money to spend on players, continued their unlikely attempt to return to the First Division with a 2–1 win at FA Cup finalists Sunderland, writes Christopher Davies.
It was Charlton's 11th away success — a League best — and their achievements are all the more commendable coming in the wake of last year's relegation, the departure of manager Lennie Lawrence, the on-off move back to the Valley and the fact that they have not been able to compete in the transfer market.
The Manager-of-the-Year award will presumably go to either Alex Ferguson or Howard Wilkinson, but the way Steve Gritt and Alan Curbishley have fashioned a promotion side in testing circumstances makes the Charlton joint-managers equally worthy of their profession's most prestigious award.
Sunderland may be playing at Wembley next month but they may also be relegated from the Second Division despite having games in hand.
Gary Bennett gave the home side the lead but defensive errors allowed Robert Lee and Scott Minto to extend Charlton's unbeaten run to seven games.
Kenny Dalglish has spent £5 million on eight players to strengthen Blackburn, but Watford's mainly home-produced side shone in the sunshine at Vicarage Road as Rovers were beaten 2–1.
Darren Bazeley scored the Watford goals for Blackburn's fourth successive defeat.
They have now won only one in 10 games after leading the division with games in hand in February.
Derby, who have bought a number of players recently, could only draw 2–2 with relegation-threatened Oxford.
But promotion and relegation issues were overshadowed by referee Terry Holbrook, who booked seven players and awarded two penalties in a game that was competitive but never dirty.
Ipswich's 3–2 win over Newcastle means John Lyall's side need six points to ensure promotion.
But Mr Lyall will not take anything for granted even though Ipswich are 10 points clear at the top.
‘There are no guarantees in this game,’ he said.
‘It is great to win and the other results have gone well for us.
But we have five games to play and we will try to win them all.
‘We have always said if we are going to be successful you have just got to try and keep winning and not worry about other results.’
He admitted that Ipswich had been as fortunate to beat Newcastle as they were to beat Wolves in midweek.
Kevin Keegan, the Newcastle manager, was not downhearted, even though the result leaves his side deep in relegation trouble.
‘I'm disappointed for the lads, they deserved better,’ he said.
‘If we play like that in our last four games we will not go down.’
Wolverhampton, who have lost so many games this season through late goals, beat second-placed Cambridge 2–1 with Mutch scoring the winning goal in the 82nd minute.
Currie put Barnsley in the lead at Leicester but second-half goals by Walsh, Mills (penalty) and Wright gave promotion-chasing Leicester a 3–1 victory.
Southend ruined manager Peter Shilton's home debut for Plymouth, who went to the bottom.
Shilton could not be blamed for the 2–0 defeat and made one superb tackle, denying Angell 15 yards outside his box.
But Southend kept alive their slim play-off hopes with an own goal by Marker, the Plymouth captain, and a brilliant diving header by their captain Benjamin.
Soccer: Hoddle's play-off ambitions stifled by another stalemate
SWINDON saw their hopes of a place in the Second Division play-offs all but disappear in a 1–1 stalemate with Bristol Rovers in a desperately disappointing West Country derby at Twerton Park.
Not even the return of player-manager Glenn Hoddle, after a two-match absence with a hamstring injury, could lift Swindon, who laboured to break down Rovers, who have now lost only once in eight games.
Shaun Taylor lifted the tedium by putting Swindon ahead after 75 minutes, but they were restricted to their 10th away draw of the season four minutes later when Billy Clark headed an unexpected equaliser from Ian Alexander's free-kick.
Mr Hoddle said: ‘It's going to be hard to get into the play-offs because there are teams ahead of us who have played less games.
We've gone six games unbeaten, though, and we're going to have to keep plugging away and win all of our last five matches.’
Soccer: Doncaster in double mood
FOUR-times Women's FA Cup winners and Premier Division League champions, Doncaster Belles, will meet Red Star Southampton in the final on April 25 at Tranmere Rovers.
And they look unbeatable following their 10–1 semi-final victory over Maidstone Tigresses at Yeovil Town on Saturday.
Karen Walker has led Doncaster's unbeaten League run and her four-goal haul on Saturday took her combined League and Cup total to 55.
Soccer: Rangers need two points
RANGERS' 2–1 victory over Dundee United at Tannadice, coupled with Hearts' 0–0 home draw with St Mirren has left the champions needing only two points to retain their title.
Mikhailichenko gave Rangers the lead five minutes into the second-half, and though McInally equalised soon afterwards, Brown scored the winner for Rangers.
Hearts can still, in theory, overtake Rangers, but Celtic are now second after beating St Johnstone 3–2.
Soccer: West Ham walk-out hinges on optimists
By MARTIN SMITH
THE SUCCESS or failure of the planned walk-out protest by West Ham supporters at tomorrow's First Division match against Southampton may depend upon events on the pitch, writes Martin Smith.
This is recognised by officials of the organisers, the Hammers' Independent Supporters Association, who are asking fans to leave Upton Park five minutes into the second half in the protest against the club's bond scheme.
‘It may not be a success if we're 1–0 up at half-time,’ they admit.
‘But when the dedicated thousands leave, the club may finally realise we still mean business.’
West Ham's 4–0 home win against Norwich on Saturday, their biggest in the League this season, will not have helped the protesters' cause.
Supreme optimists might suggest it marks the beginning of one of the greatest escapes and would be unwilling to miss any part of it.
Golf: Silva finds golden touch
By Lewine Mair in La Moye, Jersey
DANIEL SILVA, who numbers Nigel Mansell among his sponsors, became the first Portuguese player to win on tour when he handed in a closing 73 to finish two shots clear of Chris Moody in the Jersey European Airways Open.
With his gallery peppered with Portuguese waiters, Silva, 25, had 15 pars in the 40 mph wind.
He received one notable fillip when, at the 10th, an elderly couple exhorted him with the idea that his would be a fine win to set alongside Antonio Pinto's success in the London Marathon.
And another at the 15th, a hole where so many second shots were being tossed by the angry wind over the clifftop.
After he had hit, Silva chased up the hill to establish that his ball had stuck fast to the putting surface.
It had and he duly got down in two more for another of his safe pars.
The treacherous four-footer he holed at the next told him the title was his.
Nigel Mansell had for years been saying: ‘Just go out and win!’, and finally he was on the point of doing precisely that.
Mark Roe had a closing 79 in which his score slipped beyond redemption with the drive he ripped into the dell at the 12th.
He dropped three further shots but finished with a trio of pars for a share of third place.
Silva, who was born in South Africa of Portuguese parents and who won the European Tour's Qualifying School in 1990, hopes that his victory will do something to lift the game in Portugal ‘where so many talented players are struggling to break through’.
After he had signed his card, the winner was given a peaked cotton cap bearing the embroidered inscription: ‘Daniel Silva, Jersey Open champion 1992’.
It was hardly the green jacket of Augusta but to Silva at this stage of his career, it almost certainly meant as much.
Mark Treleaven, of Hayling Island, won the Selborne Salver in Blackmoor, Hampshire, after a four-way play-off on Saturday, writes Bill Meredith.
The Hampshire player, 20, had an exciting 65, four under par, in the morning and then followed with a not quite so devastating 72, which put him level with Stuart Cage, of Sandmoor, Steve Barwick, of East Berks, and Andy Rogers, of Ealing.
Treleaven strolled out for the first play-off hole, the par-four 10th, and saw off all opposition with a birdie three on the second most difficult hole on the course.
Treleaven won a place in the event only after Michael Welch, a former Daily Telegraph Junior Golfer of the Year, was forced to withdraw after injuring his thumb while training with the England squad in Spain last week.
Steven Graham, of Ham Manor, who finished in the top six in last week's Berkhamsted Trophy, proved his class by taking the Hampshire Hog at North Hants yesterday with a two-round total of 137.
A second round of 66 clinched the title for the Sussex county player after he had finished three strokes behind the first-round leader, Leslie Cox, of Foxhills, with a morning 71.
HALFORD HEWITT CUP
Tonbridge keep Malvern down
By Ted Barrett
THE CHEER that greeted John Lloyd's seven-foot putt as it dropped into the 18th hole at Deal signalled Tonbridge's second Halford Hewitt Cup victory in two years.
Their victims were again Malvern, who lost 3–2 in 1990 and 3½–1½ now.
Malvern have still to register a cup win despite reaching the final five times since 1966.
Malvern had been struggling most of the way on the only wet and windy day in an otherwise idyllic week.
All five matches in this Public Schools Golfing Societies Foursomes Festival went to the 18th except for the Sean Baguley–Tim Jenkins 3 and 2 Tonbridge triumph against Ian Timberlake and Rodney James.
Bruce Streather and Malvern's French recruit, Sebastian Blanchet, played the 17th and 18th bravely to win Malvern's only point by a hole, and the Malvern and Public Schools secretary Jeremy Lowe and Adrian Coleman fought hard for their half.
Tonbridge had a much closer call in the semi-final, the crucial third point coming against Stowe at the fourth extra hole from Martin Yates and Simon Ellis, former Cambridge captain, who had been dormy three down.
Malvern had Streather and Blanchet to thank for their decisive third point in the semi-final against Harrow and a win on the 19th.
HALFORD HEWITT CUP (Deal).
— 3rd rd: Tonbridge 4½, Charterhouse ½; Merchiston 3, Blundell's 2; Edinburgh Acad 3, Eastbourne 2; Harrow 4, Fettes 1; Whitgift 4, Eaton 1; Malvern 3, King Edward's Birmingham 2.
Qtr-finals: Stowe 3, Wrekin 2; Tonbridge 3½, Merchiston 1½; Harrow 4½, Edinburgh Acad ½; Malvern 3½, Whitgift 1½.
Semi-finals: Tonbridge 3, Stowe 2; Malvern 3, Harrow 2.
Final: Tonbridge 3½, Malvern 1½.
Peggy Carrick (Hunstanton) and daughter Angela Uzielli (Berkshire) collected their 19th mothers and daughters 27-hole scratch tournament since 1965 at Royal Mid-Surrey on Saturday.
Their total of 116 gave them a two-shot win over Mardy MacDonald and daughter Fiona Edmond.
LONDON MARATHON
Ken Mays on a disorderly finishon Westminster Bridge which upset pre-race planning Pinto powers home amid the confusion for unexpected win
By KEN MAYS
KATRIN DORRE, from Leipzig, who gave up a career as a medical student to become a full-time athlete, saved the blushes of the organisers of the 12th ADT London marathon when she managed to lead the field of over 25,000 across the line on Westminster Bridge yesterday.
It had been planned as a separate men's and women's race, with the latter being sent off 20 minutes earlier, but only Dorre managed to stick to the plan, winning in 2hr 29min 38sec.
Such was the confusion that the BBC, who had spent three hours covering the race, only just managed to catch the men's finish and went off air without knowing the second and third-placed finishers, despite a warning on Friday that such an eventuality was possible.
As forecast, there was an unexpected men's victor with Antonio Pinto, from Portugal, who only began marathon running last year, winning in 2hr 10min 02sec.
Pinto, who made a winning debut in Carpi, Portugal, in 1991, and had led his club Benfica to the European Cup, had always been at the front among a big group early on.
But then, as the course toughened and the favourites began to drop back, he was left to race it out with Thomas Naali, of Tanzania, and Tena Negere, of Ethopia, until Poland's Jan Huruk, third last year, made a late challenge to snatch second place.
It proved a remarkable race for Naali who had been paid by the promoters to act as a pacemaker and drop out at the halfway stage.
Yet he was often in danger of winning the $55,000 (£31,250) first prize until he found it just too much over the last few miles.
Britain's best performance was produced by Paul Evans, the Barcelona Olympics reserve, who finished fifth in 2–10–36, 13 places ahead of Steve Brace (2–14–11), who has been pre-selected for the Games.
Evans, from Lowestoft, who celebrates his 31st birthday today, has now run faster than Brace.
His time was only six seconds outside that of another Barcelona-bound athlete, Dave Long, and almost half a minute faster than third choice, Paul Davies-Hale, both of whom did not run.
It added weight to the criticism that the selectors may have been too hasty in ignoring this race as the final trial.
‘I could have run faster but I did not have the confidence to go at 14 miles,’ said Evans.
‘I am disappointed because I finished fresh and fifth where I would have rather been exhausted and higher in the list.
It was a missed opportunity.’
Andrea Wallace did herself proud with the bronze medal and a personal best of 2–31–32 in the women's race, only her second attempt after winning at Carpi.
Wallace, who had broken training to help at the birth of a foal on Tuesday at her Devon farm, faded near the end after previously looking strong throughout.
‘I have had trouble in sleeping the past three nights but I felt good until the 20 miles mark.
When I went through the Blackfriars underpass I felt as though I had been hit by a brick,’ she said.
There was little doubt about the winner when Rosa Mota, the Olympic champion and last year's London winner, dropped out at Canary Wharf around the halfway mark.
Mota, from Portugal, suffered yet again with a mysterious stomach complaint, which affected her during the last world championships.
‘We just don't know what it is, it is unbearable and I stopped twice before deciding to give up.
I hope to get it right by the time the Olympics come round,’ she said.
When Dorre, 30, took off, the leading men gradually overtook Wallace and Renata Kokowska, of Poland, the eventual runner-up.
Hockey: Gritty Yorkshire scrape through
By Chris Moore
THE Norwich Union County Championship yesterday returned to Yorkshire after an eight-year gap, but Buckinghamshire will be wondering how they managed to lose 1–2 at St Albans.
Bucks dominated the first half, deservedly leading when Julian Laxon scored from a Gavin Bambury cross just before the interval.
The goal looked like the signal for Bucks to move smoothly towards their first championship since 1982.
Instead it was a day for typical Yorkshire grit to show itself at its best.
Suddenly it was Bucks under pressure, with Rick Charlesworth performing a series of rescue acts.
Then Yorkshire mounted a 49th-minute attack and, aided by a deflection, Robert Ward got his shot home at the second attempt.
Six minutes later David Capel saved well from Alistair West, following up at a short corner, but seconds later he was beaten by Alan Stoves.
Jon Shaw's probing passes providing chances for Chris Maskery and Laxon, but Yorkshire, aided by some useful saves by Peter Clark, held on.
Essex beat Nottinghamshire 4–3 to take the Under-21 County Championship title.
Gisburne of Notts and Menear of Essex both scored hat-tricks, but an exciting game was decided by a 65th-minute short corner from Carjon.
SUPERBIKE CHALLENGE
Reynolds doubles up
By George Turnbull
JOHN REYNOLDS, from Nottingham, scored a superb double in the second round of the British Challenge at Oulton Park on Saturday, leading both races from start to finish on a Kawasaki.
He was followed home in each by Carl Fogarty on a Ducati.
Jim Whitham, from Huddersfield, the champion, could manage only sixth and fifth placings.
Lancashire rider Ian Newton produced the best performance of his career when he won the 250cc class in the second round of the European road-racing championship at Kirkistown, County Down.
MOTORCYCLING — AUSTRALIAN GRAND PRIX 
Doohan dashes off two in a row
By John Coles in Sydney
MICHAEL DOOHAN rode a well-judged race in yesterday's Australian Grand Prix at Eastern Creek, to make it two wins in two rounds in the 500cc world championship.
The Rothmans Honda team leader, in his ‘home’ grand prix, came under early pressure from defending champion Wayne Rainey, who was anxious to score some points after crashing in the opening round in Japan two weeks ago.
‘Rainey put in some fast laps during the final stages of qualifying, so I was expecting him to give me a tough time,’ said Doohan.
‘Even when I got by on a fast straight, where the extra power of my machine was beneficial, I thought it might be part of his plan to let me go in front and force me into making a mistake.’
Once in the lead, the Australian came off best as the two constantly lapped riders in the 28-strong field of starters — the biggest in a 500cc grand prix for more than 10 years.
As Doohan built up a lead of almost seven seconds, Rainey settled for second place on his Yamaha, 12 seconds clear of third-placed Daryl Beattie, of Australia, riding a Rothmans Honda for the first time as a replacement for the injured Wayne Gardner.
Beattie easily got the better of Kevin Schwantz on the second lap, leaving the Lucky Strike Suzuki rider from Texas with a tough job to keep his own team-mate Doug Chandler at bay.
Scottish rider Niall Mackenzie retired after five laps when his Yamaha developed engine trouble, and mechanical problems also forced out Londoner Peter Graves, who qualified for his first grand prix, and Irishman Eddie Laycock.
In the 250cc Grand Prix, world champion Luca Cadalora, of Italy, on a Honda, made a last-lap sprint to match Doohan's feat with two wins in a row.
Germany's Rolf Waldmann took line honours on his Honda in a thrilling 125cc Grand Prix, finishing half a wheel ahead of Italy's Alessandro Gramigni, on an Aprilia.
Waldmann also has maximum points after two rounds.
HOCKEY
Hightown squash Slough double
By Cathy Harris
HIGHTOWN destroyed Slough's hopes of completing a League and Cup double when they beat them 3–2 in a penalty shoot out to win the AEWHA Cup at Milton Keynes Sports Club on Saturday.
The Merseyside club, who twice equalised to level the scores at 3–3 at full time, made it an indoor and outdoor double and will take part in both European competitions next season.
The result was a bitter blow for Slough who take part in the European Clubs Championship next weekend, and their coach, Ian Jennings, admitted that the team would have to sort out several elements in the defence this week.
‘It's a great disappointment that we dominated most of the game but let them back in after leading 2–0.
The discipline within the team let us down when we were put under pressure — but perhaps it's the kick in the pants we needed,’ Jennings said.
After going 2–0 up in 32 minutes through a goal by Lesley Hobley and a penalty by Denise Shorney, Hightown reduced the deficit a minute before the interval when Jackie Crook scored from the penalty spot.
Fiona Lee made it 2–2 when she squeezed the ball in at the near post, but Shorney restored Slough's advantage with her second penalty after Crook had stopped the ball illegally.
The England striker, Tina Cullen, continued her excellent form when she was released by Maggie Souyave and beat goalkeeper Sue Knight at the second attempt in the 53rd minute to send the match into penalties.
Great Britain went 2–1 up in the four-match Test series against the United States when they defeated them 8–3 at Old Dominian, Virginia, on Saturday.
Jane Sixsmith led the scoring spree with two goals in each half with captain Mary Nevill twice on target before the break, and her Leicester colleague, Kath Johnson, converting penalty strokes in the 43rd and 52nd minutes.
A 44th minute goal by Michaela Morton, a student at Stockport College, helped England beat Scotland 1–0, the holders, and regain the Home Countries Under-18 Championship at Chelmer Park, Chelmsford, yesterday.
London Marathon Wesley leads sprint finish
By Mike Watkinson
CANADA'S Daniel Wesley won the BSAD-ADT London Wheelchair marathon at his third attempt, following a sprint finish on Westminster Bridge in which the first four competitors all achieved times inside Frenchman Farid Amarouch's 1991 course record.
Dave Holding, the British No 1, looked capable of repeating his 1989 triumph until Wesley produced a devastating finish on Birdcage Walk which enabled him to slice 70 seconds off the record.
Holding just beat Heinz Frei, Switzerland's world record holder, for second place.
Cardiff student Tanni Grey won the women's event after a tremendous duel with housewife Rose Hill, of Milton Keynes, the pre-race favourite.
SPEEDWAY
Standing in world form
By Ben Findon
DAVID NORRIS and Dean Standing, two of England's best international prospects, raced into the British semi-finals of the World Championship at Stoke on Saturday.
But Gordon Kennett, the 1979 world No 2, Stoke's Alan Grahame, an ex-British final runner-up, and Mel Taylor, a former Commonwealth finalist, failed to make the cut.
Standing, 22, of Swindon, won the quarter-final with 14 points, while Ipswich's Norris, 19, filled the fourth and final qualifying place on 11.
Carl Blackbird, of Long Eaton, and Stoke's Nigel Crabtree will also be in the semi-final draw at Ipswich and Cradley on May 3.
SNOOKER
Davis beats Drago to draw level at the top
STEVE DAVIS drew level with Stephen Hendry at the top of the Matchroom League when he came from 3–2 down to beat Tony Drago, of Malta, 5–3 at the Dome in Doncaster.
In his last competitive game before the world championship, Davis had to battle all the way against an opponent also fighting for one of the four play-off places.
James Wattana, of Thailand, followed his 6–2 defeat of Allison Fisher in Bawtry on Saturday night with a 6–2 victory over Tony Meo in Hull.
Wattana, who moved into third place, could overtake Hendry and Davis at the top if he wins his two matches in hand.
World champion John Parrott overwhelmed Willie Thorne 8–0 in Redhill while Grimsby's Mike Hallett was still anchored firmly to the foot of the table after losing 5–3 to Jimmy White in Doncaster.
FORTE HOTELS MATCHROOM LGE. — J Parrott bt W Thorne 8–0, A Drago (Malta) bt T Meo 6–2, S James bt G Wilkinson 5–3, S Davis bt Drago 5–3, J Wattana (Thailand) bt Miss A Fisher 6–2, Wattana bt Meo 6–2, J White bt M Hallett 5–3.
SWIMMING
Fibbens and Read guide Barnet to upset victory
BARNET COPTHALL dethroned Leeds, who had remained unbeaten for a decade, for the men's Mycil British Team Club Championship in Sheffield, while Portsmouth Northsea, pressed all the way by Nova Centurion, won the women's title for a second year by just three points.
Mike Fibbens with three victories to his credit, was the top male swimmer with his Barnet team-mate, Kathy Read, the outstanding women competitor.
With less than six weeks to go to the Olympic trials, Read, the triple national champion, boosted her confidence by lowering her own eight-month-old 50m backstroke British record with an impressive 30.06sec.
Read completed a double with a 1min 03.82sec time for the 100m.
For three quarters of the race she was within the time for for another British mark, but as she explained afterwards: ‘Two hard 50-metres just before meant I was lacking at the end.’
BOWLS
Third time unlucky for Allcock
By Donald Newby
NORFOLK gamekeeper Mervyn King swept to a commanding 21–9 victory over Tony Allcock to lift the singles title at the Manchester Unity National Indoor Championships at Melton Mowbray on Saturday.
It was a bitter blow for Allcock, Britain's outstanding bowler in the past decade, for he has now reached this final three times in four years, only to finish runner-up in each.
He had hoped to repeat his successes of 1985 and 1987, but could not contain the accurate drawing skills of King.
King, who works on the Earl of Leicester's Holkham estate, picked up a four on the fourth end to go 7–1 ahead and increased his lead to 11–2.
Allcock scored a four to cut the deficit to 11–6.
But King struck back immediately with a three and maintained his composure in the closing stages when Allcock killed an end and twice retrieved his fortunes with King at match point.
‘I didn't get worked up about that — I'm always pretty calm,’ King, who won the under-25 National Singles titles in 1988 and 1989, said later.
The championships ended with the Liberty Trophy final, when Cumbria added the county title to their fours success a few days earlier.
Teams in charge of Stuart Airey and Niall Currie left Cumbria 128–105 ahead of Hampshire at the close.
NETBALL
Surrey clinch double again
SURREY, the English Counties League champions, completed the double for the second successive season when they beat Middlesex 13–11 in the Evian Inter-County Tournament final at the Orchard Sports Centre in London yesterday.
While Surrey took top honours during the two-day event which involved 1,000 players and 52 counties, Hertfordshire won the under-21 title with a 14–11 victory over Bedfordshire.
ICE HOCKEY
Peace deal ends strike
THE PLAYERS' strike which brought the National Hockey League to a standstill in the United States is over.
NHL president John Ziegler announced the players, who had been on strike since April 1, had accepted a final offer and would return to work this weekend.
That means 10 regular season matches can go ahead as planned on Sunday and all the outstanding matches will be rescheduled before the play-offs.
Cricket: Ellcock may be forced to quit
By Paul Newman
MIDDLESEX returned from their pre-season tour to Portugal last night with grave concerns about their fast bowlers.
Champions in 1990 but a disappointing 15th last year, Middlesex start the season against Cambridge University on Friday still unsure about the fitness of their leading seamer and with doubts about the cricketing future of another potential England bowler.
Angus Fraser is still feeling discomfort from the hip injury which kept him out for most of last season and may have to play in pain if he is to resume his first-class career.
It could lead to his being used sparingly by Middlesex, which would hinder his chances of regaining his England place.
For Ricardo Ellcock, the picture is even bleaker.
He has been looking into the possibility of a career outside cricket as a pilot because of further problems with his back.
Middlesex are expected to announce his retirement from the game today.
Ellcock, 26, has had two major back operations.
Although he trained with the England A team during the winter and felt optimistic, he was in pain again before he left for Portugal and looked on the tour as a ‘make-or-break’ exercise.
If Ellcock's retirement is confirmed, he hopes to follow Colin Croft, the former West Indies bowler, into a career as an airline pilot.
Imran Khan, the Pakistan captain, may miss this summer's tour of England because of a shoulder injury.
He may need an operation to cure the problem, but will wait another week to see if there is an improvement.
Cricket: Simmons again the scourge of S Africans
By Geoffrey Dean in Port of Spain
THE South African bowlers suffered their second caning in six days from Phil Simmons at the Queen's Park Oval yesterday as the West Indies achieved a 3–0 clean sweep in the one-day series.
Their seven-wicket victory with seven overs to spare was only marginally less emphatic than a crushing 10-wicket triumph in the second match on Saturday.
Simmons's 104 was his third century in his last four one-day international innings, for he made 110 against Sri Lanka in West Indies' penultimate game of the World Cup.
If he made a much less certain start yesterday than in Jamaica, his second 50 was an equally violent replica.
It was achieved off only 33 balls, two more than at Sabina Park.
His first 50 had taken him 103 deliveries.
Yet Simmons was extremely fortunate to survive beyond his first over.
He came in after only one ball of the innings when Haynes was bowled by a beauty from Pringle, and appeared to glove a rising delivery to the wicketkeeper.
To the dismay of the South Africans, umpire Cumberbatch merely signalled a leg-side wide.
Pringle bowled a particularly good opening spell of five overs for six runs, which augurs well for the Test match as he had struggled to find his rhythm previously.
Fellow strike bowler Donald was rested yesterday.
Bosch was also impressive in his first spell, when he must have been perilously close to having Simmons lbw.
When he returned, however, he was hit for three fours and a six in one over by the Trinidadian, who then crashed van Zyl over extra cover for another six.
Simmons put on 78 in 27 overs with Lara before the latter was deceived by Kuiper's slower ball and gave a catch to mid-off.
Simmons's third-wicket stand with Richardson realised 104 in 15 overs.
The West Indies captain was applauded all the way to the wicket, then seemed to play himself back into some sort of form.
The South Africans, who were put in, made a steady start, reaching 58 for one after 20 overs, but were unable to accelerate against miserly seam bowling and Harper's accurate off-spin.
Hudson, who had played the most fluently for his 30 from 54 balls, was caught behind trying to cut Harper, who was also rewarded with the wicket of Rushmere when he beat him in the flight.
It was the latter's first innings of the tour.
Rushmere spent 71 balls over his 29, and at times it seemed as if Wessels and Kirsten were more interested in spending much-needed time in the middle than trying to set a challenging target.
Wessels spent 77 balls over his 45, and Kirsten 50 balls over his 28.
With the pitch playing slower than the previous day, forcing the ball was not easy, and only some effective slogging by Cronje (23 off 24 balls) ensured respectability.
Shooting: Duckworth's double win
RAY DUCKWORTH, the West Yorkshire Police and British international marksman, won the Army Open Pistol Championship and the Standard Pistol match at Bisley yesterday after a determined challenge from Andrew Lamont, who was runner-up in three of the main events.
SQUASH
Title favourites are pushed hard
By D J Rutnagur
JANSHER KHAN and Susan Devoy, title favourites in the Hi-Tec British Open Championships, each had to fight hard for their place in today's finals at Wembley.
In the women's semi-finals, Devoy was tested by the sixth-seeded world junior champion, England's Cassandra Jackman.
But Devoy was never in such danger of losing as Jansher Khan in the men's event, against Rodney Martin, the world champion from Australia.
Devoy, champion seven times in succession until she was beaten last year, meets England's Martine Le Moignan in the final.
Jansher, runner-up on his debut appearance in 1987, and again last year, meets a first-time finalist in Chris Robertson, who beat Chris Dittmar, his second-seeded fellow Australian.
Devoy would surely count her match against Jackman as one of the most demanding she has experienced during her long reign as the world's leading player, while Jackman, who was unlucky not to win the second game, pronounced herself happy with her performance.
It impressed her illustrious opponent, who said: ‘Cassie is a very fine player.
She has the game and a very good temperament.’
Devoy hinted that she expected Jackman to be her successor, by adding: ‘She can have it [the title]after me.’
It was just as well Devoy clinched the issue in three games, for she admitted to being tired.
However, her play bore no trace of diminished strength, even at the end.
Not much strength was expended in the acquisition of the first game, which she took in only 12 minutes, before Jackman had found her bearings.
In the crucial second game, which took 27 minutes, Jackman dominated several rallies and subjected Devoy to a lot of running.
A blend of disciplined squash when out of hand and aggression when serving took Jackman from 2–5 to 8–5, although Devoy served six times during this span.
On Jackman's game ball, she was foiled by Devoy hitting a dead nick with a cross-court backhand.
She found the nick again, without aiming for it, to draw level.
Jackman had two more game balls, at 8–6 and 9–9, and saved as many by conceding the final point by missing a low volley drop.
Le Moignan, seeded three, drove and volleyed with crunching power to beat holder Lisa Opie, who, injured for most of the season, exceeded expectations by reaching the last four.
In the men's semi-finals, Martin won an attritional first game that contained 25 lets and 10 penalty points, but lost his edge thereafter and offered no worthwhile opposition in the second and third.
Martin remained in disarray until he was 0–4 down in the fourth.
A penalty point in his favour ended his bad spell and he plundered seven points in a row.
Jansher, ill-prepared to cope with such a forceful resurgence, lost his nerve and the game, with two errors at the end.
The final game was tense.
A 5–2 lead did nothing to relax Jansher and Martin drew to 4–5, at which point Jansher was warned to avoid physical contact with his opponent.
Jansher won the remaining points in one hand, but the rallies were so keen and furious that another dramatic twist of fortunes was never out of the question.
ROWING
Absences mar Pooley victory
GUY POOLEY, of Leander, won Saturday's Girobank Scullers Head by four seconds from Roger Brown, but the withdrawal of Steve Redgrave and Belgian Wim van Belleghem, took some of the gloss off the event.
Brown, a member of the Nottinghamshire County coxed four in last year's national championships, beat the highly-rated Scot, Peter Haining, by a further five seconds.
Carl Smith won the lightweight division for a record eighth time.
TABLE TENNIS
England reach last four thanks to Prean success
CARL PREAN, the English No 1, secured four wins as England qualified for the semi-finals of the men's team event with a 4–1 defeat of Holland at the European Championships in Stuttgart last night.
Earlier in the day, England defeated Denmark 4–1 and, still unbeaten, will play Sweden in their last match of the group this afternoon.
Prean defeated Danny Heister in the opening game and Chen Xinhua forged a 2–0 lead by crushing Paul Haldan 21–15, 21–5.
Matthew Syed earned a 3–0 lead when he defended stylishly to beat Trinko Keen.
Prean beat Haldan to seal success.
LACROSSE
Triple Crown for England
ENGLAND's women had no problem retaining the Triple Crown when they followed the 13–2 defeat of Scotland last week with a 10–0 victory over Wales at Birmingham on Saturday.
England raced away to a 6–0 lead in the first 15 minutes, and only good saves by goalkeeper Karen Owen throughout the match averted disaster for Wales.
MEN'S 6-a-side (Orpington).
— Seniors: Hillcroft 5, Kenton 3.
Intermediate: Croydon 4 Beckenham 2.
Minors: Hillcroft A 7, Orpington 3.
RACKETS
Champions show mettle
NEIL SMITH and Shannon Hazell, the world champions, defeated Willie Boone and John Prenn 4–1 in the final of the Lacoste Open Doubles championship at Queen's Club.
Their rhythm was temporarily upset when Boone and Prenn changed sides after losing the first three games and Boone served from 8–8 in the fourth game to 5–0 in the fifth.
But the pace proved too hot and Hazell finished off the match with a service run from 10–9.
CYCLING
Veteran earns his reward
By Phil Liggett in Roubaix
VETERAN Gilbert Duclos-Lasalle, who has dreamt of victory in the Paris-Roubaix classic since turning professional in 1977, yesterday saluted his French public as one of the most outstanding winners of the 168-mile race.
Duclos-Lasalle, 37, who is likely to retire at the end of the season, converted two previous second places, a fourth and sixth, into victory when he arrived alone on the velodrome at Roubaix to one of the warmest welcomes in the long history of the race.
The Frenchman reached the stadium 34 seconds ahead of Olaf Ludwig, of Germany, after a final six miles when victory was always in doubt.
Continuous live television alerted thousands to the likelihood of Duclos-Lasalle's win.
As he progressed over the cobbled stretches of roads that give the race its title ‘Hell of the North’, he was cheered on by police and public alike.
The Frenchman's only other classic win came in the Bordeaux-Paris race in 1983, a year before his career was endangered after he shot himself in the hand while hunting.
Duclos-Lasalle made his move by breaking clear of Dutchman Jean-Paul van Poppel and the Belgian Rik van Slycke, the only survivors of a 10-strong leading group, with 30 miles still to go.
It was a move forced on him by the weakness of the rest and seemed certain to end in failure when Ludwig started his chase with 10 miles left.
Sean Yates produced one of Britain's best results with 13th place, after he cramped in the last 200 yards when sprinting for third place.
PARIS-ROUBAIX (168 miles).
— 1, G Duclos-Lasalle (France, Z) 6h 26m56s; 2, O Ludwig (Germany, Panasonic) at 34s; 3, J Capiot (Belgium, TVM) at 1m 22s; 4, P Pieters (Holland, Tulip); 5, J-C Colotti (France, Z); 6, E de Wilde (Belgium, Telekom) all same time as Capiot.
Others: 9, G LeMond (US, Z); 13, S Yates (GB, Motorola); 29, S Kelly (Ireland, Festina).
Gethin Butler (Norwood Paragon) won yesterday's Hope Valley Classic, third round of the season-long Star Trophy national road race series, over a 104-mile course at Bishop's Castle, Shropshire.
Butler finished 33 seconds clear but second-placed Mark Lovatt (Congleton CC) took the overall lead.
EUROPEAN SOCCER
Spanish referee sees red
By Graham Turner
REFEREE Raul Garcia de Loza issued five red and 11 yellow cards during an extraordinary Spanish league match between Valencia and Barcelona that spanned Saturday night and Sunday morning.
Valencia's 1–0 victory, which dented Barcelona's chances of overhauling Real Madrid at the top of the table, was almost incidental compared to the performance of Mr Garcia de Loza.
Two stretcher bearers were the first casualties of the industrious Mr de Loza for making gestures at the offical, and Valencia manager Guus Hiddink saw yellow and red in quick succession.
Barcelona's Josep Guardiola and Valencia's Ricardo Arias also fell foul of the referee's two-card trick.
The match, which kicked off a few minutes later than its scheduled 10.15 start time, ended on a bizarre note seven minutes into injury time at 12.15am.
The Valencia trainer came on to the pitch and was ushered back towards the tunnel by Fernando Giner, a home defender.
Mr Garcia de Loza chased after the player but failed to return.
After waiting several minutes, the linesmen and players shook hands and left the pitch.
The referee was reported to have blown the final whistle outside his dressing-room door.
SPAIN.
— Mallorca 0, Real Madrid 0 — Real Sociedad 2, Seville 1 — Valencia 1, Barcelona 0 — Albacete 3, Deportivo 0 — Burgos 2, Logrones 0 — Espanol 2, Sporting 0 — Oviedo 2, Valladolid 1 — Atletico de Madrid 5, Cadiz 1 — Osasuna 2, Tenerife 0 — Zaragoza 1, Bilbao 0.
Leaders: Real Madrid 44pts; Barcelona 42; Atletico Madrid 40.
GERMANY.
— VfB Stuttgart 2, Nuremberg 0 — MSV Duisburg 1, FC Cologne 3 — Borussia M'gladbach 1, Frankfurt 1 — Karlsruhe 1, Bochum 1 — Bremen 2, Dynamo Dresden 0 — Leverkusen 3, Kaiserlautern 0 — Wattenscheid 1, Hamburg 1 — Hansa Rostock 2, Schalke 0 — Borussia Dortmund 3, Bayern Munich 0 — Dusseldorf 1, Stuttgarter Kickers 3.
Leaders: VfB Stuttgart 43pts; Borussia Dortmund 43; Frankfurt 42.
HOLLAND.
— Eindhoven 3, Willem II Tilburg 0 — Sittard 0, Dordrecht 0 — De Graafschap 3, Volendam 0 — Ajax 3, Den Haag 2 — Groningen 1, Feyenoord 0 — Waalwijk 1, Maastricht 1 — FC Utrecht 1, Arnhem 1 — Twente Enschede 2, VVV Venlo 1 — Sparta Rotterdam 4, Kerkrade 0.
PORTUGAL.
— Benfica Lisbon 2, Braga 0 — Farense 0, Sporting Lisbon 2 — Uniao 2, FC Porto 2 — Boavista 1, Maritimo 0 — Guimaraes 1, Estoril 1 — Beira-Mar 0, Famalicao 0 — Gil Vicente 2, Torriense 1 — Salgueiros 0, Ferreira 0 — Penafiel 1, Chaves 0.
ICE HOCKEY
Peace deal ends strike
THE PLAYERS' strike which brought the National Hockey League to a standstill in the United States is over.
NHL president John Ziegler announced the players, who had been on strike since April 1, had accepted a final offer and would return to work this weekend.
That means 10 regular season matches can go ahead as planned on Sunday and all the outstanding matches will be rescheduled before the play-offs.
YACHTING
Conner unbowed but in trouble
By Tim Jeffery in San Diego
HAVING ducked the bullets once, Dennis Conner must do so again today if Stars & Stripes is not to be eliminated from the America's Cup defenders' trials in a sudden-death sail-off against Bill Koch's Kanza.
Stars & Stripes' 44-seconds defeat by America on Saturday, in a good sailing breeze, meant Conner lost his first chance to ensure a place in the defenders' final.
Although Stars & Stripes led on the first two legs, America's speed prevailed.
‘The turning point was on the long starboard tack at the start of the second beat,’ said Conner's tactician, Tom Whidden.
‘Sailing straight into that chop was a like boom, boom, boom,’ added Conner.
For Stripes, it was also too slow.
Koch resolutely stayed away from America's wheel, letting Buddy Melges get on with the job of dispatching Conner.
‘Buddy was painting a Van Gogh,’ said Koch.
‘Why should I want to screw it up.’
Theoretically, Conner's place in the final could have been secured yesterday, but that required Koch allowing his America to lose to his other boat, Kanza.
Short of a catastrophic breakdown, the chances of that happening were close to zero even before the race started, because Koch is determined to freeze out Conner and make the final an all America Foundation affair.
Significantly, Koch's principal helmsman, Melges, did not race in yesterday's match between the syndicate's boats.
As he has said ‘the man who throws a race is a crook for life’, it is fair to guess that Melges'’ day off’was for no other reason than that he wanted no part of any manipulation of points.
Conner, however, remains unbowed.
‘We're going to take them on Monday,’ he said.
‘There's no quitting here.’
An all America Foundation final would allow Koch to optimise his two boats, to cope with the threat of the New Zealand and Italian challengers, rather than beating Conner in the 13-race final.
To help boost the challengers in the Cup itself next month, Nippon, who have been eliminated, have offered Il Moro di Venezia their asymmetric spinnakers, and France's Ville de Paris have made their entire sail programme available to the Italians.
America's Cup Defenders' semi-final.
— Race 11: America 3 (H Melges) bt Stars & Stripes (D Conner) 44sec.
Pts: 5, Stars & Stripes, Kanza; 4, America 3.
Yachting: Olympic British best
By David Pelly in Hyeres
BRITISH competitors achieved their best results for many years in the French Olympic Classes regatta which concluded on Saturday at Hyeres.
Although there was no British overall winner, second places in the Finn by Stuart Childerley, the Flying Dutchman by Roger Tushingham and the men's Lechner Sailboard by Barrie Edgington were highly satisfactory, added to which there were fourths in the men's 470, the Europe and the women's Lechner.
Tushingham's second place in the Flying Dutchman, after winning the final race, was particularly impressive as British sailors have not been so near the top of this class since the era of Rodney Pattisson.
Olympic selection was settled in two classes.
Lawrie Smith, crewed by Ossie Stewart and Rob Cruikshank, takes the Soling place while Shirley Robertson will be the British representative in the Europe, the single-handed dinghy for women that is being used in this year's Olympics in Barcelona for the first time.
In addition, Edgington's remarkable performance makes him an almost certain Olympic choice.
The Stars are currently racing at Palma while the 470s, Tornados and Flying Dutchmen continue their programmes at Cadiz where the 470 World Championship is the next major event to be held.
Men's Lechner. — no race yesterday.
Women's Lechner. — no race yesterday.
Lawn Tennis: Drake wins car prize
GARY DRAKE, the former British junior hardcourt champion, won a £15,000 car after being nominated the best player in the finals of the Vauxhall Indoor Tennis Trophy Tournament.
After partnering Jonathan Smith to a 6–4, 6–4 win over Patrick Hughesman and Mark Loosemore, he beat Steve Alger 6–3, 1–6, 6–1 to earn Royal Berkshire a 2–1 final win over Queen's Club.
Long Road Cambridge beat Puma Welwyn 3–0 in the women's final.
Letter to the Sports Editor: Celtic cream
SIR — On a day the Daily Telegraph's front page carried John Major's warning that the UK faces break-up, it was somewhat ironic to read that Jamie Salmon believes it is ‘time to send Scots, Irish into exile’.
It is astonishing that he believes that the exclusion of London Scottish and London Irish from League One will raise English rugby standards.
Are the Scots and Irish playing their rugby elsewhere in the league to be exiled, too, in the name of raising standards?
To be the best you must surely play against the best.
KENNETH IRVINE London-based Scot
Letter to the Sports Editor: Come in, Topolski
SIR — Does Daniel Topolski (Daily Telegraph, March 30) seriously believe that the Oxford Boat Race crew deserve to be hailed as sporting gods for their efforts?
Mr Topolski rightly takes great pride in his association with the Boat Race and regards the event as one of the major features of the sporting calendar.
But far from demanding more of the public's attention, he should be thankful for the coverage the Boat Race already receives.
It seems to me that Mr Topolski is putting the cart before the horse.
Surely the 18 people taking part are doing so through a love of their chosen sport, and not to become national heroes.
Perhaps the BBC's build-up to the event carried Mr Topolski away; media coverage of a sport is actually of secondary importance to the event itself.
STEVE MORRIS Chester
Letter to the Sports Editor: Service point
SIR — I agree with D H Tuckey (Letter, April 6) about limiting the service to one serve per point in tennis.
However, I feel there should be two grades because of the difficulty of actually getting the game started with one service in some areas of junior or park tennis.
A start could be made by limiting the service to one per point in the tie-break in the first-class game.
Dr A J NIMMO London SE22
Letter to the Sports Editor: Change the rules
SIR — In February 1987 I wrote to Jimmy Hill with my comments regarding the rules of football.
I should like to reiterate those comments to you now as I believe they remain relevant: 1) Control the duration of play by an ice hockey-type clock to prevent time-wasting. 2) Players to have their names on the back of their shirts.
3) The ball must not be passed back to the goalkeeper from outside the penalty area.
Should this happen, a free-kick should be awarded from one corner of the penalty area.
4) Three adjudicators with access to instant video replay of all goals to determine if cheating has taken place (ref: Maradona/or the hand of God).
The same adjudicators should be responsible for control of the clock (see item 1).
Also the clock should be stopped when there is needless passing back of the ball from the halfway line towards the end of the game.
Generally speaking, individual cleverness by British players is abysmal compared to 90 per cent of overseas players.
This could possibly be improved by all clubs having an artificial pitch of good quality; we have played on mud heaps for far too long.
We are never going to win the World Cup with football played as it is today.
NORMAN G HANNELL Luton
Letter to the Sports Editor: Betrayed by the ‘lords of the rings’
SIR — I have just returned with my family from Tignes, France, where we cheered on my son Graham Nugent and his fellow team members in the fifth Paralympics.
I must congratulate Michael Calvin on his article (Daily Telegraph, March 31) in which he highlighted my son being told to cover up the Olympic Rings on his Great Britain uniform, which he otherwise wore so proudly.
Whilst in the Paralympic Village we read the quote from Mr Dick Palmer, of the British Olympic Association, ‘justifying’ their not allowing our athletes to wear ‘their’logo.
I would like him to explain to the Americans, whose US banner had ‘his’ rings the size of footballs, or to the Swedes, who had the Olympic logo emblazoned across their tracksuits, and to the many other teams why Great Britain are not entitled to wear it.
Even if, as I believe, the British Paralympic team are not affiliated to the BOC, the real reason is, as ever, money.
Large companies such as Coca Cola, Mars and many others pay a great deal of money for the privilege of using the logo.
Although some financial assistance is given to team members, which is very welcome, most of the cost is carried by the individual athletes, some of whom are unemployed.
If you do have a price Mr Palmer, I will offer you ‘30 pieces of silver’, which history tells us is the price of betrayal.
JOHN NUGENT, Broxbourne, Herts
PERSONAL VIEW The night rugby's Holy Grail was taken on a bender
By Peter FitzSimons
Sydney Harbour Bridge, Friday LAST NIGHT'S abominable whiskey was causing a wild African wail of hammering drums — Ka-thud thud-thud-thud, Ka-thud thud-thud-thud — to beat about two inches inside my left temple.
Beside me, Jeffrey Bernard was being more than just a little unwell.
Behind us, following our weaving course, the police car was closing in.
And between us, the bloody Rugby World Cup kept falling through the seats to knock my hand from the gear stick.
No kidding, it was a bad day, a mean day, an ugly day, a ‘shoot-me-before-I-go-mad’ sort of day.
How it all came to this I still don't quite know, so cloudy were the after-effects of the whiskey.
But after we'd pulled over and Jeffrey Bernard had been unwell on the pavement, after the police car had been persuaded to leave us alone, and after we'd finally got that hefty brute of a Bill Ellis Trophy fully upright again — in its carrying case and everything — I was at least able to start thinking partially straight again.
I suppose for Australia it all started on Nov 2 when the Queen gave Nick Farr-Jones the World Cup at Twickenham, and rugby union's Holy Grail thus passed into Australia's hands…
In the beginning there was great ceremonial fanfare for the Cup as it was feted throughout the great salons of the land.
Photographed from all angles, toasted by the people and politicians alike, it was the symbol of our rugby supremacy and treated with extraordinary reverence by the whole population.
The high point of this reverence was undoubtedly when it was cheered by countless thousands as it travelled down Sydney's George Street in a full-blown ticker-tape parade.
And from the glory of this, to being almost arrested in the company of Jeffrey Bernard and myself on the Sydney Harbour Bridge, I suppose must seem an extraordinary downward leap for the Cup.
But you gotta understand…
Instead of confining the Cup to a gleaming glass case somewhere, the Australian Rugby Union took the attitude that if you're going to win such a proud flag of valour, the only sensible thing to do is to wave it around.
Thus it started popping up everywhere — even in Hobart, Tasmania, last Thursday night, when I went to speak there at a rugby dinner.
And what a hit the Cup was.
In a typically wild, rollicking rugby evening, with mayhem breaking out everywhere, the local lads had a marvellous time with the Cup, knocked out that they could actually touch the code's most holy object.
But enough carousing and photographing…would I mind, my Tasmanian countrymen asked, taking the World Cup back to Sydney for them the following morning?
Not at all, not at all .
Just as I hadn't minded when asked if I would like to take care of Jeffrey Bernard for a few days while he was in Sydney to promote the play about himself, Jeffrey Bernard is Unwell, which is currently playing here.
One thing led to another, and before you knew it, there we were…on the bridge, with the Cup, pursued by the cops.
Was it Jeffrey's state of health that moved the policemen on?
Or perhaps even that he and I together, in as filthy moods as we were, mustn't have looked like the sort of people even a policeman should risk messing with.
(If only they'd known that my companion was a convicted killer of rubber plants in an Indian restaurant).
Whatever, the cops eventually moved on and the Englishman and I were spared the task of explaining what such an unlikely pair of lads as ourselves were doing with such a gleaming trophy.
We were thus free to take the Cup to lunch, where, feeling better, the former rugby hooker, Jeffrey Bernard, pronounced himself happy that ‘if England can't have the Cup, then at least it's good that the Australians have it…anybody but the wretched French and the bloody Welsh, who never bought a drink for anybody in their life’.
Which accusation nobody could ever level at Jeffrey Bernard.
It was a long lunch in the presence of our new-found friend, the Rugby World Cup.
Incidentally, be assured that for all its many travels, the Cup itself is in perfect shape without a single scratch upon it.
There is only some slight damage to its carrying case, but that is to be expected.
Should England win the World Cup next time round, you will undoubtedly notice that a small shard of plexiglass is missing from the said carrying case.
To recover this, you must go to the Coach and Horses pub in Soho, where you will find a drunken Jeffrey Bernard still confounding the dire predictions of all his doctors.
Feel around in the top pocket of his blazer, there you will find the shard.
In the meantime, as Bernard says: ‘England may not have the World Cup, but at least in my fair English blazer pocket there will always be a part of it.’
Or something like that.
Your Mr Bernard is, by the by, even if unwell, a terrific fellow.
If the police had not given us the benefit of the doubt, I should have been more than a little proud to go to jail in his company, together with the Cup.
This way, though, it's easier.
At least now, England will not have to play an Australian prison side, led by Jeffrey Bernard and myself, to win the World Cup back in 1995.
World Cup whets appetite As the new season begins today at Lord's, English cricket must confront searching questions at Test and county levelsPakistanis will test England to the full and swell the coffers says Christopher Martin-Jenkins
By CHRISTOPHER MARTIN-JENKINS
STAMINA is not the least of the qualities demanded of the professional cricketer.
But 19 days have passed since Imran Khan accepted the Waterford Globe from Sir Colin Cowdrey in Melbourne after Pakistan had won the World Cup; a mere 10 have gone by since England's ‘A’ team finished their tour of the West Indies on a relatively high note in Barbados.
Today the ‘A’ team take the field against county champions Essex at Lord's, the opening fixture in a first-class season which will still be running in 22 weeks' time.
If the pre-Easter weather is kind, it should be an attractive start to a season which promises much.
To a man the ‘A’ team will be eager to show the Essex captain what they can do.
Like Graham Gooch himself, they are well aware that the England team which starts the season after the most successful overseas tour for five years may not be the one which finishes it.
The reason, of course, is the formidable strength of Pakistan, whose tour, which includes five Tests and, for the first time in England, five one-day internationals, starts at Arundel on May 3.
Something (like the weather) will have to go badly wrong if this is not to be another extremely profitable season for the Test and County Cricket Board.
For England and Pakistan to have contested the World Cup final was a marvellous bonus for those whose job it is to sell tickets in advance.
Pakistan should be even better as a five-day team than they proved they could be over 50 overs.
If, as they fervently hope, Waqar Younis has recovered sufficiently from the stress fracture in his back to bowl as he did in taking 113 first-class wickets last season at a cost of 14 each — a wicket for every 30 balls he bowled — and Imran's shoulder injury permits him, after all, to play as more than just a batsman-captain, theirs will be a fast bowling attack as strong, at least on paper, as any the West Indies had during the 16 years of world supremacy which came to an end here last summer.
Moreover, unlike those West Indian teams who dominated the Tests of 1976, 1980, 1984 and 1988, Pakistan can augment a four-pronged fast bowling attack comprising Waqar, Wasim Akram, Aqib Javed and Imran Khan with a young leg-spinner of immense flair in Mushtaq Ahmed.
It even seems possible that Mushtaq's idol, Abdul Qadir, the first leg-spinner since Chandrasekhar to take more than 200 Test wickets, will also tour.
But if Imran decides, as he said on Saturday that he might, to have an operation on his right shoulder and not to tour, Pakistan will look less invincible.
Although Javed Miandad is more popular with most of the Pakistani players than the aloof Imran, they have seldom played so effectively under his machiavellian leadership.
Gooch will play it his own way, whoever captains Pakistan.
Like the newly-elected Prime Minister, with whom he shares not just a love of cricket, but a firm adherence to basic principles, a natural decency and a dogged belief in hard work, the England captain enjoys a challenge against the odds.
He hopes that the cohesion and character which England have shown for most of the last 11 months will bridge the gap in sheer talent which will continue to separate the two teams.
After two home seasons of consistently high achievement, Gooch's batting, so important for his team's stability, showed signs of unaccustomed frailty in New Zealand.
His latest examination from Pakistan will reveal whether it was a temporary aberration or the start of a gentle decline.
If England score sufficient runs Pakistan's batting could be put under pressure.
IF England could hold their own against Pakistan, it would not only be a great achievement, but one which would make all the difference to their chances of regaining the Ashes from Australia in 1993.
The success or failure of the England team has become pivotal to the financial health or sickness of the county clubs.
Their relationship is inter-dependent.
For this reason, the announcement this Thursday of the recommendations of the Murray committee for the future structure of county cricket from 1993 onwards will be keenly awaited by all in the game.
They will opt, I understand, for a 17-match, four-day championship.
My hope is that on May 19, when the full Board vote, they will go instead for eight four-day games, the remainder to be played over three days on uncovered pitches and run-ups, thus restoring life to pitches, variety to bowling attacks and a priceless education to batsmen.
To be brought up on covered pitches only is like learning English without a concurrent basic grounding in Latin.
In the same way that the latter introduces, almost unconsciously, knowledge of the origin of words and the structure of a sentence, so playing on damp or drying pitches fills the gaps in a developing batsman's technique.
For this season the hectic schedule of recent years continues, although the Sunday league, a competition certain at least to be revamped in 1993, is without a sponsor, a fact which will cost the TCCB — and therefore the counties — £50,000 in prize money.
The expectation is that if Durham, the first new first-class county since Glamorgan in 1921, are to win something in their inaugural season, it will be a one-day competition.
With Ian Botham and Dean Jones, to name but two of their expensively-acquired team, they will not lack for attractive or high-class cricketers.
Let us hope, above all, that one or two of the genuine locals have established themselves before the season is over.
Nottinghamshire, who won the Sunday league last year, will be hoping for something with more prestige this time and with Chris Lewis and Chris Cairns augmenting an already talented staff, they will be the team to beat.
CAIRNS for Franklyn Stephenson, who should work off some of his frustration to Sussex's considerable advantage, will not be an immediate gain.
The young New Zealander came down to earth with a bruising bump in the World Cup and still has much to learn, but he remains potentially an all-rounder of world class.
Essex, whose young players to watch are Mark Ilott and Nick Knight, defend their Britannic Assurance title hoping, as usual, that Neil Foster's knees will allow him to remain the country's best bowler.
He will be one of a number of players in Mike Gatting's disapproved touring team to South Africa hoping for a reprieve from their ban when the ICC meet this July.
Gatting himself is hoping to force his way back into the England side before the season is over and so is Matthew Maynard, of Glamorgan, who had a productive season in New Zealand after averaging 60 in the championship last season.
With Viv Richards back to show everyone he can still do it, no-one will take Glamorgan lightly, and the same goes for Warwickshire, last year's surprise packet, and Kent, with Carl Hooper to assist them.
There is truly not a single county which can safely be eliminated from a chance of winning one of the main trophies, although Gloucestershire, cruelly deprived of the English half of their anticipated new-ball pair, David Lawrence and Courtney Walsh, and Leicestershire, would need the biggest swings of the lot to upset the opinion polls.
I shall be surprised if Yorkshire's improvement under the luckless Martyn Moxon does not continue and amazed if Sachin Tendulkar does not convince even those who bitterly resent the idea of an overseas player.
Letter to the Sports Editor: Impractical to exile the Exiles
SIR — I was utterly infuriated at the thoughtless and bigoted article by Jamie Salmon (Daily Telegraph, April 6).
How on earth does he expect the exile clubs of London Scottish and Irish to survive if they are not included in the English league system?
When the leagues go home and away within the next two years these clubs would be left with approximately six Saturdays of rugby per season if excluded.
It's totally impractical for them to enter their own national leagues, we all know that.
These clubs have been part of the backbone of British rugby for decades, but Mr Salmon would obviously be quite happy to see them fade into extinction.
England are at present near the top of the rugby world, but if they feel they cannot keep finding a world-beating XV from 24 of 26 clubs in their top two leagues, my heart bleeds for them.
Bath, Leicester, Harlequins and Wasps are not top dogs ‘purely’ because of the league system.
They were organised and formidable teams before its formation.
I was interested to read that none other than Simon Halliday (Harlequins) regretted that with the onset of league rugby he would no longer be able to compare his skills with those of his counterparts in Llanelli or Cardiff — he would, however, still have that opportunity with the cream of Scotland and Ireland.
GARETH JAMES London Welsh RFU
Letter to the Sports Editor: Salmon trap
SIR — I would like to take issue with Jamie Salmon's nonsensical views on the position of the exile clubs in the Courage Leagues.
Firstly, he assumes that the 120 players fielded by the other eight League One clubs on any given Saturday would be purely ‘English-qualified’.
Should Wasps' Lozowski and Oti have made themselves only available for Poland (or even Italy) and Nigeria respectively and/or been barred from playing in League One?
Should Orrell's Morris be banished to Neath or Cardiff to give an ‘English’ scrum-half a chance at the No 9 slot?
Of course not.
He similarly assumes that exile players are only qualified for the clubs' ostensible countries of origin.
This is incorrect.
London Irish, for instance, are currently fielding flanker David Pegler, former captain of London and England B, and centre Paddy Young, former England schoolboys captain.
Their young winger/outside-half, Michael Corcoran, is as eligible for England as he is for Ireland.
Mr Salmon then, quite illogically, goes on to applaud the presence of overseas players in League One.
What is an overseas player, if not an individual exile?
I am sure Harlequins' Troy Coker makes an invaluable contribution to the other players' understanding of the game.
JOHNNY DOBBYN Purley, Surrey
Letter to the Sports Editor: Soccer greed
SIR — I would like to express my dismay and concern at the lack of attention being paid to the football infrastructure in this country.
We are all aware of the manipulating that is occuring in the creation of the new ‘Greedy League’, but there is no visible sign that anybody is looking beyond the ‘big boys’.
As a supporter of the lower divisions and non-League football, I am becoming increasingly alienated from the game at the top level and I believe many thousands of people are going the same way.
Media and television attention to the half-dozen or so major clubs is now very boring.
I also find it incredible that the demise of Aldershot has not led to a positive reaction to assist the smaller clubs.
How can it make sense not to promote two clubs from the Conference next season to bring the Fourth Division up to 24 clubs.
The decision to keep it at 23 means fewer fixtures, less money and a greater likelihood of further clubs folding.
I would like to see the Third and Fourth Divisions and GM Vauxhall clubs combining.
They should operate on a part-time basis and attract their own television and sponsorship.
Then, sooner or later the ‘Greedy League’ will realise what an asset they have lost.
MIKE GADBURY Stoke D'Abernon, Surrey
Letter to the Sports Editor: Union more fun
SIR — The fact that Steve Redfern has been trying for six years to resume playing rugby union after playing rugby league (Daily Telegraph, April 2) shows that union is a more enjoyable game.
Many ex-international union players are still turning out every Saturday for junior teams.
Why, if a league player wants a game, does he not play amateur league?
League does not have enough good amateurs to feed its professional ranks and few of its top professionals continue in amateur league when their careers end.
P NOLAN Beverley, N Humberside
Letter to the Sports Editor: A chilling return to Hillsborough
SIR — Colin Malam's view (April 6), about the timing of the FA Cup semi-final at Hillsborough being too soon, was shared by most Norwich supporters.
We were not very happy to find that Hillsborough had been chosen and even less so when we were allocated the Leppings Lane End.
Having played in the other semi-final against Everton on that fateful day in 1989 we were stunned, on returning to our coaches, to hear the news coming from Hillsborough.
For me, having to enter the ground last Sunday through the area and tunnel where the crush had taken place was a chilling experience.
Norwich fans did pay their respects by placing bunches of daffodils on the pitch behind the goal, although nothing of this gesture seemed to be mentioned on TV or in the press.
Although a ‘mature’ lady, I am a supporter of ‘save the terrace’and cannot agree that seats are necessary — fans will stand up most of the time anyway, as we did last Sunday, and seats are more of a hazard when leaning over to see what is happening on the pitch.
The main reason Hillsborough claimed so many victims was that the fencing prevented escape, not necessarily because they were standing.
MYRA HAWTREE Stalham, Norfolk
Letter to the Sports Editor: Sitting targets
SIR — I am the same age as the funniest sports writer around, Michael Parkinson.
I remember well all the characters ‘Parky’ reminisces about and recall with longing the great sliding tacklers.
I believe, however, that Michael is totally wrong about the Taylor Report and his belief that every spectator should be seated.
During the last three seasons I've had four major matches, including two at Wembley, ruined.
Drunken ‘yobs’ being sick, threatening anyone who objects and standing on seats are common.
At least I could have moved if I had been standing.
Why do all the hooligans seem to be on the row in front and the row behind me?
A lot of luck is required if a seat is purchased.
I'm afraid Michael, the ‘yobs’ are still with us — all they have done is move into the seats.
DANNY CORNS Trowell, Notts
Cricket: Family man who gives likely lads a firm lead PROFILE Mark Nicholas, the Hampshire captain, on Graham Gooch, restorer of England's respect and self-belief
By MARK NICHOLAS
AT 11am today (not withstanding the weather), Essex's favourite son will shuffle down those famous steps at Lord's, shoulders drooped and rolling, to launch the English cricket season.
He might have the likely lads behind him: Pringle from Kenya, Foster from Colchester, Waugh from Sydney and various waifs and strays that Essex Man has housed; or he may be ready to bat.
If a pup from the England A team should over-pitch the new ball, then, sure as eggs are eggs, England's captain will tonk it back past him and set off for the first runs of 1992.
Nobody has been more appropriately cast: almost single-handedly Graham Gooch has rejuvenated English cricket.
He has given it continuity and confidence, matching perspiration with performance.
After years of indifference at international level, England have regained their belief and self-respect.
Gooch has led the way with monumental batting efforts and a strict diet of training and practice that leaves younger men breathless.
Indeed, his work rate is so high that his players are inspired to perform if only so that the old so-and-so does not get the better of them.
In the hushed, beaten dressing-room after the World Cup final, there was a united whisper —‘If only we could have done it for Goochie’.
Graham Gooch was born in 1953 at Leytonstone, son of Alf and Rose.
He was an East Ender, near as possible a Cockney, and, with his mother, shopped the markets of Walthamstow and Leytonstone insisting that chips with this and chips with that was a triumphant diet for a sports crazy kid.
He never nicked an apple off the cart (he didn't go much for fruit and veg), he was probably too honest.
His devotion to Essex cricket came from these roots, as he followed West Ham United Football Club and played cricket with Alf for the East Ham Corinthians.
It was at this time, too, that he forged the one consistent thread of his life — the love of his family.
As with many sects, East Enders have a powerful, inherent security.
Like a lion with her cubs, they lick their own wounds and show little of themselves to outsiders.
When Gooch loses form with the bat or confidence with the media, he withdraws, shying away from awkward exposure.
He has not been helped by this shyness (he had been with Essex for three years when Keith Fletcher asked if anyone had heard the young Gooch speak) and it has led to misrepresentation.
The ‘miserable’ image that lurks unfavourably beneath the stubble is its legacy.
The shyness, of course, is not reflected in his play, where a dominant character craves for success.
He is a simple, pragmatic cricketer.
‘If you fail to prepare, you prepare to fail,’ might be his motto.
He has no need for motivation and, interestingly, does not suffer from nerves.
He tries to play his best all of the time and plays to win.
He expects the same of those around him.
An immensely confident batsman, Gooch is at his most bullish against the West Indians, where he has found great success.
As he peers down the gun barrel with his high, unorthodox stance, he visualises former glories.
As long ago as 1980, he dominated the most potent fast attack in history.
Against Garner, Holding, Roberts, Croft and Marshall, he averaged 40 in England and 57 in the Caribbean.
During the same time, he played six Tests against Australia and averaged just 13.
The quicker the ball came to him, the easier he played it.
Last summer — and 11 years on — on a tricky surface at Headingley and at a crucial time, he played his greatest Test innings, carrying his bat for an extraordinary 7½ hours making an unbeaten 154.
His pleasure was that England went on to their first home victory against the West Indies since 1969.
He celebrated with his cubs, not with the outside world.
Gooch is a terrific big-match player.
His batting oozes responsibility and time and time again he has ushered Essex through scary run chases or guided England with equal zeal in both rearguards and assaults.
He holds the bat aloft for comfort, so that his eyes remain level and he concentrates feverishly, believing it a greater crime to be out for 30 than for nought.
When his form is good, he straight drives with awesome certainty, barely bothering to run as he knows his timing has ensured a boundary.
Though his current technique is based on the battle against fast bowling (he is moving back rather than across in an attempt to eliminate his Achilles heel, the lbw decision), he plays slow bowling with rare arrogance.
Gooch has developed as a captain, too, pulling strings whereas before he might have retreated.
After two seasons as captain of Essex, he resigned saying: ‘As I see it, when you win you're supposed to and when you don't, it's your fault.’
Now, the leadership of his county is his pride: the winning of the championship last summer, his happiest moment in the game.
He was back with his roots.
If he is sterile in the handling of his attack — sometimes key bowlers wheel away until they drop — it is because his nature does not allow the experiment of risk.
Tactically, he may not be Brearley or Fletcher, for he sticks with what he knows; but Brearley or Fletcher could not bat like Gooch.
In a way, we are witnessing the second coming of Graham Gooch, the flowering of an unfulfilled embryo.
He has as many centuries in the two-and-a-bit years that he has been England captain as he had in all his years in the ranks.
If he continues to play so well, he will be remembered as a ‘great’ batsman.
To do so, he will need to rest up a little, for an old body is a less willing one.
He feels that there is plenty of cricket left in him and, amid all the rumours and quotes about ‘fuel in the tank’, he is not likely to relinquish his role with England until he has had another crack at the Ashes.
In his time, this most coveted prize has been won by Brearley, the scholar; Gatting, the street fighter; and Gower, the idealist.
In 1993, it might be the turn of Gooch, the professional.
He may yet tour India next winter, for there is a three-month break before the challenge of a calmer series against swing and spin —‘You are a long time retired,’ he says impishly.
Contrary to opinion, Gooch is a thoroughly happy man.
He is splendid company though you must know him well to have his trust for the scars of rebuke when called a traitor for playing in South Africa a decade ago remain etched on his character.
Strangely, there is both the outlaw and the patriot in this formidable cricketer.
He neither sought the captaincy of England nor flaunts it.
He would not fear losing the captaincy but, while he has it, he will continue to make quite sure that he doesn't fail it.
Cricket: Family man who gives likely lads a firm lead PROFILE Mark Nicholas, the Hampshire captain, on Graham Gooch, restorer of England's respect and self-belief
By MARK NICHOLAS
AT 11am today (not withstanding the weather), Essex's favourite son will shuffle down those famous steps at Lord's, shoulders drooped and rolling, to launch the English cricket season.
He might have the likely lads behind him: Pringle from Kenya, Foster from Colchester, Waugh from Sydney and various waifs and strays that Essex Man has housed; or he may be ready to bat.
If a pup from the England A team should over-pitch the new ball, then, sure as eggs are eggs, England's captain will tonk it back past him and set off for the first runs of 1992.
Nobody has been more appropriately cast: almost single-handedly Graham Gooch has rejuvenated English cricket.
He has given it continuity and confidence, matching perspiration with performance.
After years of indifference at international level, England have regained their belief and self-respect.
Gooch has led the way with monumental batting efforts and a strict diet of training and practice that leaves younger men breathless.
Indeed, his work rate is so high that his players are inspired to perform if only so that the old so-and-so does not get the better of them.
In the hushed, beaten dressing-room after the World Cup final, there was a united whisper —‘If only we could have done it for Goochie’.
Graham Gooch was born in 1953 at Leytonstone, son of Alf and Rose.
He was an East Ender, near as possible a Cockney, and, with his mother, shopped the markets of Walthamstow and Leytonstone insisting that chips with this and chips with that was a triumphant diet for a sports crazy kid.
He never nicked an apple off the cart (he didn't go much for fruit and veg), he was probably too honest.
His devotion to Essex cricket came from these roots, as he followed West Ham United Football Club and played cricket with Alf for the East Ham Corinthians.
It was at this time, too, that he forged the one consistent thread of his life — the love of his family.
As with many sects, East Enders have a powerful, inherent security.
Like a lion with her cubs, they lick their own wounds and show little of themselves to outsiders.
When Gooch loses form with the bat or confidence with the media, he withdraws, shying away from awkward exposure.
He has not been helped by this shyness (he had been with Essex for three years when Keith Fletcher asked if anyone had heard the young Gooch speak) and it has led to misrepresentation.
The ‘miserable’ image that lurks unfavourably beneath the stubble is its legacy.
The shyness, of course, is not reflected in his play, where a dominant character craves for success.
He is a simple, pragmatic cricketer.
‘If you fail to prepare, you prepare to fail,’ might be his motto.
He has no need for motivation and, interestingly, does not suffer from nerves.
He tries to play his best all of the time and plays to win.
He expects the same of those around him.
An immensely confident batsman, Gooch is at his most bullish against the West Indians, where he has found great success.
As he peers down the gun barrel with his high, unorthodox stance, he visualises former glories.
As long ago as 1980, he dominated the most potent fast attack in history.
Against Garner, Holding, Roberts, Croft and Marshall, he averaged 40 in England and 57 in the Caribbean.
During the same time, he played six Tests against Australia and averaged just 13.
The quicker the ball came to him, the easier he played it.
Last summer — and 11 years on — on a tricky surface at Headingley and at a crucial time, he played his greatest Test innings, carrying his bat for an extraordinary 7½ hours making an unbeaten 154.
His pleasure was that England went on to their first home victory against the West Indies since 1969.
He celebrated with his cubs, not with the outside world.
Gooch is a terrific big-match player.
His batting oozes responsibility and time and time again he has ushered Essex through scary run chases or guided England with equal zeal in both rearguards and assaults.
He holds the bat aloft for comfort, so that his eyes remain level and he concentrates feverishly, believing it a greater crime to be out for 30 than for nought.
When his form is good, he straight drives with awesome certainty, barely bothering to run as he knows his timing has ensured a boundary.
Though his current technique is based on the battle against fast bowling (he is moving back rather than across in an attempt to eliminate his Achilles heel, the lbw decision), he plays slow bowling with rare arrogance.
Gooch has developed as a captain, too, pulling strings whereas before he might have retreated.
After two seasons as captain of Essex, he resigned saying: ‘As I see it, when you win you're supposed to and when you don't, it's your fault.’
Now, the leadership of his county is his pride: the winning of the championship last summer, his happiest moment in the game.
He was back with his roots.
If he is sterile in the handling of his attack — sometimes key bowlers wheel away until they drop — it is because his nature does not allow the experiment of risk.
Tactically, he may not be Brearley or Fletcher, for he sticks with what he knows; but Brearley or Fletcher could not bat like Gooch.
In a way, we are witnessing the second coming of Graham Gooch, the flowering of an unfulfilled embryo.
He has as many centuries in the two-and-a-bit years that he has been England captain as he had in all his years in the ranks.
If he continues to play so well, he will be remembered as a ‘great’ batsman.
To do so, he will need to rest up a little, for an old body is a less willing one.
He feels that there is plenty of cricket left in him and, amid all the rumours and quotes about ‘fuel in the tank’, he is not likely to relinquish his role with England until he has had another crack at the Ashes.
In his time, this most coveted prize has been won by Brearley, the scholar; Gatting, the street fighter; and Gower, the idealist.
In 1993, it might be the turn of Gooch, the professional.
He may yet tour India next winter, for there is a three-month break before the challenge of a calmer series against swing and spin —‘You are a long time retired,’ he says impishly.
Contrary to opinion, Gooch is a thoroughly happy man.
He is splendid company though you must know him well to have his trust for the scars of rebuke when called a traitor for playing in South Africa a decade ago remain etched on his character.
Strangely, there is both the outlaw and the patriot in this formidable cricketer.
He neither sought the captaincy of England nor flaunts it.
He would not fear losing the captaincy but, while he has it, he will continue to make quite sure that he doesn't fail it.
Sport Around The World: Heading a heavy football can shrink your brain
By BRIAN OLIVER
NEVER mind punch-drunk ex-boxers — former footballers suffer too, according to Norwegian researchers who have determined that heading a football can cause permanent injury.
They also found that, because of heavier balls used in the past, it is a case of ‘the older the player, the greater the damage’.
What would Dixie Dean and Tommy Lawton make of it all?
Tests on 37 former international footballers showed 12 were suffering from headaches, dizziness and impaired memory.
The victims had symptoms of central cerebral atrophy, or shrunken brains, and X-rays showed neck damage corresponding to a premature ageing of 10 years.
The percentage of sufferers was much higher in players aged 35 to 64, reports the Norwegian medical journal.
‘A wet football of the old type was like getting a brick on your head,’ says Ove Sortland, Professor of Radiology at Ulleval Hospital and co-author of the report.
Accomplished headers of the ball were less likely to suffer injury than those who were not as proficient, because they met the ball in a way which which imparted less strain.
‘We don't know yet whether the young players of today will have the same problems,’ adds Sortland, who, despite the results, will not be advising children against taking up football.
‘There are sports which are far more dangerous,’ he says.
CHINA is planning to join the Formula One motor racing circuit.
Work will start on a new circuit by the end of the year if the Communist government give the go-ahead.
The project would cost £57 million, reports China Daily.
The track would be constructed in Zhuhai, a capitalist-style special economic zone bordering Macau, the Portuguese enclave with a long history of grand prix racing.
‘We're trying our best for an agreement to start construction before the end of this year,’ an official tells the Daily.
The 1.85-mile track would be lined by five grandstands with a capacity for 150,000, and racing would start in 1995.
A letter of intent has already been signed by local government and a Malaysian investment company, but approval is pending from Peking and the International Motor Racing Association.
TENNIS umpiring is about to improve with the help of computer technology.
It will be easier, too.
So says the American umpire, Dana Leconto, who has tried out the new Palm Unit, a hand-held microprocessor which logs all shots, reminds players of court and ball changes, keeps time and does everything but make line calls.
The Palm Unit, which costs £280 and will soon be in use at all ATP men's tournaments, was tested in a recent tournament in Singapore and Leconto tells USA Today: ‘It's like an autopilot on an aeroplane.
You just press a button and watch the match.
It makes you a better umpire.’
GREYHOUND racing history was made in a remarkable race in Birmingham last week.
In winning the greyhound Grand National at Hall Green, Kildare Slippy jumped five flights of hurdles — and still broke the track record on the flat.
Not quite the same as Ed Moses breaking the 400 metres best while running over hurdles, maybe, but quite an achievement nevertheless.
It was the first time a hurdling dog had broken a flat record but trainer Paddy Hancox was not surprised.
He tells Greyhound Life: ‘He's a brilliant dog — probably one of the best hurdlers ever.’
AFTER winning on points in a professional boxing match in Brisbane, Kevin Thorpe bought the loser a beer.
He also plans to go fishing with him.
The reason for the friendliness is that Thorpe's victim was his identical twin brother, Steve.
The twins, both 22, though Kevin is 11 minutes older, pulled no punches in the welterweight bout and Steve tells Associated Press: ‘If I'd had the chance, I'd have knocked him out.’
It was the first pro bout between twins and the only way the 400 spectators could tell them apart was by the colour of their shorts.
Sports Commentary: Boot room leaves its imprint
By DONALD SAUNDERS
I F LIVERPOOL reach the FA Cup final, by defeating Portsmouth at Villa Park tonight, the veterans of the Anfield boot room will have demonstrated yet again that a dedicated, experienced back-up team is as important to a successful football club as an inspirational manager.
When Bill Shankly surprisingly retired in 1974, after transforming Liverpool into one of the giants of League soccer, it was widely predicted that the club would soon slip back into the rut from which he had hauled them.
Few forecasts have been so wide of the mark.
Having failed to persuade Mr Shankly to change his mind, Liverpool's board resisted the temptation to appoint another charismatic manager.
Instead they invited Bob Paisley to move from the boot room to the manager's office.
By the time he quit in 1983, Mr Paisley, supported by his old colleagues Joe Fagan, Ronnie Moran, Roy Evans, Tom Saunders and Reuben Bennett, had guided Liverpool to six championships, a hat-trick of League Cup successes and three European Cup triumphs.
Mr Fagan then carried on the tradition, steering Liverpool to a championship-League Cup-European Cup treble the following year.
Despite this admirable record, Liverpool's directors decided to break the sequence when Mr Fagan retired in 1985 by seeking a replacement in the dressing room.
But the boot room continued to play an invaluable part in this difficult post-Heysel period, helping Kenny Dalglish to establish himself quickly as an outstanding manager with the club's first championship-FA Cup double in 1986, and subsequent League titles and another FA Cup final.
Then, after Mr Dalglish had shocked the soccer world by resigning in the middle of last season, Mr Moran left the boot room to steady the ship, until Graeme Souness was free to leave Glasgow Rangers and return to Liverpool, where he had once been a key player.
Now, the boot room has again come to the rescue.
This time Mr Moran has stepped forward to shoulder even greater responsibility while Mr Souness recovers from a heart operation that will keep him out of the manager's chair for the rest of the season.
Victory over Portsmouth is essential if Liverpool are to avoid completing two consecutive seasons without a major trophy for the first time in 20 years.
So, should they secure their passage to Wembley, then defeat Sunderland in the final, the FA Cup surely should be placed proudly on display not in Anfield's handsome trophy room, but below stairs, in the humble abode of the boys from the boot room.
WATCHING the collapse of the opinion polls' projections of a hung Parliament early last Friday morning, I was reminded of the 1970 General Election.
On that occasion, too, the polls got it wrong.
I first learnt of Edward Heath's unexpected victory over Harold Wilson on arrival at a Mexico City hotel.
It was the second major shock of the week.
Only a few days earlier England had been knocked out of the World Cup by West Germany.
In those days of fewer opinion polls they seemed to play a much smaller, less intrusive part in the elections.
Even so, I knew how the pollsters felt.
After all, I, along with almost every other British journalist in Mexico, had confidently predicted that England would reach the World Cup final for the second consecutive time and stubbornly resist Brazil's attempt to take the trophy from them.
The West Germans had not appeared to pose a threat to that plan until they wiped out a 2–0 deficit late in the second half of the quarter-final.
Only then did we begin to fear the worst.
ONCE again, we had been let down by the refusal of human beings to conform to expected patterns.
This is an occupational hazard shared by sportswriters and opinion pollsters.
Most of the time we are able to take such perversity in our stride.
Sometimes, however, notably during a General Election or a big fight, total inaccuracy is publicly punished.
Indeed, I well remember my one, involuntary, appearance on the front page of one of Fleet Street's best-selling tabloids, alongside eight other guilty-looking British journalists, the morning after we had all failed to warn our readers that Cassius Clay was a whole lot better than Sonny Liston.
Fortunately, our embarrassment was eased by the presence among us of Rocky Marciano, who had been moonlighting for a rival tabloid.
Next time, of course, we got it right.
I wonder if the polls will be as fortunate.
I CAN understand why Barry Hearn is claiming that a rematch between Chris Eubank and Nigel Benn would be the ‘biggest fight in Britain since the war’.
If it is staged he would be the promoter.
Consequently he will have to create sufficient live and TV interest to attract the huge sums the boxers will demand, even after the ‘unrealistic’ figures they are now seeking have been modified.
This may prove to be the most expensive contest staged in Britain, but I doubt whether it really will be the biggest since the war.
Those of us with long memories would place Henry Cooper's two fights with Muhammad Ali and his defence of the British, European and Commonwealth heavyweight titles against Joe Bugner way above it for class and public interest.
In the days before hyperbole was shortened to hype and live boxing was a TV rarity, Cooper had a nationwide following.
I suspect the left hook with which he floored Ali in their first bout and the controversy aroused when referee Harry Gibbs decided Bugner had outpointed him will remain important entries in British boxing long after the widely-publicised arguments between Eubank and Benn have faded from memory.
Still, it is good to know that British boxers can now command as much money for fighting in London as they once would have received only when topping the bill in the United States.
In due course, however, the customers will insist that high wages are matched by high standards.
Rugby Union: Leicester run riot in record victory
By Charles Randall
TONY UNDERWOOD scored six tries on the wing for Leicester in their record 100–0 club match win against Liverpool St Helens at Welford Road on Saturday.
This total passed Leicester's previous highest win, 95–6 against Birmingham five seasons ago, while the 19 tries raised their previous best by four.
However, Underwood's achievement fell short of the seven tries by Alistair Smallwood, who took Manchester to the cleaners in 1922.
Saracens, the only obstacle between Bath and the League One championship on April 25, confirmed themselves as London's highest placed club with a convincing 27–9 win over a lively London Irish side at Southgate.
Gloucester beat Bristol 29–15 after both sides decided to throw the ball around in the sun at Kingsholm.
Bristol overtook Gloucester's 14–3 lead in the second half but two late tries by Morris for Gloucester gave the score a more one-sided look than this mid-table contest had actually been.
When Newcastle Gosforth fell by the wayside 4–9 to relegation candidates Bedford, West Hartlepool's 7–0 victory over Wakefield secured them promotion, with London Scottish, to the top division.
Stabler put over a penalty and Mitchell secured victory by bursting through Wakefield's defence.
The fight against relegation from League Two remains close and Bedford's win seems to have postponed the day of reckoning until their game at Morley on April 25.
Bainbridge, the former British Lions forward, gave Newcastle the lead with the only try of the game.
Richmond clinched promotion from League Three with a 50–3 thrashing of Roundhay but Nuneaton were assured of relegation by losing 15–12 at home to Clifton.
Havant's 32–3 demolition of Sidcup left them needing a victory at home over Sudbury on April 25 to leapfrog Basingstoke and gain promotion from League Four South.
London Scottish were the best organised and quickest side at the London qualifying tournament of the Worthington Best Bitter National Sevens and, along with other pool winners Harlequins and Saracens, progressed to the finals at Bath on April 26.
Both they and Saracens had hard-fought draws in one of their pool matches but go through by virtue of scoring more tries.
RESULTS.
— Pool A: London Scottish 38, Blackheath 0; London Scottish 18, Wasps 18; Wasps 17, Blackheath 10.
Pool Winners: London Scottish.
Pool B: Harlequins 18, Richmond 4; Harlequins 38, London Irish 0; Richmond 34, London Irish 0.
Pool Winners: Harlequins.
Pool C: Saracens 40, Askeans 0; Saracens 12, Rosslyn Park 12; Rosslyn Park 14, Askeans 9.
Pool Winners: Saracens.
Bay of Plenty showed the advantage of the special coaching which New Zealanders receive for such events when they romped to victory in the Melrose Sevens tournament, taking the prized trophy overseas for the third year in a row by defeating Kelso 19–12 in the final.
Rugby Union: Mapletoft turns the screw on Harlequins
By Nick Cain
Rugby29pts Harlequins20 RUGBY'S League One ambitions looked dead and buried.
They trailed 20–7 at half-time as Harlequins ran through their repertoire of slick back-line moves in preparation for their Cup final showdown with Bath.
The only stumble in the Quins surge, which brought tries for Carling, Thompson and Pears, who also landed two penalties, came when Saunders, Rugby's ace poacher, intercepted Halliday's would-be scoring pass and held off Quins' all-comers in a 90-metre sprint for the line.
Then, as Alex Saward, Harlequins' press officer, put it, ‘one of those things that happen in rugby’ happened.
Lurking on the wrong side of a maul following a drop-out, Quins' prop, Mullins, had his nose broken by an elbow in the face.
The perpetrator, the young Rugby lock, Smith, got away with a stern lecture from referee Steve Lander, who had been alerted to the incident by his touch judge.
Smith should have walked.
Mullins, badly bloodied, had little choice but to go off.
Having already lost Sheasby (ankle), Quins began the second half with substitutes Greene and Goodwin pressed into action — and the complexion of the game changed.
The Rugby Lions, who lived up to their epithet by tackling superbly throughout, found a champion of lost causes in full-back Mapletoft.
This Loughborough student, a talented soccer player who declined an apprenticeship with Coventry City, amassed 17 points.
He began his second-half account by out-pacing Stuart Thresher to Quantrill's chip kick after Bishop's thumping tackle on Thompson had turned over possession.
Then, with their pack gaining the upper hand, Rugby once again benefited from Mr Lander's judgment when he awarded them a penalty try.
From the stands Pears' deliberate knock-down of Pell's ‘scoring’ pass to Hensley defied the laws of probability.
Mapletoft, having knocked over the conversion, trumped it by banging over a 30-metre dropped goal off his weak foot to level at 20–20.
Inspired by such virtuosity, the Revan-powered Rugby scrum was in no mood to let Quins off the hook.
A five-metre scrum in the closing minutes saw them splinter the Quins pack for Charles to touch down.
Fittingly, a Mapletoft penalty brought the curtain down.
David Rees, the chairman of Rugby, has tended his resignation after an internal disagreement.
Club coach Allen Foster stepped down last week.
RUGBY COMMENTARY Ross teaches Northampton a thing or two
By Jamie Salmon
NORTHAMPTON'S surprising defeat at the hands of Midlands rivals Nottingham on Saturday has most probably ended their League championship hopes for 1992.
With Bath to play their last match at home, it looks as if the title will once again belong to the West Country, even if Orrell were to win their last two games, as Bath's points difference is much the greater.
Northampton's return to challenging for top honours was brought about by a complete overhaul of the club's structure both on and off the field.
From that moment they have gone from strength to strength and last year reached the final of the Pilkington Cup only to lose in extra time.
In another inspired move this season they have added a new coach in Glen Ross, from New Zealand.
Having coached Waikato in the New Zealand provincial championship for some years, Ross was looking for a new challenge and the opportunity to come to Northampton came at exactly the right moment.
He said: ‘I needed a rest, but a change is often as good and the chance to experience English rugby was too good to turn down.
Fortunately, it was easy to make a decision as Wayne Shelford was already at the club and he gave me an insight into what it was all about and what to expect.’
Ross admits to being a little disappointed at the level of basic skills when he arrived, adding: ‘A lot of the mistakes were down to the mental approach and lack of concentration, but, having said that, the attitude and determination of the players has been excellent throughout the season.’
Training sessions under Ross at Northampton are carefully constructed and meticulously planned.
‘There is nothing worse than players hanging around waiting for the next instruction.
The sessions are all done at pace and the length should be 80 minutes maximum.
‘The days of two-hour training sessions have long gone as players turn up in better physical condition and therefore know fitness work has to be done.
Fitness is totally the players' responsibility, not mine.’
JOHN Olver, Northampton's captain, has been mightily impressed by the new coach's ideas and methods.
He said: ‘I do more in an hour with Glen than I ever have in two hours with any other coach, and the team as a whole achieves much more.
Knackering though it is, the sessions are also very enjoyable and make everybody work for each other.
His tactical knowledge is also first class.’
Ross has enjoyed the League matches and feels there is very little difference between teams at the top and bottom, as Saturday's result shows.
He is against the proposed plan to introduce a 10-team league playing each other home and away as he feels it would be asking too much of the players.
In addition, he feels the season is far too long.
From what he has seen this year, he also believes the English game is rather stereotyped.
‘I expected to see a lot of back play but have been surprised by the lack of it,’ he said.
‘A number of teams do not have a conceptual understanding of a balance of a game and appreciate just how you can involve the backs as often as possible.
There are, however, a number of very good clubs and outstanding players that could hold their own anywhere.’
Northampton have been so suitably impressed by Ross's abilities that they have offered him the coaching job for the next two seasons, a post that he has accepted.
He added: ‘I have been greatly impressed by the structure of the club and the professional approach of the people who work within it.
We are really a little ahead of our targets on the field and I'm sure things can only get better.
I have thoroughly enjoyed this year and am very excited about the next two seasons.’
ROSS was impressed too with England's performances in recent months and felt they scored some superb tries.
He believes England are in a healthy state in terms of players but quietly, and quite rightly, points out that there is always more to learn.
In this area he is aggrieved by the proposed new regulations relating to overseas players.
‘I don't want to say too much as people will think I am only concerned because if the new rules come into force it will mean Shelford can't play for us next season.
‘However, the one thing the southern hemisphere does know a thing or two about is rugby union and to close the door would be to the detriment of the English game in the long run.
One place in a team is not too much to give up in return for new ideas and expertise.’
Rugby Union: Morris takes blame for Orrell fall COURAGE LEAGUE ONE
Davies' last-ditch kick gives Bath the advantage in title race
By John Mason
Wasps13pts Orrell12
DEWI MORRIS, England's Grand Slam scrum-half, went to a party in Manchester on Saturday night with a heavy heart.
He was convinced he had probably cost Orrell the chance in the next 12 days of becoming England's champion club for the first time.
The competitive Morris was being unduly hard on himself, though there was no getting away from the fact that a missed kick by him to touch in the final second against Wasps at Sudbury had spelt defeat.
There were consoling words from Huw Davies, whose dropped goal from 40 metres sent Orrell packing empty-handed, their league season if not in tatters, then decidedly ragged at the edges.
Davies, once described fondly by a former captain of Wasps, Alan Black, as the clown prince of rugby, said enigmatically afterwards that every dog had his day.
Indifferently as Orrell, who came south in third place and with a match in hand, played, Wasps' victory by a try, two penalty goals and a dropped goal to a try and two penalty goals was fortuitous.
The dropped goal, the ball agonisingly slow in flight, was a beauty but there was a strong element of doubt about the validity of the exchanges immediately before.
Either offside or obstruction, or both, could have been awarded against Wasps as they scrambled after the ball as the final line-out, which they lost, broke up.
Morris, though insisting that the referee had to be the sole judge, was plainly put out.
‘My thoughts as the ball went through the posts?
Utter despair.
Did I think the big flanker was offside and did I think I was half-held.
Yes, I have to say I did.
But I accept the referee's decision.’
While Morris, undeservedly, shoulders the blame, it has to be said that without him Orrell would be a middle-of-the-road side, well served up front but without, say, the authority of Bath, the likely champions, behind the scrum.
Throughout the Wasps match frayed Orrell nerves were obvious from the opening minute, Hynes, Ashurst and Cusani attracting warnings from the referee.
Their display also served to demonstrate faults under the searching limelight that championship-chasing brings.
In that respect, the first-class game also needs strict but sympathetic control from referees, who, above all else, must be consistent.
Pedantic knowledge of the laws is one thing, sensible application quite another.
Nor could jumpy Orrell cope with the efficiency of the steady, unflurried Pilgrim, the full-back, who kicked Wasps' penalty goals besides putting in the delicate chip that set up the try for Oti.
It was the sturdy Bates who fielded Morris's kick in the last second and threw the long pass inside to Davies.
Their efforts were compensation for an earlier breakdown in discipline (verbal only) which permitted Strett to kick the first of his two penalty goals.
The second penalty goal by Strett eased Orrell, who were without Heslop after 30 minutes because of a rib injury, in front at 12–10 with about five minutes remaining.
The Orrell try came, as ever, from Morris after good work by Ashurst and Kimmins.
Strett's conversion took Orrell to a 9–0 lead by half-time and the title was beckoning.
It's a hard old world.
Remaining Top Games, April 20: Harlequins v Orrell.
April 25: Bath v Saracens, Northampton v Rosslyn Pk, Orrell v Nottingham.
ICE HOCKEY
Durham book place in Wembley play-offs
By HOWARD BASS
DURHAM WASPS, the holders, booked a place in the Heineken Championship semi-finals by beating Norwich & Peterborough Pirates 11–5 last night, writes Howard Bass.
Mike Blaisdell and Rick Brebant both scored three goals to inflict the Pirates' first defeat in the quarter-finals.
Whitley Warriors improved their Wembley prospects by beating Nottingham Panthers, who led 5–1 in the 17th minute.
Whitley scored eight goals in a row, three of them in 61 seconds, to win 9–6.
HEINEKEN CH'SHIP. — Qtr-final series:— Durham 11, Norwich & Peterborough 5 — Murrayfield 13, Humberside 9 — Whitley 9, Nottingham 6 — Billingham 5, Whitley 11 — Humberside 3, Durham 9 — Nottingham 7, Cardiff 3.
HEINEKEN LGE. — Promotion Play-Offs:— Basingstoke 9, Slough 7 — Bracknell 6, Swindon 6 — Telford 2, Ayr 6 — Fife 7, Telford 6 — Romford 5, Ayr 3 — Slough 6, Bracknell 7 — Swindon 7, Basingstoke 6.
Entry Play-Offs:— Blackburn 10, Chelmsford 10 — Streatham 2, Medway 15 — Trafford 9, Oxford 5 — Livingston 2, Chelmsford 8 — Medway 10, Streatham 4 — Oxford 6, Trafford 8.
Rugby Union: Hull kicks RAF to victory
By John Mace
Army6pts Royal Air Force18 THE greater efficiency of the Royal Air Force's back row and the all-round kicking ability of their outside-half, Paul Hull, carried them to victory at Twickenham against the Army in the final match of this season's Inter-Service tournament.
It also forced the ninth triple tie of the competition.
Having beaten the Royal Navy, who then defeated the RAF, the Army needed only a draw to give them their 29th outright title, but they seldom generated the cohesion necessary to trouble what was a disciplined RAF team.
Their ball retention was poor and they also committed too many infringements, often in attacking positions.
Hull continually capitalised on this failing with long, relieving kicks and, in addition, he kicked four penalty goals from six attempts.
The RAF enjoyed a territorial advantage throughout most of the game and their pack did what was required in preventing the Army forwards from winning the quality possession they sought.
Their flankers, Morgan and Williams, also made life very difficult for the Army half-backs.
Brian Richardson and Nisbet had a decisive edge in the line-out and Worrall, who was playing in his 20th Inter-Service match, provided a smooth link with his backs.
Hard as they tried, however, Underwood and his colleagues were unable to pierce a determined Army defence and the game's only try came when Robson, the prop forward, forced his way over the line, with Hull adding the conversion.
On several occasions the Army forwards exposed a certain frailty in the RAF's defence around the fringes and launched promising sorties deep into enemy territory.
The Army backs also had their moments, but too often the soldiers shot themselves in the foot as the critical pass was dropped or the wrong option taken.
They could score only two long-range penalty goals, converted by Walker.
Army: M Walker; S Bartliff, H Graham, W Bramble, J Fenn; A Deans, S Pinder (D Williams, 75); D Coghlan, C Wood, J Fowers, D Orr Ewing, R Castleton, R Wainwright, G Richardson (capt), S Berryman.
Penalty goals: Walker (2).
Royal Air Force: S Lazenby; S Crossland, G Sharp, M Cooke, R Underwood; P Hull, S Worrall (capt); D Robson, S Collins, A Billett, B Richardson, A Nisbet, C Morgan, D Williams, D Parsonage.
Try: Robson.
Conversion: Hull.
Penalty goals: Hull (4).
Rugby Union: Bitter-sweet victory ends Davies reign
By Charles Randall
Nottingham 18pts Northampton 9 NOTTINGHAM'S rousing victory gave Alan Davies a send-off with a bitter-sweet flavour on Saturday and ended an era at Beeston.
Davies will be pushing ahead with his intention to move house to Wales during the close season to simplify his role as Wales's coach.
His departure from nearby Long Eaton thus severs a rugby link that has helped to bring Nottingham to eminence from relative obscurity over the past 14 years.
The coinciding appointment of Dusty Hare as salaried coaching director and looming relegation this season have become part of the shifting sands of time.
Davies, Hare and Geoff Cooke, the England manager, watched Nottingham knock Northampton's Courage League One title hopes sideways in what could be the last top division match at Beeston for a number of years.
Nottingham's survival hopes depend on winning at Orrell on April 25 — and doing Northampton a favour in the process.
Possible but unlikely.
A table-topping rebound next year would not be enough for a quick return if a no-promotion season is declared to accommodate the proposal to reduce League One to 10 clubs — a mad price to pay for an all-play-all format.
For a country the size of England, such a tiny league would be a waste of resources and Cooke, presumably, would not want to attend second division games, even to view players such as Nottingham's Martin Pepper, a flanker of England quality.
There will be no surer way of rendering the divisional championship worthless than introducing a tiny club super-league.
Given that more competitive matches are needed, League One needs expanding, not reducing, under the existing system, in which play-once is the only flaw.
Pepper was outstanding against Northampton, with Greenwood, Hindmarch and the two centres, Potter and Jones, not far behind.
The gap between Nottingham and the league leaders was indistinguishable, apart from scrummaging.
The impression that several Northampton players were suffering from the effects of last Tuesday's victory at Leicester was endorsed afterwards, and rarely could Olver, Bayfield and Shelford have had such ineffective games.
Northampton managed only one try, a push-over by Shelford with the advantage of a strong breeze, and spent almost the entire second half penned in their own half.
They spotted the danger of Potter's inside solo break too late, and Nottingham's pushover three minutes from time was the final insult.
Rugby League: Sheffield scramble into top division
DESPITE the impressive 38–4 scoreline against London Crusaders, there was a distinct lack of style to match the occasion yesterday as Sheffield secured their return to the First Division in a game spoilt by strong wind.
Eagles, with the elements in their favour in the opening half took full advantage, killing the game by building up a 20–0 advantage with the help of two tries from Price and six goals from eight attempts from Aston.
In the second half, Picksley, Mycoe, Plange and McAlister added touchdowns against outclassed opposition who never looked like getting into the contest.
By the time Bernei went over for London in the 69th minute, Sheffield had accumulated a massive 32–0 lead.
Although Eagles' defence was rarely put to the test, they need to improve their control for the sterner tasks that lie ahead next season.
Swinton centre Steve Snape leapt from the sin bin to join a brawl five minutes from time — and this time was sent off — as substitutes and ground marshals joined the referee and touch judges in trying to regain order and enable Wakefield Trinity to complete their 44–8 victory.
Bottom-of-the-league Swinton showed their temper in the final 20 minutes as they faced their 21st loss, but Wakefield's full-back, Gary Spencer, was also dismissed.
Wakefield, restricted to a penalty goal in the first quarter of an hour, took command in the next 15 minutes to run in three of their eight tries, two by centre Mason, who went on to a hat-trick.
Swinton's only response before the interval was a penalty goal by full-back Wilkinson, but Kennett took advantage of a moment of inspiration to add a try in the second half.
Welshman John Devereux blasted Widnes back into the premiership hunt with a 24-point spectacular, including four tries, to help beat Hull 36–20.
The Great Britain tourist was in blistering form as he sent Hull spiralling towards the relegation zone and ended his own side's run of five successive defeats.
Hull fell apart after Gay and Nolan had given them an early 10–0 lead.
Howard and Devereux brought Widnes back into the game and after Gay had revived Hull's hopes it was Devereux, along with Wright and Holliday, who sent them crashing.
Featherstone's Derryk Fox grabbed a dramatic 21–20 victory over Leeds with a last-minute drop-goal, boosting their hopes of avoiding the drop.
Rovers opened the scoring when Newlove went over and they increased the lead with a Fox goal.
John Gallagher reduced the arrears with a penalty and put Leeds ahead when he converted an Innes touchdown.
A try by Bentley increased the visitors' lead but Newlove's second touchdown levelled the points.
Leeds regained the advantage when Hanley crossed and Gallagher tagged on his fourth goal.
Ian Smales's try and Fox's fourth goal tied the scores again with 10 minutes to go and it took Fox's drop to separate the sides.
Boxing: Foreman may be finished
GEORGE FOREMAN may never fight again following his narrow points win against British-born Alex Stewart after 10 painful rounds in Las Vegas on Saturday.
The former world heavyweight champion, 43, who ended the fight with his face bloodied and battered, said he would leave the final decision on his retirement to his wife Joan.
‘She wants me to give it up and she's really going to kick my tail this time,’ he said.
‘But I wasn't running from the kid, he was running from me.’
BASKETBALL
Play-off target for top three
THE TOP three finishers in the First Division took a firm step towards the Carlsberg play-offs at Wembley Arena in May with comfortable away wins in the first round of the best-of-three quarter-final series.
Champions Roland Kingston won 103–80 at Birmingham Bullets and runners-up Tigers defeated Hemel Royals 97–64 on Saturday night following Worthing's 102–90 victory at Leicester on Friday.
The other quarter-final series is between Derby Bucks and London Towers.
POLO
England lose in semi-final
ENGLAND gave Chile their hardest match so far in the third World Limited Handicap Championship at the St Cristobal Polo Club in Santiago, Chile, but lost 6–4 in the semi-final.
Henry Brett and James Lucas scored two goals each for England, who had qualified as European champions.
AMERICAN FOOTBALL
Alexander misses crucial kick for London Monarchs
FOR THE first time in his career as kicker for the London Monarchs Phil Alexander was put in a pressure situation at Wembley on Saturday — and his missed field goal from 39 yards cost the reigning World League Champions victory against Birmingham Fire.
There were 12 seconds of overtime remaining as Alexander, the only starting Briton on the Monarchs roster, stepped up but his kick was about two feet wide.
The game was the first tied match in the World League and Alexander said: ‘I feel like I've let the whole team down.’
Quarterback Stan Gelbaugh was no doubt harbouring similar thoughts.
With 2min 47sec remaining of regular time and the Monarchs leading 17–14, he threw an interception which set up Birmingham's equalising field goal and sent the game into overtime.
BOWLS
Parrella holds off fightback
BRISBANE'S Robert Parrella repeated his Commonwealth Games final win over Scots-born Mark McMahon from Hong Kong to capture the Mazda International title at the Tweed Heads Club on Australia's Gold Coast yesterday.
Parrella held off a spirited fightback from 23-year-old McMahon to win 21–19.
The Australian had raced into a 14–6 lead but was pulled back to 17–16 at one stage.
MAZDA T'MENT. — Semi finals: R Parrella (Australia) bt D Katunarich (Australia) 21–15; M McMahon (Hong Kong) bt A Thomson (England) 21–19.
Final: Parrella bt McMahon 21–19.
Rugby Union: Bridgend fall from title chase
By Edward Bevan and David Green
WHILE Swansea maintained their position at the head of the Heineken League's Division One with a comfortable 23–4 win over bottom club Maesteg, Llanelli stayed in touch, one point behind, by beating Cardiff 22–6.
But Neath's recent revival continued at the Gnoll when they ran in six tries and effectively ended Bridgend's hopes of winning the Division One title.
Neath, who have failed to match last season's title-winning form, mainly because the younger players have required time to adjust to the First Division, scored three tries during an eight-minute period in the second half.
Andrew Thomas, who has now replaced Phllips as Neath's first-choice hooker, supplemented his work in the tight by galloping over for two tries.
Behind the scrum, McCarthy varied his options intelligently.
Ball, in the centre, also had a splendid game contributing 14 points.
Llanelli's performance over lowly Cardiff was one of their less convincing of a productive season.
Taking control at the start, Llanelli threw away three clear chances before Lewis scored from close range in the 15th minute.
They continued to handle poorly and take wrong options, thereby permitting Cardiff to get into the game.
But Stephens set up a try for Nigel Davies just before half-time, and tries after the break by Boobyer and Evans settled the match.
Cardiff attacked gamely in the final quarter and scored a late try through Jeffreys.
A try from Martin Jones two minutes from the end enabled Pontypool to draw 10–10 in their game against Newport.
Cross Keys face a two-week playing ban after having their fifth player sent off this season.
Prop Ian Reynolds was dismissed for head butting in the 31–15 second division win at Aberavon.
Teams who have already had five players sent off, such as Beddau, Aberavon Green Stars and Croesyceiliog, are liable to a two-week ban.
Rugby League: Wigan cruise home after early sparkle RUGBY LEAGUE
Mid-season sort-out gives impetus for third successive championship
By John Whalley
Wigan50pts
Bradford Northern8 WIGAN, whose mastery of the understatement off the field rivals total dominance on it, secured their third successive Stones Bitter Championship on Saturday in a performance which, after boiling over at the start, gently simmered into a nine-try rout.
The champions were at their brilliant best in the opening quarter, tormenting Bradford with six touchdowns before, uncharacteristically, easing up.
It was entirely understandable.
The rubber-stamping had been done.
With a 34–0 lead, top gear was no longer required.
Yet, despite their form over the last two months, the turning point for Wigan's 20th major trophy in six years undoubtedly came in December when it looked that they might struggle for success this season.
Out of the Regal Trophy and falling behind in the League where they had already lost four games, Wigan players and coaching staff held a meeting to iron out problems caused by a lengthy early season injury list and the loss of Ellery Hanley, to Leeds.
The response was to start an unbeaten run of 19 games which has swept Wigan to the verge of a third consecutive double or, as John Monie, their coach, put it, ‘halfway towards another successful season’.
Gene Miles, who along with Dean Bell, has provided the solidity for Wigan to batter opponents into submission so often this season, explained the significance of the December get-together: ‘The injuries were clearing at the time of the team meeting and we put everything into winning games around Christmas and New Year.
It was over that period we started to climb.
‘The other major turning-point was when we beat Leeds 24–0 last month.
We played really well and while the other contenders still had to play each other, our run-in was not too bad.
I think we all knew then we were on our way.’
Miles, battle-hardened in the tough Australian school, rates Wigan as equal to any side he has played in.
He added: ‘Players are not just training at club sessions, they continue to build up on their own.
They have put so much effort in individually and are reaping the rewards.’
Miles and Bell, along with Andy Gregory, were signalled out for special praise by Monie, who was gaining his eighth major trophy in under three seasons at the club.
‘The loss of Hanley and Andy Goodway, through injury, at the start of the season took time to get over,’ Monie said.
‘It is credit to the senior professionals for pulling us through.
Miles, Bell and Gregory may be getting older, but there is not a First Division club who would not move in if they became available.’
While Miles and Gregory have still to decide whether to stay with Wigan for another season, the continuing dominance of a club which only 10 years ago was not considered to have one player good enough to start the series against Australia, is almost total.
An illustration of this is that last week 13 Wigan players were chosen for the summer tour.
With expert organisers on the field such as Bell, Gregory, Miles and Shaun Edwards, who beat Ken Gee's record of 18 winning medals for the club, their outstanding discipline is matched with strength, speed and mental durability in all positions.
Edwards, with four tries, including a hat-trick in 18 minutes in the first half, Frano Botica, with seven goals and a try, and Joe Lydon took the individual honours on Saturday and with competition so intense in the reserve and junior sides, players continue to progress with a hunger to match their predecessors' exploits.
This season, the newcomers have come from other clubs but Miles and Martin Offiah, who, like Bell, scored two tries, Billy McGinty and Neil Cowie all illustrate the point.
They have not experienced Wigan's past and provide the extra impetus for the present which negates any possible complacency among the established.
Bradford offered honesty and toil.
Desperate for points to avoid relegation, they could not even succeed in keeping the score down despite a creditable second-half rally; only Summers's try was added to Gill's 25th try.
The two sides were a world apart and while Northern hope for successive victories in their final two games for survival, Wigan can relax and prepare for the Silk Cut Cup final at Wembley on May 2 against Castleford.
They may even find time for a sustained effort to win the Premiership, a trophy which has eluded them since 1987, the only way they can improve on their remarkable exploits of the last two seasons.
Bradford: Wilkinson; Francis (Green 19), Anderson, Helliwell (Grayshon 15), Gill (Helliwell 62); Iti, Summers; Hobbs, Noble, Hamer, Medley, Powell, Fairbank.
Referee: C Morris (Huddersfield).
RACING COMMENTARY Unequal fences show need for stiff measures
By John Oaksey
NOBODY, unfortunately, has invented a scientific method of measuring the stiffness of a steeplechase fence.
Until some genius does so, controversies like the one which surrounded this year's Mildmay Course at Aintree, are bound to crop up from time to time.
This, ironically, was a year in which, with 34 of the 40 runners completing at least one circuit in the Martell Grand National and only three horses actually falling, the great steeplechase must have satisfied even its most inveterate ‘Cruelty to Animals’ assailants.
Of course, at the other end of the scale, there are still diehard conservatives, with a small c, who moan that the National is now ‘just another long-distance chase’— much like the Scottish equivalent won by Captain Dibble at Ayr on Saturday — with all its heroic glamour gone beyond recall.
They may even be right — if you choose to call subjecting horses to unnecessary risk of mortal injury ‘heroic.’
The sort of televised carnage which disfigured some recent Grand Nationals is simply no longer acceptable.
Becher's, without its slope, may not be quite as spectacular as of old, but, much more important, it is a great deal safer and fairer.
If that is ‘soft’ then I am proud to be a ‘softie.’
If, moreover, as seems very likely, the new order attracts more and more top staying chasers to Aintree, that will surely inject a far more desirable brand of ‘heroism’ into Grand National day.
But while the famous fences satisfied almost everybody, the fact has to be faced that, of 71 horses who attempted the seven conventional birch obstacles of the Mildmay course, 17 fell.
Some of the falls (notably the fatal one of Far Over Struy) could, and would have, happened anywhere.
The luckless eight-year-old hit the fence so close to the ground that at least a somersault was inevitable.
He was not the only one responsible for his own downfall, and there were also a few who got away with it.
One of Peter Scudamore's mounts, Aquilifer, for instance, somehow managed to gallop straight through a fence without falling, or even disturbing the equilibrium of his limpet-like companion.
But for most ordinary horses and jockeys, the Mildmay fences, four of them brand-new, turned out to be, by modern standards, exceptionally stiff.
Any horse hitting one more than six inches from the top either fell or, at best, landed at an angle too steep for comfort.
Bob Dixon, the man responsible for these fences, is a skilled, experienced groundsman who has forgotten more about fence-building than most in his craft will ever know.
And Ron Barry, who inspected and passed them, is hardly likely at this stage willingly to foist unfair or unsuitable fences on the profession he so honourably adorned.
Both men, in fact, were and still are, honestly convinced they have done a first-rate job.
As we've seen, until the fences were raced over, no-one could do more than guess how stiff they would turn out to be.
It is not the first time that, for whatever reason, such a ‘mistake’, if you can call it that, has been made with the best will in the world.
I can remember similarly bitter ‘Stone Wall’ comparisons being made by jockeys and trainers when new fences were first used at Newbury, Wetherby, Plumpton, Leicester and several other courses.
The late Tim Brookshaw, not famous for faint-heartedness, danced an eloquent jig on top of the last fence at Leicester to show how hard it was, and one day there was almost a jockeys' strike at Plumpton.
For all sorts of reasons, there is an undesirably wide range of severity between the fences on British courses.
Only the pattern — between 4ft 6in and 4ft 8in high, on a six-foot base — is uniform.
Almost everything else can vary according to the taste of the fence-builder and his employers, the money the course has to spend, the cost, quality and availability of birch and a catalogue of lesser factors.
Variety is all very well, but not in this case.
Horses are creatures of habit, and steeplechasers should know what to expect.
Ideally there ought to be one standard level of stiffness and severity for galloping courses like Cheltenham, Newbury or Sandown Park and another for fast tracks like the Mildmay.
But before such precision can be achieved, we need that genius with his magic measuring machine.
Racing: Chapple-Hyam in Guineas warning
By HOTSPUR (J A McGrath)
PETER CHAPPLE-HYAM said yesterday that Rodrigo de Triano, a disappointing fourth in Saturday's Singer & Friedlander Greenham Stakes at Newbury, will miss the 2,000 Guineas at Newmarket on May 2 if the ground is at all soft.
Chapple-Hyam was inclined to blame a shortfall in fitness for the colt's first defeat but was equally sure the tacky ground, officially good to soft, was also a major factor.
‘I'm very glad we ran him,’ Chapple-Hyam explained.
‘I had the option of pulling him out because I was concerned about the ground, but the run has shown that I have been far too soft on him.
His holiday has just ended, I can assure you.’
Chapple-Hyam is adamant there is still significant improvement to come from the colt, who lost his position as Guineas favourite and is now 7–1 from 9–2 with Ladbrokes.
‘He lost 10 or 11 kilos, which is a lot for him.
The fact is that he blew up badly.’
The trainer believes he still has time to get Rodrigo de Triano back to peak fitness for the 2,000 Guineas but stresses that the colt will not take his place in the Classic if the ground softens up: ‘If there is even a touch of soft, he won't run; he needs to have it like a road.’
Rodrigo de Triano's defeat was the only disappointment in an otherwise memorable day for owner Robert Sangster, who landed an 899–1 hat-trick in the last three races with Lost Reputation, River Defences — his Derby contender — and well-fancied Ecliptic, backed from 33–1 in the morning to 9–1.
Meanwhile, Lion Cavern, the Greenham winner, is by no means certain to run in the 2,000 Guineas, hence the lukewarm reaction from bookmakers.
Ladbrokes slashed his price to 10–1 from 20–1, while Hill's offer 6–1 ‘with a run’.
Both firms make his stablemate Tertian their new favourite.
Tertian, winner of the Somerville Tattersalls Stakes at Newmarket last October, goes straight to the Guineas, with Pat Eddery aboard, but the present state of the market surely indicates the need for a solid Classic pointer more than anything else.
Lion Cavern came from last in a slowly-run race and displayed commendable resolution to emerge a narrow but worthy winner.
The Sheikh Mohammed camp will decide on a target after Wolfhound and Steinbeck run in the Free Handicap at Newmarket on Wednesday.
Runner-up River Falls, beaten a head, and his stablemate Swing Low, third, are both in the 2,000 Guineas but Richard Hannon will send one for the Italian version.
Paul Cole sends Magic Ring back sprinting after the colt's failure in the Greenham and his first target will be the Temple Stakes at Sandown.
Stablemate Desert Zone — who has been backed at long odds for the Ever Ready Derby — runs today at Brighton but Cole's main hope, Great Palm, is not due to reappear until the Dante Stakes next month.
The final shape of the 2,000 Guineas market depends largely on the performance of Forest Tiger, now 7–1, in Thursday's Craven Stakes at Newmarket.
If he impresses, there is no doubt he will become clear favourite.
He faces seven rivals, including Kentucky Derby contender Dr Devious, who impressed Cash Asmussen in a gallop at Newbury on Saturday.
On the jumping front, trainer Nigel Twiston-Davies is still deciding on whether to send Captain Dibble, courageous winner of Saturday's Scottish National at Ayr, to Fairyhouse next Monday for the Irish Grand National.
He admits that the £50,000 bonus is a big temptation.
‘He is a big horse and his preference is for soft ground.
That will have a major bearing on whether he travels over,’ said the trainer.
Racing: Glasgow is Best of Day
By Course Correspondent
GLASGOW*, who finished with gusto under a sympathetic ride on his reappearance at Doncaster last month, can put that experience to good use by landing today's Levy Board Maiden Stakes (4.0) at Brighton.
This headstrong Top Ville colt was equipped with a net muzzle going to the start and Steve Cauthen was obviously intent on anchoring Glasgow towards the rear in order to teach the him to settle.
Unfortunately, a combination of ‘traffic’ problems and overdoing the waiting tactics brought about his downfall, but Glasgow will know more about was is required today and can recover loses.
Willie Carson, who takes over on Glasgow, may initiate a double with Tiger Claw in the Town Purse Handicap (2.30).
Sarum is fancied for the Petworth Handicap (3.30) and Plain Fact, never in a position to peg back Wanda at Lingfield Park recently, may have too much pace for his rivals in the Conflans Handicap (5.0).
JUDO
Gordon lifts morale
By Nicolas Soames
ELVIS GORDON, the unpredictable heavyweight, saved the best throw of the British Open at Crystal Palace for the final when he lifted 125kg Frenchman Jerome Dreyfus five feet into the air before throwing him on the mat.
The move won Gordon the heavyweight Open title and provided a much-needed lift for a British men's team who were inevitably overshadowed by the success of the women.
Bantamweight Karen Briggs, featherweight Sharon Rendle and light-middleweight Diane Bell all won on Saturday with performances that make them odds-on favourites for medals in Barcelona.
Kate Howey, 18, the world junior middleweight champion, might have won more than a bronze if she had not incurred a seven-point penalty against Marianne Charve, of France, in her semi-final.
In the battle for Olympic selection at under-72kg, Croydon's Josie Horton won a silver while Jane Morris from Kent took a bronze and Nick Kokotaylo, 38, beat Ray Stevens for a bronze at under-95kg.
LAWN TENNIS
Wild card for Borg
BJORN BORG who, at 36, is still contemplating a return to Grand Slam tournaments, faces Olivier Delaitre, of France — ranked 44th in the world — when he plays his first official men's singles match for almost a year in Nice tomorrow.
Borg has been given a wild card for this week's Nice Open and next week's Monte Carlo Open.
Borg's wife, Italian singer Loredana Berte, was taken to hospital in Milan on Saturday after collapsing at home.
Jim Courier, of the United States, beat Holland's Richard Krajicek to win the men's singles title at the Japan Open in Tokyo yesterday.
Courier, 21, who reclaimed the world No 1 ranking from Sweden's Stefan Edberg on Saturday, won 6–4, 6–4, 7–6.
Brighton's Julie Pullin won her second African satellite circuit tournament in three weeks when she beat Estelle Gevers 6–2, 2–6, 6–4, in Gaborone, Botswana.
Racing: Five-timer for Bolger but Derby hope flops
By Tony Stafford
JIM BOLGER'S Derby hope St Jovite flopped when odds-on for the Gladness Stakes at The Curragh on Saturday, but the trainer and owner Mrs Virginia Kraft Payson still left the track in a happy frame of mind.
Bolger monopolised the rest of a seven-race programme, compiling his first five-timer at odds of 681–1 and Mrs Payson saw two explosive wins from her home-bred colts Tropicarr and Magic Carr before flying back to the United States yesterday.
St Jovite, whose only previous defeat was fourth to Arazi in the Grand Criterium at Longchamp last autumn, found the combination of seven furlongs and heavy ground in the Gladness Stakes doubly unsuitable.
As he struggled home a remote fourth, Bezelle, the only other three-year-old in the field, beat the Barry Hills-trained Norwich by a neck.
Bolger intends running St Jovite over a more suitable 10 furlongs in the Derrinstown Stud Derby Trial at Leopardstown before tackling the Epsom Classic.
Last year, Bolger lost his record of races won in a calendar year to his perennial rival Dermot Weld, but the signs are that he will regain the record this season.
Saturday's quintet gave him the remarkable tally of 15 wins from the 35 races run on the Flat in Ireland in 1992.
On Saturday, the juvenile Tahdeed and the three-year-old fillies Gadansk's Honour and Arrikala for owners Henryk de Kwiatkowski and Harry Dobson showed that his yard has strength in all divisions.
Both owners will be represented when Bolger mounts a strong raid on Newmarket this week.
Dobson's Irish Memory runs in the Craven Stakes on Thursday and de Kwiatkowski's Star of Gadansk tackles Wednesday's Earl of Sefton stakes.
Gadansk's Honour is a possible for the 1,000 Guineas at the following Newmarket meeting, but her participation depends on the performance of Miznah in tomorrow's Nell Gwyn Stakes.
Thyer, owned like Miznah by by Maktoum Al Maktoum, tackles the Fielden Stakes on Thursday as a build-up to a Kentucky Derby clash with Arazi.
This was the week when: APRIL 13–20, 1967: THIS WAS WEEK WHEN
By BRIAN STATER
KEITH JARRETT, a teenage centre with Newport, played out of position at full-back when he made his debut for Wales but scored 19 points in the 34–21 defeat of England at Cardiff Arms Park.
Jarrett contributed five conversions, two penalty goals and a try.
The Telegraph reported: ‘It was this try, in fact, that put paid to England's chances for when he took a bouncing ball in his stride and raced unopposed 60 yards to the line, England were in full attacking trim and had narrowed Wales's lead from 13 points to four.
His conversion from wide out was the final straw.’
The result dashed England's hopes of winning the Triple Crown and left France as the Five Nations champions.
England's disappointment may account for a sour note in the Daily Telegraph.
One verdict on the match was that ‘Jarrett's goal-kicking was touched with an unearthly magic.
Three of his goals bounced in off the posts.
The refereeing could have been much stricter and the arguable decisions certainly broke in favour of Wales.’
IN THE SAME WEEK: Sir Alf Ramsey's England footballers, World Cup winners nine months earlier, were beaten 3–2 by Scotland at Wembley, prompting ‘hordes of tartan-clad Scots to pour over Wembley's barriers to dance on England's grave, kiss the centre spot and dig up pieces of turf as souvenirs.’
The Telegraph commented: ‘As Sir Alf [pictured]watched his team begin their first game together since last November he must have felt like a yachtsman who takes the winter covers off his boat, eases it into the water and finds it has sprung leaks fore, aft and midships.’
Scotland scored through Denis Law, Bobby Lennox and Jim McAlliog.
England's goals came from Jack Charlton and Geoff Hurst.
The Telegraph said: ‘After England's first defeat since the World Cup we should conclude that this was the end of a team, not of an era.
Sir Alf can now concentrate again on building for the future instead of defending the past.’
FINALLY: Henry Cooper fought what everyone thought would be a pushover opponent at Leicester.
Cooper, knocked out by Floyd Patterson in his previous fight and looking for a gentle return to the ring, took on Boston Jacobs, an unknown New Yorker.
What he got was rather different — Cooper was cut over both his eyes and plodded to a points decision before being roundly booed.
London Marathon: Marathon pursuit of legendary excellence Michael Calvin on Steve Edwards' long-running love of perfection
By MICHAEL CALVIN
AS USUAL, all human life was there.No-one noticed Steve Edwards among the cancer victims, comic turns and capering octogenarians who yesterday redefined the appeal of the London Marathon.
The runner, wearing No 4393, was just another face in the crowd when he padded across Westminster Bridge.
But, even in an event in which excellence and eccentricity rub shoulders, he deserves to be regarded as distinctive.
Organisers, conditioned to portraying the remarkable as routine, broke with tradition by making Edwards run with a health warning.
To emulate him, they proclaimed, ‘a runner needs a unique constitution and a unique personality’.
They fear the power of the example he set by completing a world record 87 marathons, in 13 different nations in the year to March 15.
Having defied medical advice, serious car crashes and all known sporting logic, he now intends to break the individual endurance record of 524 marathons.
His London debut was his 201st competitive trudge over the distance which, accordingly to the fable of Pheidippides, the Athenian messenger who died after sprinting from the Battle of Marathon in 490 BC, demands respect.
Edwards, 29, endured eight marathons in 11 days over Christmas, ran several without sleep and regarded a broken bone in his foot, sustained in a stumble down an Alpine pass, as an occupational hazard to be ignored.
His misadventures are the stuff of legends.
He ended one weekend, which spanned marathons in Holland and Austria, hopelessly lost in Czechoslovakia, where he duly ran out of petrol.
The circumstances in which wrote off his car on a Belgian motorway, during an overnight journey from Holland to the Potteries Marathon in Stoke, were more worrying.
His wife and son were fortunate to escape unscathed from an uncontrollable spin.
‘I was mentally destroyed,’ Edwards admitted.
‘It was then I asked myself, ‘Is this all worth it?’’
Since resuming his quest in Scotland the following weekend, Edwards, who installs computer software for Coventry City Council, is used to the obvious question: why?
‘There's got to be some form of addiction there,’ he acknowledged.
‘It is a natural drug that I have got used to.
You feel good within yourself after a marathon.
‘It is a way out of your normal life.
When I'm running, I feel like I am a machine, like a new car that has been run in well.
I settle down to this lovely rhythm and feel the health in my body.’
Long-distance athletics is noted for attracting characters who are, in the jargon of sports psychology, obsessive compulsives.
But Brian Miller, one of Britain's leading sports psychologists, argues: ‘People who run lots of marathons are not necessarily freakish.
They could just as easily be train spotters, standing at the end of railway platforms.
‘They're a little like mountaineers.
They run marathons because they are there.
The idea they are all introverts is a myth, but they pay significant attention to detail.’
Edwards agrees.
‘I'm a very responsible sort of bloke, very precise,’ he said.
‘I want things to be done well, done on time.
I'm quiet but I'm strong willed.
‘People are very quick to knock.
When they say I must be mad, I ask them, ‘What do you do in your life?’
If they say ‘nothing much’— and they usually do — I reply, ‘At least I've got something to talk about’.’
Edwards's pursuit of a peculiar form of fame remains a debating point in the medical community.
His family doctor has given up preaching restraint.
‘He tells me I won't be able to go on like this, but he knows how important it is to my life,’ Edwards reasoned.
Dr Dan Tunstall-Pedoe, a cardiologist who directs the Marathon's medical team, cannot afford to be quite so sanguine.
‘I wouldn't recommend to anyone what he does.
The Marathon is a challenge, but it is not a ‘health event’ as such.
It is better to do one or two and then opt for more sensible distances.’
ELITE runners usually complete three marathons a year.
They are especially sensitive to micro-trauma, bruising and bleeding in microscopic areas of muscle caused by pounding the pavements.
An average club runner like Edwards, travelling at around 9mph, does not need exceptional cardiovascular strength.
But his workload makes him susceptible to fluid depletion and liable to be among the 35 per cent of marathon runners who suffer knee damage.
Edwards, who ran despite a knee ligament injury during his successful record attempt, admits he does not like to dwell on the punishment he is inflicting on his body.
The event, as ever, was for all shapes and sizes, ages and abilities.
It was sport's classless society and allowed Edwards to glory in his enduring ambition.
He said: ‘I'd love to be running marathons when I'm 84.
In fact, I'd love to end my life in a marathon.
Surely that's better than fading away in a hospital bed somewhere?
At least I'd finish doing something I love…’