

EC fake drug fraud ‘threat to patients’
By Peter Pallot, Health Services Staff
PATIENTS on life-saving drugs could be taking ineffective or dangerous counterfeit products without realising it, as victims of a trade ruse, manufacturers said today.
Sufferers from diabetes and epilepsy, or those given counterfeit antibiotics, could be particularly at risk, said the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry.
The warning follows incidents in which National Health Service patients have been inadvertently dispensed counterfeit versions of the world's best-selling drug, Zantac, for stomach ulcers.
‘As it happens the Zantac did contain some ranitidine [the active substance]but other counterfeits have been completely inert,’ Mr Peter Lumley, association spokesman, said yesterday.
In another incident, patients had been given fake steroid creams, he added.
Illegal counterfeit manufacturers have taken advantage of a burgeoning circular trade between E C countries in pharmaceuticals.
This trade — dubbed parallel importing — has sprung up within Europe because each E C member State has a different health service and different ways of fixing drugs prices.
The French Health Ministry pays 30 per cent less for its products than most European countries, including Britain.
Prices in Greece and Portugal are also up to 40 per cent lower than in the rest of Europe.
High-price, low-bulk pharmaceuticals are ideal for moving from cheap to expensive markets and, under Commmunity rules, manufacturers are powerless to intervene.
Mr Lumley said parallel trade had become so great that eight in 10 High Street chemists in Britain regularly dispensed drugs made in Britain, exported to France, say, and re-imported for sale to NHS patients.
Parallel trade is now so well established that Health Department payments to pharmacists can be clawed back for sales of discounted drugs.
Given the thriving circular trade, it was easy for counterfeit manufacturers to pass off goods which they know would not be checked, said Mr Lumley.
‘There is evidence of unlicensed products being inserted into the chain,’ he said.
The Medicines Control Agency made visual checks on packages but did not run laboratory tests on batches, the only way to spot fake products, he continued.
In a drive against counterfeiting, the association is asking member companies, which sell drugs worth £3 billion a year to the NHS, for ‘greater openness’ when they detect fraud.
Instead of keeping quiet about information which might deter doctors from prescribing the product under suspicion, companies should urge the agency to batch test imports.
Mr Lumley said the fake Zantac was discovered because a patient noticed that the product tasted abnormal and contacted Glaxo, Zantac's maker.
He said: ‘We have to acknowledge parallel importing is a fact of life and patients will find some instructions in their packages may be in a foreign language, but they should be overlaid with English.
‘However, if a product looks different or tastes different from normal, the patient should first contact the pharmacist, who has a professional duty to dispense only licensed medicines.
‘If he is not happy, the patient should contact the manufacturer.’
Fraud is likely to occur only in sales of brand-name drugs still under patent.
Once patent life has ended, the manufacturers' price drops and parallel trading is barely profitable.
Letter to the Editor: Education brief
SIR — Following the Conservatives' election victory may I, as chairman of the governors of a large rural comprehensive school, make a threefold plea in respect of the future of state education.
First, any changes in education and their implications must be carefully planned and fully thought through.
Initiatives must be completely researched in partnership with educationalists before being launched.
Second, what education now needs more than ever is a period of calm and stability in which changes can be introduced or consolidated in partnership with the teaching profession without undue haste and lack of preparation.
Finally, whatever the future of state schools' funding, whether it be grant maintained or devolved under the local management of schools, all schools must be fairly and adequately resourced.
There must be no schools which are winners or losers.
Our nation's children must be the winners.
PETER BARDGETT Frome, Somerset