

Coursework failing the test
By PAUL MARSTON
GCSE coursework had lowered standards and allowed pupils to gain undeservedly high grades, members of the union said yesterday.
They attacked the internal assessments, which teachers have normally defended as superior to the traditional written exams.
Other teacher organisations have strenuously opposed Government efforts to reduce the maximum marks permitted for coursework from 100 per cent to between 20 and 40 per cent.
Coursework became compulsory when GCSE replaced O-levels in 1988.
Mr Roy Nettleship, from a Nottingham comprehensive, said many teachers felt it was not ‘respectable’ to question coursework.
But he knew of pupils handing in assignments to teachers to have the spelling and punctuation corrected before being submitted for grading.
He said teachers in the humanities believed that pupils were obtaining grades they could not possibly achieve in exams.
Mr John Douglas, from the Royal Grammar School, Newcastle upon Tyne, described coursework as ‘ideological nonsense’ which had damaged education.
‘It has caused the abandonment of high standards and is one of the prime causes of stress among teachers and conscientious pupils.’
Children from homes where parents took little interest in education had suffered rather than benefited from its introduction, he added.
Mr Jeremy Cole, a teacher at Latimer School, Kettering, Northants, said three pupils last year had ‘slavishly copied’ a piece of maths coursework from another boy, but it had not affected their grades.
Mr Stephen Woodley, from King's School, Canterbury, said teachers could set easier assignments and see their candidates win higher grades.
The union affirmed its opposition to 100 per cent coursework and support for a 20 to 70 per cent limit.
Solicitors ‘should have full rights in higher courts’
By Tim Butcher
THE DAY when solicitors can present cases in higher courts came closer yesterday with publication of the findings of the committee that is advising the Lord Chancellor on legal reform.
The committee accepted that solicitors from private practices could be conditionally granted full rights of audience in either civil or criminal cases in higher courts.
To meet the conditions, solicitors should have been qualified for at least three years, have been given suitable training and have a record of advocacy in the lower courts.
At present, solicitors can appear in higher courts in special circumstances.
They are allowed to read out agreed statements in libel cases in the High Court and to act as advocates in Crown Courts at committals for sentence or at appeals against conviction or sentence from a magistrates' court if they took part in the original hearing.
The committee also said that solicitors who appear in court should not be subject to the same restrictions as barristers, such as the ‘cab-rank rule’ requiring barristers to accept cases on a ‘first come first served’basis.
The rule that cases should be prepared for trial by someone other than the advocate presenting them in court should not apply to solicitors, the committee said.
It also said that solicitors employed by large companies should not be allowed to appear in higher courts because the fact that they were employed might stop them from showing impartiality and detachment.
For similar reasons, the committee rejected an application that barristers employed by the Crown Prosecution Service and the Government Legal Service could be given extended rights of audience.
In principle, the 1990 Courts and Legal Services Act ended the centuries-old monopoly that barristers enjoyed in advocacy.
The Advisory Committee on Legal Education and Conduct was set up under the Act to examine the practical way in which reform could be carried out.
The Law Society, the body that governs 60,000 solicitors in England and Wales, submitted last April its application for more rights of audience to the committee.
It was in response to that application that the committee yesterday published its findings, which must now be digested by the Law Society before it formally applies to the Lord Chancellor for extended rights of audience.
Lord Griffiths, committee chairman, said: ‘The major step is that clients should have the choice of being represented by the same lawyer throughout.
If the safeguards we propose are adopted, we are confident this can work as successfully as it already does in the magistrates’ and county courts.’
The committee's findings were broadly in line with what the Law Society wanted, according to Mr Peter Ely, its president, although the committee's opposition to employed solicitors appearing in higher courts went against the society's wishes.
Barristers, who opposed the ending of their monopoly, were less happy with the findings of the committee.
Mr Gareth Williams, QC, chairman of the Bar Council, said the advocacy training course for solicitors was inadequate.
It amounted to ‘an extended weekend’.
ASSISTANT MASTERS' AND MISTRESSES' ASSOCIATION
Teachers urged to support opting out
Reports by Paul Marston, Education Correspondent
TEACHER unions should accept the implications of the Conservatives' election victory and abandon their opposition to opt-out schools, the leader of one of the main classroom organisations said yesterday.
Mr Peter Smith, general secretary of the 120,000-strong Assistant Masters' and Mistresses' Association, said the general election result meant that hundreds of schools would seek to leave local authority control ‘within the next few weeks’.
At present, about 200 of the 4,000 secondary schools are grant maintained.
‘Grant maintained schools can no longer be seen as a politically reversible gimmick,’ he said at the union's conference in Birmingham.
‘It is foolish and unrealistic for any teachers’ organisation not to acknowledge that reality.
‘They're here to stay,’ he said.
‘Let's make them work.
‘Other unions should not Siberianise themselves because they don't like the election result.
But the Government must enter into genuine dialogue with us to ensure these reforms are successful,’ Mr Smith added.
He proposed the establishment of a funding council for the grant-maintained sector and safeguards to prevent disputes over the running of schools, as had occurred recently at Stratford School in east London.
Parents should be given the power to vote on the removal of individual governors if their conduct was felt to be unsatisfactory, Mr Smith suggested.
The union already has 3,000 members in opted-out schools and most of the union will be in the sector if, as ministers expect, half of all secondary schools have become grant maintained by 1997.
Mr Smith said he feared that opt-out schools could give rise to a two-tier education system.
Mr Robert Balchin, chairman of the Grant Maintained Schools Foundation, welcomed the union's backing.
‘I am delighted to have the support of one of the biggest teacher associations,’ said Mr Balchin.
‘I hope the others will follow suit at their conferences next week.’
Prisoner at the bar, you are guilty until proved innocent
Tough new laws have been hailed as essential to fight drug barons, football hooligans and others hard to convict.
NIGEL BURKE argues that they subvert our system of justice
BY NIGEL BURKE
THE QUALITY of British justice has just passed into the stewardship of Mr Kenneth Clarke.
The new Home Secretary will determine what is in the next Criminal Justice Bill.
If he hopes to maintain the character and traditions of justice, he may be surprised at what his predecessors have left behind.
The principle that a man is innocent until proved guilty has recently been subverted, though few have noticed.
Luckily, Mr Clarke has a combative, sceptical personality.
A Home Secretary needs one, not so much to stand up to criminals as to stand up to people with damaging non-solutions to crime.
The presumption of innocence has not been toppled; rather, it has been corroded by a series of laws on alcohol and tobacco, football hooliganism, drugs, videos and even badgers.
In no case has the legal principle been sacrificed to a thoughtful new policy on criminal justice.
It has been thrown away in the haste of cobbling together a package of ‘tough new laws’ whenever the Government felt the need for legislative machismo.
If statute laws were printed like newspapers, these would be tabloid, not quality laws.
The new presumption of guilt is most explicit in the 1985 Wildlife and Countryside Act: ‘If, in any proceedings for an offence, there is evidence from which it could reasonably be concluded that the accused was digging for a badger, he shall be presumed to have been digging for a badger unless the contrary is shown.’
There it is.
If there is a case to answer, the court must proceed with a presumption of guilt.
The argument of all crackdown law is that it applies special, draconian measures to tackle some heinous crime.
The usual reality is that it applies histrionic measures to tackle topical crime.
Crackdown law also undermines the basic fairness and credibility of justice.
Presuming guilt is not a selective means of convicting the guilty with more certainty.
It is an unselective means of making conviction more likely for both the guilty and the innocent in about equal proportion.
It serves an appetite for convictions, not justice.
The presumption of guilt is being written into new laws, but rarely with as much candour as in the badgers example.
Instead, the laws specify offences in a radical new way so as to reverse the burden of proof implicity.
Laws used to specify offences such as loitering with intent or malicious wounding, so that it was up to the prosecutor to prove the evil character of an act that might be more or less culpable.
New crackdown laws have re-specified offences so that a mere physical action, such as loitering, is the offence.
The prosecution need only prove that the physical action took place, and after that the defendant is expected to put forward a good reason or excuse for his action to escape conviction.
For example, the Football (Offences) Act 1991 says: ‘It is an offence for a person…to go onto the playing area…without lawful authority or lawful excuse, which shall be for him to prove.’
Here we have a law, advertised as a solution to violence and disorder, that makes no mention of violent or disorderly acts by the defendant.
The prosecutor merely has to prove the technical offence of walking on grass.
Prudent people can avoid the snares of the Football Act by not walking on the pitch.
The Contempt of Court Act 1991 spreads a wider net over everyone who reports or handles news.
Anyone who accidentally publishes material which is sub judice, and is charged, is expected to prove ignorance that the published material was sub judice .
Proving ignorance of facts that one might or might not have known is impossible, unless one has been in a well-documented coma.
Similarly, the Prevention of Terrorism Act requires bankers to prove that they did not know that a client's funds were serving terrorism.
A banker who is deceived by a client can therefore face serious charges without the traditional benefit of being presumed innocent.
IN THE past few years the laws forbidding the sale of alcohol to teenagers have been weakened, in the sense that they are neither as just nor as realistic as they were.
In the more commonly understood sense they have been strengthened, because they have been changed so as to obtain more convictions relating to well-publicised and hard-lobbied issues.
The offences used to be ‘knowingly selling intoxicating liquor’ and ‘selling tobacco to a person apparently under the age of sixteen years’.
The 1988 Licensing Act and the 1991 Children and Young Persons (Protection from Tobacco) Act have deleted the words ‘knowingly’ and ‘apparently’.
A publican or tobacconist who, in good faith, sells his goods to a 15-year-old who looks 20 has committed a crime, unless he successfully employs the permitted defence that he sold the goods innocently.
He must prove his innocence and good character.
The Drug Trafficking Offences Act 1986 presumes guilt in a different way again.
This permits people to be punished for crimes that are assumed to have taken place, and of which the suspect is assumed to be guilty, without any formalities of proof, evidence or charges.
Defendants who are found guilty of any drug-selling offence may be stripped of all their assets, including any means of legitimate livelihood, on the presumption that all their wealth is the proceeds of crime.
Defendants are permitted to prove their innocence to the extent of whatever accounts and receipts they may have, but case law has shown that it is impossible to prove that savings from wages are not the fruit of crime, being just money in the bank.
This new power to presume guilt of unspecified offences was advertised as a unique response to the unique evil of drug trafficking.
The 1988 Criminal Justice Act extended it to cover all crimes where a few thousand pounds are involved.
When tough new laws are announced, it is usually with the refrain ‘The innocent have nothing to fear, as long as they can prove it’.
It is often said, and rightly, that a lot of thought goes into defendants' rights, but not enough into victims' rights.
The presumption of innocence is also concerned with victims' rights: it is there to prevent an innocent suspect from becoming the second victim of a crime.
Public confidence in the administration of justice by police and courts is half-collapsed, and it has to be rebuilt.
A basic faith remains in the principles of British justice.
If these principles are undermined for the sake of legal machismo, there will be nothing on which to build.
Nigel Burke is a lay legal adviser.
Big drop in means-test home grants
By John Grigsby Local Government Correspondent
A BIG fall in home improvement grants is shown in figures published by the Department of the Environment.
They show that grants worth about £350 million were made last year, the first full year of means-tested grants, compared with £1 billion in 1989.
Mr Peter Archer, chairman of the housing committee of the Institution of Environmental Health Officers, said yesterday: ‘At this rate it can be expected to take more than 65 years to deal with unfit properties identified by the 1986 English House Conditions Survey.’
Only 87,300 grants were paid last year and 42,000 of those were for minor repairs or facilities for disabled people.
This compares with 229,100 in 1984 at the height of the improvement boom.
Environmental Health News says: ‘Unless there is a boost to the improvement programme, many houses that are in terminal disrepair will fall into dereliction.’
The programme to improve houses with bed-sitting rooms, flats and other houses in multiple occupation has also been curtailed to a sixth of the 1983–84 level.