

Peterborough:
CARDINAL Hume will celebrate Good Friday in ecumenical fashion, watching a Passion parade in central London with the Bishop of London, Salvationists, Methodists and Muslims.
The day marks a highlight for Simon Hannigan, 29, who will take the role of Jesus.
Playing Mary is Kathleen Campbell, 35, who happens to be Hannigan's fiancee.
‘It will be a moving and exhausting day,’ says Hannigan, who comes from an ecclesiastical family.
‘I have to drag the cross halfway up Victoria Street.
I have been keeping fit with swimming.
Simon of Cyrene comes to help me when we reach New Scotland Yard.’
The actors from the Rites Of Passage company will stop off at Methodist Central Hall for a flashback to the Last Supper.
‘We're going to have bread, but not real wine,’ says Hannigan.
‘I think it's going to be Ribena.’
Helping to organise the event is Fr Michael Seed, Hume's ecumenical adviser, who discloses that certain precautions have had to be made.
‘We have taken out insurance in case a coach comes along and runs over Mary Magdalene,’ he says.
Commentary: Save us from the believers
By CLAUDIA FITZHERBERT
CANNOT help feeling a certain degree of admiration for the Evangelical Christians who are, invariably, to be found lurking behind every accusation of satanic child abuse.
I respect them for the medieval certainty of their beliefs and for the casuistical cunning of their arguments.
They have no difficulty in imagining, for example, that there are thousands of people at large in Britain who are in the habit of aborting babies specifically for the purpose of eating them and they argue, ingeniously, that the lack of forensic evidence of satanic abuse can itself be read as proof of the existence of Satan.
If the Christians do eventually deliver a true case of satanic child abuse — and, who knows, God forbid, they may, for satanists are real enough and a bit of copycat crime is surely due after all this publicity — it will be seen by many to validate all their arguments.
And then these formidable Christian missionaries will rejoice as their churches fill to overflowing with fearful born-agains.
Though this Evangelical triumphalism has yet to come to pass, the curious state of affairs already exists in which parents, up and down the country, fear the caring professionals as never before and fear the overtly Christian carers most of all.
I myself had a disturbing experience the other day, when one of our local health visitors came to call — something they are wont to do if you have children under the age of five.
He had a small gold cross about his neck and a quietly menacing air: ‘I've come to see the twins,’ he said.
‘Righty ho,’ I replied, for it never does to show these people how frightened you are of them, ‘do come in.’
I said the children were upstairs and I would go and fetch them.
‘Oh, no,’ he said, ‘no need for that,’and he bounded up the stairs.
Correctly surmising that theirs was the room with the broken bolt hanging from the door, he entered it just as I was catching up with him.
The twins, I was relieved to see, made a charming sight, crouched underneath a cot taking it in turns to lick one another 's ears.
The man bent down and tried to speak to them; the twins smiled sweetly and returned to their game.
‘They can't talk yet,’ I explained patiently, ‘although they understand a lot.’
He said that they should see a speech therapist.
I said surely not, they were only two.
They should be talking, he replied implacably.
Well, I said, floundering a little, boys were notoriously backward and so were twins and, really, didn't he think…
I stopped mid-sentence.
His small gold cross was glinting in the sunlight.
My sons have been booked in to see a speech therapist.
I pray, every night, that he or she will be an unbeliever.
A FRIEND tells me of a post-electoral poster war which has broken out in his salubrious street in north Kensington, London, quite different in tone from the good-humoured gobbing on one another 's doorsteps which characterised neighbourly relations during the three weeks preceding the day that the revolution failed to dawn.
Those three weeks had thrown up a heartening variety of political allegiances in the tree-lined avenue but all happy agreements to differ evaporated in the wake of John Major's sinister victory.
The new tone was set in the early hours of Friday when a broken-hearted bearded man of radical inclinations tore down his Labour posters and replaced them with a single bleak statement which, curiously, he must have had printed before the election.
The background was scarlet, the lettering black and the poster read: moral — don't give sheep the vote.
Such wretched arrogance on the part of the defeated revolutionary so enraged the Tory-voting entrepreneurs opposite that they set about producing a reply, out of brown wrapping paper and spray paint.
By midday on Friday, the elegant facade of their first-floor flat was dominated by a banner bearing the message: moral — get stuffed boyo.
The heat was on and, over the next 24 hours, posters proliferated alarmingly.
democracy is dead, lamented a punky schoolgirl from her bedroom window; socialism killed it, proclaimed the gentleman with Dobermans from his sitting room below.
Some of the exchanges were rather less thoughtful: eat the rich read one window, kill the poor replied another.
And so on.
We are, it would appear, a passionately political nation.