

City: Savoy plunges by 78pc to £2.3m
NOT even a clutch of famous hotels including The Savoy, Claridge's and The Connaught could help The Savoy Group escape the full effects of war and recession which prompted a 78 p.c. slump in pre-tax profit to £2.3m during 1991, writes Karen Cooper.
The full-year result, announced coincidentally on the same day as its old foe Forte, which owns 69 p.c. of the ordinary shares, followed a first-half loss of £674,000.
The A shares, which have fallen from 670p since the interims in September, lost 8 yesterday to 615p.
The B shares were steady at £60.
Trading in the new year, according to managing director Giles Shepard, has not improved greatly.
‘No doubt business is better than last year but it has not been as good as many people suggested it might be,’ he said.
But after seeing signs of a pick-up in American demand, he says the hotel industry might get a boost around September, on the basis that recovery here lags America by about four months.
Occupancy levels last year fell to about 60 p.c., from the low 70s in 1990, and turnover dropped 14 p.c. to £79.2m.
‘Immediate action’ was taken to cut operating costs, which were down 8 p.c. to £69.7m.
The interest charge however rose by £1m to £1.6m after a £4m increase in debt to a £10½m.
A £3m loan was taken out during the year to buy the freehold of the Lancaster hotel in Paris.
Dividend is held at 7p per A share and 3½p per B share.
City: Russell slips £100,000 to £1.7m on year
PROFITS at Alexander Russell, the Scottish quarrying and coal group, fell slightly from £1.8m to £1.7m last year.
Total sales dipped from £38.7m to £37.7m.
The quarrying business saw sales and profits fall by 6 p.c. and 14 p.c. respectively but the concrete division's profits improved 5 p.c. thanks to strong roof tile sales.
Chairman Russell Nicolson said after two years of downturn ‘growth has now resumed and will carry on strongly for many years’.
Earnings per share fell from 3.5p to 2.6p but a 1.15p final dividend, payable on May 29, keeps the total at 2.15p.
The news was greeted with a 1p rise in the share price to 85p.
Suspicious share activity has recently thrust the company into the bid spotlight.
City: Adviser held over ‘missing £4.5m’
By Duncan Hughes
POLICE are interviewing a London-based independent financial adviser about the whereabouts of about £4.5m in client funds.
Kenneth Renton, of Wentworth Investment Services, was yesterday arrested by City of London police at Heathrow Airport after being out of contact since last Friday.
Wentworth Investment Services' regulator — the Financial Intermediaries Managers and Brokers Regulatory Association — alerted police late Tuesday, following inquiries into the company.
Earlier that day, Fimbra had sent an investigation team to the King Street offices but could not find several client records or locate Mr Renton.
The company was a lowest category Fimbra member and not authorised to handle clients' money but could offer advice on unit trusts, life insurance and pensions.
But it is believed funds were channelled through an unauthorised company, Wentworth Asset Management, which had let its application for Fimbra membership lapse.
The missing funds are believed to have been deposited by four clients.
Late yesterday, Fimbra issued a suspension notice preventing the company from taking any investments and freezing existing client funds.
City: Wall Street sets the pace with 47-point surge
By correspondents in New York, Hong Kong, London
WALL Street moved further into record-breaking territory yesterday, continuing a recent run which has set the scene for sharp rallies in Tokyo and Hong Kong.
The New York market underpinned the post-election mood of optimism in London as well.
The FT-SE 100 Index closed up 39.7 at 2,640.2 yesterday.
Apart from strong results from telephone giant AT&T, Coca-Cola and American Airlines, Wall Street continued to benefit from the central bank's recent monetary easing.
The Dow Jones index surged 47.63 points in late trading to close at 3353.76 having risen by 124 points in four sessions.
That run has encouraged a rash of buying interest in Tokyo, where hopes have been growing that the worst of the big recent price falls may be over.
Yesterday saw the key Nikkei 225 index close 508.43 higher at 17,948.01, a near-3 p.c. gain.
In New York, dealers noted that the market virtually ignored figures showing a meagre 0.2 p.c. rise in industrial production last month and a barely perceptible increase in capacity utilisation.
These followed earlier suggestions that the recovery from recession will be slow.
Hong Kong jumped more than 100 points to 4,986.
It was reacting to Hongkong & Shanghai Bank's £3.1 billion takeover bid for Midland.
Shares in the Hong Kong local bank gained HK$1 to HK$40.25 (£3), as dealers shrugged off disappointment that its hidden reserves, revealed on Wednesday, were no more than £1.14 billion.
Its 61 p.c. -owned subsidiary, Hang Seng Bank, jumped HK$2.50 to HK$39 because its £525m reserves were more than expected.
Other stock markets around the world followed the optimisic trend set by the big exchanges, though in many of them the trading was relatively light.
Sydney's All Share Index yesterday rose 15.0 points to 1580.6 and in Singapore the Straits Times industrial index jumped 17.00 points to 1,394.32.
City: German inflation revised to 4.8pc
By Mary Brasier
GERMAN inflation was revised upwards to an annual rate of 4.8 p.c. yesterday as figures provided mixed news of the state of the economy.
Inflation continued to increase after March figures were adjusted to show a rise from 4.3 p.c in February.
The figures were in line with market expectations but show no halt to the continuing inflation trend in Germany.
The latest evidence of price movements will delay any move by the Bundesbank to consider reversing its tight money policy and lower interest rates.
Import prices remain a signficant factor in the trend of higher inflation in Germany.
Germany's vulnerability to the world recession is shown in trade figures that have been sharply worse than last year.
The economy moved back into the black in February after a Dm412m deficit during January but the latest Dm1.6 billion surplus is still well below the comparable Dm2.1 billion a year earlier.
City: Forte falls 62pc to £73m but sees signs of upturn
By Marc Popiolek
HOTELS and catering group Forte is set for a sharp recovery in profits after weathering the effects of the Gulf war and the recession in 1991, it was revealed yesterday.
Trading was under pressure on all fronts at the Travelodge-to-Posthouse hotels group last year.
The fall in tourist traffic stemming from the Gulf war affected its luxury hotels in London and other major cities while recession in Britain undermined demand from business customers, particularly in the provinces.
The results showed profits down by 62 p.c. to £73m before taxation in the 12 months to January 1992.
Overall sales rose by 1 p.c. to £2.66 billion but the increase was solely from the contract catering side.
Turnover at the hotels fell 8 p.c. and at the restaurants it was down 1 p.c.
Trading profits at the hotels halved to £75m and at the restaurants profits fell 15 p.c. to £63m.
By contrast, contract catering profits rose 18 p.c. to £47m.
The interest charge was £107m, up from £88m.
Forte is keeping the final dividend, payable on July 1, unchanged at 7.16p, giving a total of 9.91p.
The payment was not covered by earnings per share — only 6p — but gearing is not excessive at 44 p.c. and the profits fall was caused by a unique combination of adverse circumstances, unlikely to be repeated.
Pointing to signs of an upturn in a number of markets, chief executive Rocco Forte said yesterday, ‘some solid progress will be made in 1992’.
‘The London hotels are showing recovery, but business is unlikely to return to 1990 levels in the current year,’ he said.
Demand in the provincial hotels is still depressed.
Last weekend saw ‘a surge of bookings’, said Mr Forte.
These consisted mainly of leisure bookings, particularly for the coming Easter weekend, which almost dried up during the election campaign.
On top of the recovery in demand, Forte stands to gain the full benefit of cost reductions of £40m made last year.
Brokers Peter Joseph of Smith New Court and Paul Heath of UBS Phillips & Drew both expect profits to rise to £125m this time.
‘Forte has clearly had a very difficult year, along with the rest of the industry,’ said Mr Joseph.
‘A strong recovery is in prospect in 1992 and 1993,’ he said.
‘The results were much as we had expected in an extremely tough year,’ said Mr Heath yesterday.
‘There are strong benefits to come from the cyclical upturn.’
The shares rose 4 to 254p yesterday.
City: BTR finds pension surplus of £512m
By Marc Popiolek
ACQUISITIVE conglomerate BTR has a surplus of more than £500m in its group pension fund and enjoyed a £54m holiday from pensions contributions last year, according to its annual report and accounts, published yesterday.
The accounts reveal that surplus in the £1.4 billion fund was boosted to £512m last year, partly as a result of redundancies.
During 1991, BTR increased its workforce from 105,000 to 140,000 but, after allowing for the 48,000 staff added because of acquisitions, there was a net reduction of 13,000.
The largest purchase last year was electrical engineer Hawker Siddeley, bought at a cost of £1½ billion.
So far, the various Hawker pension funds have not been merged with those of its new parent company and the £512m BTR surplus does not include anything for Hawker.
The surplus at Hawker was not detailed yesterday but is believed to be substantial.
The latest available information, contained in the Hawker accounts for 1990 and based on an actuarial valuation at March 1989, shows a surplus of £111m.
Since March 1989 and prior to the takeover late last year, Hawker reduced its head-count dramatically.
It would not be surprising if the surplus were now between £200m and £300m, giving a total for the newly enlarged BTR group of about £750m.
The accounts confirm that senior BTR executives are paid less than those of similarly sized concerns.
Chairman Sir Owen Green received £217,000, up £3,000, in 1991.
Alan Jackson, promoted to chief executive at the beginning of last year, received £254,000, up from £214,000.
City: The Baltic Exchange ‘three years to rebuild’
By Matthew Doull
THE historic Baltic Exchange building, severely damaged in last week's IRA bomb blast, will not have to be torn down but may take three years to rebuild, said exchange chairman Peter Tudball yesterday.
Mr Tudball told a meeting of the exchange's ship-broking members they could either remain at Lloyd's of London or move to the old Billingsgate fish market in the meantime.
The latter is owned by America's Citibank and has just been refurbished.
Unlike the fourth floor of Lloyd's, it has a purpose-built trading floor, but the exchange might have to sign a longer lease than it needs.
Lloyd's chairman David Coleridge reiterated his elation at having the new tenants while their listed Edwardian building is repaired, and offered them the use of his building's catering facilities — an important consideration for many members.
A spokesman for the City's surveyors department said: ‘There was an element of confusion after the blast because the Chamber of Shipping building had partially collapsed and we thought there might be similar damage to the Baltic.
On closer inspection it is not as bad as we thought.’
The City's planners tend to encourage the restoration of listed buildings to their original states if they do not have to be torn down, he said.
Through Lloyd's broker Steel Burrill Jones, the Baltic is fully insured for the damage, estimated at £80m.
Mr Tudball said the episode ‘has probably cemented the exchange's future’.
City Comment: Arabs set up tents to spike Midland's plans
PERHAPS it is something personal between the Kuwaitis and Sir Peter Walters, but the Arabs seem set to use the London stock market to interfere with his plans.
When Sir Peter was chairing British Petroleum the Kuwait Investment Office entered the market to buy shares after the 1987 market crash caught out the government's share sale and the oil company's rights issue.
Now Sir Peter chairs Midland Bank and the same managers of the Kuwait state investments are doing their utmost to dump Midland shares on to the market just as Hongkong & Shanghai makes its bid.
After two days of trying, however, the shares remained unsold last night and stockbrokers Hoare Govett have the problem of starting their attempted placing all over again this morning in the knowledge that if it cannot be done today, holidays prevent them trying again until Tuesday.
The Kuwaitis own 10 p.c. of Midland worth £300m.
The 362p at which they want to place the shares is 16p below the 378p paper value of Hongkong's bid (excluding the 7p dividend which Midland holders keep).
But with the market price another 1p lower after Tuesday's 7p fall, Hoare's own market-makers were offering to buy Midland shares from the rest of the market at 362p or to sell at 367p.
Other market-makers were buying only at 360p.
Few were in the market for the Kuwaiti shares, but few were in the market at all with such an overhang: only 2.9m shares changed hands compared with Tuesday's 30m.
Hoare found buyers for nearly half the stake on Tuesday — but institutions agreed to take shares only on condition that all could be placed.
The brokers thus started again yesterday, but while they apparently conditionally placed more than half this time, they still could not find enough buyers.
The brokers are scheduled to start again from scratch today, but there is talk of rival firms telling the Kuwaitis that they would like a go.
At least this is not a bought-deal: Hoare is acting as broker — it has not purchased the shares itself and is stuck with no potential loss.
But the Kuwaitis' tactics and timing are interesting: as holder of the only stake smaller than Hongkong's they ought to have been able to sway what threatened to be a contested offer.
Presumably, Hongkong is not a buyer because it wants to offer shares rather than cash.
Presumably, Lloyds Bank, which Midland spurned in favour of Hongkong, is not prepared to buy in case it fails to win the bid: it still holds a stake in Standard Chartered from a similar unsuccessful venture.
The Kuwaitis certainly did not share their thinking with Sir Peter, but the message from the Gulf seems to be the same as the message from the London market — Lloyds is out of the running.
City Comment: That sinking feeling over La Cinq TV
BLANK screens in France this week should serve as a gentle warning for anyone tempted to write blank cheques for a seat at Britain's Channel 5 television licence auction.
France's Channel 5 — La Cinq — abandoned its fight to survive just as the Independent Broadcasting Authority opened bidding for the new British station with a warning of the commercial risk.
Risk ran riot at La Cinq, which was finally switched off after being beaten by losses of more than £100m and shareholders' refusal to throw any more good money on to its airwaves.
The station was the product of French television deregulation five years ago, but it never established the audience size or advertising to sustain its costs and the debt that its owners had taken on to launch it.
Established media groups like Hachette, publishers of Elle magazine, failed to make it a commercial success.
The involvement has so far cost Hachette's shareholders £180m in provisions and the humiliation of being forced into an improbable merger with electronics group Matra.
The two companies share little except their chairman.
Investors must be glad that French law limited Hachette to 25 p.c. of La Cinq but British bank Kleinwort Benson obligingly took a 7 p.c. stake and is looking to Hachette to recover its money.
French cosmetics group L'Oreal — with even less excuse for getting involved with television — bought a film library but has now written-off £3m owed by La Cinq and has had to cut the celluloid's value by £48m.
But one person, however, is undaunted by the corporate blood that has been spilled over La Cinq: Silvio Berlusconi, the Italian media owner is now bidding for Britain's Channel 5 after twice failing to revive its French namesake.
Perhaps he believes in third-time lucky, but other hopefuls in the British auction would do well to rely on something more concrete than fortune.
City Comment: Eurotunnel feels the draught
AS EACH day ticks off before the crucial announcement on Friday next week from Eurotunnel, the share price falls.
Yesterday's 9p drop to 370p took the shares to an 18-month low ahead of the promised interim announcement on the dispute between the tunnel developer and its contractors over the £800m of extra payments they are claiming.
Eurotunnel lost the last round when an arbitration panel ruled in the contractors' favour.
The markets suspect that the horsetrading between the two sides will continue until up to at least Friday week, but that the outcome looks bad for the company whatever the settlement.
Investors want to hear more about what Eurotunnel described last month as a ‘marginal failure’ to comply with the conditions of its banking facilities.
It cannot afford, however, to upset its bankers — not least by asking them to finance a settlement with the sub-contractors.
Any support for the shares from the possibility of a British Labour government's public expenditure on infrastructure has evaporated and hopes of an interest rate cut on either side of the Channel are also fading.
Most of Eurotunnel's shares are held and traded on the Paris market these days and there is fear that the company will end up issuing shares as full or part payment to Transmanche Link, the group of 10 contractors which are building the tunnel.
Such a solution has the virtues of visibility and simplicity — but the threat of more paper has depressed the share price still further.
The Transmanche companies, at present making their own provisions against the tunnel, cannot relish accepting shares with a falling value, but the further the price falls, the greater stake in Eurotunnel they would hold.
City: Apple suit failure lifts US computer shares
By Jonathan Confino
SHARES in American computer companies Microsoft and Hewlett-Packard soared yesterday after a judge rejected the bulk of a $5½ billion (£3 billion) lawsuit filed by one of their rivals, Apple Computer.
Federal Judge Vaughn Walker dismissed Apple's claim that the popular computer display graphics on its Macintosh range had been copied by the two firms.
The decision came as a huge relief to Microsoft which has placed great emphasis on its Windows software programme, the latest version of which was released only last week.
Microsoft's shares leapt $12 to $129, while Hewlett's equity rose $1¾ to $81⅝.
The companies successfully argued that many elements of the Macintosh screen, which uses movable symbols rather than typed commands, were not original or that they had been invented by Xerox Corporation or International Business Machines.
While the judge said some questions remained unresolved, Microsoft's lawyer David McDonald concluded: ‘If it isn't a complete victory, it was more than 95 p.c. of the way.’
Shearson Lehman analyst David Readerman, who raised his Microsoft rating to a ‘strong buy’ following the court ruling, said the company could easily adapt its Windows programme if the judge ruled against it on the remaining issues.
City: Tie Rack payout as US losses stemmed
TIE Rack, whose expansion into America has been described as ‘attempted suicide’ by chairman Roy Bishko, is aiming to break even in its American shops ‘in a couple of years’after a better performance in the year to February.
Restructuring involving the closure of shops and a warehouse cut American losses from £1.2m to £856,000.
Combined with lower interest costs, overall pre-tax profits jumped from £51,000 to £1.03m after exceptional reorganisation charges of £504,000.
News of a return to dividends after no payment in 1990–91 sent the shares up 9 to 40p.
The dividend is ½p, payable at the end of July.
The profit rise masks difficult trading for the ties and scarves retailer in Britain.
Sales were hit early on by the Gulf war and profits fell 19 p.c. to £2.8m.
But the group saw its gross margin rise from 49 p.c. to almost 52 p.c. and says it has seen a ‘healthy improvement’ in new year trading.
After starting last year with net debt of £6.3m, it now has net cash of almost £4m.
Cash of nearly £7m was generated internally and a rights issue raised £3.2m last June.
Stock levels were cut by 29 p.c.
Earnings were 1.99p after a loss per share of 1.79p a share in 1990.
City: Clydeport in £26m buy-out
CLYDEPORT, formerly the Clyde Port Authority, has been bought out by its management for £26m.
The executives and employees will own 66 p.c. of the equity.
Midland Montagu Ventures led the buy-out with 3i Group supplying some of the funds.
The company operates the port facilities at Glasgow, Port Glasgow Greenock and Ardossan, and is the harbour authority for the River Clyde.
City: Pathe failure
DEBT-RIDDEN Pathe Communications, parent company of Hollywood studio MGM, yesterday failed to make principal and interest payments of $35m (£20m) on two debt issues.
MGM is already in default on $600m of loans from Credit Lyonnais and is totally dependent on it for capital to finance its day-to-day operations.
City: Newarthill loss
NEWARTHILL, the McAlpine family's private construction group yesterday joined the sector's casualties when it announced losses for 1991 totalling £72.2m.
Turnover fell 29 p.c. to £464m and, at the pre-tax level, the group incurred a £42.8m loss, up from £6.2m in 1990, struck after a £25m exceptional write-down in the value of a property joint-venture in Leicester.
There were no exceptional items last time.
But, below the line, there are further provisions totalling £33½m — to cover the fall in value of fixed assets investments and properties — and possible liabilities.
City: WMI up 52pc
WASTE Management International, the waste disposal group recently floated in London, has returned first-quarter profits 52 p.c. higher at £27.3m on turnover up a third at £186m.
The company, made up of the non-American waste disposal interest of Waste Management International Inc, earned £96.4m pre-tax last year.
The shares, placed at 585p, slightly below earlier expectations, closed at 648p when formal dealing began on Tuesday.
Yesterday, they improved a further 7p to 655p.
City: Tarmac slides
BUILDING materials group Tarmac yesterday became the latest company to reduce its dividends — from 11¼p to 5½p, with the final of 2½p payable on July 6.
Profits for 1991 fell from £191m to £21m after £39m of exceptional provisions.
Turnover fell by 11 p.c. to £3.23 billion as trading at six out of the group's seven divisions experienced downturns.
Questor — P24
City: Golden profits
GOLDEN Vale, the Irish dairy products and agribusiness, pushed pre-tax profits on by 18 p.c. to 14.7m last year on sales 41 p.c. ahead at I£296m.
The performance benefited from first-time contributions from the dairy division of Food Industries and Bridgend Creameries, acquired last year.
A 0.94p final dividend on June 29, lifts the total from 1.24p to 1.36p.
City: TIP £1.7m sale
TIP Europe has sold its lorry rental subsidiary, CSL Truck & Trailer Hire, for £1.7m cash, its net book value, and leased the rental fleet to Unilink Contract Hire, an offshoot of Transport Development Group.
City: PWS purchase
LLOYD'S broker PWS Holdings is buying 75 p.c. of insurance broker Burns-Crosson for £100,000 with the undertaking to subscribe another £50,000 for further shares on completion of the deal, and can take its shareholding to 85 p.c. by 1997 for up to a total cost of £500,000.
City: O&Y clears hurdle to Toronto office sale
By Jonathan Confino in New York and Fred Langan in Toronto
EMBATTLED property giant Olympia & York has cleared the main obstacle to concluding the sale of its prestige Toronto office block, Exchange Tower.
The company is selling the building, which houses the Toronto Stock Exchange, back to its bankers to repay holders of C$300m of short-term securities, which are secured on the building.
O&Y's liquidity crisis meant it could not repay the holders when they refused to roll over the commercial paper.
An agreement in principle to sell Exchange Tower was reached last month, but O&Y was subsequently unable to meet the conditions attached the deal.
The main requirement, that O&Y first raises enough funds to pay off a separate commercial paper programme, will be met within the next day or two.
The company believes this should pave the way for the deal to be signed and allow it to concentrate on its multi-billion dollar restructuring.
Under the terms of the agreement, O&Y will continue to manage the property and will buy it back in the future at a premium.
In addition, the company confirmed yesterday it defaulted on an $800m Eurobond issue secured by a tower in Manhattan's World Financial Centre.
O&Y failed to make a $62m interest payment on the issue despite a 20-day grace period and is trying to negotiate a standstill agreement.
O&Y has also missed a C$450m principal payment on Toronto's Scotia Plaza development and a $100m principal payment on a New York property.
Negotiations continued yesterday in Toronto between the company and various groups of creditors.
O&Y says it intends disclosing more, but only to suppliers of corporate loans of more than $5 billion, and to London's Canary Wharf project.
The company wants to restructure only this portion of its $19.4 billion debt, thereby leaving its prized American and Canadian property portfolio untouched.
This plan has upset bankers holding bad loans as they want ‘the pain to be shared’ by everyone.
But creditors with well-secured loans support the scheme.
City: Air France loss at £68.5m
By Mary Brasier
AIR France, the state-owned carrier which has just agreed to buy its Belgian rival Sabena, trimmed its losses to land £68.5m in the red for 1991.
The company recovered from a disastrous first half where business fell because of the Gulf war to deliver an operating profit of £21.3m against a loss of £114m in 1990.
Last year's net loss was £71.7m.
Air France has reduced costs, with 3,000 job cuts planned over the next two years and the sale of its headquarters.
The weakness in passenger traffic, which fell 8 p.c last year, and operating losses have not prevented the airline from launching the most successful expansion programme among European airlines so far, in a bid to be among the few groups which are expected to survive deregulation over the next few years.
The French government has put in £200m of new capital and a further £330m has come from Banque Nationale de Paris.
As well as the Sabena deal, Air France — run by Bernard Attali — is getting together with the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development — run by brother Jacques Attali — to take a 40 p.c stake in the Czechoslovakian airline CSA.
Air France also has an operating alliance with Malev, the Hungarian carrier which is looking for a strategic foreign partner.
City: French Docks Bill launched
THE French government yesterday attempted to end months of intermittent industrial action by dockers and a 40-year union stranglehold over their working conditions with new legislation to reform French ports.
The government unveiled a Bill, which, like the reform of the National Dock Labour Scheme in Britain, proposes an end to the special contracts and guaranteed pay enjoyed by dockers.
In future they will be treated like other manual workers and be paid monthly salaries.
The changes are expected to provoke the loss of about a third of France's 8,300 dock jobs and an end to the power of the CGT union.
However, some groups of port workers have already drifted away and signed contracts with freight handling companies.
City: CBI reports fall in high street sales
By Clare Pearson
RETAIL sales fell last month, reversing seven successive months of annual growth, the Confederation of British Industry reports today in its latest survey of sentiment in the distributive trades.
But retailers hope the improving trend will resume this month, as uncertainty about the election is out of the way.
The fact that March sales worsened not only year-on-year, but compared with February, suggests the election played a part in the decline, the CBI says.
The expected improvement this month will have a limited effect on shop suppliers, however, as the unexpected March sales fall left stocks at levels not seen since last August.
The CBI points out that the comparison with March last year is distorted by special factors, notably the announcement in last year's Budget that value-added tax would increase on April 1.
This provided a boost to bigger-ticket purchases.
The Easter holiday, which fell in March last year, also makes comparison difficult.
Clothing and footwear volumes were particularly hard hit last month, after having been boosted by heavy price discounting earlier in the year.
DIY and durable household goods also fell back, though carpets and furniture remained marginally higher on a year-on-year basis.
Grocers and specialist food retailers presented a brighter picture, reporting a continuing advance in annual sales growth though the pace remained slower than last year.
This sector was the most optimistic about the near-term outlook, expecting much stronger sales in April.
Wholesalers reported an improvement in sales both year-on-year and compared with February, and said they expected volumes to keep up the pace this month.
Motor traders said the slower annual decline in sales continued last month, though sales for the time of year have flattened over the past five months.
Parts and accessories sales declined sharply, reversing an earlier trend.
The latest survey was conducted between March 13 and April 8 and was completed by 520 retailers, wholesalers and motor traders.
City: Russians start to scream for ice cream
By Matthew Doull
RUSSIANS are all screaming for ice-cream.
Despite their economic woes and their climate, Muscovites are reckoned to eat more than 200 tonnes of the chilly confection every day, and Britain's Allied-Lyons aims to scoop some of that market.
Baskin-Robbins, the food and drinks group's ice-cream subsidiary, broke ground yesterday on a £30m factory to manufacture its 31 flavours in the Russian capital.
The company will contribute about £20m for equipment and training, while its joint venture partner Rosmyastoltorg, a Russian ministry of trade body, will contribute the land and factory buildings.
On its completion in 1994, the plant will supply 16,500 tonnes — 8m gallons — of ice-cream a year to the seven Baskin-Robbins stores already trading in Moscow, St Petersburg and Nizhny Novgorod.
Their frozen wares are currently shipped from America.
Many foreign brands have established themselves in the former Soviet Union for the sake of the publicity, but Baskin-Robbins becomes one of the few to commit themselves to manufacturing there.
Allied spokesman Godfrey Linnett said: ‘We wouldn't be investing this money in a loss leader.
At the moment profits are not going to be vast in the shops, but we believe this is a huge market.’
‘Throughout the year people stand outside on the street and eat it.
Normally it is vanilla, but I don't think the Russians are as amazed our the different flavours as people think.’
But such Western delights as Kahlua'n Cream and Jamoca Almond Fudge do not come cheaply.
Punters on the Nevsky Prospekt are asked to cough up 50 roubles for a single cone, or about 50p at the official exchange rate — a luxury for people making roughly £15 a week.
Baskin-Robbins has signed a deal with a group of dairy farmers, who have 15,000 cows, to supply the milk necessary for the factory.
The company will also provide them with the technical support necessary to ensure the milk's quality.
Although the plant will have the capability to make it, low-calorie frozen yogurt — that most decadent of Western desserts — may have to wait a while.
‘That is a much longer term thing.
That is going to take time,’ sighed Mr Linnett.
The Market: Buyers out to make good times roll
By Paul Murphy
AT first glance, it would appear that things are actually starting to roll on the London stock market.
Taking heart from another record-setting session on Wall Street overnight, the FT-SE 100 was marked up 20 points at the outset yesterday.
To the surprise of many, and regardless of the approaching Easter weekend, a string of real-life cash-in-hand buyers appeared.
Having returned to pre-election campaign levels in the aftermath of John Major's confounding of the pollsters, dealers found themselves confidently bidding the main index up well beyond the 2600 level.
Activity dropped off a little in the afternoon before another strong opening in New York pushed leading share prices to their best levels of the day.
The final reading on the Footsie cash market was 2640.2, up 39.7 points and 39.4 short of the indicator's all time high, registered on September 2 last year.
With some aggressive buying, the futures market maintained a hefty premium all day and after hours trading in the June Footsie contract suggested that market is all set to go better again today.
However, price movements were said to have been exaggerated by a distinct lack of spare stock, with many market makers struggling to fill a series of programme and basket trades.
Conditions are expected to settle down by the middle of next week.
County NatWest helped sentiment by declaring itself unreservedly positive on short-term prospects.
The broker's global strategist, John Reynolds, citing the removal of political risk, accompanied by some healthy investment interest from Europe, sees the market reaching 2700 before it pauses for breath.
Bid stories were again swirling around the trading desks, with Hillsdown Holdings (up 16 at 192p) joining the list of usual suspects such as Kwik Save (5 better at 573p) and Ranks Hovis McDougall (firming 1 to 228p).
Asda, which appears to have been the subject of an extraordinary — but unsuccessful — ramp on Tuesday, edged on ½ to 31½ after a huge 10m share cross trade between brokers.
Hopes for some juicy corporate finance work helped put another 9 points on Kleinwort Benson at 260p and 13 onto Hambros at 263p.
In a busy building materials sector, that was responding to a stream of corporate figures, Epwin Group turned in an encouraging 96 p.c. take-up figures for its recent one-for-four rights issue.
The market price ended unchanged at 169p.
RMC jumped 24 to 630p after some flattering words from broking analysts in the light of 1991's results, announced on Tuesday.
Atlas Converting Equipment jumped 60 to 585p, buoyed by some directors' share purchases.
The stock still has a long way to go before its regains the 780p level at which its stood in early April before a warning of a slow-down in sales.
After a quiet few months, computer systems group Vistec sprang to life, gaining 2 to 17p.
There was heavy cross-trade activity in Scottish Hydro-Electric, putting the stock 5 better at 105½p.
United Biscuits responded to the appointment of Redland chief executive Robert Napier and ICI finance director Colin Short as non-executives with a 10-point rise in the share price to 435p.
There were reports of heavy American demand for media stocks, helping Michael Green's Carlton Communications rise 28 to 614p and Central Independent Television on 28 to £13.13.
Pearson ran on 15 to 860p, News International added 10 to 395p and Reed International rose 9 to 588p, while United Newspapers ended 4 higher at 404p after a small share placing.
Guinness was moving against the market trend, ending the day off 12 at 576p.
Followers put the decline down to worries about prospects for the drinks company's French associate, LVMH, amid reports of sharply lower luxury good sales in Tokyo.Similar pressures were said to be responsible for the decline in Rothmans ‘B,’ off 10 at £10.99.
With reports of a big seller, Vodafone suffered a short-lived dip to 351p.
The overhang was cleared, enabling the shares to bounce back to 356p, down 2 on balance.
BAT Industries, up 19 at 736p, enjoyed a lively session amid suggestions that brokers James Capel was recommending the stock, citing expectations of a strong growth in dividends.
Some of the big international stocks were marked higher simply in response to Wall Street's progress.
Glaxo rose from 799p to 812p, Wellcome put on 18 to £11.28 and Unilever ended 24 higher at 920p.
Gilts traders enjoyed another bout of support in the morning, amid some switching out of German bonds and into short-dated British issues.
Interest waned in the afternoon, but with conditions still said to be ‘squeezy,’ the Treasury 11¾p.c. 2003–07 was able to hold on to a rise of £516 to £117⅝ on a yield of 9.13p.c.
The Market:
Poor Aviva Petroleum.
Having seen its share price collapse on Tuesday after a series of market rumours, the oil exploration company put out a statement claiming everything is fine with its Colombian operations and also noting that its largest shareholder, Gulf Resources & Chemical Corporation has increased its stake from 22.9 p.c. to 24.1 p.c.
The share price duly fell another 12 to 99p before a partial recovery to 103p.
The head of Gulf Resources is Aviva's deputy chairman, Graham Ferguson Lacey, the evangelical preacher who recently bought Land's End and John O'Groats.
Mr Ferguson Lacey has an image problem in the City, dating from an number of unsuccessful ventures in the 1970s.
City Diary: FT chief's home is all the rage
THE ultimate indignity has befallen Richard Lambert, editor of the Financial Times, following its backing of Labour last week.
Under the headline ‘Red Ed's Home’, the Sun newspaper has pictured Lambert's ‘£300,000 pad’ in Islington, owned by his ‘loadsamoney wife Harriet [who]owns half the neighbourhood’.
Lambert has been widely criticised and there has been speculation that the controversy could lead to his departure from the FT.
But Lord Blakenham, chairman of the FT's owner, Pearson, tells me: ‘To say that Richard Lambert's job is in jeopardy is complete nonsense.
Pearson's policy is for our newspapers to be corporately and not proprietorially managed.’
Asked what he thinks of the pro-Labour stance, Blakenham adds cagily: ‘I wouldn't like my own views to be taken out of context.’
City Diary: Disappearing act in big top
WHILE the economy has performed its own high-wire act, news reaches me of a circus whose partners have been forced into personal bankruptcy.
The Santus Troupe partnership of Julian Santus and his sons Ernest and Roger was compulsorily liquidated by the VAT man at the end of last year and bankruptcy orders have now been made on all three.
They owned a circus tent with its own seating and turned their hands to most of the acts, but have not been able to pay debts estimated at £60,000 or more.
The Official Receiver has not heard from the family and has no idea where they are, but assumes they are on the road.
It is unlikely that any attempt will be made to recover the tent and seats, as this could cost more than they are worth.
City Diary: Initial objections
PRINCE Charles' great architectural opponent, Max Hutchinson, has ordered that the engraving of his name in marble at the Royal Institute of British Architects' headquarters, be altered.
It seems that the engraver discovered his real first name is John and engraved J Maxwell Hutchinson on the foyer wall bearing the names of all past RIBA presidents.
‘It simply has to go,’ wails Hutchinson.
‘I have no particular objection to the name John but I never use it and it is not how I like to be known.
Yet there it is in the travertine marble for all to see.’
City Diary: Well out of order
MORE than 1,500 ferry passengers were stranded last Friday night when eight officers refused to sail after a dispute over water rations.
Officers of the B&I ferry Isle of Innisfree, which travels between Rosslare and Pembroke, took action after being refused mineral water with their meals.
The eight ‘get all the soft drinks they want, as well as fruit juices’, storms a B&I spokesman.
‘But they insisted they had to have everything that's on the passengers’ menu as well, which was mineral water.’
B&I put passengers up in hotels until the ferry sailed, 24 hours late.
The company plans to dock the officers' pay and is threatening disciplinary action.
City Diary:
HARD-working Tie Rack designers could perhaps do with a rest.
Fresh from launching the new Walt Disney range of ties (’ Huey, Dewey and Louie are very popular’) and ‘art-to-wear’scarves collection, chairman Roy Bishko hiked up his trousers to reveal the next big thing: socks covered with brightly coloured ties.
Sock Shop, incidentally, says it has no plans as yet for ties with sock motifs on them.
City Diary: Attali's room without a view
JACQUES Attali says the cost of the European Bank For Reconstruction & Development's first annual meeting in Budapest was £715,000 — at least, that was the budgeted figure.
Officials make it clear that the actual cost is not yet known.
Attention has in the past been drawn to Attali's use of private planes and £280,000 outlay on office chairs, including over 100 white leather ones for the London top brass.
‘The staff of the bank have stayed in two-star hotels, not as expensive as many in the town have used,’ insists Attali.
The economy-minded president even stayed at the four-star Buda Penta Hotel rather than the grander Grand Hotel overlooking the Danube.
City: Smiths Industries 13pc half-time fall to £44m
By Ra Tickel
SMITHS Industries, the aerospace-to-medical systems group, saw pre-tax profits fall 13 p.c. to £44.3m in the six months to February, but with £95m of cash in its coffers, the interim dividend rises 5 p.c. to 4.1p on June 5.
With demand reflecting the financial pressures affecting all major airlines and defence cutbacks, profits in the aerospace division fell by a quarter to £18.2m.
Roger Hurn, chairman and chief executive, said the success at gaining orders has been encouraging.
The most significant of these include a multi-million dollar American military programme for fibre-optic gyro systems, and retrofit business, again in the United States, for fuel gauging equipment.
The medical systems arm had a strong first half, with profits rising 17 p.c. to £11.6m.
Its operations performed well in Europe and North America, with increased sales and profits helped by a recovery in markets in the Middle East.
The 13 p.c. advance in profits to £8m in the industrial division was down to the inclusion of Flexible Technologies, a manufacturer of hoses pipes and flexible ducting, acquired for £34m at the end of August last year.
Despite this spending, and increased investment in funding development projects, the group's cash pile has risen 20 p.c. in six months.
But is still some £20m lower than a year ago, and interest earnings fell 27 p.c. to £6½m.
The shares, however, improved 14 to 309p.
Questor Column: Shifting sands for building sector
Edited by Marc Popiolek
BRITISH construction industry bosses are running out of superlatives with which to describe the slump.
Not content with the ‘worst since the war’, Jim McColgan, managing director of Blue Circle, yesterday dubbed 1991 ‘one of the worst years in business history’.
Yet, as Blue Circle's figures emphasise, the sector's problems are only partly caused by the downturn in demand in 1991.
The worst damage stems from companies' mistakes during the 1980s boom.
For Blue Circle, cement volumes tumbled by 17 p.c. in Britain last year, and yet group profits fell by ‘only’ 36 p.c. and it could maintain its dividends without too much strain.
Tarmac shareholders have not been so lucky.
With profits virtually wiped out, the payout has been slashed by more than half.
During the heady 1980s, Tarmac got carried away chasing the easy money in housebuilding and property development.
At the peak it made a fortune — not from building houses or office blocks but from land inflation.
When deflation set in the previous gains were wiped out and more.
Many specialist housebuilders and commercial property developers have weathered the deflation pretty well.
It is the optimists who did not react quickly enough to the downturn who have been caught out.
Costain, Tarmac, John Laing and Higgs & Hill have been forced to make huge provisions and cut their dividends.
Others, such as John Mowlem and Taylor Woodrow, seem bound to follow.
Yet most of the building materials suppliers, even those where profits have virtually dried up, have held their payments.
Given the outlook, this looks justified.
There are already signs of an upturn in housing repair and maintenance, and, to a lesser extent, in new building.
In some cases — particularly bricks and blocks — stocks are very high but in other areas profits should react pretty quickly.
For the housebuilders themselves, the prospects are less encouraging.
Though unit sales may recover fully, profits will not if Britain really has become a low-inflation economy.
The contractors which expanded into housebuilding have another problem.
They are only now feeling the first effects of the slump in new commercial work.
It will take the London office market years to recover from the 1980s hangover and it is hard to identify any areas of growth other than building all-seater football stadiums.
That also means there are tough times ahead for materials suppliers with a large exposure to commercial construction, though some, such as Blue Circle and RMC, diversified wisely during the boom.
Despite the scale of the sector's misjudgments, the City is in no position to criticise.
It, too, believed recovery was in sight a year ago and bid up shares aggressively.
All that followed was a rash of rights issues which have left shareholders nursing huge losses.
Even now, the shares of many housebuilders and contractors look over-optimistic.
But the Redland bid for Steetley is a reminder there will probably never be a better time to buy quality building materials assets.
Questor Column: Blue Circle solid enough
WITH more than half the British cement market, Blue Circle is in the front-line of the construction recession.
Yet the 36 p.c. fall in profits to £124m last year compares well with many in a more sheltered position.
In part, it can thank the huge cost of cement works which meant there was none of the rush of new entrants in the boom.
So, despite a 17 p.c. fall in volumes in Britain, Blue Circle managed to hold its prices and expects to do so again this year.
Profits still tumbled from £68m to £33m but that includes £8m of redundancy costs.
America was also difficult but there was strong growth in Malaysia and Chile.
Even after heavy cost-cutting, the British cement business will continue to struggle as demand falls further.
But that should be offset by recovery from the bathroom and heating companies which made little-changed profits of £42.6m last year.
Blue Circle is paying same-again dividends of 11¼p from earnings of 13.6p.
The final of 7½p is payable on May 27.
Brokers BZW forecast a modest recovery to £130m in 1992 which gives a forward multiple of 19 at 272p.
High enough after a strong run.
Questor Column: Tarmac on road to better times
AS THE biggest housebuilder and quarrier in the country, Tarmac was not going to escape serious trouble, especially as it is big in the similarly hard-hit eastern United States, too.
But, after a management reshuffle, it has done the sensible thing and cut the dividend.
Borrowings remain high at £457m, for gearing of 51 p.c., but the group has squeezed capital from the housebuilding side and, if trading unexpectedly worsened, it would simply have to sell prize assets instead of peripheries.
Kicked out of Footsie, Tarmac is trailing the class acts in building materials badly and must secretly wish for a German recession to unseat Redland and RMC from their pedestals.
A lot depends on whether recovery here comes with a whimper or a pneumatic bang.
At 139p, the forward multiple for 1992 is in the upper twenties but the yield of 5.3 p.c. is sustainable and the next six months offer a once-in-a-lifetime chance for bidders to grab Tarmac's £3 billion plus of sales cheaply.
One to hold.
Questor Column: Downhill course for Higgs & Hill
THINGS have deteriorated so far and so fast at Higgs & Hill that shareholders were lucky to be offered anything as a final dividend.
Yesterday, it was cut to 3p, payable May 8, for a total cut from 20p to 9p.
The shares rose 4 to 88p — scant reward for investors who supported last year's rights issue at 260p.
The proceeds have shored up the balance sheet but the trading picture is grim.
After £21m of exceptional provisions, mostly against housing developments, a pre-tax profit of £6.8m in 1990 was replaced with a £16.7m loss last year.
That compares with a profit of £28m at the height of the boom in 1988.
The shares are supported less by a yield of 13.6 p.c. than by net assets of 200p.
But, if the last year has taught anything, it is that hostile bids for contractors are fraught with danger.
City: Helical Bar £6.49m in red
HELICAL Bar, the property group run by Michael Slade, is slashing its dividend total from 10p to 4p, with a 1.6p final on July 1, after tumbling from a £2.71m profit to a £6.49m pre-tax loss in 1991.
The deficit follows a slump in turnover from £74.8m to £31m, and is after a £4.62m exceptional charge, mainly additional provision on a City Road, London, office development, although this was partly offset by a £3.7m fall in the net interest bill to £15.4m.
The sale of £47m of properties has helped lower debt, but net assets fall too, from 258p to 220p a share.
City: Haden in tumble to £14.6m
HADEN MacLellan Holdings, the engineering and automated manufacturing systems group put together by Philip Ling, chairman, is maintaining the payout to shareholders at 8p, with a 5p final on July 1, despite a 38 p.c. tumble in profits last year to £14.6m pre-tax.
Work on installing spray booths for Japanese car makers in Britain helped boost results of the automated manufacturing systems division, with profits up 36 p.c. to £9.9m on turnover 50 p.c. ahead at £150m.
But, with turnover down 31 p.c., the North American side tumbled from a £5½m profit to a £1.83m loss.
Mel Hawley, chief executive, said the Nissan and Honda contracts in Britain were completed last year, and the Toyota paint shop would be finished by end 1992.
While reporting strong inquiry levels, he said orders were still quiet and warned it would not be possible for the European automated systems business to sustain its 1991 performance this year.
Demand for the group's Drypure paint recovery process has suffered, and, with the joint venture Drypure centre in Toledo, Ohio, incurring a small loss, £2½m has been set aside below the line, against its possible closure.
City: IN BRIEF New Central Witswatersrand: P-t profit for 18 months R8.08m (R2.62m for preceding year) including R4.27m (nil) on realisation of investments.
Nav R43.6 (R41.2).
Eps 197p (151p) excluding profit on sale of investments.
Fin 67 cents, making 196 cents (151 cents), on June 12.
City: Airbreak doubles to £1.6m
TOUR operator Airbreak Leisure Group, one of the few new issues last year, yesterday unveiled more-than-doubled full-year profits up from £711,000 to £1.6m pre-tax.
The outturn tops the £1½m forecast in December, when calling on shareholders for £3m — with a 1-for-3 rights issue at 43p a share — at the same time as announcing the acquisition of Mediterranean flotilla holiday specialist Sunsail International, for £8m in shares.
David Lewis, chairman, said the year started with a considerable amount of uncertainty and despair in the travel industry.
However, the group managed to put itself into a position to take advantage of the surge in bookings which followed the ending of the Gulf war last year and the demise of International Leisure Group.
With sales for 1992 holding up strongly, the Sunsail acquisition completed in February, and a full year's benefit from Goldcrest Aviation joint venture with Champion Holding, Mr Lewis said the group looked forward to another successful year.
Individually-Designed Homes: Laying the foundations for your own castle
Peter Harris on how the British approach of designing and buying a home differs to our European neighbours.
Most houses lack individuality
By PETER HARRIS
IT IS a rather puzzling irony that in a country where we are apparently so obsessed with our homes, such a huge proportion of our new houses are mass produced boxes which are put up speculatively by developers who have little knowledge of their end customers' needs and requirements.
If an Englishman's home is his castle it has typically become, since the last war, a castle which lacks character, individuality and substance.
The architectural profession has singled out individual housing as an area of potential new work especially for smaller practices.
Richard MacCormack is the President of the Royal Institute of British Architects.
At the election he stood as the architect's architect, pledged to stand up for quality of design.
Land prices have fallen dramatically during the past four years (by an average of 35 per cent according to the Departmentof the Environment) and the prices of materials and services have also fallen.
It is a good time to have a home built to suit one's individual needs.
‘Britons tend to view their homes as a commodity to be traded and this has put people off having features in their homes which they think the market might find too ‘individual.’
‘Just as period properties are marketed on their ‘period features,’ I think the market would welcome the distinctive characteristics of contemporary design.’
The structure of the house building industry in Great Britain is quite different from that of most of rest of the ‘western’ world.
Victor Mirontschuk is President of a leading American architectural practice, EDI Architecture/Planning, which is based in Houston, Texas with offices in New York and San Francisco.
He has formed a joint venture with an English firm, Period Homes Partnership of Crediton, Devon, which aims to marry the best of British exterior design with the more creative use of internal space achieved by American home designers.
‘In the USA and Canada,’ he said, ‘it is far more usual for houses to be tailor made to fit the needs and aspirations of the family who will live in it.’
Rob Rickey, an American architect currently working in Britain, agrees.
‘When I was living in New Hampshire,’ he said, ‘about half my friends, many of whom had no connection with the building industry, built their own houses.
It's a much more normal thing to do in the States.’
The same applies to Europe.
Tracy Cullimore was until recently a European market researcher for John Laing Construction and has subsequently established her own research business.
‘The most usual way of buying a new detached house in France, Belgium and Germany involves the house buyer working closely with the builder of his choice on finding a site, raising the finance, developing the design and choosing the materials,’ she says.
‘Land prices are much cheaper in France and planning restrictions much more relaxed.’
So relaxed in Italy, according to one anonymous wag, that they tend to build the house first and apply for planning permission later.
Also higher property transfer taxes and commision rates make selling a house a much less attractive option in Europe so people tend to treat a house as a long term home rather than as an investment.
The London based Construction Industry Research and Information Association (CIRIA), in a recent report on the French construction market, points out not only that the number of British housing starts is only 60 per cent of the French level, but also that ‘individuals are clients for 50 per cent of dwellings and construction companies for 25 per cent.’
The corresponding report on the Belgian market tells the same story.
‘Prospective home owners exercise more choice in the design and building phases and homes tend to incorporate more individual architecture and specifications than is generally the case in the U.K. There are correspondingly few large building contractors involved in speculative residential development.
The few that exist offer specific system-built houses that allow variety, flexibility and individual design.’
The same applies to Germany.
In Britain, where the top 10 house-builders dominate the output of new private houses, it has traditionally been either the rich or the enthusiastic DIY brigade who forged ahead with their own individual home building.
Not so now.
The number of private home-builders has continued to grow.
VAT returns show that 9,581 individuals reclaimed the tax in 1991 having completed a genuine, hands-on self-build project.
An additional 1,000 self-builders would have reclaimed VAT through their business accounts.
These figures take no account of people who have commissioned a registered builder to build their house which would have been zero rated for VAT.
It is estimated that this element would bring the total to over 20,000.
Research based on self-builders' site insurance premiums suggests an average build cost (excluding land) of £60,000.
This would put the annual value of the individual home-build market at £1.2 billion without including the market for home extensions and general improvement work.
The Department of Environment figures for private sector, domestic RMI (refurbishment, maintenance, improvement) in 1990 indicate a total spend of £6.2 billion with an estimated addition of £2 billion, which takes account of DIY activities and the ‘black economy.’
This is indeed a sizeable market.
Peter Harris is editor of Individual Homes magazine
Individually-Designed Homes: Adapting a kit to suit your needs
By RACHEL WARREN
WHEN the great gale struck in October 1987, the FitzPatricks were in the middle of building their Hedlunds home in the village of Upton Grey, near Basingstoke.
‘The roof was on but there was a lot of external brickwork to be done,’ says Mem.
‘As we cut our way through shrubs and trees to get there we were hysterical.
‘But it was such a firm structure nothing had moved.
I think we were the only house in the village which had no damage whatsoever.’
She and her husband Edward, an insurance broker, had inherited the land and wanted something more spacious than their four-bed roomed London house.
The previous year she had read about energy-efficient homes —‘being Australian, I can't bear being cold,’ she says.
After consulting knowledgeable friends the couple opted for the top-of-the-range timber-framed Hedlunds Swedish House.
The local planners agreed.
‘I had a meeting with them before we negotiated terribly hard with Hedlunds,’ says Mem.
An official looked at the site, specified the maximum permissible height and, subject to suitable tiles and brickwork being used, planning permission was granted.
Next came talks with Hedlunds who agreed to do a turnkey operation, using a three-man team to erect the structure and local builders, plumbers, plasterers and electricians to complete the work.
Building costs to completion, including the kit, were £138,000.
Mem designed their ideal home, based on a Hedlunds standard.
‘I redrew it to what fitted our site and what I needed in terms of accommodation for the children and grannies who appear from time to time— mindful of the fact that Edwina and Michael were two and four, but weren't going to stay that size for long .’
Within the 4,000 sq ft of living space, upstairs she specified four bedrooms and three en suite bathrooms, a playroom, a study and, for Edward, a small dressing room.
Downstairs, they planned a 20ft by 20ft drawing room, a 15ft 6in by 13ft 6in dining room and a main guest bedroom and bathroom.
‘We wanted that extra privacy for guests.’
The kitchen and breakfast room were joined to create a spacious 22ft by 15ft area.
She added a utility room and boot room and was particularly pleased with her idea of a television room off the kitchen —‘that was brilliant.
It's got a very thick safety glass door on it so you can see what the little dears are doing but can't hear them.’
The parts were ordered from Sweden in Spring 1987.
The foundations were laid in May.
The kit was delivered in June —‘and we moved in carpeted, curtained and decorated on December 17.’
Fixtures, fittings and decor, she estimates, cost just under £30,000; the couple later spent about £5,000 landscaping the garden.
Their planning was meticulous — Mem used buckets of her son's Lego to work out where every radiator and socket should go to accommodate their furniture.
And, though she says she was overwhelmed by the task of choosing decor for some 17 rooms before they were built, she would do it all again.
‘I loved it and the house works brilliantly for us as a family.’
They are also delighted by low heating bills, thanks to high insulation and triple-glazing.
A whole house ventilation and heat recovery system eliminates condensation and sucks out stale air.
‘We sleep with the windows tight shut and wake up to a room that is absolutely fresh,’ says Edward.
After an outlay of under £175,000, the house is valued at £350,000.
Individually-Designed Homes: A design for living among the rich
By LYNNE EDMUNDS
A UNIQUE patch of north London houses the very wealthy, from the Sultan of Brunei to millionaires from as far afield as Greece, Hong Kong and Nigeria.
Known locally as the Kenwood Triangle, Bishop's Avenue has properties starting at a million pounds and rising to the £25 million asking price of the vast, newly-built Towers.
Recessions are irrelevant here, says Trevor Abrahmsohn, managing director of Glentree Estates, which is handling the marble Summer Palace priced at £12.5 million.
The property is tailor-made for a Middle Eastern buyer with its his ‘n’ hers lounges and indoor pool.
So how do a young couple like Geoffrey and Elaine Springer, with three children under 10, come to be living in that exclusive locality…in a home valued at £800,000?
The answer is that they pursued the site owner monthly for three years until he agreed to sell the plot, seconds away from Hampstead Heath, then designed a five-bedroom house with 40ft outdoor pool and had it built.
It is the third house Geoffrey, a property developer, has designed for the family.
The first had three bedrooms and a gym — a must for Geoffrey — on a 21ft wide, 107ft deep plot in Hampstead.
Then they bought an acre in the north of Barnet, north London, for a house with five bedrooms, three bathrooms, a 30ft hall with minstrel gallery, and three large reception rooms.
‘Great fun to design and have built,’ says Geoffrey.
But ‘it just never felt like home,’ adds Elaine.
‘It was too big and too open plan…
We just rattled around in it.’
They took that into account when building their third house, in a small development off a country lane on the Highgate side of Kenwood, but stuck to their usual system of Geoffrey working out the designs with a lot of input from Elaine.
Then they had a draughtsman prepare the plans and sub-contracted the building.
As before, they used the best natural materials, warm brick and tiles for the exterior, with wood-framed ‘galleried’ windows a feature of the design.
There is natural brick on the walls of their long family sitting room, which has open fireplaces and a children's ‘playspace’ alongside the patio doors that lead out to a barbecue area and pool.
A functional touch distinguishes the kitchen.
It is all white, with maximum workspace and minimum cupboards, and has a built-in breakfast table and matching chairs.
The bath and shower rooms are all tiled, like the kitchen, floor to ceiling.
The formal dining room is simple, with characteristic lack of shelving and cupboards, and an 8ft 3in high ceiling with the recessed lights.
Stereo operates in every room, controlled from a concealed box.
The hall is two storeys high, with an atrium spilling out plants half-way up and built-in wooden plant holders at ground level in the corners of the marble floor.
The Springers have now decided to sell and do it all again on a plot not far away — but this time with an indoor pool for year-round use and half-doors so children can be kept within sight of the kitchen and gym.
Individually-Designed Homes: Preparing the basic ground work Michael Ergatoudis on how to calculate your building costs
By MICHAEL ERGATOUDIS
THE IDEA of preparing a budget for the building of a house is a daunting thought, especially to someone who is more used to budgeting for the family holiday.
However, it need not be too complicated.
The best way to approach it is to break down all the various costs into three manageable groups ‘Land Costs,’‘Direct Build Costs’ and ‘Other Costs.’
LAND COSTS
The first group of costs to contend with is that related to the purchase and transfer of ownership of land.
In addition to the price of a plot itself, there will be a valuation fee plus surveyors and legal fees.
These include the cost of conveyancing of ownership, land registry fees and stamp duty at one per cent payable through your solicitor.
(There is no stamp duty payable on property bought before August 19 due to the suspension of stamp duty).
DIRECT BUILD COSTS
The build itself can be broken down into two groups, ‘Direct Build Costs’ and ‘Other Costs.’
‘Direct Build Costs’ will vary according to the size and specification of the project and includes the cost of all, labour, materials, plant and equipment required.
‘Other Costs’ include everything else, ie professional fees, installation of services, building the infrastructure etc.
‘Other Costs’ can be seen as the cost of developing the plot and their total will remain fairly constant in your budget, regardless of the size of dwelling you build.
When it comes to approaching lenders for finance, they will want to see detailed budget plans, including an accurate estimate of the total of all direct build costs.
However, for initial budget purposes, it is sufficient to estimate these costs by using the average build costs per square foot achieved by others who have recently built their own home.
You can make a quick estimate of your project's direct build costs by using these examples.
The average cost per square foot provided here are national averages based on actual costs incurred by clients of leading package supplier Design and Materials Ltd, all of whom have completed their homes in the past six months.
The costs include straightforward foundations, all fittings and fixtures, double glazing, a high standard of insulation, connections to drains or septic tanks, garage, paths and driveway.
In certain areas, the local planning authority may insist on particular external materials such as natural stone which will also increase the budget.
The national average of Direct Build Costs on a ‘self management’ basis, by a competent private individual on a directly employed labour basis, using local tradesmen and without providing any labour themselves, is about £32–£36 per sq ft.
When built using a reputable small builder registered with either the NHBC or Foundation 15 to construct a weather-tight shell and then individual local tradesmen to fit out and complete — £34-£38 sq ft.
There are two other routes that are less commonly used.
When built by a large NHBC builder, on a formal contract, £40–£50 per sq ft.
But when built by a large firm of builders employed via an architect acting as contracts manager, £50+per sq ft.
The area of a building is normally taken as the area enclosed by the internal faces of the external walls (11 sq ft equals 1 sq metre.)
Under 900 sq ft.
Small houses, bungalows and holiday chalets.
900–1,300 sq ft.
Three bedroom houses.
Three or four bedroom bungalows or spacious two bed bungalows.
1,300–1,600 sq ft.
Three or four bedroom houses and bungalows with space for either a large lounge or small office/utility room and second bathroom.
1,600–2,000 sq ft.
Four bedroom houses or bungalows with two bathrooms, large lounge, study etc.
2,000–2,500 sq ft.
Spacious family houses or very large bungalows with five or more bedrooms, two or three bathrooms, large lounge studies etc.
Flexibility to incorporate most features.
Last in the budget, come all the ‘other costs’ involved in a building project.
These include site clearance; connection of utilities, such as electricity, water, telephone and gas (if available); professional fees, including architects and legal fees; finance costs, including interest and arrangement fees; insurance costs; inspection fees; and finally, any temporary accommodation costs.
Once you have established the sub-totals for each of the groups of costs, their total will give you a good estimate of the final bill of your proposed project.
Once you are happy that you can afford to finance your new home, draw up some detailed proposals with quotes for each individual cost and then arrange to see your lender.
But, remember, there is no point in underestimating buildings costs just in order to secure finance.
Individually-Designed Homes: Self-build knocked to the floor by recession Richard Bridges finds there may be little profit in constructing your own home
By RICHARD BRIDGES
IT IS a sunny morning and, leaning on your spade, you contemplate the dozen plots where you and 11 friends are building your dream homes…
Within a year or so you will have the satisfaction of moving in to the house you have built with your own hands; your old home will have been sold, allowing you to pay back the building society loan you took out to buy the land and materials; and there will be more than enough profit, considering how much you saved by using your own labour, to pay for some champagne to celebrate.
A couple of years ago this kind of scenario seemed plausible to thousands of people who committed themselves to self-build co-operatives.
The idea is simple: a group of people with different building skills team up to build each other 's houses, saving perhaps a third of the cost of a ready-made home.
Now, high interest rates and recession have put paid to many such schemes.
Interest charges became unbearable for many, while the co-operative workers' existing homes — which were supposed to help pay off the loans — remained stubbornly unsold.
Worse, they and the new land against which loans were secured declined in value in some cases to less than the amount borrowed, forcing lenders to foreclose.
Now that house prices have fallen, the discount offered by such schemes no longer seems so attractive.
David Tuffin, of the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors, says the principle of self-build is still fine, so long as people's prime concern is to make a place to live rather than save cash or make a profit.
Given the time it takes for non-experts to put up a house, the interest charges on your loan may eat considerably into the discount you capture by using your own labour, says Tuffin.
According to a spokesman for the Birmingham Midshires building society, which still provides finance for self-build schemes, people are now encouraged to sell their first homes before they start building a new one.
It is up to them whether they move in with Mum and Dad or set up a caravan on site until the work is finished.
Self-build co-operatives are typically born in one of two ways: The private enterprise approach simply involves a group of people who set up their own company through which to take out a collective loan.
The other way, in which local authorities and housing associations play a larger part, is known as the ‘community approach.’
According to Jonathan Hines, of the architectural co-operative Architype in south London, there is a fair bit of community building going on.
The idea is to give people with no money or property of their own the chance to build something, with some kind of public financing to help them on their way.
It is a way, for example, of liberating people from council housing waiting lists.
One route is the Birmingham Council method.
The council makes land available, together with an interest-free loan, while building goes on.
When the houses are up, the co-operative takes out a real loan with a building society.
This is paid back gradually in rent from the co-operative's members and the council's cash goes off in search of new schemes to finance.
Then there is the more complicated Chisel method.
Housing association money is handed over to an organisation called Community House in South East London (Chisel) which then finances various co-operatives.
The builders do not put money in, but their labour is recorded in the value of the co-op's assets as ‘loan stock’; they have a stake in the housing.
Again, the builders end up paying rent, but if they move out they get the value of their loan stock back again.
Individually-Designed Homes: Away down yonder in the land of Potton Rachel Warren traces the rise of the popular Tudor-style range
By RACHEL WARREN
ROMANCE and enterprise conspired to launch Potton, the U.K.'s largest supplier of timber frame components, into the realm of self-build.
In 1979, Jill Hutchinson and her fiance discovered a derelict 16th century cottage in Potton, Bedfordshire, and restored it, complete with inglenook and exposed beams in time for their wedding.
The picturesque result and subsequent offers to purchase, for substantially more than the couple had paid, were not lost on Jill's father, chairman of a company which already specialised in timber frame building.
He rightly defined a potential market for Tudor-style post-and-beam homes full of nooks and crannies and launched the Heritage range at the 1981 Homeworld Exhibition in Milton Keynes.
Since then, more than 2,000 such home have been erected in the U.K. and it remains the company's most popular product, available in 12 variations from the 1,000 sq ft Hatley to the 4,000 sq ft Abbotsley — an E-shaped stately home with potentially six bedrooms and a long gallery.
Potton's later ranges are the Rectory, based on the traditional Queen Anne House and available in six designs from 1,530 sq ft to 3,075 sq ft, and the Shire bungalow in six different styles from 935 sq ft to 1,565 sq ft .
But it was the mock-Tudor style which first caught the public's imagination and appealed to the burgeoning market of more affluent self-builders who were happy to delegate the construction, says Potton's PR manager, Richard Crisp, who joined the company four years ago after building his own Potton home.
In the face of recessionary gloom, Potton's have just had their two most successful years; in 1990 they sold 250 units, but those who built that year made the original commitment — such as finding land and seeking planning permission — several years earlier.
‘The gestation period can be quite considerable.
People certainly built last year who first saw us at the Ideal Homes Exhibition in 1984 and 1985.
Once they decided to work to a particular time-scale, they carried on regardless,’ says Crisp.
A recent survey reveals that the company is now tapping the market of the older professional who has strong collateral in an existing property and possibly other assets.
Those taking early retirement find a challenge in planning and supervising the construction of a customised home.
Increasingly, Potton's customers will sell their homes and rent while their Potton home is being built.
That makes financial sense in a difficult housing market, says Crisp, and the disruption is short-term; with timber-frame, the shell can be erected and weather-proofed within two weeks and the whole project completed within three months.
Because timber-frame is a dry construction method, the homes can be decorated immediately without the risk of shrinkage and cracking which can occur as a result of humidity in brick and block build.
Another key advantage is insulation, say Potton, who claim that their product can yield heat savings of at least a third over a comparable brick home.
Most potential clients visit them at Potton and attend one of the free seminars, held three times a week.
Potton can advise on land sales and required planning consent.
Customers choose a basic timber frame design — their show house, the £30,250 four-bedroom Granston E in the Heritage range is the most popular.
Erection costs an additional £3,500.
The company's price lists explain what features are supplied and what they erect — their general rule of thumb is that the kit and erection represents about a third of the total building costs, excluding land.
Consulting either an architect or a builder, the purchaser then works out an internal plan and discusses how the exterior should look.
The Heritage range is the most flexible because cantilever cross frames are used to carry all the first floor loads and most of the roof, leaving internal divisions largely a matter of choice.
Externally, walls can be of rendering, timber, brick, tile hung or stone — according to taste and planning regulations.
As with conventional buildings, roofs can be tile, slate or even thatch.
Typically, the finished product will be worth 15 to 35 per cent more than the purchaser's outlay.
Crisp says his four-bedroom Potton house, which cost him £120,000 to build, is currently valued at £180,000.
Appointments: JOBWATCH Many happy returns
By CHRIS BIRD
TAX IS exciting, says Lorraine Parkin, a tax manager who specialises in VAT consultancy for Arthur Andersen, the international accountancy firm.
‘As a consultant, I get to know a wide variety of businesses and people who are in interesting commercial positions.’
The Tory election victory came as a relief to Parkin, who will not now have to learn a completely new set of tax laws.
‘There was some tension before the election,’ she says.
‘Business did fear a change of government.’
But despite the political war of words over tax, she found it hard to prepare new strategies because no party had said very much about VAT.
‘Think of any business and we advise it,’ Parkin says.
Companies can lose millions of pounds paying tax in an inefficient way, while finance directors can go to jail if a company under-declares VAT.
Each day Parkin wades through tax directories and lengthy court reports.
Knowing the labyrinthine tax laws is essential, as she has to advise clients contesting tax bills at industrial tribunals, the High Court and perhaps even the European Court of Justice.
She dismisses any idea that her accounting is in any sense ‘creative’: ‘I'm not avoiding taxes but planning.
With the law book in front of you, you look to see how your client can declare taxable income in the most efficient way while always keeping within the law.’
Her work is now complicated by the prospect of closer European union.
‘The borders might be going down but only to be replaced by a vast amount of new paperwork.
There will eventually be a general European accordance on VAT rates.
But, until then, I have to be able to sort out the confusion for my clients.’
After four years as a VAT control officer at Customs and Excise, Parkin decided to turn from gamekeeper to poacher and joined Arthur Andersen in 1986.
‘In the Civil Service there was a lot of monotony and routine.
Promotion prospects for talented people were slim.
Here, there's a genuine meritocracy; you're given real authority to deal with clients and it's much more rewarding.’
For a working mother the hours can be long, but a trusted nanny takes care of her two toddlers, and Parkin finds both her husband and the firm very supportive: ‘I'm still here after two children.’
The most important qualities for an aspiring tax manager?
‘You must be good at listening and observing; good at oral and written presentation of complex tax problems so that your client can understand them, and you have to know your accounting and you need a high level of commercial awareness.’
BACKGROUND: Graduated from Southampton University in 1982 with an Honours degree in English; worked for Customs and Excise as a VAT control officer 1982–1986.
HOURS: ‘Normally 9 am to 6 pm, but it can be longer.’
SALARY: ‘At the upper end of the market with company car, Bupa and pension.’
BEST ASPECT: ‘Client contact.’
WORST ASPECT: ‘The day-to-day admin.’
Appointments: In the company of a minder
There is an alternative to the workplace nursery, as Kevin Maguire discovers
By KEVIN MAGUIRE
WORKPLACE nurseries are not the only solution for company-sponsored childcare.
Glaxo Group Research, part of one of the world's largest pharmaceuticals groups, has pioneered a childminding scheme which is proving remarkably popular with employees.
Women wishing to return to work after maternity leave can telephone an agency which will vet, recruit and supervise a local childminder, and provide back-up cover if the main carer is ill.
The service, run by Company Kids of Stratford-upon-Avon for Glaxo plants in Greenford, west London, and Ware, Hertfordshire, is the key part of an employment package designed to smooth the path for women who want to resume their careers.
Of Glaxo's 3,500 research staff in Britain, 47 per cent are female, more than half are graduates, and the workforce has an average age of 33.
A recent survey found that one third of women employees planned to have a child during the next few years.
Other surveys have found that many parents, especially those who use public transport, do not want to turn children into commuters, dragging them to a workplace nursery every day.
According to John Hume, director of human resources for Glaxo Group Research, more than 60 mothers have opted to use the childminding initiative since it was introduced a year ago.
The project is also relatively cheap.
Glaxo says it spends more than £30,000 on the scheme, while a 50-place nursery could cost up to £250,000 to build and as much as £200,000 a year to run.
‘The business case for what we are doing is obvious,’ says Hume, calculating that it costs an average of between £10,000 and £15,000 to recruit and train a replacement for every female member of staff who leaves.
It is also cheaper for parents — they pay an average £60 for 42 hours of care a week under the Glaxo scheme, compared with a subsidised £85 the company anticipates it would charge for a workplace nursery.
Linda, a 38-year-old research scientist at Glaxo's Greenford complex, says the scheme encouraged her to return to work nearly a year ago after the birth of her son.
Towards the end of her 40-week maternity leave, a childminder who was lined up to look after her baby suddenly pulled out.
Starting the time-consuming process of interviewing childminders all over again was a daunting prospect.
Company Kids, under its contract with Glaxo, did the legwork for her.
‘It has worked out very well for me.
He's happy in his placement.
I get to work and I can concentrate,’ Linda said.
‘Lots of people will consider returning to work if they think they have good quality childcare.’
Nadine Dorries of Company Kids says predictions five years ago that by 1992 workplace nurseries would be as common as staff canteens were wide of the mark.
There are now 425 in the country, but they provide only one place for every 300 children under five years of age.
‘Women receiving help with childcare costs from an employer are still in a minority,’ Dorries said.
‘The recession was not envisaged and the tight labour market has disappeared, at least for now.
But the old problems — skill shortages and the loss of highly trained staff — will return when the economy picks up unless employers start taking action now.
‘Workplace nurseries were trumpeted as the solution but now people are asking whether they really are best, because of the cost and inconvenience of dragging a child to work.’
Dorries said two other companies had established Glaxo-style schemes, and BP Exploration recently announced that it was creating an in-house childcare information service on nursery places and childminders.
Since the 1990 Budget, parents with a child in a workplace nursery do not pay tax on the value of the care, but women employed by companies that either ‘buy’ places at private nurseries or the 60 or so firms such as British Gas, National Power, Debenhams and BMW which issue childcare vouchers (worth an average £27 a week) must pay tax on what is treated as a perk.
The Campaign for Tax Relief and Childcare pressure group estimates the cost to the Treasury of exempting places in workplace nurseries from tax at £3.4 million, while the cost of exempting other employer subsidies such as vouchers and allowances would be £1.7 million.
Problems with childcare remain the biggest barrier to women succeeding at work.
A recent Institute of Directors' survey of 200 successful female executives found that of the 87 per cent who claimed to have encountered career obstacles not experienced by male colleagues, difficulty with childcare, at 37 per cent, was the biggest factor.
Relatives remain the greatest source of carers for pre-school children; childminders account for 26 per cent.
Joanna Foster, chairwoman of the Equal Opportunities Commission, says that while virtually every politician and company has accepted that more must be done, there have been more words than action: ‘Provision is patchy and mostly accessible only to high income groups.
It inhibits women's access to training and good employment.’