

Suspicious van causes M1 closure
EASTER holidaymakers heading out of London were delayed when the M1 was closed for more than two hours last night because of a suspect van on the hard shoulder two miles from where an IRA bomb exploded last week.
British Rail suspended services passing through Mill Hill as a precaution.
Traffic started moving again when the van was pronounced safe.
A man was later arrested.
London Weather Centre predicted that it would be warmer but wet over the weekend.
Rain will fall almost everywhere today, persisting in Scotland tomorrow and Sunday while most of England and Wales turns dry and cloudy.
Heavy congestion was reported on many motorways.
An AA spokesman said: ‘People tried making an early getaway to beat the traffic but they've all met up and combined with others returning home from work.’
John Patten seeks return to belief in good and evil
By Damian Thompson, Religious Affairs Correspondent
MR JOHN PATTEN, the new Education Secretary, has begun his term in office with a passionate condemnation of the godlessness of society and an appeal for a return to belief in good and evil.
Mr Patten, a practising Roman Catholic, says in this week's Spectator magazine that Britain cannot become civilised again without a revival of the fear of damnation and the hope of redemption.
The article is the sharpest challenge by a Cabinet minister to church leaders, whom Mr Patten accuses of refusing to suggest that anyone except governments and institutions can actually be bad.
Mr Patten says the Church ‘must encourage parents and exhort children.
It must recognise that evil exists, not endemically in the corridors of power, but individually in the sinews of society.
‘It must proclaim, too, that responsibilities are as important as rights; that there are no excuses for crime; and that even those who have turned out to be bad can be helped to be good.’
The reference to excuses for crime is likely to be interpreted in some circles as a challenge to the Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr George Carey, who was heavily criticised by Conservatives last year when he implied that urban deprivation was to blame for the Tyneside riots.
Mr Patten calls for a shift in Church attitudes.
‘Some very clever, very nice and very holy people need to be turned away from internal debates on the relative clap-happiness of church services or the sexual inclinations of the clergy or whether to write letters to the papers campaigning for this or that party in general elections.
‘They need to be turned towards teaching the fundamental lessons of redemption and damnation, good and evil, right and wrong, good and bad.’
Mr Patten, 46, a former Oxford geography don, is regarded as close to the European Christian Democrat tradition, which is predominately Roman Catholic.
But his article also contains a distinctly Thatcherite defence of ‘now derided Victorian values’.
He says: ‘Dwindling belief in redemption and damnation has led to loss of fear of the eternal consequences of goodness and badness.
It has had a profound effect on personal morality — especially on criminality.’
Deterrence by tougher penalties is not enough.
‘Delinquent parents need to feel the contemporary lash if they won't persuade their children to behave,’ he says.
Mr Patten suggests that the root of the problem is that science has weakened faith.
‘Scientific thinking means that all things must be proved before they are.
‘Doubting Thomases have been elevated from the pitiable to the theologically correct.
Secularisation is summed up by advertising, peddling our ‘right’ to happiness.
It also submerges the quaint and old-fashioned idea that in the end happiness comes not from cars, colour televisions and consumables but from within ourselves.’
Mr Patten says church attendance is falling, except in ‘churches which have allowed much-abused fundamentalism to creep in’.
In contrast, there has been ‘a clear decline in the inclination of the leaders of our Churches to suggest anyone could be bad — governments and institutions, certainly, but individuals, no.’
Mr Patten ends on an optimistic note.
‘The belief that, deep down, people still want God, want redemption and want faith, leads me to think, in a politically wind-blown Holy Week, that the message of hope this coming Sunday is still worth a Mass.
And, as Jesus promises, the Christian Church will survive and ‘the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it’.’
Empire State black-out as Hotel Queen goes to jail
By Charles Laurence in New York
THE lights of the Empire State Building, the brightest jewel on the Manhattan skyline, have been switched off in retaliation for the jailing of Mrs Leona ‘Queen Meanie’ Helmsley, the self-styled Hotel Queen who failed to pay her million-dollar tax bill.
Her husband, Mr Harry Helmsley, 83, a property magnate, who escaped joining his wife in the dock on tax charges because of ill-health, said he had ordered the lights that play on the art deco pinnacle turned off as a ‘symbolic gesture’.
It is a bitter blow to the city's tourists, and to make matters worse he also doused the lights on a second Manhattan landmark, the Helmsley Building on Park Avenue.
That removed the sight of the gold-leafed cupola that traditionally glitters above Grand Central Station.
As Mrs Helmsley, 71, settled in a Kentucky prison for the first night of a four-year sentence for tax evasion, the New York panorama became a model smile marred by a missing tooth.
Mr Helmsley did not say how long he planned to keep his buildings in mourning, but his wife is expected to be in jail for at least 19 months before she is eligible for parole.
Mrs Helmsley, who was convicted of cheating the Internal Revenue Service of $1.7 million, caused uproar when she said ‘only the little people pay taxes’.
Job figures boost hopes for economy
Post-election surge in car sales: unemployment increase slows
By PHILIP JOHNSTON
THE SMALLEST monthly rise for almost two years in the number of people out of work, and the first clear signs that the two-year decline in car sales may be ending, prompted cautious optimism yesterday that the worst of the recession may be over.
Coupled with last week's fall in inflation to four per cent, ministers believe the much-vaunted ‘green shoots of recovery’ may at last be showing through.
A seasonally adjusted increase of 7,400 in the March unemployment total proved a welcome bonus for Mrs Gillian Shephard, the Employment Secretary, on her arrival in the Cabinet.
The increase in manufacturing unit wage costs is at its lowest level since 1989 and is increasingly in line with Britain's main competitors.
Figures yesterday also showed the number of industrial stoppages to be the lowest since 1929, and the number of working days lost by industrial action — 800,000 in the year to the end of March — was the lowest since records began 100 years ago.
Mrs Shephard said the unemployment figures were ‘a glimmer of hope’ but added that it would be foolish to build too much into one month's statistics.
Nevertheless, unfilled vacancies were the highest for a year, a further indication that ‘we are in the right kind of atmosphere to benefit from the recovery’.
Mr Tony Blair, Labour employment spokesman, said while the rate of increase in unemployment had slowed, more people were still out of work than in virtually every other EC country.
He also feared that many businesses had already built redundancies into their plans for the coming year.
Mr Jim Wallace, Liberal Democrat spokesman, said the upward trend of unemployment remained ‘appalling’.
Car production in March was the highest since November 1990 and commercial vehicle output was the highest since June 1990.
Rover reported a surge in sales since the election.
Mr John Towers, managing director, said that in the five days after the poll sales had risen by 20 per cent compared with the same five days last year.
After a disappointing first quarter, he predicted that a steady increase in car Jobless details — P8 City Report — P22 City Comment — P23 sales would push the total above last year's.
Evidence that consumers are shaking off their spending caution after the election also came from the biggest credit information group, Infolink, which reported a rise in credit inquiries.
Applications for shop, car and home loans were up by 5.5 per cent, suggesting that worries about the recession are beginning to ease.
Dr Brian Bailey, Infolink chairman, said the figures revealed a ‘very positive’ reaction to the election result.
‘It appears that consumers are already returning to the high street and are beginning to consider major financial decisions, which were postponed in the uncertain period before the election,’ he said.
‘It is another positive indication that the election result will give renewed impetus to the tentative consumer credit recovery which began earlier this year.’
Government borrowing figures yesterday, while in line with Treasury forecasts, confirmed the extent of public debt, which some analysts believe will require deep public spending cuts and a postponement of any tax cuts.
In the financial year just ended, Government finances finished nearly £14 billion in the red as the recession eroded tax receipts and the cost of paying unemployment benefit soared.
Mr Lamont, the Chancellor, has forecast a borrowing requirement of £28 billion for 1992–93 to pay for the recession, modest Budget tax cuts and extra public spending.
Official March production figures from the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders and the Central Statistical Office showed that total car production reached 133,951, 8.44 per cent up on March last year.
Export production, at 55,946, was down 7.2 per cent.
Commercial vehicle production ‘leapt ahead’ to 29,058, a rise of 40.74 per cent.
Export production, at 16,567, was up 78 per cent.
The surge in commercial vehicle production was regarded as a particularly encouraging pointer to an improvement in the economy.
The Budget cut in car tax, from 10 per cent to five, led to a brief flurry of sales that fizzled out as the election approached.
Motor industry executives believe that many people held off buying until after the election because of uncertainty about higher tax bills if Labour took office.
Mrs Sarah Hogg, head of the Downing Street policy unit, is to continue in the post, it was made clear last night.
The Prime Minister's office quashed suggestions that Mrs Hogg, the wife of Mr Douglas Hogg, Foreign Office Minister, and a former Economics Editor of The Daily Telegraph, might be leaving No 10.
Vans appeal by police
By Neil Darbyshire Crime Correspondent
SCOTLAND Yard yesterday issued descriptions of the two vans used in the IRA bombings in the City of London and Staples Corner bombs and appealed for information about their movements on and before last Friday.
The van left outside the Baltic Exchange in St Mary Axe was described as a pale blue and white Ford Luton, registration EMH 757V.
Police have spoken to the previous owner, who recently sold the van privately.
The vehicle which contained the Staples Corner bomb was described as a white Bedford CF van, registration A185 UYE.
Police have located the owner of a van with the same number plates, who described the builders' logo on the vehicle when he sold it several months ago.
Task force reglazes offices after blast
By BEN FENTON
AN army of glaziers is at work in the City, battling to repair the thousands of windows shattered by last Friday's IRA bomb.
It's an enormous task.
In the Commercial Union building alone almost three acres — 2,000 panes — of toughened glass must be replaced, according to Mr Ray Morley, a marketing manager of the insurance firm, who said yesterday that the building would be out of service for a year.
One glazier has estimated that windows for the 370 ft, 27-storey office block, where 90 people are busy clearing the gaping frames, could cost up to £3 million.
Buildings up to a quarter of a mile away suffered severe damage from the 100 lb bomb, which killed three and injured 91, as the pressure wave ricocheted from St Mary Axe down the concrete canyons of the Square Mile.
At 99 Bishopsgate, the home of the Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank, about half of the windows must be replaced at a cost of up to £300,000.
Reglazing there is already under way by Express Glass Contractors, a company with experience gained from replacing windows destroyed by an IRA bomb in Whitehall Place earlier this year.
Mr David Cummings, general manager, said: ‘We have never done anything on this scale, but everyone has been fantastic and our suppliers have stood by us.’
Although many of the largest emergency glazing companies carry large stocks of glass, they have had to call on manufacturers, especially Pilkington's, for extra supplies.
Mr Tony Cove, Pilkington's public relations manager, said: ‘Fortunately we opened a new production line recently and the building industry is down on its orders at the moment, so we have been able to cope.’
But the glass, which is toughened, cut to size and then strengthened in furnaces, is not cheap.
The 30 ft high plates at the base of the 52-storey National Westminster Tower could cost as much as £2,000 each.
Although the disaster may seem a boon to an industry that has shared in the recession which struck the construction industry, not all firms have welcomed the flood of work.
Mr Warren Silk, administration director of Cook's Glass and Glazing, a Croydon-based company, said: ‘I know it's tremendous, but it's also very sad.
Apart from the fact that it's not the way we like our work to come to us, it has provided some other difficulties.
It is not good for our cashflow because we have to extend our credit limits to get more glass in.
‘We have 30 men who are working from 6am to 11pm and most of the extra payments we would expect to receive may go on overtime.’
He added that the work for London's glaziers could last for at least six months once the emergency tasks have been completed.
The cost of repairing the damage caused by the City bomb could be as little as £300 million — less than originally thought — according to surveyors and insurance experts, writes Matthew Doull, City Staff.
Despite earlier fears, the Baltic Exchange will not have to be demolished and is to be repaired at the cost of about £80 million.
Industry sources say consequential loss claims could prove a greater burden than the building repair costs.
Streets sealed off as two face bomb charges
By Alastair McCall
A MAN and woman appeared before magistrates in east London yesterday on several terrorist charges.
They were arrested at their home in Islip Gardens, Northolt, north-west London, on Monday.
James Joseph Canning, 36, and Ethel Audrey Lamb, 60, were driven from Paddington Green police station and arrived amid tight security at the specially-adapted Arbour Square court in Stepney.
Police marksmen, with Heckler & Koch machine-pistols, were stationed on the roof of the court building, and officers with revolvers and wearing bullet-proof vests ringed the court.
Surrounding streets were sealed off.
They are jointly charged with conspiracy to cause explosions and possessing Semtex and six assault rifles on or before April 13.
Canning was charged also with causing an explosion in Bridle Lane, Soho, central London, on April 6, and possessing a revolver with intent to resist arrest.
Canning and Lamb were flanked by police in the oak-panelled courtroom and stared straight ahead throughout the hearing, saying nothing.
A further 12 anti-terrorist squad officers were inside the court.
A bullet-proof glass screen sealed the public gallery and everyone entering the building was subjected to a body search.
Canning was unshaven with dark, curly hair and a moustache.
He wore a blue jersey, striped shirt and grey trousers, and had a large gash and abrasions on his right cheek.
He had further abrasions to his forehead.
His solicitor, Mr Colin Reynolds, drew the attention of the magistrate, Mrs Daphne Wickham, to these injuries.
She ordered that Canning receive proper medical attention.
Lamb, who was short and had wavy, blonde hair, wore a tracksuit and plimsolls.
There was no application for bail during the nine-minute hearing.
Lamb and Canning were both remanded in custody for one week.
Lamb will reappear before Arbour Square magistrates on April 23, but Canning will not reappear in person until May 14.
A man being questioned by police following the arms find in Northolt was released without charge last night.
Woman aids search for killers who shot sergeant
By David Graves
DETECTIVES hunting the killers of an Army recruiting sergeant in Derby named two more men they want to question yesterday.
They also detained, under the Prevention of Terrorism Act, the sister of a third man they want.
One of the men, Declan Derek Duffy, 19, known as ‘Wacko,’ has tattooed on his left hand the initials INLA — standing for Irish National Liberation Army which has claimed responsibility for the murder of Sgt Michael Newman, 34.
The second, Anthony Patrick Gorman, 22, known as ‘Fanta,’ has the letter F tattooed on his left arm.
Mr Don Dovaston, assistant chief constable of Derbyshire, issued the two men's names 24 hours after releasing a photograph and identity of the third man — Joseph Magee, 26, who lived in Derby with his wife and son for the past year after being released from jail in Northern Ireland.
Magee's 30-year-old sister, Kathleen, who for several years has lived in a redbrick Victorian terrace house in Northumberland Street, Derby, with her seven-year-old son, Christopher, was being held last night.
Armed police raided her house early on Wednesday.
Three other people arrested after the shooting have been released without charge.
The three wanted men were close friends from Armagh, and Duffy and Gorman had been in Derby with Magee for several weeks before Monday's shooting.
Mr Dovaston, who said his appeal for information about Magee had prompted 700 telephone calls from the public, said all three men were highly dangerous and should not be approached.
He appealed to an Irishwoman, who called police with ‘vital information’ yesterday morning, to contact detectives again.
Magee, who was knee-capped in Northern Ireland several years ago, was seen lagging behind the other two as they ran from their gold-coloured Granada getaway car which they abandoned in Charnwood Street, Derby, minutes after the shooting.
Neighbours said Magee's wife, Fiona, who is in her early 20s, and 12-month-old son, Kevin, had left their rented terrace home in Silver Hill Road, less than half-a-mile from Charnwood Street.
Mrs Magee's mother was also said to have left her home in nearby Howard Street early yesterday carrying some suitcases.
Both homes are close to the house in Northumberland Street where Magee's sister lived.
Ms Magee, who has a local taxi driver as a boyfriend, had worked as a barmaid in local public houses and clubs.
An inquest on Sgt Newman was opened and adjourned yesterday.
Duffy, also known as ‘Squint’, is 5ft 7in tall with green eyes, short, light brown thinning hair, 10½ stone, clean-shaven, tanned and broad shouldered.
He occasionally wears gold rimmed spectacles and has a very strong Irish accent.
He is extensively tattooed, with one on his right forearm of a rifle and a red star and on his left hand the initials INLA.
He has a tattoo of a swallow on his upper left arm and on his left hand a diamond on the first finger, heart on the second, club on the third and spade on the fourth.
Gorman is 6ft, slim to medium build, 12 stone, dark brown, short hair, blue eyes with a Mexican-style moustache.
He has a heart tattooed on his left hand and the initial F on his left forearm.
Magee is 5ft 5in tall, slim, 8½ stone, fair complexion, blue eyes with fairly short, straight receding hair.
He had a 4in scar on his left leg as a result of the knee-capping and a two-inch scar on his right wrist.
He has a tattoo on his left arm of a heart with the letter A inside with the names Pat and Joe underneath.
He has a soft Irish accent.
Thirty armed police hunting Magee raided the Wisteria Hotel, Cliftonville, near Margate in Kent, yesterday but found no trace of him.
Police take note of plastic protest
By Gerald Bartlett
THE STIFF plastic sheet in police officers' notebooks, said by some lawyers to be ‘a manoeuvre’ to make testing for note-doctoring impossible, is to be withdrawn immediately.
A Scotland Yard spokesman said last night: ‘In response to complaints expressed by a number of people, including some from the legal profession, it has been decided that the use of plastic sheets in surveillance logs [note books]— used as a firm backing on which to write in the street — will be withdrawn.’
They were introduced seven months ago.
Lawyers and sections of the media have been concerned that the plastic sheet prevents electronic document analysis (Esda), which has been used to correct a number of miscarriages of justice — including wrongful convictions of the Birmingham Six, Guildford Four and Tottenham Three.
Esda is effectively negated because the plastic sheet ensures that no indentation is left on underlying pages.
Sir Peter Imbert, the Metropolitan Police Commissioner, said: ‘All our surveillance log books now carry a unique number.
Similarly, each page is uniquely numbered.
On completion, it is signed by the officer making the notes and countersigned by his supervisor.
‘Any alterations or changes to the page must be noted and initialled at the time.
The much-maligned plastic sheet was also there to prevent, in one case, from reading the surveillance notes from another which was completely unconnected.
‘We will overcome this problem by using a new log book for every new case and the pages will remain in the book.’
Detective hurt
A 30-year-old detective was recovering in hospital last night after being punched and kicked unconscious in Chiswick High Street, west London, while helping a uniformed officer to arrest a woman.
The assailant, a man, fled in a sports car.
Earl Spencer to close Althorp on weekdays
Earl Spencer is to close Althorp House to the public during the week to give his family more privacy.
The Northamptonshire mansion reopens to the public this weekend for the first time since the death of his father.
But it will close from Tuesday to Friday each week, except in August when it will be open every day.
A spokesman at the estate said yesterday: ‘As the new earl has just taken over, we are reviewing our business policy.’
Mugger murders British holidaymaker on the first day of jazz trip to New Orleans
Shot tourist ‘paid price of defiance’
By Hugh Davies in New York
A BRITISH tourist shot dead in New Orleans on the first day of her holiday may have died because her boyfriend refused a mugger's demand for money.
Police piecing together the events of Tuesday night have discovered that the killer had robbed another couple a few minutes before.
He confronted Julie Stott, 27, and her companion, Peter Ellis, 27, forced them to lie spreadeagled on the ground, and apparently shouted for them to hand over their money and watches.
Police sources said that either they were unable to understand him or simply said ‘no’.
An officer said: ‘It may be that they just didn't act quickly enough for him.’
The attacker, a 6ft Afro American in his 20s, shot Miss Stott in the back of the head and in her right arm.
Other shots were fired, but Mr Ellis escaped injury.
Miss Stott was taken to the Medical Centre of Louisiana, where she died at 7.30am on Wednesday.
A grief-stricken Mr Ellis said yesterday: ‘It's a nightmare.
People are showing me great compassion and I appreciate it…but it is too awful to talk about.
Really, there is nothing to say…nothing.’
Mr Ellis spoke at the Monteleone Hotel, New Orleans, where he and Miss Stott from Bridgewater Court, Eccles, Manchester, booked a room on Tuesday, after arriving for a holiday they had planned months ago.
Both jazz enthusiasts, they were in the city for the start of the world-famous New Orleans Jazz and Heritage festival.
Soon after checking in, they decided to stroll around the Vieux Carre, the elegant French Quarter which dates back to 1718.
They visited a club to listen to music.
‘We had just had dinner,’ Mr Ellis told detectives.
‘We were going back to the hotel when it happened.
It was all so quick.
One minute we were together.
The next she lay there dying.’
The gunman is thought by detectives to have been under the influence of ‘crack’ cocaine.
He escaped by car.
He had robbed another couple about 10 minutes before the killing, after parking his car and approaching them waving a gun.
‘I remember being surprised that he was robbing us,’ said the woman victim.
‘He looked so nice and was so well spoken.
He walked around behind us and stuck the gun in my back.
He told us not to turn around and to give him our money and jewellery or he would kill us.’
The man got back in his car and drove the wrong way along the street.
The couple watched as he stopped alongside Miss Stott and her companion.
They were in a store phoning the police when the shots were fired.
Gay Gordon, 36, a local businesswoman, grabbed a gun and her cellular phone and dashed out on to the street.
‘I saw the girl lying on the sidewalk with blood gushing from her head.
She looked like a rag doll.
She was unconscious by the time I reached her,’ she said.
‘The boyfriend was walking around in a daze.
He was too shocked to talk.
He was just staring in disbelief.
‘If you didn't know what had happened you'd have thought he was not with her because he was standing apart as if his emotions were shut down.’
Soon after the murder, a huge wreath of white lilies was placed at the blood-stained scene.
A note read: ‘There are good people in the world.
I wish you could have met them.’
The card and flowers were there for several hours.
Then someone stole them.
Tale of Millie the spaniel puts £500,000 into Bush account
By Stephen Robinson in Washington
AN ENGLISH springer spaniel named Millie enabled President Bush to treble his income last year.
His wife, Barbara, made £508,000 as Millie's Story, her tale of life at the top through the eyes of her dog, soared into the best seller list.
But she gave most of it to a charity promoting adult literacy, living instead on the £115,000 presidential salary.
Details were revealed as Mr Bush made his tax return public yesterday, something he has done every year since he became vice president in 1981.
In the 1991 tax year, the couple's joint income, including the book royalties, was £743,000, nearly three times the previous year's £258,000.
They also earned £112,000 from dividends and interest held in a trust operated on their behalf by independent investment advisers.
The Internal Revenue Service will not have been unduly interested in Mr Bush's earnings from his 1987 autobiography Looking Forward.
That boosted his income last year by a mere £1,550, all of which he paid to charity.
Marilyn Quayle, wife of the vice president made £6,800 for Embrace the Serpent, her novel about political life in Washington.
Family mourns ‘a wonderful girl’
By Nigel Bunyan
JULIE STOTT'S parents arrived in New Orleans last night.
Mr Raymond Stott, 60, a retired ICI administrator, and his wife, Margaret, 55, a teaching assistant, from Middleton, Greater Manchester, were initially told she was on a life suppport system.
But hospital officials later informed them that doctors were simply waiting to confirm she was clinically dead.
Yesterday Miss Stott's grandparents said they believed she and her boyfriend, Peter Ellis, originally from Tyneside but working as a computer analyst in New Zealand for the past 18 months, had gone on the three-week holiday in order to get engaged and to share their love of jazz.
Mr Frederick Garnet, 81, said: ‘The last thing she said to us before she left was that she would have some very good news for the family when she came home.
We knew she had just been promoted at work, so it couldn't be that.
‘When we asked her if she was going to marry Peter she just smiled and said we'd have to wait and see.
But we knew in our hearts they were ready to name the day.’
His wife, Josephine, 82, described her granddaughter as ‘a wonderful, bubbly girl full of vigour.’
She added: ‘We just can't take in the fact that a life with so much to offer has been suddenly ended.
‘There was no reason for this to happen.
Whoever did this must be sick in the head.’
Miss Stott, a textiles and design graduate of the University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology, had worked as development and design manager for a Bolton textiles firm for six years.
Yesterday Mr Peter Robinson, chief executive of Sundour Fabrics, a subsidiary of Courtaulds, said she had flown to Los Angeles, and then travelled on to New Orleans with Mr Ellis.
He said: ‘Julie was a super girl with a lot of talent and a great future.
She was respected by everyone she worked with and was brilliant at the job.
‘I have seen Julie's parents and they are obviously terribly upset.
But they are being very brave.’
Mr Robinson said Miss Stott's career had already taken her to exhibitions in Germany and on buying trips to Paris.
He believed that with such experience she would not have resisted the orders of her assailant.
Sex killer strangles boy, 4, in his bed
By Wendy Holden
A FOUR-YEAR-OLD boy was sexually assaulted and strangled in his bed in what police described yesterday as a ‘ghastly and horrendous attack’.
Matthew Robinson, who lived in a lodging house for social security tenants in Keyham, Plymouth, Devon, was discovered by his brother Jason, nine — who had slept the night in the bunk above him — at 8.30am on Wednesday.
The victim had been put into the lower of two bunk-beds at about 9pm the night before by his father, Mr Alan Robinson, 52.
Jason was put into the top bunk half-an-hour later by Mrs Christine Robinson, 39, his Australian-born mother.
During that 30 minutes, Matthew was unattended and he was ‘seemingly asleep’ when his brother was taken to bed.
Jason saw and heard nothing during the night and raised the alarm when he went to tell his parents that he was unable to wake Matthew.
Mr and Mrs Robinson, who own the house but have divided it into single bed-sits for Social Security tenants, told police that at first they thought their son had been a victim of cot death syndrome, but a post mortem examination revealed the murder and assault.
Last night Mr and Mrs Robinson — described by police as ‘loving and caring’— were being questioned by a team of detectives along with present and former tenants.
A specialist child protection team was questioning Jason and scientific evidence was being gathered.
Det Supt Malcolm Corps, leading the inquiry, said: ‘The house has numerous tenants and is not secure.
People come and go as they wish and people call there.
‘We are going through the process of making forensic tests and taking statements, which may take some time, and the inquiry is now mushrooming out from the house.’
The police are anxious to hear from anyone who has lived in or visited the house recently or who knows of anyone who has done so.
Sports coach is new envoy for Russians
By Michael Fleet
AN ATHLETICS coach who struck up a friendship with a teacher from a remote Russian region 19 years ago has been appointed its cultural and economic envoy to the West.
Mrs Jan Charlton, from Grove, near Wantage, Oxon, has been given the title ‘co-ordinator’ by the government of the republic of Mari, 500 miles north-east of Moscow.
It gives her a role as a pseudo-ambassador to the region and she has been granted a special travel visa allowing access to the area without the normal restrictions on foreigners.
‘I was on a visit doing some coaching when I was told the President and Secretary of State wanted to see me.
I went to a meeting and they asked if I would try to get them contacts from the West,’ said Mrs Charlton.
The 55-year-old coach of Grove Athletics Club has already begun her new role by encouraging local sporting and musical groups to consider visits to Mari and has formed a link with a Wantage-based company, Autotype International, which is sending two executives to Mari El in July.
‘The region is remote even within Russia but the people are very keen to gain experience of the outside world and meet people from the West,’ said Mrs Charlton.
‘I had never heard of the area when I met a teacher from there in 1973 but we became friends and I started to visit.
I was the first British person most of them had met and they see me as a bridge to the outside world,’ she said.
Mr Colin Walker, a senior manager at Autotype International, said he would be reporting back on possible business links after the summer visit.
‘We sold to the old Soviet Union but dealt only with the central import agency.
‘Now we are finding new markets and we are very interested in seeing what we can offer Mari El and what they can offer us,’ he said.
Woman critical
An 81-year-old woman who collapsed two hours after a robber grabbed her handbag as she left the British Legion Club in Clapham, south London, was on a life-support machine at St Thomas's Hospital yesterday with a suspected blood clot on the brain.
Patient leaves
Sharon Jackson, 21, whose hands were sewn back after being severed by a wallpaper factory guillotine eight weeks ago, left Withington Hospital, Manchester, yesterday.
She has some movement in her fingers.
Helicopter pilot blamed for rig crash
By Robert Reid Scottish Correspondent
PILOT error was blamed yesterday for a North Sea helicopter crash in which six men were killed.
Capt David Anderton died when his Sikorsky S61N struck a crane on Shell's Brent Spar oil platform and fell into the sea 116 miles east of Lerwick.
But the crash could have been avoided had the pilot taken a safer course, Sheriff Douglas Risk said in his report on an inquiry into the accident held 13 months ago.
Capt Anderton had made his final approach with the helicopter's tail rotor pointing towards the crane, which was out of his sight.
The blades hit it and the aircraft was sent across the deck and into 450 feet of water.
Four expert witnesses had argued there had been a range of approaches open to the pilot, Sheriff Risk said.
‘The accident might have been avoided if he had adopted an approach which enabled him to keep the crane in sight.
Such alternative approaches were open to him at the material time.’
Sheriff Risk rejected suggestions that the Sikorsky should not have been landing on a restricted helideck.
Mr Fred Tyler, an Edinburgh solicitor acting for Mrs Denise Anderton, the pilot's widow, said: ‘The sheriff has dismissed from consideration the many causal factors to this accident referred to in evidence and adopted by the Air Accidents Investigation Branch in their report.’
First battle in 40 years over choice of Speaker
Order, order!
Six candidates are embroiled in a Commons clash over who will succeed Bernard Wetherill.
George Jones reports
By GEORGE JONES
THE NEW House of Commons is facing the prospect of the first full-scale contested vote between Labour and Conservative MPs for the election of Speaker for more than 40 years.
With at least six candidates — five Conservative and one Labour — now in the race to replace Mr Bernard Wetherill, intense behind-the-scenes soundings will be taken over the next week to try to reach a compromise.
Most Tory MPs are determined to maintain the tradition that the majority party nominates the new Speaker when the position becomes vacant.
But Labour MPs are equally keen to push the claims of Miss Betty Boothroyd, Labour MP for West Bromwich West, as the first woman for the job.
She has been a deputy Speaker since 1987, and is understood to have been Mr Kinnock's choice for Speaker if Labour had won last week's General Election.
When the new Parliament meets for the first time on Monday, April 27, the first task facing MPs will be to choose a Speaker.
Mr Edward Heath, as Father of the House, the longest serving MP in the new Parliament, will be in the chair for the election.
Unless the two main parties can agree on a successor a contest seems inevitable.
The last time there was a serious battle for the post was 1951, when Mr W S Morrison, Conservative MP for Cirencester and Tewkesbury, was elected, defeating Major J Milner, Labour MP for Leeds South East, who had been deputy Speaker in the previous Parliament.
It was the first time since 1895 the election of the Speaker had been the subject of a division.
The five Tories being canvassed are: Mr Peter Brooke, former Northern Ireland Secretary.
He has support from senior Tories, including many Cabinet Ministers.
They argue that his experience in Northern Ireland has demonstrated that he has qualifications for the job, combining authority with even-handedness.
Mr Paul Channon, former Transport Secretary.
He is the most experienced candidate, having been an MP since 1959.
He has tradition on his side, with three former Speakers among his ancestors.
Sir Giles Shaw, former Home Office and Trade and Industry Minister.
He has the support of fellow Yorkshire Tories, including some members of the 1922 Committee of Tory backbench MPs.
But the 1922 is not promoting any one candidate.
Dame Janet Fookes, who could become the Tory nominee for the first woman Speaker.
She is on the Speaker's panel of chairmen for Commons committees, so has experience of the chair.
She has made a career as a backbencher, taking an interest in penal affairs and animal welfare.
Mr Terence Higgins, a Treasury Minister in the Heath Government in the early 1970s.
Since then he has been an active backbencher, chairing the influential Treasury and Civil Service select committee.
He was a member of Mr Major's leadership campaign team.
On the Opposition side, Miss Boothroyd is being promoted vigorously by senior Labour MPs, who argue that as Mr Weatherill was a Conservative MP, it is Labour's turn to choose his successor.
She is popular on both sides of the Commons, and has some support from Conservative MPs who would like to see a woman Speaker.
Miss Boothroyd's supporters are understood to be ready to put the issue to a vote, while there is an equal determination on the Tory side to put forward their preferred nominee.
Senior Tories dismiss the argument that the choice of Speaker should alternate between the parties, saying that tradition dictates the nomination should lie with the majority party.
One reason for this, they argue, is that it is a ‘responsibility’ for the Government to see its majority reduced by one vote with the appointment of the Speaker.
The Speaker only votes in the rare event of a tie.
Tory sources insist that Mr Major is leaving the decision up to backbenchers, who will be sounded out over the next few days.
‘There are no Government fingerprints on this,’ said one leading backbencher.
The post of Speaker carries a salary of £65,058, though Mr Weatherill took the same as a Cabinet Minister, £63,047.
It also carries with it an impressive ‘grace and favour’ set of apartments in the Palace of Westminster overlooking the River Thames.
Livingstone is Left candidate to lead Labour
By Philip Johnston, Political Correspondent
DEVALUATION of the pound, deep cuts in military spending, phased withdrawal of the Army from Northern Ireland and tax increases on earnings over £26,000 a year were proposed by Mr Ken Livingstone yesterday as he launched his bid for the Labour leadership as the candidate for the party's hard-Left.
The Brent East MP and former Greater London Council leader joined Mr John Smith and Mr Bryan Gould in the battle to succeed Mr Kinnock.
But Mr Livingstone is unlikely to gain the nomination of 55 Labour MPs necessary before his name can be put to Labour's electoral college, which will meet on July 18 to choose a new leader.
With the hard-Left marginalised in recent years, the chances of Mr Livingstone getting beyond an intention to stand must be slim.
The Campaign Group of MPs, to which he belongs, numbered fewer than 30 before the election and four Left-wingers, including Mr Dave Nellist, stood against official Labour candidates and lost their seats.
While Mr Livingstone was hopeful yesterday of a Campaign Group membership of 50 when MPs return after Easter, half that number seems a more realistic target.
But Mr Livingstone challenged such a pessimistic assessment of his chances.
He said: ‘I am not in politics for gestures.
I am in politics because I wish to achieve power and to transform Britain and its economy.’
Mr Livingstone attributed Labour's defeat to an economic policy hidebound by the need to defend the level of sterling inside the European exchange rate mechanism and an unwillingness to finance Labour's spending commitments from defence cuts rather than tax increases on middle income groups.
‘It was Labour's policy failure — above all on taxation — which failed to win voters.’
‘Simply changing the leader without changing policy is therefore not enough.’
He said Mr Smith, as Shadow chancellor, bore the chief responsibility for this failure of Labour's economic and taxation policy, and so it was ironic that Mr Smith was now being presented as the best leader for the party.
Mr Livingstone said that unless Labour adopted an economic policy that provided room for manoeuvre by cutting interest rates it would make itself unelectable.
He added: ‘We could make the fatal mistake in these next 12 weeks of simply changing personalities.
In the next 12 weeks we could lose the next general election.’
Mr Livingstone would cut £7 billion from defence spending, reduce interest rates by two per cent and devalue the pound by 15 per cent in the European exchange rate mechanism.
Union ‘barons’ set to back Smith challenge
By Kevin Maguire, Labour Correspondent
UNIONS are ready to give Mr John Smith more than half the votes he will need on July 18 to be elected Labour's new leader.
He is on course to secure a clear majority among the union block votes in Labour's electoral college to give him a clear advantage in the battle to succeed Mr Kinnock.
The union section of the college has 40 per cent of the votes and the leaders of five unions, controlling 24 per cent, have publicly declared or privately indicated they will back the Shadow Chancellor.
The transport workers, GMB general workers, AEEU manufacturing union, Usdaw shopworkers and UCW postal staff are likely to be joined by at least two others — the Nupe public employees and Cohse health workers — which would guarantee Mr Smith just over 30 per cent of the total vote.
Such a result would leave Mr Smith, sponsored by the general workers, still able to win even if he failed to gain the support of most MPs or constituency parties.
The ability of ‘union barons’ to pick the next leader could backfire on Mr Smith, who is likely to push ahead with plans to dilute the influence of the block vote at the party's annual conference.
Few unions intend to ballot their members paying the political levy before casting their block votes and most decisions will be taken by activists on executives or at union conferences.
Old atom plant must stay shut
By Roger Highfield, Science Editor
NUCLEAR ELECTRIC faces a £75 million loss after the nuclear safety watchdog rejected a plan to restart an aged nuclear reactor suffering from deteriorating welds.
The 15-month shutdown of its Trawsfynydd power station in North Wales has already cost £50 million.
The prospect of a restart has now been put off to the end of the year.
This will cost at least another £25 million in lost electricity production.
However, because the twin reactor plant is unlike other magnox stations, the decision is unlikely to affect a move by Nuclear Electric to extend the lifetime of its 30-year-old Bradwell station in Essex by up to 10 years.
Yesterday, the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate said that it had rejected the company's plan to return Trawsfynydd's reactor one to operation for six months of tests.
Each year the plant is out of action, beyond its shutdown in February, 1991, costs £40 million in lost electricity.
Nuclear Electric said it will spend £800,000 on modifications to the plant and the case for its operation at lower power levels, which it hopes to submit by autumn for restart by the end of the year.
In December, a threat to shut four other ageing Magnox nuclear power stations because of similar deterioration was lifted by the Inspectorate.
But Trawsfynydd was more seriously affected by radiation, which gradually makes welds brittle in the steel pressure vessel holding the reactor's heart.
The inspectorate disagreed that Nuclear Electric's margins of safety were sufficient to restart Trawsfynydd, a spokesman said yesterday.
Though the problem of radiation embrittlement has been recognised since the outset of the civil Magnox programme in the early 1960s, the inspectorate called for more evidence of the safety of Magnox plants in 1990 after it found the rate of embrittlement may have been faster than predicted.
Nuclear fuel from Japan is to be reprocessed at Sellafield in Cumbria as a result of a £170 million contract announced by British Nuclear Fuels yesterday.
The contract to reprocess fuel for the Japan Atomic Power Company is the fourth extension to a deal signed in 1968 which has seen more than 1,000 tons of spent Magnox fuel delivered to Sellafield.
‘Redundant’ breasts could be removed, says doctor
By Wendy Holden
BREASTS may be redundant organs which could be routinely surgically removed in healthy women to prevent the possible spread of cancer, a leading doctor has suggested.
Mr James Drife, professor of obstetrics and gynaecology at Leeds General Infirmary, says society views mastectomy as ‘unacceptably mutilating’ when all it involves is ‘excision of a redundant gland and a pad of fat’.
Writing a ‘philosophical, not a practical, proposition’ in this week's British Medical Journal, Mr Drife says feelings about breasts are far from logical and are based on attitudes to sexuality and femininity.
Women mourn the loss of a breast —‘which at 50 has no function other than a psychological one’— unlike almost any other part of their body which might have to be removed for health reasons.
‘The way to eradicate breast cancer is to remove the breasts before the cancer develops,’ he writes.
‘The age at which she has the operation may be left to the woman.
With the insertion of implants it could be carried out at any age, but the sensible option would be prophylactic mastectomy either at the completion of her family or at the menopause.’
A new way to detect women at high risk of developing cervical cancer is announced today by a team of researchers from the Imperial Cancer Research Fund.
Existing smear tests find slight abnormalities in 250,000 women every year, but cannot distinguish between those who will go on to develop serious disease and those who will not.
The researchers, writing in The Lancet, describe a new way of detecting levels of the human papilloma virus HPV 16 in smear cells.
This virus is harmless at low levels, but high levels indicate disease in 90 per cent of cases.
Widow's £50,000 bequest to Paisley
By Susannah Herbert
MR IAN PAISLEY, leader of Ulster's Democratic Unionist Party, has been bequeathed £50,000 by an 86-year-old English widow who had never met him.
Mrs Ellen Newton, of Beacon Hill, Hindhead, Surrey, who died in January, admired Mr Paisley and had followed his progress through television and newspaper reports.
In her will, published yesterday, she decreed the money should be distributed by Mr Paisley among ‘the Protestant community of Northern Ireland suffering financial distress as a result of terrorist activity within the Province, as he shall determine’.
Mr Paisley was out of the country yesterday but his son, Ian, said that, when his father first heard of the bequest, he had thought it was a hoax.
‘When he realised it was genuine, he was delighted,’ he said.
‘This will go a great way to help victims of future atrocities in the Province.’
The money has been invested in a trust fund, the Ellen Newton Memorial Trust, and the interest will be given to the families of terrorist victims.
‘Unfortunately, we cannot backdate payments because there would be too many people,’ said Mr Paisley, who is his father's personal assistant.
‘This money would have been very useful a year ago after the Teebane massacre because two families lost their only breadwinners.’
Mrs Newton, a committed Anglican and regular churchgoer who had no children, left estate with a net value of £2,791,248.
All but £7,000 was given to churches or charities.
Mr Leslie Draper, her solicitor, said: ‘She was appalled at the hardship following atrocities in Northern Ireland and was not convinced enough was being done for the people left behind.
‘She saw Ian Paisley as a responsible man on the spot who would be able to distribute the money.’
Mr Jeremy Hanley, son of the late actor Jimmy Hanley, has been apppointed Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Political Development at the Northern Ireland Office.
He becomes Sir Patrick Mayhew's right-hand man in the forthcoming inter-party and inter-governmental talks about the political future of Northern Ireland.
Mr Martin McGuinness, the Sinn Fein leader detained in Dublin on Wednesday, was released without charge yesterday.
Driver crashed runaway coach
A coach driver steered 27 elderly passengers to safety yesterday by crashing his vehicle into an empty house after its brakes failed on a steep hill in Paignton, Devon.
Colin Henry, 45, of Torwood Gardens Road, Torquay, was cut from the wreckage by firemen and taken to hospital with 16 passengers, all from Maghull, Liverpool, who were slightly injured.
In another crash, 11 people, including six children, were taken to hospital after a coach carrying 45 children collided with a minibus on the A40 near Haverfordwest, Dyfed.
Boy swept into sea is named
A schoolboy who drowned after being swept into rough seas by a wave at Burton Bradstock, Dorset, on Wednesday was named yesterday as Mark Cleverly, 12, from Hengrove, Bristol.
David Smith, seven, from Woolacombe, Devon, who was swept into the sea in Devon on Tuesday, has not been found.
Life-saver drug
Treating heart attack victims with clot-busting drugs before they reach hospital can reduce deaths by up to 17 per cent, Dr Philip Hannaford, of the Royal College of General Practitioners' Manchester research unit, told a meeting in Dallas, Texas, yesterday.
Blyth wife sues
Round-the-World yachtsman Chay Blyth, 51, is being sued for divorce by his wife, Margaret, on the grounds of unreasonable behaviour because of the time he has spent at sea.
Farmer shot by own trap
By Michael Fleet
A FARMER shot in the back by a booby-trap gun made the machine himself to scare foxes, police said yesterday.
Detectives who at first treated the death of Mr Peter Jowett as murder said they now believed he was killed as he set a snare.
Det Chief Insp Dave Sinclair said that although they could not rule out the possibility of someone else having fired the machine, the incident was now being treated as an accident.
Mr Jowett, 43, was found 30 yards from the trap on his 1,000-acre estate at Winterslow, near Salisbury, Wilts, on April 8.
The device, which used a shotgun modified to fire bullets, was concealed in a wooden box hidden among trees.
Police discovered Mr Jowett's fingerprints on the device, and found parts used to build it in his workshop.
Mr Sinclair said: ‘Mr Jowett was fairly regularly making devices on the farm and was a very accomplished electronics engineer.’
The machine was examined by Home Office scientific experts in Huntingdon who found it used a battery-operated self-arming mechanism and was fired by a motor.
Police said they did not know why the gun had gone off, but believed it might have been triggered by the wind.
Mr Sinclair said the inquiry was continuing, and appealed to anyone who might have helped Mr Jowett build the machine to come forward.
Mr Sinclair said the gun had only been fired once, but two entry wounds had been made in Mr Jowett's back because the the bullet had parted with its jacket.
Rights of car boot bargain hunters
By Virginia Matthews Consumer Correspondent
BARGAIN-HUNTERS who scour the Church bazaar, the Scout fete and the car boot sale this Easter have the right to demand their money back if what they buy turns out to be a pig in a poke, a report says today.
If the Scoutmaster says a novelty plastic umbrella stand is pure elephant's foot or if the vicar's wife passes off a gold-plated tie-pin as the real thing, they can be held to account under law.
‘Making false claims about a second-hand item verbally or in a small ad is a serious offence, even when the proceeds go to charity,’ according to Mr Keith Richards, a senior lawyer with the Consumers' Association and the author of the report.
‘Any private seller who makes a factual statement about the goods he is selling, verbally or in writing, can be held to account if what he says is inaccurate.’
He adds: ‘People who get carried away when describing their wares can end up in the small claims court.’
Although the principle tenet of the Sale of Goods Act — that goods should be ‘of merchantable quality’ or ‘fit for their purpose’— does not automatically apply when the seller is an individual or club, all second-hand goods must ‘fit their description’.
‘Most people finding that the leather handbag they picked up at the school fete was, in fact, plastic would shrug it off if the proceeds of the sale were going to a good cause,’ said Mr Richards.
Strangeways riot leader gets maximum 10 years' jail
By Nigel Bunyan
A CONVICTED rapist who led the Strangeways prison riot in which dozens of suspected sex offenders were attacked, received the maximum 10-year sentence at Manchester Crown Court yesterday.
Mr Justice Mantell said that Paul Taylor, 27, who was nearing the end of a three-and-a-half-year term for theft and assault at the time of the riot in April, 1990, had taken part in some of the worst violence.
He had appointed himself ‘judge, jury and executioner’.
Three other men found guilty of riot were also jailed, John Spencer, 30, for eight years, James Miller, 31, for seven years and Tiny Doran, 25, for four years.
Spencer, and another former Strangeways inmate, Andrew Nelson, 22, who was among four men acquitted of riot, were both jailed for 18 months for contempt of court after threats to jurors and their families.
The judge rejected suggestions that the riot had been a protest against conditions in the Victorian jail.
‘It was a brutal and cowardly attack on wretched creatures whose offences placed them at the bottom of the prison heap,’ he said.
He told Taylor, who appeared in the dock wearing a dark suit with a small teddy bear mascot on the breast pocket, that Parliament had laid down a maximum sentence of 10 years for an appropriate case and to deter those who took the law into their own hands.
‘In my judgment this is an appropriate case.
I cannot imagine a worse,’ he said.
The worst riot in British penal history started during a Sunday morning service in the Strangeways chapel.
Moments after an address by a Church Army officer, Taylor ran down the aisle and, seizing a microphone from the prison chaplain, began haranguing inmates about the system.
In a recording played to the jury, he could be heard shouting: ‘This gentleman has spoken about how Jesus can take away the hardness from your heart.
I would like to touch on how prison brutalises you.’
The disturbance escalated into a full-scale riot when other inmates began pulling on balaclavas and taking out sticks, iron bars and knives they had concealed beneath their uniforms.
Taylor, from Birkenhead, Merseyside, struck one prison officer, taking his keys, and within minutes the rioters had erected the first of a labyrinth of barricades and begun systematically destroying the chapel.
From there they swept out into the main prison wings, intent on hunting down the jail's segregated Rule 43(1) prisoners being held mainly on sexual offences.
Amid chants of ‘Get the beasts’ and ‘You're going to die’, they spent the next several hours dragging their victims from their barricaded cells, humiliating them and beating them up.
At least eight prison inmates attempt suicide or mutilate themselves daily according to the Howard League for Penal Reform which said the catalogue of self-injuries, almost 3,000 incidents last year, was an ‘appalling record’.
There were 42 suicides in prison last year, including one 15-year-old and six men aged 17 to 21.
In the first four months of this year, 11 inmates have killed themselves, including five aged 21 or under, said the group.
‘Glimmers of hope’ after lowest jobless rise for two years
By Kevin Maguire Labour Correspondent
UNEMPLOYMENT grew by a lower-than-expected 7,400 last month, the smallest increase for nearly two years.
The 23rd successive rise pushed the jobless total up to 2,652,000 or 9.4 per cent of the workforce in March and dole queues remain at their longest since September, 1987.
But the rise in the seasonally adjusted rate, regarded by experts as the best guide as it compensates for factors such as the weather, was barely a quarter of the anticipated 30,000–35,000 jump.
A cautious Mrs Gillian Shephard, the new Employment Secretary, said yesterday that too much should not be read into one set of figures before adding that they and a series of other favourable statistics may offer ‘glimmers of hope’ on the jobless front.
‘The number of people becoming unemployed has eased over recent months and more people are leaving unemployment and getting back to work,’ she said.
Jobcentre vacancies, up 3,200 to 127,500, were at their highest for a year.
‘My top priority is to do all that I can to help those out of work find jobs.
I will therefore be looking at the range of measures on offer to ensure that as we come out of the recession they offer unemployed people practical and effective help in getting back to work.’
Unemployment fell according to the seasonally adjusted count last month in Scotland, Wales, the North-West and North.
But it remains greater in every region compared with a year ago.
The South-East and West Midlands have been hardest hit by the recession.
Nationally, the total is up 1,056,000 on April, 1990, when it first started expanding.
On an international basis, the British rate is calculated at 10.2 per cent which is above the averages for the ‘Major 7’ economies, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, and the European Community.
Only Spain and Ireland of the 11 other Common Market countries record a higher rate.
The actual number out of work and receiving benefit fell last month by 3,010 to 2,707,477 or 9.6 per cent.
But based on the experience of the last 10 years the total is expected to fall by more in March.
Once seasonal factors were allowed for, a 7,400 growth was detected.
The relatively small rise took both the Department of Employment and the City by surprise and compared favourably with the revised 37,800 increase in February.
Whitehall officials were unable to explain it fully and refused to speculate when dole queues will start shortening.
City economists were similarly cautious.
Mr John Shepperd, chief UK economist with merchant bank SG Warburg, said: ‘They are suspiciously good.
We are clearly past the worst of the unemployment increases, but we are likely to see some erratic figures for a time.’
However, the key quarterly average has dropped and is down to 33,700 over the three months to March.
Other encouraging signs emerged yesterday.
As well as more Jobcentre vacancies, the number of people leaving the count between February and March remained steady at 355,600.
But the number joining the register because they had been made jobless dropped 25,700 to 352,400.
The growth in average earnings over the 12 months to February remained constant at a 12-year low of 7.25 per cent, but Mrs Shephard said the rise in manufacturing unit wage costs was at its lowest level since 1989.
‘This and growing business confidence over the last year should mean better news for jobs and those out of work,’ she said.
More than 3,000 people joined Government programmes and 504,056 receive help under a series of schemes which exclude them from the unemployment count.
Mr Tony Blair, Labour's employment spokesman, said the rate of increase in the jobless total appeared to have slowed, but he said more were out of work than in virtually every other European Community country.
He challenged Mrs Shephard to scrap Employment Action, which has been widely criticised as a dead-end scheme providing little or no training, with a proper community-based programme.
‘The test of whether the changes in Mr Major's new Cabinet are cosmetic or real lies in the new Secretary of State's response to this appalling situation,’ said Mr Blair.
‘For three years the Government has been cutting help to the unemployed, depriving them of the training they need and reducing their ability to find their way back to work.
‘If these policies continue, then it will show conclusively that, although the face at the top has changed, the commitment from the Government is simply not there.’
Payment for stabbed girl's parents
By COLIN WRIGHT
THE parents of an 11-year-old girl stabbed to death by a woman psychopath released early from hospital while under a Mental Health Act detention order have accepted an undisclosed payment from Doncaster Health Authority, writes Colin Wright.
Emma Brodie died in Frenchgate shopping centre in Doncaster after being stabbed through the heart with a carving knife by Carol Barratt, 24, who had attacked another child in the same place weeks earlier.
Trent Regional Health Authority ordered an inquiry into why Dr Neil Silvester, a consultant psychiatrist at Doncaster Royal Infirmary, had authorised Barratt's early release.
It concluded that Dr Silvester had been guilty of a ‘serious error of professional judgment’ and ordered him to take a six-month retraining course.
Doncaster Health Authority confirmed yesterday that it had made an undisclosed payment to Mr Rod Brodie and his wife, Valerie, both 38.
It said: ‘The health authority does not accept legal liability but, in view of the unique and tragic circumstances of this case, has agreed to make a contribution to the family of an undisclosed sum.’
Mr Brodie said: ‘We are not interested in the money because, however much it was, it could not compensate for losing Emma and the way it happened.
We have taken it this far because we wanted some justice.
‘Carol Barratt is going to be looked after for the rest of her life, and looked after well, whereas life for us is never going to be the same again.’
International: Deputies argue over Russia's new name
By Marcus Warren in Moscow
RUSSIAN parliamentarians, already routed over their opposition to economic reform, were on the rack again yesterday when they tied themselves in knots over what to call the country.
The Congress of People's Deputies voted overwhelmingly in favour of renaming the Russian Federation ‘Russia’, but within minutes members from the republics which make up the huge state were demanding restoration of the word ‘federation’.
‘We've received a slap in the face from Big Brother,’ said one deputy from Bashkirtostan.
With tempers fraying, it was decided to return to the question today.
Earlier this week, after threatening to resign, President Yeltsin's youthful team of ministers manoeuvred the Congress into overriding a resolution which put economic reforms in jeopardy.
On Wednesday, deputies meekly passed a declaration confirming the Russian president's powers to rule by decree, appoint ministers himself until December and push through market reforms.
‘The government has a free hand as regards interpreting this declaration,’ Mr Yegor Gaidar, the first deputy Prime Minister and economics supremo, said yesterday.
The deputies, many from the old communist establishment of factory and farm managers, took fright at the prospect of losing billions of pounds of Western aid, which was conditional on continuing reform.
They also had no alternative to Mr Gaidar's policies of tight monetary discipline.
The Congress's disarray — radical democrats argue that it should be disbanded — has been on embarrassing display this week as deputies argued over what to call their state.
‘Russia’ won by a majority of 871 to 30, but after emotional speeches claiming the vote might start a Soviet-style disintegration, it was agreed to review the decision.
International: West joins in drive to stop Serbia
By Michael Montgomery in Sarajevo
WESTERN powers threatened yesterday to suspend Serbia's membership of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe as they launched a campaign against the republic to try to halt the bloodshed in Bosnia-Hercegovina.
As the Serbian-dominated federal army continued its push to grab land in the former Yugoslav republic, Herr Hans-Dietrich Genscher, German Foreign Minister, and Mr James Baker, US Secretary of State, agreed to take ‘joint and decisive action’ against Serbia.
Britain joined in the condemnation.
In one of its strongest statements yet, the Foreign Office said: ‘We also deplore the actions of the federal army which, instead of separating the warring factions and restoring peace, has openly sided with the Serbian terrorists.’
Herr Genscher proposed a number of joint German-US measures, including blaming Serbia for the fighting and suspending its membership of the CSCE.
The West is considering further sanctions in the hope of piling on the economic agony in Serbia, where inflation has hit 28,000 per cent.
Serbia, only recently released from EC sanctions, was defiant.
Mr Radoman Bozovic, Prime Minister, said: ‘We are not prepared to give way to pressures contrary to Serbian dignity and to our economic sovereignty.’
In Bosnia, the Yugoslav army yesterday seized control of the town of Visegrad and began enforcing military rule after stamping out pockets of resistance by Muslims, Belgrade radio said.
Troops moved into Visegrad after a four-day siege which left an unknown number dead and forced 20,000 mainly Muslim inhabitants to flee to the surrounding hills.
The takeover of Visegrad, the fifth Bosnian town seized by Serbian forces since Bosnia gained independence two weeks ago, was in defiance of an EC-sponsored ceasefire.
The final assault cast a shadow over a visit to Sarajevo, Bosnia's capital, by Mr Cyrus Vance, the UN special envoy, who held talks with leaders from the republic's Serbian, Croatian and Muslim communities and Yugoslav army commanders.
America is co-ordinating Western efforts to begin a massive airlift of food, blankets and medical supplies to breach a virtual blockade of Bosnia and help the estimated 200,000 refugees.
International: MPs suspended after ANC talks
By Our Johannesburg Correspondent
Four MPs of South Africa's liberal opposition Democratic Party were suspended yesterday for holding secret talks with Mr Nelson Mandela with a view to joining the African National Congress.
Mr Jan van Eck, Mr Jannie Momberg, Mr Pierre Cronje and Mrs Rob Haswell are expected to be expelled from the party next week.
International: Hong Kong: If the hat fits This weekend, Chris Patten, Tory Party chairman who lost his seat in the general election, is taking a break in France to consider a new job offer — the Governorship of Hong Kong.
Hugo Gurdon, our South-East Asia Correspondent, sets out the perks and pitfalls of a post that has only one certain outcome — it will end at midnight on June 30, 1997
By HUGO GURDON
NOT the least onerous of the Hong Kong Governor's duties is to wear a big fore-and-aft hat billowing with goose feathers.
Ceremonial plumage makes it difficult to tell whether the hat fits.
But ensuring it does is one of the most important tasks facing Mr Major in the aftermath of his election victory.
The 28th and last Governor of Hong Kong must captain the territory until midnight, June 30, 1997, when he will hand back Britain's last important colony to China.
His position will be incomparably less grand than that of the last Viceroy of India, and his achievement is almost certain to be less satisfactory.
As things stand, Hong Kong will pass from colonialism to dictatorship without the usual intervening stage of independence.
Unless Chinese communism follows the Soviet version into oblivion, Hong Kong's six million people will return to the thrall of a system which the majority fled China to escape.
Despite this, the Governor must deliver a territory that is confident and prosperous, avoiding the vortex of international opprobrium without smashing Hong Kong on the rocks of China's intransigence.
The new man will face scorching criticism as an ‘appeaser’ if he does not accelerate the introduction of democracy.
But he will be under heavy pressure from the Foreign Office to avoid needling Peking.
As it is, he will have to fight for every freedom supposedly guaranteed already in the 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration.
Peking is blocking virtually all progress in the Joint Liaison Group, which must negotiate the details of the handover.
Perhaps the first task facing Mr Chris Patten, or whoever takes over from the current Governor, Lord Wilson, will be to break the deadlock over whether the People's Liberation Army of China should set up shop in the glossy commercial heart of Hong Kong island.
‘He'll have to make Peking realise Hong Kong is like a jet,’ said one analyst.
‘Unless it moves forward quickly, it falls.’
Lord Wilson is a fine sinologist and diplomat and a strong administrator.
But most people agree that what the territory needs is a forceful, clever politician, who can negotiate agreements without begging London for help.
The next five years will be a battle — much of it fought in the Governor's quarterly meeting with Lu Ping, head of Peking's Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office.
What Hong Kong needs, and what Mr Major fervently desires, is someone who has no predisposition to ‘understand’ if Peking again goes back on its promises.
British dignity and Hong Kong's autonomy were dented last September when Mr Major had to fly to Peking — essentially to get Chinese permission to build a new Hong Kong airport.
Part of the new Governor's job will be to avoid a face-saving repetition.
Mr Allan Lee, leader of the conservative majority in the legislature, said: ‘He must be able to make quick decisions negotiating with the Chinese.
They can be very rigid.
He'll have to establish mutual trust.
At the moment there is suspicion on both sides.
‘Britain's reputation hangs on what happens to Hong Kong.
If there's a mass exodus or we go down the drain, no one will admire you for decolonisation.’
Without bitterness, but with five years' experience, Lord Wilson said yesterday: ‘No Governor should expect this job to be a bed of roses or to get plaudits or easy popularity.
It is always going to be difficult with a lot of conflicting pressures.’
The highest salary in the British civil service — £140,000 — is one compensation.
Others include an architecturally odd but lavishly comfortable residence overlooking the city, a country retreat with swimming pool in the New Territories, a yacht, two Daimlers, a Rolls-Royce, and a peerage upon retirement.
As Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces and chancellor of both universities, the Governor is to be seen at occasional military parades, or handing out diplomas.
But 90 per cent of his work is the hands-on business of government.
As the Queen's representative holding Letters Patent under the Great Seal of the United Kingdom, he can sack his Cabinet, disband the legislature, declare martial law and rule by diktat.
In practice, of course, he does nothing of the sort.
Each Tuesday he meets his unelected Cabinet, the Executive Council, and they approve —‘rubber stamp’ is how critics describe it — legislation passed on by the Civil Service.
Part of Lord Wilson's legacy will include a phalanx of sinologists, plus a strong administrative team headed by Sir David Ford, the Chief Secretary.
With these skills already in place, a Help Wanted advertisement for the Governor's job might read: ‘Regional experience/administrative brilliance a plus — but not vital.’
A leading liberal, Mr Martin Lee, whose United Democrats won a landslide in elections for the partially-democratic legislature in September, defined the Governor's job differently: ‘He must be committed to democratising Hong Kong and to standing up for the territory's interests, especially in the case of conflict with Britain and China.
‘We won a popular mandate for real democracy.
The present Governor says ‘no’ because it would antagonise China.
We say, ‘What right have you to refuse if we are willing to take the risk?’’
The risk is of so angering China that business confidence collapses, emigration soars and, after 1997, Peking demolishes democratic structures as it sees fit.
China admits it is compiling a list of Hong Kong criminals and ‘trouble-makers’.
Already, 1,150 people emigrate each week, draining Hong Kong's talent, wealth and middle-class ballast.
The stock market leaps and tumbles at Peking's every smile or frown.
Gunfire and the occasional grenade explosions accompany raid after raid on jewellery shops.
Hong Kong lives with knife-edged volatility.
Mrs Rita Fan, head of the government's Security Panel, says: ‘When there is a transfer of authority in any society, law and order suffer.’
So, the new Governor must have the stamp of authority.
It must be someone, said an analyst, ‘who can get a grip on the situation’.
Messrs Lee and Lee welcome the prospect of Mr Patten's appointment: the Democrat on the grounds that ‘he is not just another appeasing sinologist from the Foreign Office; the conservative because ‘he carries more weight than the others mentioned, and he has direct access to No 10’.
More than a dozen other candidates' names — some frivolous, others serious — have been bandied about, particularly since Lord Wilson's departure was brutally disclosed four months early by his elevation to the peerage at New Year.
It is an exit to match Lord Wilson's humiliating arrival.
In April 1987, the Governor was scuppered by his wardrobe.
The plumed cocked hat was all right, but the white tropical uniform fitted like a bespoke bag of potatoes.
‘It was a shambles,’ said a sympathetic friend.
‘He had another one made later at the Mandarin Hotel, but the first one made him something of a laughing stock.’
International: Libya to expel diplomats in sanctions fight
By Alan Philps, Diplomatic Correspondent
LIBYA reaffirmed its determination yesterday to fight United Nations sanctions and said it would expel diplomats from countries which have taken action against it.
On the second day of the UN-enforced air boycott, Tripoli radio said envoys from France, Germany, Italy, Sweden, Belgium, Czechoslovakia and Japan were summoned to the Foreign Ministry and told some of their number would be expelled.
The threat does not apply to Britain as there are no relations with Tripoli.
The Foreign Office said Britain's two diplomats in the Libyan capital, who are working under the cover of the Italian embassy, were not summoned to hear the warning.
Mr Ibrahim al-Beshari, Foreign Minister, said Libya would continue to fight UN Security Council Resolution 748 ‘because it is based on the logic of force, not of law’.
He said Libya was not being ‘stubborn’, but merely holding out for an honourable solution to the crisis.
The resolution demands that Libya should hand over two men suspected of planting a bomb which blew up Pan Am flight 103 over Lockerbie in December 1988 with the loss of 270 lives.
Life appeared to continue largely as normal in the Libyan capital, and the warning seemed to amount to no more than the routine diplomatic tit-for-tat when countries expel each other 's envoys.
Col Gaddafi remained silent on the crisis, leaving his number two, Major Abdul Salam Jalloud, to denounce the sanctions in familiar terms as a Western conspiracy against the Islamic world.
The generally low-key Libyan response suggests that Col Gaddafi is intent on riding out the sanctions and does not want to repeat the mistakes of President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, who provoked the West last year by taking foreign workers hostage as ‘human shields’.
The Libyan oil industry depends on thousands of foreign experts, including Britons and Americans, and they seem to be content to stay.
Libya's transport links by sea and land were reinforced to compensate for the lack of international flights.
Tunisian and Libyan officials discussed bus routes to carry passengers to Tunisian airports near the frontier, while Egypt prepared to receive travellers from Libya at a military airport in Sidi Barrani, 50 miles from the border.
International: Najibullah deposed ‘and under arrest’ Afghanistan up for grabs as fighting spells last days of UN peace plan and crumbling regime
By Robert Adams in Islamabad
PRESIDENT Najibullah of Afghanistan, installed by Moscow six years ago, lost power yesterday to a coalition of generals and a rebel commander as guerrillas closed in on the capital, Kabul.
The Foreign Minister, Abdul Wakil, said the President was stripped of his powers after he tried to flee the country earlier in the day.
Rebels stopped him at the airport but his whereabouts were not known last night.
A broadcast by state-run Radio Kabul said Mr Najibullah had ‘unlawfully resigned and fled’.
Mr Wakil told a news conference that the President was being held in Kabul with ‘those who tried to help him escape’.
Mr Najibullah fell as troops defected and the government's biggest military base, two garrison towns and the lifeline road to the former Soviet Union fell to an offensive by seven loosely allied guerrilla groups.
Ghulam Farouq Yaqubi, head of the Khad secret police, killed himself after learning of the President's attempted escape, government officials added.
Mr Wakil denounced Mr Najibullah for cowardice in trying to flee and said he had been forced to resign as head of the ruling Watan (Homeland) Party.
‘No organisation, no individual, could have threatened his security, but Najibullah, because of the threat of the restoration of peace and the fear that he would have to answer for some of his past deeds, tried to flee,’ said Mr Wakil.
Some hoped that Mr Najibullah's demise would bring an end to the country's 13-year civil war and prevent the fighting from reaching the capital, but one radical Muslim rebel group threatened to attack Kabul anyway.
The chaos in Afghanistan may sound the death knell for the United Nations peace plan, which hoped to effect a smooth transition to an interim administration.
The UN's special envoy, Mr Benon Sevan, flew to Kabul last night after a day of talks with Mujahideen leaders, the Pakistani Prime Minister, Mr Nawaz Sharif, and Iran's ambassador in Islamabad.
Diplomats believe Mr Sevan tried to accelerate the decision on who would make up an interim council to replace Mr Najibullah.
‘Perhaps he still has a chance,’ said a western diplomat in Pakistan, ‘but it looks as though events have overtaken him.
It looks like both Najibullah and the UN no longer have any relevance.’
International: Moscow's man was last hope for unity
By ALAN PHILPS
THE FALL of President Najibullah ends the latest stage in the Afghan civil war which began when the Kremlin, in a last gasp of empire building, took the country over in April 1978, writes Alan Philps, Diplomatic Correspondent.
But there is no sign that the disgrace of the last Soviet satrap will clear the way for peace.
The fighting has so disrupted the country that some observers believe it may divide between north and south along ethnic lines, or into a patchwork of Islamic fiefdoms controlled by the Mujahideen tribal warlords.
Despite his past as an agent of Moscow and former head of Afghanistan's secret police, Mr Najibullah was seen latterly by the West as the only man with the toughness and guile necessary to preserve the country's unity.
Although the country may have lost its strategic significance with the collapse of the Soviet Union, Washington is nevertheless concerned at the possibility of an unstable radical Islamic state growing up on the borders of the former Soviet Central Asia.
The signal for the collapse of the regime was Mr Najibullah's announcement last month that he was ready to step down in favour of a United Nations-appointed interim committee.
It destroyed morale throughout the regime, forcing commanders and party chiefs to activate their tribal links with the Mujahideen and save their skins before the time of reckoning.
The effect has been to accentuate divisions between the majority Pushtuns (known in the days of the Raj as Pathans) and the ethnic minorities of the north such as the Tajiks, who are kin to the people of the former Soviet republic of Tajikistan across the Amu Darya river.
The minorities have thrown off the Pashtun yoke, largely thanks to the military prowess of Commander Ahmed Shah Massoud, a Tajik from the Jamiat-e-Islami (Islamic Society) opposition group.
Having survived several Soviet assaults, he controls the country north of the Hindu Kush mountains and has had his territory swelled by a series of recent defections from the security forces.
If the Mujahideen divide up the country among themselves it is likely that the big divide would be along these mountains, which would then become the new division between Central Asia and the Indian sub-continent.
Cdr Massoud has done his best to keep Mr Najibullah in power for as long as possible, largely to thwart his main rival, the Hizb-e-Islami (Islamic Party) of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar.
Fighting between the Mujahideen has taken as much effort as battling the demoralised government forces.
The UN special envoy, Mr Benon Sevan, has sought to halt the fighting and install a temporary governing committee, but the Najibullah regime has collapsed so fast that his increasingly frantic efforts never had a chance.
The President's successors in Kabul are ready to work with the UN peace process, but it is hard to imagine the rebels agreeing to join in when victory is so close.
International: Snow halts rescue as Etna lava creeps towards town
By Bruce Johnston in Zafferana
SNOW, high winds and bitter disagreement yesterday further hampered attempts to tame Mount Etna, which is threatening to overrun the Sicilian town of Zafferana with millions of tons of volcanic lava.
The wall of molten lava has come to a virtual halt 150 yards from the first home in the town, but officials said yesterday that its flow appeared to have picked up speed further up the slope.
A crust appears to have formed over the volcanic rubble, but red-hot lava began creeping over it yesterday and into a private orchard.
Bad weather dashed hopes of attempts to halt the flow during what was seen as a natural lull in the lava's momentum.
Some experts say that even if the eruption stopped today, the sheer pressure of lava piled up behind for six miles would bring debris cascading down on to the town anyway.
Some estimate the volcano is pouring out one million tons of debris a day, at a rate of 15 ft per second, from a fissure that opened in mid-December.
The Italian army yesterday detonated nearly 400 lb of dynamite 3,500 feet up Mount Etna's slopes.
The explosives, which were described as nothing more than an experiment, were detonated just above a dam built in January and breached last week.
They succeeded in closing off the third of five underground conduits formed beneath the surface crust and through which red-hot magma has been flowing.
But the teams later discovered that the conduit was dry, suggesting that the lava had already found a new course.
Rumours have been circulating that experts are bitterly divided over what to do.
But in another experiment 50 two-ton concrete slabs are to be chained together and dumped from a huge tilting steel platform about 6,750 ft above sea level.
It is hoped the slabs will block the conduit from which the main force of the lava is said to be bearing down ‘like a train’, causing it to break up and cool.
High winds and snowfalls have, however, grounded at a lower level the powerful US Navy Sea Stallion helicopters used to transport the slabs.
Prof Letterio Villari, a noted vulcanologist, said yesterday he had ‘absolutely no faith whatsoever’ in the plan.
If Zafferana was saved from the lava, which could flow for a year or more, it would be ‘a complete fluke’, he said.
International: Police seize Expo exhibit coca leaves
By Our Madrid Correspondent
DRUG SQUAD officers have stopped plans to give visitors to the Expo ‘92 World's Fair in Seville a ‘true taste’ of life in Bolivia.
Detectives seized eight kilos of coca leaves, the base for cocaine, which were to have been handed out for visitors to chew at the Bolivian Pavilion.
King Juan Carlos will open Expo ‘92, which runs for six months, on Monday.
The Bolivians had planned that the king would be the first to be given a coca leaf as he toured Expo, which has pavilions from 112 nations.
International: Bond surrenders his passport
By Our Sydney Correspondent
The London-born businessman Mr Alan Bond has surrendered his Australian passport to his bankruptcy trustee in Perth, but has retained his British/EC passport which, he says, is overseas having visas added to it.
Apart from his bankruptcy, Mr Bond is to face criminal financial charges next month, and is required to give evidence before the Royal Commission inquiring into financial dealings between several Western Australian entrepreneurs and a former state Labour government during the 1980s.
International: Ethiopia helps Sudan army in war on rebels
By Scott Peterson in Nairobi
SUDANESE and Ethiopian government troops are preparing to launch an attack from the rear on embattled southern Sudanese rebels in the next few days, rebel spokesmen said yesterday.
Troops loyal to Khartoum's Islamic military regime are massing in the Ethiopian frontier town of Raad — with the consent and military support of the Ethiopian army — to attack Pakok, a small town just inside the Sudan border and less than 100 miles from the rebel base at Kapoeta.
The rebel Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA), led by Colonel John Garang, has been caught off guard by the military build-up.
‘We never expected that they would attack us from behind — from Ethiopia,’ said Dr Justin Arop, SPLA representative in Nairobi.
‘On all other fronts we were ready for them, but we'll put what we can into this one.’
Since the Khartoum regime launched a five-pronged ‘final offensive’ against the mainly Christian or animist rebels in early March, its army has taken Pochala, Col Garang's hometown of Bor, and a string of smaller towns, advancing to within 30 miles west of the rebel headquarters at Torit.
Government troops have never in the nine-year civil war cut so deeply into rebel territory during their annual dry-season offensive.
Rebel fears about the opening of a new and dangerously close front line to the east come just days after Khartoum radio announced the capture of Shambe, a strategic island in the Nile.
Khartoum's offensive is thought by observers to have taken advantage of a rebel rift last August over alleged human rights abuses.
The split, which is not yet healed, led to an SPLA factional battle in Bor in November.
More than 2,000 of Col Garang's Dinka tribesmen were killed.
International: Fresh clamp on smoking in Australia
By Geoffrey Lee Martin in Sydney
HARSH new cigarette packaging regulations have stunned Australia's tobacco industry, which is still reeling from a total ban on tobacco sponsorship of sport and on all forms of advertising except at the point of sale from July next year.
Under the proposed new laws only about three-quarters of the front of each packet of cigarettes will be available to display the brand name and other marketing information.
The remaining surface must carry blunt warnings about the dangers of smoking.
The laws, which are expected to pass easily through federal and state parliaments, will also come into force on July 1 next year.
The flip-top of cigarette packets must carry warnings such as‘Smoking kills’ and ‘Smoking causes lung cancer’in letters about a quarter-inch high.
The sides of the pack must carry details of how much tar, nicotine and carbon monoxide are in each cigarette as well as explanations of why each is harmful to health.
The back of the pack must be covered with further detailed health information.
The law is likely to be challenged in the courts by the Tobacco Institute of Australia, which represents the tobacco companies.
‘In a democratic society, such a dictatorial approach is a national disgrace,’ said Mr John St Vincent-Welsh, the institute's chief executive.
Letter to the Editor: Hong Kong is not a consolation prize
SIR — The reports that Mr Patten, having failed to hold on to his seat in Parliament, might be wheeled out as Governor of Hong Kong (April 16) are symptomatic of the Government's indifference to the wishes of the people who actually live there.
Mr Patten was doubtless an excellent chairman of the Conservative Party, but does he know anything of Hong Kong?
Does he understand China?
Were the people of Hong Kong ever consulted on who is to represent their interests during the difficult years to 1997?
Or are they expected to be grateful that after the hamfisted handling of Sir David (now Lord) Wilson's resignation, Hong Kong is to be the possible reward for a loser in the game of political musical chairs?
The po-faced statements issued by the Foreign Office that ‘the matter is under careful consideration’ and the like are revealed as hot air.
A rabbit has been pulled out of the political hat, and might be handed to Hong Kong.
If so, let us hope that the magic stays with it.
Lord WILLOUGHBY de BROKE London SW1
Letter to the Editor: Best candidate
SIR — Along with the other members of the tiny, self-styled ‘think tank’ of the Cheltenham rebels, Mr Mortimer Moore (letter, April 15) misunderstands the reason why the Cheltenham Conservative Party selected John Taylor as its candidate.
There was no question of Mr Taylor being selected in order to attract ‘more of the ethnic minority vote’ in other parts of the country.
Such an idea would be quite laughable.
He was selected because those responsible for choosing the successor to a hugely popular MP considered he was the best candidate.
As a resident of Whaddon, and therefore presumably a member of ‘the ex-agricultural working class’, I am anxious that fellow voters should not be deceived into believing that another candidate would have had a better chance of holding the seat for the Conservatives.
We sincerely hope that Mr Taylor will stay with us and defeat the handful of critics at the next election.
JOHN ALEXANDER Cheltenham, Glos
Letter to the Editor: Thorny problem
SIR — In turning over a new leaf, the Labour Party would do well also to turn over a new blossom.
The presumptuous way in which it has laid claim to the English rose as representing the party is indicative of its misplaced self-assurance that the people of ‘our country’, as they repeatedly refer to England, wish to be governed by Labour as much as it wishes to govern us — an illusion emphatically dispelled last week.
The English rose is not a proper emblem for any political party, but for the nation as whole.
Now that Labour is going to choose between a Scotsman and a New Zealander for its new leader, it would be less offensive and more appropriate if it were to adopt an All Black thistle as its logo.
ANTONY CARTER Bournemouth, Dorset
Letter to the Editor: Not infallible
SIR — Just because something is made in Japan does not mean it is wholly reliable.
In the past five years my Honda Accord wouldn't start in Scotland (the earth wire from the battery fell off) and my Honda Quintet quietly conked out on the M40 (cause never found).
An Olympus AX2 camera ultra-light shutter release failed, while its replacement, an AF10, forgot how to wind the film on.
My Canon Typestar typewriter occasionally forgot to type the letter ‘R’ and its successor, a Typestar 90, would sometimes forget to transport the next line, thus printing a new line over the previous one.
It's time we British bucked up.
These foreigners may be inventive, but they are not infallible.
Dr T. RUSSELL Gerrards Cross, Bucks
Letter to the Editor: ‘Jumbo’ innovator
SIR — On reading your obituary on Stuart Sturridge (April 15), I note that little was stated about his contribution to the cricket bat industry.
His family company, which started in the 1870s, had over the years supplied bats for many of the leading cricketers.
In more recent times Sturridge was an innovator of the ‘Jumbo bat’, a much heavier range of bat, which gave the stronger player the ability to hit the ball much further.
Initially used by Viv Richards, the Jumbo was so successful that the other manufacturers had to follow his lead by bringing out their own heavy bats.
In 1987 Graham Gooch joined the company, and together they made a great team, leading to Gooch's innings of 333 in the Lord's Test match in 1990.
C. D. E. BAZALGEE Waterlooville, Hants
Letter to the Editor: As I was about to say…
SIR — With such well-informed media personnel telling us every hour on the hour that Messrs Kinnock, Hattersley, Patten, Mandela, Smith and Gould are ‘expected’ to make an announcement after the weekend, or within a day or two, stating that they will do this or that, probably because of this reason, possibly causing this response — is it absolutely necessary for us to have to endure the appearance of the person concerned to tell us what has been drummed into us until our eyes stick out like organ-stops?
Surely those politicians, members of royalty, athletes or anyone who wishes to make a clarifying statement should have sufficient intelligence to appreciate that the media-kings of speculation cannot only guess what the content of the future announcement will be, but can make it so much more interesting by speculating on the response, plus the reaction to the response by the person who probably intended to say the opposite to what the ‘experts’ had been speculating would be said for the past 48 hours.
RAY ROURKE Twickenham, Middx
Letter to the Editor: Order of the bath
SIR — With the present water crisis in the South-East, perhaps it would be helpful to adopt the war-time restriction on baths of no more than five inches of water.
Or, better still, maybe we should question the present shibboleth that a bath or a shower a day is necessary for hygiene.
I wonder what medical opinion is of this wasteful practice?
Perhaps the once-a-fortnight-whether-I-need-it-or-not brigade would be vindicated.
HECTOR CARTER Guildford, Surrey
Alas, Labour — the workers don't need you any more
By CHARLES MOORE
IN MY beginning is my end, as the poet wrote.
The Labour Party was born with the 20th century, and seems likely to die with it.
At the TUC of September 1899, the Amalgamated Society of Railway Servants moved a resolution calling for a special conference to discuss the representation of the working man in Parliament.
This took place the following February, and the Labour Party, at first called the Labour Representation Committee, was formed.
At the next election, two Labour MPs (one of them was Keir Hardie) were returned.
Since ‘working men’— which meant manual labourers — now had the vote, and greatly outnumbered other types of voter, it was not surprising that those claiming to speak in their interest rose to power.
By the 1920s, there was a Labour government.
In 1945, there was a Labour landslide.
In the 1960s, Harold Wilson thought Labour ‘the natural party of government’.
But the seeds of destruction were contained in the moment of triumph.
The working man was so successfully emancipated that he (and even more, polls suggest, his wife) ceased to defer to those who said they were his public spokesmen.
The ‘labour movement’ did not like it when the working man felt he could get on unaided.
He began to expect to own a house; he more and more rarely worked with his hands; as he earned more, he found the paying of tax increasingly disagreeable.
Instead of being flattered to share in collective power as one of several million involuntary votes at the party conference, he felt insulted.
As the idea of ‘labour’ faded, so did the attraction of Labour.
The party had been a crutch for the weak.
As the weak became strong, they cast it aside.
Ever since then, Labour has been on the defensive, both ideologically and demographically.
With every redistribution of seats by the Boundary Commission, it is left with fewer.
The party has made huge efforts to seem more modern.
In showbiz terms, it has succeeded, but not in the underlying reality.
Throughout the General Election campaign, trade union leaders were invisible, but as soon as Mr Kinnock resigned as leader, they filled the television screens, explaining why they were going to put Mr John Smith in.
No offence to Mr Bill Jordan, Mr John Edmonds and Mr Bill Morris, but if Labour is ever to win, the voters must never see their faces again.
It is not that they are extreme, or personally off-putting.
It is just that their claim to power is completely out-of-date.
It is as if Lord Salisbury still decided who should lead the Conservative Party.
Labour needs an Iain Macleod to attack its ‘magic circle’.
What seems like an age ago, but was actually last week, I spent the day with Mr Kinnock's campaign.
The climax of the day was a rally of party supporters in Blackburn.
The speeches covered a great range of tone and emotion.
Mr Robin Cook was brilliantly witty.
Mr Kinnock was passionate to the point of tedium about the National Health Service.
A woman Euro-MP was nasty about Ascot, Cowes and Henley, but, her apart, the atmosphere was good-natured and relaxed.
What struck me, however, was how distant the preoccupations of the audience were from those which could capture a majority in modern Britain, or could govern it successfully if that majority were ever won.
At their worst, the sentiments were resentful — wanting to hurt the better off; at their best, they were generous — wanting to mobilise a sense of community in the service of the vulnerable.
Either way, they left out reality.
They assumed that wealth was automatically there, and that the task of politics was simply to take from the wrong people and give it to the right ones.
They assumed the state would know how to perform this task.
Because of these false assumptions, Labour's appeal is restricted.
It is secure with working-class pensioners who believe Labour will protect them.
It is strong with public service workers whose relation to the generation of wealth is indirect, but it does not work with the young bank employee in Basildon with £15,000 a year and prospects.
On the eve of poll, the slogan of the Daily Mirror was ‘Remember me’.
The people we were invited to remember were an old woman, a hospital patient, a homeless young girl, and so on.
Many would say that this showed the essential nobility of the Labour cause.
Possibly.
But it also prompted a doubt.
Can a party of government be a pseudo-religious miracle-worker, getting the lame to walk and the blind to receive their sight?
Isn't its prospectus unreal?
ENOUGH voters seem to have thought so, which is why we now have a Labour leadership contest.
And the favourite, oddly, is the architect of the prospectus that was disbelieved.
Again and again in the past two or three years, Mr Smith quelled dissent by saying that only his policy of studied respectability and his concentration of tax upon the top 20 per cent of voters could win.
They didn't.
Mr Smith has no explanation for the defeat, although his supporters imply that it lies in the personality of Neil Kinnock.
Mr Smith's chief opponent, Mr Bryan Gould, does have an explanation.
Tax became the great argument at the election, he says, because Mr Smith excluded all other economic ones.
No one was more zealous than Mr Smith in supporting membership of the Exchange Rate Mechanism.
The party of the workers fell in behind the policy of foreign bankers, which meant that it fell in behind high unemployment caused by high interest rates.
All through the campaign, Mr Smith harried Mr Norman Lamont for his claim that ‘unemployment is a price worth paying’, but Mr Smith's actual policy showed that he believed this too.
Mr Gould does not believe it.
He wants a realignment.
Although he does not quite dare to say it, he wants the entire ERM to dissolve.
He thinks Labour should have its own economic policy, instead of shadowing the Tories as they shadow the Germans.
He is aiming for full employment by Keynesian means, redistribution of wealth through jobs, not taxes.
That strikes a chord in the South, which Mr Gould represents and Mr Smith does not.
It is true that all polls showed how popular Mr Smith was with voters, and that he is the most experienced and competent man on offer.
Labour feels safe with him.
But that is the problem.
Labour needs someone with whom it feels thoroughly unsafe, someone who can overcome its sentimentality about itself.
Labour began in the 1890s because the Liberal Party failed to respond to social change.
Keir Hardie joined Labour because the Liberals would not make him, a miner, a parliamentary candidate.
Labour is losing in the 1990s because it is like those 19th-century Liberals.
Mr Gould seems to understand that better than Mr Smith.
Leading Article: Day of atonement
NO DAY of the year symbolises the apparent marginalisation of the Christian tradition in this country quite as starkly as Good Friday.
For most of the population, it is the first day of the spring holiday.
More shops than ever will be open; there will be an exodus to the sea, the countryside and to foreign holiday destinations.
The sombre atmosphere which still prevails in more solidly Christian countries has given way to a festive mood.
This change has not happened overnight.
More than 20 years ago a well-known ice-cream manufacturer in the North of England excited adverse comment by demanding that the churches should declare a fixed date for Easter.
This, he said, should be as late in the year as possible, so that the holiday trade in general and ice-cream manufacturers in particular would benefit from the increased chance of warm, springlike weather.
The secularisation of Holy Week and Easter now seems complete except for a faithful remnant of practising Christians — about 10 per cent of the population on most calculations.
Palm Sunday, for Christians the commemoration of Christ's entry into Jerusalem, was marked this year by the opening of Euro Disney.
Mickey Mouse, that great icon of our times, was seen bestriding the continent of Europe — which once thought of itself as coterminous with Christendom — like a colossus.
It is surely not being excessively pompous to see this as one sign of a trivialisation of European civilisation, or to accept that there has been a catastrophic spiritual impoverishment of national life when a country such as our own, which once thought of itself as Christian, can for the most part simply ignore today's commemoration of Christ's passion and death.
The national Church does not entirely escape responsibility for this situation; within living memory the bishop of one major see let it be known that he would not be available to officiate at services on Good Friday since he had to start the boat race at his old school.
Easter Day itself, of course, is the greatest celebration of the Christian year.
But for Christians, the celebrations cannot begin quite yet; first they must live through the year's darkest day.
It is the day when they stand in imagination at the foot of the Cross to witness the judicial murder of Christ, to remember their own failings and to anticipate the holiday — literally the holy day — for which they have prepared throughout Lent: the day on which they believe Christ rose from the dead.
It is in that long preparation that we can see how profoundly secularisation has changed our civilisation.
Christians fast to prepare for a feast; the modern world feasts and then queasily goes on a diet.
Ours is the civilisation of instant gratification; the word ‘discipline’ used to imply a commitment to some future achievement, and the willingness to make sacrifices for it: now, for many, it is the name of a sexual perversion.
The effects of this spiritual transformation are everywhere to be seen.
In almost every aspect of our national life, from the educational system to the institution of marriage, the ethic of instant gratification and the rejection of perseverance and the long haul are clearly evident.
But the Way of the Cross is not simply something that Christians have thought up to make themselves miserable.
It is the way they know they have to pass before they come to the triumph of Easter.
Leading Article: Edge of the abyss
WHILE our attention has been on the General Election and its aftermath, the Serbs have been up to their old tricks.
The recognition of the independence of Bosnia-Hercegovina by the European Community and the United States last week was the signal for Serbian irregulars and the federal Yugoslav army to launch an assault on the eastern part of the state.
Several towns have been taken and, ominously, closed to international agencies such as the Red Cross.
Sarajevo, the capital, is being shelled.
Hundreds of people are believed to have been killed and 200,000 driven from their homes.
The intention of the assailants is obviously to create an ‘ethnically clean’ Serbian corridor in eastern Bosnia as a prelude to partitioning the state.
The parallel with what they attempted in Croatia is alarming enough; only in this case, given the intricate Muslim, Serb and Croat mix in Bosnia, the loss of life and displacement of population could be far greater.
The timing of the latest push for a Greater Serbia is a direct challenge to the Americans and Europeans.
Having recognised Bosnian independence, they have an obligation to defend the new state's territorial integrity.
An encouraging pointer to their response is the lead given by America to co-ordinate Western action against Serbia.
With Croatia, by contrast, Washington was slow to become involved, leaving the EC to make the running.
For a start, America has proposed that Serbia be suspended from the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe if it has not halted its aggression against Bosnia-Hercegovina by April 29, the date on which delegates reconvene in Helsinki after the Easter break.
Washington has also decided to fly in emergency supplies of food and medicine.
The Community, which agreed last week progressively to lift economic sanctions against Serbia, should back the Americans by putting its offer on hold until the federal army withdraws and the irregulars are disbanded.
The West may be reluctant to become involved in the fighting but it can at least leave Belgrade in no doubt that the price of aggression will be diplomatic and economic isolation.
Bosnia-Hercegovina stands on the edge of an abyss.
Swift action is needed to rescue it.
Peterborough: McAlpine turns on Tory ‘brat-pack’
FROM his Venetian bolthole yesterday evening, Lord McAlpine, the Tory grandee and mighty socialite, tore viciously into the reputations of Conservative Central Office's ‘brat-pack’.
He has, to switch metaphors, grabbed by the throat the Tories' controversial team of young election campaign advisers, shaken them vigorously, and hung them up on the nearest meat hook.
‘It's not about these young chaps in particular, it's about bottom,’ boomed McAlpine, who is being described as Neil Kinnock's speechwriter after the Labour leader, in his resignation statement, quoted his article praising the contribution of the Tory tabloids to the election victory.
But McAlpine reserved his fire for the young team.
‘I would hate it to go down in Conservative mythology that we always had to have a gaggle of young men running every campaign,’ he said, ‘although if we had the same bunch at the next election at least they'd be a few years older.’
We were talking after another of McAlpine's broadsides in Countryweek magazine.
In its Easter issue he calls the brat pack ‘appalling creatures’, and has a particular go at David Cameron, a rather cold, in my experience unhelpful, young man who briefed John Major daily during the campaign and has just become special adviser to Norman Lamont.
‘If Cameron were a dentist,’ McAlpine told me, ‘I'm not sure I'd let him touch my teeth.
I've met some of his colleagues in the corridor, stepped back and tugged my forelock.’
In his article, McAlpine calls for an inquest into the activities of the youngsters.
Their efforts, he writes, must be put under close scrutiny: ‘I do not know Mr Cameron and, from what I hear of him, have no desire to…
Mr Cameron, 25, you are also reported as saying, ‘Whatever people say about us, we got the campaign right, otherwise we would not have won.’
I suggest, Mr Cameron, that you reflect not on the obvious arrogance of that statement, rather on the plight of 44 Conservative members who lost their seats.’
Peterborough: Office politics
AS the biggest Whitehall shake-up in two decades gets under way, there is firm evidence that the civil service expected Labour to win the election.
Senior mandarins had gone to the trouble of finding accommodation for Labour's promised Ministry for Women.
The Department of Employment confirms it had cleared several of its own offices for the purpose, and lined up contractors to refurbish them.
‘It was purely a contingency arrangement,’ says a spokesman, explaining that it needed to have a ‘suite’of offices speedily available for the new Secretary of State for Women — probably Jo Richardson — and her staff to move into.
The billet, on the fifth floor of Steel House, the Employment building in Tothill St, Westminster, was selected after discussions with Ms Richardson which took place under the customary pre-election rules.
As it happens, the department is also seeing changes under the Tories, with the new Secretary of State, Gillian Shephard, gaining responsibility for women's issues and losing tourism.
‘I imagine we'll be playing musical chairs,’ says the spokesman.
‘We don't know what is happening, but that may yet be allocated to women's issues.’
One man who may have his eye on it is David Mellor, Secretary for National Heritage.
‘It's a nice 1950s building, close to the Commons,’ says a well-placed source.
‘But he may not think it grand enough.’
Saunders in ethics talk to students
ERNEST Saunders, jailed for his part in the Guinness affair, has given a lecture to business students in which he spoke about ethics in management.
Saunders, who was released early, suffering pre-senile dementia, spoke on Wednesday evening at Cranfield School of Management in Beds.
He addressed more than 100 businessmen studying for a Master of Arts Business Administration exam.
Yesterday the school defended its decision to allow a convicted fraudster to lecture students.
A spokeswoman said: ‘We were not condoning what he did or holding him up as someone who should be followed.
But he has a wealth of business experience.
He was not given any VIP treatment and he was not paid.’
US Air Force rebuked over rape trial
By Robert Shrimsley
THE Commander of a US Air Force base in Britain has been reprimanded by the Ministry of Defence for failing to hand over a rape suspect to British police, trying him instead at a court martial.
Staff Sergeant Michael Tilghman, a security officer at Bentwaters air base in Suffolk, was convicted at a court martial of the rape of his British girlfriend against the conditions of the Visiting Forces Act which states that cases of murder and rape must be tried by domestic civilian courts.
He had initially been charged with assault and the rape indictment was added during the trial as it emerged that such a charge was appropriate.
Tilghman, who was jailed for five years, fined £3,250, reduced to the ranks and dismissed the service, is now serving his jail term in America.
Suffolk police only discovered the court martial had taken place when officers read details of it a local newspaper.
They complained to the Ministry of Defence police in Suffolk who relayed the complaint to Whitehall.
An MoD spokesman said it was because the initial charge was not one of rape that the Suffolk police had not been informed.
‘It is not a serious breach of the rules, particularly as the man did not go unpunished, but we have now reminded the Americans of the appropriate custom.’
Obituary of Sir William McEwan Younger, Bt
SIR WILLIAM McEWAN YOUNGER, 1st and last Bt, who has died aged 86, built up his local family brewing interests into the international giant Scottish & Newcastle Breweries.
Although outwardly a man of the Establishment, Bill McEwan Younger had the self-confidence to adopt unorthodox views which stood the test of time.
Despite his languid manner and an almost drawling accent, his achievements exemplify the best Scottish tradition of entrepreneurial independence.
He lived all his working life in Edinburgh, but was the least parochial of men.
A Borderer from Melrose, he showed more interest in keeping up the rivalry between Highlander and Lowlander than in scoring off the Sassenachs, whom he was prepared to respect as competitors and, if they were good enough, business associates.
William McEwan Younger was born on Sept 6 1905 and educated at Winchester and Balliol College, Oxford.
He joined his father's firm from university, and achieved dominance over it when he inherited a controlling interest through Mrs Ronnie Greville, the legendary hostess of Polesdon Lacy.
Never afraid of disturbing cosy arrangements that had outlived their usefulness, McEwan Younger worked single-mindedly for a merger with William Youngers, another family company.
Having consolidated his base, he launched an aggressive drive that led to the take-over of Newcastle Breweries and several smaller Edinburgh companies to form Scottish & Newcastle, which by the time he retired as chairman in 1969 was supplying about 10 per cent of British beer sales.
True to his belief in the efficacy of competition, he avoided building up an extensive chain of outlets, and preferred to thrive by vigorous marketing.
This stood his company in good stead when the Monopolies Commission erected the vulgar prejudice against tied houses into something approaching a holy principle, to justify compulsory selling-off in the middle of the property slump.
McEwan Younger had an outstanding war record.
He enlisted in 1939 with a Lowland Territorial light anti-aircraft regiment, which arrived early in North Africa.
In the defence of Tobruk his battery shot down more than 50 Stuka dive-bombers, for which he was awarded the DSO.
When pressed he would explain the secret of his success, in a shy, matter-of-fact way.
Always sleep by the guns, he said, and never let the men dig bolt holes, lest they become too attached to them when the bombs begin to fall.
For the rest it was a matter of discipline and the basic incentive of ‘getting the buggers before they got you’.
He loved his ‘Jocks’ without a trace of condescension, and when he took over the regiment as lieutenant-colonel in North Africa and Italy, his double-barrelled beer name earned him the affectionate sobriquet of ‘Colonel Screwtop’.
He was mentioned in despatches, for having displayed the same casual courage his companions had remarked on before the war as he pursued his favourite pastime of mountaineering (he had neither the time nor patience for golf and was reckoned by devotees to be only a fair-weather fisherman).
Until badly fitted with a new hip in his seventies, he remained a tall, slim, naturally commanding figure, with a full head of wavy hair framing a ruddy complexion.
McEwan Younger was a marvellous host, especially with business or political cronies, and had a leisurely, relaxed manner that could become passionate in discussion of what he thought to be mistaken policies or dubious personalities.
He regarded Scottish nationalists as often mischievous and self-seeking, and would have relished John Major's recent championing of the Union.
But he was usually mild in manner, especially with subordinates, to whom he was ready to devolve responsibilities and to give support when the business or political going got rough.
Despite his lifelong friendship with Lord Home, McEwan Younger strongly supported Edward Heath's new broom Conservatism in 1970, and the next year became chairman of the Conservative party in Scotland.
By 1974, however, he despaired of the Tories' ability to stick — like his Jocks — to their guns, and lamented the failure to market their new faith in unstuffy enterprise.
In retirement he resumed an earlier active interest as trustee of the Institute of Economic Affairs, of which he was the largest single (albeit anonymous) benefactor.
He was among the first to welcome the radical reforms launched by Mrs Thatcher, especially in curbing the entrenched legal privileges of the trade unions.
As a true Scottish non-conformer, he had no exaggerated respect for placemen in high office, and enjoyed jokes at the expense of the mighty.
He relished the story of the Scottish newspaper which described a local war hero as ‘that battle-scared warrior’, later amended to ‘bottle-scarred’ and finally to ‘battle-scarred’.
McEwan Younger was a familiar figure in Edinburgh and played a full part in its commercial life, as a director of the British Linen Bank and Scottish Television, and as chairman of Second Scottish Investment Trust.
He regretted that many major Scottish companies shifted their headquarters to London, and took quiet pride that Scottish & Newcastle attracted high-flying executives from England — and that it was still run from an office almost in the shadow of Holyroodhouse.
As a founder and chairman of Highland Tourist (Cairngorm Development), he provided a practical demonstration of how to market Scotland as a conference and holiday resort.
He served as Deputy Lieutenant of Midlothian, and then of the City of Edinburgh, from 1956 to 1984.
On ceremonial occasions he paraded at Holyroodhouse as a Member of the Queen's Body Guard.
In 1964 he was created a baronet for his outstanding contribution to Scottish business and political life.
McEwan Younger married first, in 1936 (marriage dissolved in 1967), Nora Balfour; they had a daughter.
He married secondly, in 1983, June Peck.
There is no heir to the baronetcy.
Obituary of Pamela Countess of Onslow
PAMELA COUNTESS OF ONSLOW, who has died aged 76, became a celebrity in 1973 when she emerged as a key figure in the ‘Littlejohn Affair’— one of the more curious spy stories of recent years.
In July 1973 two brothers, Kenneth and Keith Littlejohn, were found guilty in Dublin of the biggest bank robbery in Irish history.
Throughout the trial the brothers had maintained that they had been working as agents for the British Government in Dublin.
They said that the robbery had been made to appear like the work of the IRA in the hope that it would provoke the Irish government into introducing tougher legislation against the terrorists.
Whitehall vigorously denied that the British security forces were in any way connected with the bank raid.
But it emerged that Kenneth Littlejohn had indeed been recruited into MI6 two years previously — and that Lady Onslow was indirectly responsible for this.
In 1971 Lady Onslow was working as a volunteer for Teamwork Associates, a charity which sought to keep ex-Borstal boys on the straight and narrow.
One such was the 27-year-old Keith Littlejohn, who had spent time in Borstal after robbing an elderly shopkeeper.
Lady Onslow befriended Littlejohn, who lost little time in asking her to arrange a meeting between a Government minister and his brother Kenneth, who, he said, had some important intelligence about the IRA to pass on.
Lady Onslow, who was of Anglo-Irish extraction, contacted her friend Lord Carrington, who was then Minister for Defence.
A meeting was arranged between Kenneth Littlejohn and Mr Geoffrey Johnson Smith, Minister for the Army, at Lady Onslow's house.
A degree of immunity from prosecution for theft was certainly given to Kenneth Littlejohn in return for information about the IRA.
The brothers went on to operate as secret agents in the Republic of Ireland under cover of a company called Whizz Kids, which supposedly specialised in women's hot pants.
But the British authorities were unable to protect the Littlejohns when they were arrested for the robbery of £67,000 from a bank in Grafton Street, Dublin, in 1972.
Pamela Louisa Eleanor Dillon was born on Aug 26 1915, on the groundsheet of a Grenadier.
She was the only daughter of Eric Dillon, who was a grandson of the 16th Viscount Dillon, a zoologist.
Her mother, Juanita Beckett, daughter of a brigadier-general and granddaughter of a field marshal, was an enthusiastic but not especially talented pianist, and devoted much of her time to practising a particularly thunderous rendition of Sibelius's Valse Triste.
Young Pamela used to have to don a tutu and dance until she dropped, hot angry tears rolling down her cheeks the while.
Released at last from her dancing, Pamela Dillon was sent to St Margaret's, Bushey, a school for the orphans of clergymen — an odd choice, for both her parents were anti-clerical.
In 1934 Eric Dillon became the 19th Viscount Dillon.
His daughter trained as a kennelmaid in Cobham and studied at Rada before marrying, in 1936, Viscount Cranley, the only son and heir of the 5th Earl of Onslow, another zoologist.
On the death of his father in 1945 Lord Cranley became the 6th Earl of Onslow.
He served as a Conservative Whip in the House of Lords and as Captain of the Queen's Body Guard of the Yeoman of the Guard from 1951 to 1960.
Before the dissolution of her marriage in 1962, Lady Onslow arranged for Clandon Park — the Onslow family seat in Surrey, designed by the Italian architect Giacomo Leoni in the 1730s — to be opened to the public and persuaded her husband's aunt, the Countess of Iveagh, to put up a substantial endowment for its restoration and upkeep.
It was handed over to the National Trust in 1956.
It was during her time at Clandon that Lady Onslow first became interested in voluntary work.
She gave invaluable service to the Red Cross, St Dunstan's and the Voluntary Aid Detachment, and was appointed a JP in 1951.
She went on to become chairman of Guildford juvenile court magistrates.
She moved to London after the break-up of her marriage and became a prison visitor some time after Teamwork Associates was swallowed into a larger body.
Lady Onslow was haunted by the Littlejohn affair for some years.
In 1975 she received a book bomb through the post from the IRA.
The parcel exploded when she opened it, singeing her head and arms.
She responded to this outrage with her customary fortitude, refusing medical aid.
The next year, in what was almost certainly a case of mistaken identity, the IRA bombed the Belfast home of another Lady Onslow, widow of Sir Richard Onslow.
For the last 30 years of her life Lady Onslow lived at Notting Hill Gate, and in the mid-1970s she led her neighbours in a rates protest against the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea.
She also kept up a vigorous campaign against the expansion of Geale's fish and chip restaurant near her house: she said the smells made her garden unusable.
Lady Onslow is survived by a son, the present Earl of Onslow, and a daughter, Lady Teresa Waugh, the novelist, who is married to Auberon Waugh.
Pamela's major qualities were courage, humour and broadmindedness, although the last of these was put to the test, first when her only brother became a Roman Catholic, then when her only daughter married one.
However, these qualities enabled her to win the trust and friendship of many ex-convicts.
Although her house was frequently burgled, she maintained a high standard of hospitality.
While tending to keep her two worlds separate, she made the literary, political and family circles she inhabited well aware of her other life among former convicts, and presumably vice-versa.
Unshockable, she listened to the most abominable confessions with equanimity, and cooked a memorable boeuf a la mode.
She was a most unusual woman.
Obituary of Maj-Gen Harry Letson
MAJOR-GENERAL HARRY LETSON, who has died aged 95, enjoyed a life of remarkable success and versatility.
He was a university professor, ran his own engineering company, revived shipbuilding in British Columbia, was Adjutant-General of the Canadian Army, and served as secretary to the Governor-General of Canada.
Having been in the militia in 1910, when he was 14, on the outbreak of war he joined the Canadian Army as a private in the Western Universities Battalion and was soon promoted NCO.
In 1916 he moved with them to England, where he was commissioned.
The next year, as a lieutenant in the 54th Battalion in France, he won an MC and was severely wounded by machine-gun fire, which left him with a lifetime limp.
After the war Letson returned to Vancouver, where he graduated in engineering from the Pacific Coast branch of McGill University.
He returned to England to gain his doctorate from London University, and from 1923 to 1935 he was Associate Professor of Engineering at the University of British Columbia.
Harry Farnham Germain Letson was born in Vancouver on Sept 26 1896, when it was still a shantytown.
On the day of his birth his father founded the pioneer engineering firm of Letson & Burpee, which Harry later inherited and developed into one of the largest in western Canada.
As chairman of the metal trades section of the Canadian Manufacturers Association and a member of its national defence committee, he played an important part in the revival of shipbuilding on the Pacific coast.
He was largely responsible for organising the supply of machinery and equipment to be fitted in the bare hulls to be built in the yards of British Columbia — an industry which proved to be of vital importance during the Second World War.
Military affairs were of absorbing interest to Harry Letson.
In 1927 he became the commanding officer of the British Columbia Regiment (Duke of Connaught's Own Rifles), a militia unit in Vancouver.
At his own expense he spent some months in England attached to units of the British Army for training.
In Canada he took every military course available to him.
He was a crack shot and went to Bisley five times, last appearing there, in 1934, as commander of the Canadian team.
For six years from 1930 he commanded the Canadian Officers Training Corps at UBC.
He was then promoted colonel to command the Militia's 14th Infantry Brigade and the Vancouver defences.
In 1939 Letson once more volunteered for active service, and in August of the next year he was posted to Washington as military attache at the Canadian Legation.
His subsequent promotion to the rank of brigadier was an indication of the growing military co-operation between Canada and the United States.
In February 1942 Letson was again promoted, to be Adjutant-General in Ottawa.
In 1944 he returned to Washington as chairman of the Canadian Joint Staff Mission, responsible for planning Canada's participation in the invasion of Japan.
When the vastly popular Field Marshal Earl Alexander of Tunis was appointed to Canada in 1946, Letson — as a soldier with wide connections in business and society — proved an admirable choice as Secretary to the Governor-General.
He held the post until 1952.
On retiring from it he continued to take an active part in military affairs.
From 1954 to 1958 he was adviser on Militia to the Army and in 1963 was appointed honorary Colonel of the British Columbia Regiment.
Letson was appointed CBE in 1944 and CB in 1946.
He also held the Efficiency Decoration and the Canadian Forces Decoration.
He married, in 1926, Sally McKee Lang.
They remained in Ottawa after his military service, where he was on the advisory board of a trust company and was close to the excellent fishing of the Gatineau hills.
Obituary of William Arrowsmith
William Arrowsmith.
At Boston, Mass, aged 67.
Professor of Classics, Boston University, from 1986.
General editor of the Greek tragedy and new translations series published by Oxford University Press; he was also the founding editor of three literary journals, The Chimera, The Hudson Review and Arion.
Obituary of Harold Romberg
Harold Romberg.
Aged 79.
Judge at the Supreme Restitution Court in Germany from 1953.
Joined administration of justice branch in British Zone of occupied Germany, 1945.
Set up the Central Legal Office.
Legal Adviser to British Government, 1974.
Appointed judge in the court in Berlin, 1988.
OBE. 