

FROM RUSSIA WITH MUSHROOMS 1747–1765 A.D.
Prince Charles Edward Stuart, ‘Bonnie Prince Charlie’, came and went with a song, 10,000 starving Highlanders, and 12,000 Glasgow shirts.
The great review on Glasgow Green had only managed to squeeze 60 recruits from the reluctant ranks of the Clydesiders, but neither the shirts, the 6,000 coats and pairs of shoes, the printing press, printers to go with it, guns and ammunition, hostaged town councillors, or his alcoholic mistress, Clementina Walkinshaw, could keep out the chill on Culloden moor.
The Jacobite cause fell and the indecisive Prince with it, but there were those who fought not for the Stuarts, but for their country.
The bravery and nobility of men like the Cameron of Lochiel who saved Glasgow from the Prince's wrath, and the Highlanders who died then and in the years to come, are a permanent monument to the spirit of Scotland.
Those who lived had a stark choice, submit, or…flee into exile.
Many did flee, taking their skills of war with them to Germany, France, Russia, and just about everywhere else.
Where the River Lovat flows out of Lake Ilmen and north to Lake Ladoga, there stood a great city with wooden walls.
Those were the days when every Russian city had its Kremlin, a high fortress bristling with watch-towers.
To the east lay Moscow, to the west, Courland and Lithuania, and northwards the new city of St Petersburg, and league upon endless league, the frozen forests of the territory of Novgorod.
For this was Novgorod, ancient, wooden, like the bole of an immense tree that has been carved into the likeness of a city, Novgorod the Great, a gilded fortress of the Romanov Empire.
JAMIE Stuart hoisted his pack and leaned into the bitter wind blowing off the Polish plains.
He had lost the feeling in his fingers and a rime of frost clung to his moustache and beard.
The world about him was white as death.
It swirled and howled, driving the sleet and snow towards him alone.
He trudged forward doggedly, blinking the ice from his eyelashes.
He was alone at the centre of driving lines of grey and wet, and only a will that had already taken him across wide seas and a wider continent drove him forward.
He stopped and the snow began to drift over the toes of his boots.
Somewhere, he could not tell whether it was near or far, somewhere outside his present universe of ice, a bell was tolling.
Suddenly a wall loomed up before him, its top hidden by the swirling snow.
Set into the wall, which was made of wood, was an enormous iron-studded door.
Reaching inside his tartan plaid he tried to make his fingers take hold of the pommel of his sword.
Drawing it with difficulty he pounded on the gates shouting wildly.
The wind whipped the words away and they were lost in the gale but someone must have heard the banging.
With agonising slowness the great gates swung inwards and Jamie found himself confronting…a bear.
He took a step back and shook his head in disbelief.
The bear stirred himself and laughed.
He realised that he was, in fact, looking at a man, so heavily clothed, hatted and booted in furs that he could have made a fortune doing tricks at the Glasgow Fair.
Too hungry and cold to care what awaited him inside Jamie staggered forward and into the man's arms.
He knew the most trusted adviser of the late Tsar Peter had been a Scotsman, but there had been four Tsars since then, and there was a Tsarina, Elizabeth, on the throne, or so he had been told in Vilna.
The man was speaking to him, but Jamie's Russian was rudimentary and he was half-dead with cold.
The gates shut  behind him with a dull thud and the sound of the wind died away.
His rescuer was smiling, pulling and pointing at the tartan plaid that had protected the young Highlander in his wanderings across eastern Europe.
Jamie knew that wherever he was in the wild world, far from his home, he was not the first Scotsman to hammer at the gate.
‘So,’ said Andra, picking at the pool of wax on the table with a broken fingernail.
‘That's quite a story.
Why did ye come back?’
People always ask, ‘Why did you come back?’ when someone has been living abroad.
The answer could be, ‘Mind your own business.’
In fact, it's probably the safest answer, because there.
is always a reason.
Jamie was not a man for ‘safe answers’.
‘Like I said,’ he explained, ‘after those last months in Sweden, the  Ruskis made me up to Captain.
Then SHE came along.’
‘Aha!
Now we're gettin' it,’ said Andra.
‘There's a she in it is there?
I thought ye just couldn't stick it!’
‘I was at Culloden,’ said Jamie.
‘It's still no' safe to say that,’ Andra looked about him nervously.
The only other customers in the ‘Ravel’ that afternoon were a musician with a small Irish fiddle and his companion, a tall skeletal man with the remains of what had once been an extremely fine hat, crammed down over his greasy locks.
Both were very drunk and attempting to sing a song that was remarkable for the complete absence of any words.
‘I ken you were all right when the Prince was here,’ he continued, ‘and there are plenty in Glasgow that will keep you safe, but things have changed for the worse since you went away.
There's money and trade aplenty for some, but Jacobites are still hunted.’
‘I don't care,’ said Jamie.
There were streaks of white in his beard, like new-fallen snow.
‘Anyway I'll lay a wager that they've all forgotten.
It was more than 20 year ago.’
‘You were tellin' me about this ‘she’,’ urged Andra with relish.
‘Wan o' thae eastern women, wis she?
I've heard aboot them.’
He licked his lips.
‘No,’ replied Jamie, looking at a fly on the table as if it was a long-lost brother.
‘She was a German, and she was mad.’
‘Oh they are all mad,’ said Andra knowingly.
‘Don't have tae go to Russia to find that oot.’
‘I'm talking about the Empress,’ Jamie growled.
Andra moved his chair back from the table a little.
‘The Tsarina Catherine…some call her the Great, like Peter.’
‘Who?’
‘Never mind, anyway, she was a German actress, if that's what you want to call it, and she was hard as iron.
Not particularly good-looking but by God she was more of a man than any of them.
Know what she did?’
‘No?’ said Andra, eyes wide.
He leaned forward again.
‘She had a great big elephant…that's one of those muckle beasts with two tails from Africa!’
Andra nodded, his mouth open.
‘See this elephant?’
Jamie continued…’
She had one made out of ice…with ROOMS in it to keep prisoners in.
And she did.
Right in the middle of the square in St Petersburg, kept them there 'till they died of cold.
She was mad.’
‘I see what ye mean,’ said Andra, awestruck.
‘Well,’ continued Jamie, staring into the past, ‘she had a well-known habit of taking a fancy to tall sodgers.’
‘Oh aye,’ Andra winked at him, but Jamie continued, oblivious.
‘Catherine was reviewing the elite Scots Guards and their captain this day.
That was me.
There we were on parade, six hale companies, not all Scots mind, mostly just the officers.
We were all lined up on the field at Peobresanskoe…the Winter Palace.
Here she stopped at me.
The big Kulak that goes everywhere with her looked at her, then at me, then gives me a bit o' paper.’
‘Whit was oan it?’ gasped Andra.
‘Nothin'.
Nothin' at aw'.’
‘Whit was it fur then?’
‘I had to write ma name oan it ye fule.
She's mad.
Only takes men that can write.‘
‘And…?’
‘And whit?
’ Jamie wrote his name in the beer on the table-top with the knuckle of a finger long since lost in battle.
‘Aboot the paper…and this…’
‘Catherine.’
‘Aye, Catherine.
Tell us!’squeaked Andra in desperation.
‘Well I'm here, anyway.’
Jamie grinned at him mirthlessly.
‘She did give me something though.’
‘What was that?’
‘Yer drink, man.
Ye havna' touched it.’
‘Oh aye…’
Andra looked down at the concoction in the dusty glass in front of him.
‘What was it called again?’ he asked doubtfully.
‘It's called a ‘Cathy’ after herself.
It's gin and these…’ he spread out a handful of shrivelled objects on the table in front of him.
Andra suspected they were somebody's ears.
‘Very good,’ he said nervously.
‘Aye, right.’
‘They're mushrooms, ya fule,’ said Jamie with feeling.
‘I pit the right amount of juice in yer drink.
Try it.
SHE invented it.’
‘Who?
The…the wumman that was mad…?’
Jamie frowned once, then sat back and watched in satisfaction as Andra drank his first ‘Cathy’.
GIVE A BODY PEACE 1750–1820 A.D.
Burke and Hare were amateurs compared with the activities of the Glasgow Resurrectionists.
In the closing years of the 18th century the old town suffered a virtual invasion of body-snatchers.
Great advances in surgery, culminating in the work of the Hunter brothers, were fuelled by a plague of grave-robbing.
‘Job-lots’ of bodies were bought in Ireland and imported to Glasgow labelled ‘Tea’.
The Necropolis, Ramshorn, Gorbals, and Cathcart burial grounds became known as ‘Doctor's Larders’, and the citizens of Glasgow went in terror of students and paid ‘corpse-baggers’ disturbing their eternal rest.
Feelings ran high.
The mistaken identification of some red dye, accidentally spilled on a window sill, as blood, led to a riot that was only broken up when the mob was charged by soldiers led by a cutlass-wielding town councillor on horseback.
‘Bob Dragon,’ or Dreghorn, the ugliest man in Scotland, was also thought to be associated with the Resurrectionists.
Anything out of the ordinary aroused suspicion, and a hysteria akin to the days of witch trials led to the construction of sentry boxes and iron ‘mort-safes’ bolted across tombs.
In 1813 a gang of student body-snatchers known as the Patent Leather Club or Brotherhood of the Knife were found to be stockpiling spare limbs in tubs of salt water in secret rooms off the High Street.
They were led by a suave and brilliant student called Granville Sharpe-Pattison.
When he was tried by a University Court which still had the theoretical right to condemn its students to death, he was ‘allowed’ to escape to America where he became one of the United States' greatest surgeons.
He was buried at his own request, in Glasgow.
With an equal number of doctors and town watchmen in the city, about 50, no gas and only a few oil lamps illuminating the winding streets and alleys, the dark work of the Resurrectionists went ahead almost unhindered.
MRS McAllister was among friends.
They had all died at roughly the same time, victims of one of those brief epidemics of cholera that continued to attack the city until the great Loch Katrine water scheme was opened in Victorian times.
She lay beside her uncle, her brother, and several near neighbours, the fresh earth of the recent interment scattered and scuffed about the leaf-strewn path of the Necropolis, city of the dead.
From the cemetery hill, the panorama of the ill-lit city, a dark mosaic of shadow against the darker night, flowed down the hill towards the river, pale in the westering moon.
Candles and oil-lamps gleamed weakly in distant windows and a torch shone briefly down by the ancient Cross as a link-boy led a gentleman home after a night's revelry, by the shortest and hopefully, safest route.
The three figures crept up the hill softly.
One had a lantern, but it was shrouded by a cloth, a deep, hidden glow like subterranean fires far beneath the earth.
They stopped beside Mrs McAllister's resting-place and looked at the ground in silence.
‘Are ye sure this is it?’
A stocky figure with a heavy serge coat and a ‘lum’ hat set at a jaunty angle, turned to his two companions.
‘Aye,’ replied another, slim and small as a child but with a face centuries old.
‘See!’
He held out a grubby scrap of paper.
‘I canna see it in this light ya fule,’ the top-hat swayed angrily as its owner knocked the hand away.
‘This'll dae.
Wherr's the spade?’
The third member of the expedition, laden with shovels, picks and other nameless implements, handed a curved spade to the little man.
‘Here ye are, Heg,’ he said slowly.
‘Is this the right one that ye want?
Is it, eh?’
Heg scowled in the darkness.
‘Ya daftie, Stim, it's no' me that's askin'.
They are aw' aw' right, so they are.’
Stim offered the spade to the leader of the company with a flourish.
‘Yer spade, Biff,’ he said with a nasal whine.
‘It's the right wan.
Heg says it's the right wan.’
There was a chill wind on the Hill of the Dead, but Biff took off his top-hat and mopped his forehead with a red spotted handkerchief.
‘Aye.
It's the right wan right enough,’ he folded his arms.
‘Use it then.’
‘What?
Me?’
The daftie struggled to keep hold of his armful of implements.
‘Aye.
You.
Dig.’
Heg and Biff sat on the edge of the open grave sucking their unlit pipes.
About six feet below them they could hear thumps and scrapes as the luckless Stim dug his way down into the darkness.
‘Are…are ye still up therr…?’
The nervous voice floated up from the damp gloom below.
‘Naw,’ replied Biff, taking his pipe from his mouth and spitting.
‘Ye are, aren't ye…?’
A note of hysteria crept into the voice from the grave.
‘Keep diggin', ya fule.’
Bill cast a knowing glance at his companion.
‘Tell us when ye…’
There was the sound of wood splitting and tearing, followed by a choking gasp from the open grave.
‘That it?’
Biff asked coldly, standing up and peering down into the darkness.
‘Christ!
Aye…’ coughed Stim.
‘What a reek.
It's awfy…’
‘That'll be gas,’ Heg nodded knowledgeably.
‘Builds up fast.’
‘I think I'll risk a wee bit of the lantern,’ Biff held the light over the yawning opening, lifting the corner of the cloth.
A pale yellow beam struggled down beneath the lip of the grave, illuminating the panting Stim, ankle deep in loose earth, the lid of the coffin propped to one side in two parts.
The corpse lay white and pale as ice on a silk pillow.
Jagged slivers of wood pointed outwards from the heavy brass plate at the top like a crown of thorns.
‘Aw for pity's sake,’ complained Biff.
‘It's a cholera.
They gie ye half-price for a cholera.
Too far gone.’
He jumped as Heg tapped him on the shoulder.
‘Watchies!’ he whispered urgently.
‘I think it's watchies comin'.’
Biff turned.
Below and to the left a light twinkled briefly, then was hidden.
‘Right enough,’ he stuck his pipe in his pocket.
‘Looks like they are just comin' over the Cathedral wall.
We've time to get off up the Garngad.’
He ran into the night, followed by Heg, and they vanished among the tombstones.
‘Biff…
Heg…?’ a voice floated up from the open pit.
‘Are ye still therr…gies a haun’.
I'm stuck.
I canna get oot o' the grave…’
THE LEAN-TO THEATRE 1751 A.D.
Following the Puritan days of the Reformation, music, dancing and theatre were all regarded as inspirations of the devil.
That was back in the early 1600s and things had been improving gradually ever since.
Anyway, Glasgow people have always had a natural ability to entertain others, if not themselves, and as early as 11 November 1699, a certain John Smith, not related to the John Smith who is a regular guest at a major hotel in the city, received permission from the Town Council to teach dancing.
He was only allowed to work provided he did so during reasonable daylight hours.
Furthermore, there was to be no ‘promiscuous dancing’, which meant men and women…together!
On no account was the aforesaid Mr Smith ‘to have any balls at all’.
The Town Council was then, as now, very strict in the matter of public morality.
The city was used to the incursions of travelling tumblers, magicians, quack doctors, actors, and other undesirable elements, especially during the Fairs.
It was 1750 before actual theatrical entertainments began to be held, something between musical comedy and tragical farcical comedy, a potage of as many as 20 ‘plays’ in the same programme based on mythical and romantic themes.
The very first of these may have been held in Burrell's Hall off the High Street, but two years later, Glasgow's first Concert Hall was cobbled together.
The backers rather misjudged the mood of the populace at the time, and far from attracting crowds of culture-hungry theatre-goers, the actor-managers of the day had to be protected from the mob by the soldiery.
This may have had something to do with the fact that the theatre, a lean-to affair of wood and canvas, was built against the ruined wall of the Bishop's Palace next to Glasgow Cathedral.
Eventually, stirred up by a fire-breathing minister called Reverend George Whitefield, the mob, that is to say, congregation, censored the proceedings by the simple expedient of pulling the theatre to bits.
There is still a legend in the Theatrical world that once you have played Glasgow on a Saturday night, you are a true professional.
Although the legend refers mainly to the late-lamented Glasgow Empire, actors have long and highly trained memories, and having the theatre demolished in the middle of Act Three is not an experience that the Brotherhood of Thespians is liable to forget in a hurry.
THE Duke of Florentino pulled up his trousers and shouted at his reflection.
‘Thou art forever damn…ed darkling knavish poltroon of a…of a…’
‘Count, darling…’ a mass of red-gold curls and a turned-up nose intruded into the glass over his shoulder.
‘Thanks, Georgie,’ His Grace the Duke, otherwise known as Everard Bean, pouted and drew himself erect.
‘I can never get the ‘Count’ part.
Why could he not be a Duke as well, or even something common, like a Captain of Arms or a hostler's lackey?’
‘Dukes are common enough,’ grinned Georgie, setting his wig straight.
‘Bound to overlap you know, with ten parts each and the twiddly bit with the songs.’
‘Seen the crowd?’ asked the Duke, buckling on a wooden sword and striding up and down the narrow space, waving his arms about and muttering to himself.
The Green Room, a flap of canvas pegged to the ruinous wall of the Bishop's Palace, was heavy with the smell of powder and sweat.
‘All three of them,’ Georgie leaned against the cool stone wall and folded his arms.
‘Two old men and a dog.
Glasgow is not a theatre place, I think.
No culture.’
‘No money, more like,’ the Duke bowed and his shadow, after a moment's hesitation, did likewise.
‘Otherwise they would be flocking in.
They flocked for the Calumny of Apelles and Gerda, Princess of Tyre in Newcastle.
Not enough handbills, that's what I say.’
‘The Scots don't look very…amusable,’ drawled Georgie, picking a bit of 1,000-year-old stone off the wall behind him and aiming it at a tent-peg.
‘I hear the Churches don't think very well of us.’
‘Mmmm…’ nodded the Duke, licking his fingers and smoothing down his eyebrows,’…not ready for it.
Too far north.
Cut off.’
‘What is?’
‘They are.’
‘Mmmm…’ said Georgie archly.
‘No feeling for the boards.’
‘Really!’ protested the Duke, looking shocked.
‘We don't want that kind of custom.‘
‘What on earth are you talking about darling?’
Georgie tossed his curls crossly.’
The boards are our life.’
‘Oh…’ the Duke looked apologetic.
‘Sor…ee.
I thought you said ‘bawds’.‘
Georgie giggled.
‘You are dreadful, you know.’
‘I'm a Duke,’ said the Duke with an air of gravity.
‘And I don't care who knows it.’
‘More like a Count,’ muttered Georgie.
‘Shall we…?’
He held up the tent-flap that led to the theatre.
The Duke marched out on to the stage which, as everyone knows, represents the world, closely followed by the Duchess, still holding a piece of the Bishop's Palace.
The Reverend George Whitefield was not a man for jokes.
The nearest he had ever approached to any hint of levity was when he had stopped frowning for an instant the day that news had reached him of the death of Prince Charles Edward Stuart in Rome.
‘So perish all the ungodly,’ he had said, and the frown had closed in again.
Today it had doubled, crossed from one side of his forehead to the other, and reinforced a series of furrows rather than wrinkles, that made his broad white forehead look like a new-ploughed field covered in snow.
‘They shall perish,’ he thundered with feeling, rehearsing his favourite passage.
’‘They shall not desecrate the precincts of ancient tombs and the Great Reformed Kirk of Glasgow with a temple to their vanities and profanities, their antics and mummery…
’’ He licked his thumb and turned the paper, ‘…and flummery’,’he added, the last bit being written on the next page.
He enjoyed re-reading sermons almost as much as writing them.
He felt sure that the current piece, delivered that very morning to a rapt audience, would have the desired effect.
‘Reverend!
Reverend Whitefield…!’ the door burst open.
It was John Fleg, one of the Elders of the congregation who had stood,rapt as the great man in the High Churchyard had delivered his thunderous sermon against the Theatre, for all to hear.
‘Indeed, John,’ Reverend Whitefield looked up from his reading.
‘You seem somewhat discommoded, I would say.’
John Fleg's chest heaved as he fought for breath.
‘It's the congregation, Meenister, oor congregation.’
‘What is?’ enquired the curate quietly, putting his papers inside the heavy bible on the desk and closing it with a sigh of satisfaction.
‘What's to do?
Calm yourself man.‘
‘The congregation, Reverend,’ gasped the red-faced carpenter.
‘They and others of the citizens are pulling the theatre down, and the soldiers from the Gallowgate Barracks are awa'!’
‘Are they indeed?’
The frown looked almost benign.
‘And the actors have fled.’
‘Have they indeed?’
It seemed for the barest fraction of an instant that a smile might be knocking at the underside of that granite jaw.
‘Aye, Reverend,’ continued the Elder, getting his wind.
‘The hale contraption, painted trees, stage, tents, all down and trampled underfoot.’
The Reverend Whitefield sat back and made a steeple of his fingers, secure in his knowledge of the power and the professionalism of his performance.
GET YOUR HORSE OFF MY CHAIR 1753 A.D.
’ In the land of the hatless, the man with a bunnet is a toff,’or words to that effect, and the same relationship existed between Glaswegians who were stuck with Shanks's Pony, and the gentry who heaved their bulk into a sedan-chair after a heavy Saturday night.
In 1753, 237 years before the days when 50 taxis lined Ingram Street at two o'clock on a Tuesday morning, back in the days when Ingram Street was a muddy avenue leading to a country house, sedan-chairs were being pushed aside by state-of-the-art horse cabs.
Glasgow was very pretty in the 18th century, pretty impassable at the least sign of rain.
It was well endowed with ‘footpads’, which is what muggers and thieves were called at the time.
Anyone with a few coins in their purse, or gold pieces, was well advised to take a ‘chair’ or a ‘cab’home after dark.
Those were the years of the Clubs, the gatherings of merchants, gentlemen, and others, which included The Lucky Black Tavern, My Lord Ross's Club, The Chop Society, the Tinkler's Pot, the Face Club, the Hodge Podge, and the Old King Coul Club.
Many clubs employed ‘cravat-looseners’ whose sole job was to make sure that those who had slid beneath the table through no fault of their own, were not about to be choked by their clothing.
There were hunting parties, and celebrations that occasionally resulted in fires, riots, and other expressions of middle-aged high-spirits.
The 1750s were the years of the Glasgow Academy of Fine Arts, jointly supported by the University and Glasgow businessmen, a brave adventure ten years ahead of the Academy in London.
The Foulis brothers, Andrew and Robert, were publishers and printers as well as founders of the Glasgow Academy of Arts.
Their price of £4,000 to anyone who could find a typographical error in their works remains unclaimed to this day.
Glasgow had become a ‘city of culture’.
It was a place of innovation and modernity.
There were carry-ons and carry-outs, a Florentine potage of high jinks and art, in which the outmoded sedan-chair was soon to join lepers, witches, battling Provosts, Jacobites and clubgoers alike, in the bottomless lobby-press of the vanished centuries.
CRUICKSHANK'S Tavern was awash with laughter.
The Royalish and Not-So-Ancient Chop Society was in session.
The Chairmaster, grave, imposing, and bald as a biscuit , apart from the red wig, adhering by a miracle to his left ear, was attempting to give some kind of order to the proceedings.
‘The Honourable and Ancient…’ he hammered the table with his plate, having misplaced the gavel in his pocket.
‘Order!’ he cried to general applause.
‘We of the Chop Society are gathered tae consider chops of great merit, drink rum and watter, and look into the arts, verse, singing, fiddle and the like.’
Bogle the Locksmith was sick on a waiter's sleeve, taking advantage of the temporary lull.
‘Greetings…ahem…
Brethern…’ the Chairmaster continued.
‘It has already been hinted at by oor worthy comrade up the back before he passed oot, we are but six months old as a body…’
‘My body's older than that,’ the locksmith offered, staggering past.
‘If you PLEASE sir,’ the plate banged in desperation.
‘I will if you will,’ called out a voice from the fug at the end of the table.
‘To continue,’ the Master of Ceremonies shouted resolutely.
‘It is my greatest of pleasures, or almost so, to bring afore your attentions a very distinguished applicant for joining this here famous company of scholars and gentlemen.’
He tapped the shoulder of the hunched figure seated at his left.
‘Gentlemen and fellow Choppers, I give you, I recommend to you, that notability in the world of the Weed, Master Ingram of that ilk.
How say you?
Say you ‘Yay or Nay’, or perhaps, ‘Nay or Yay’?’
He sat down with a crash and Ingram got shakily to his feet.
A chorus of fists, plates, and in one case, teeth, greeted his rise.
‘Thank you,’ Ingram stammered over the uproar.
‘I know that ye number among your good selves mair humble merchants like myself, professors, surgeons, so I hope to…’
‘Mair sherbet in that man's rum,’ cried the locksmith, quite recovered and sucking the end of an over-done chop.
‘He's had nae sherbet.’
‘That's an allegation I deny,’ retorted Ingram, swaying unsteadily.
‘Let the alligators stand forth.’
‘The question!’
The assembly began to chant.
‘Put the question!
Gie him the QUESTION!‘
‘S'right,’ nodded the Chairmaster, struggling to his feet and leaning heavily on the candidate.
‘Must give ye the question!’ he grinned sheepishly and staggered back a step.
‘Do your worst sir,’ Ingram frowned in concentration and joined the querent by tripping back daintily over his own boots and grabbing his partner's sleeve.
‘Ask away then.’
‘And the penalty if ye fail,’ the Master of Ceremonies warned in a brief moment of lucidity.
‘Tae continue.
Weel sir…here it is.
Is the inside of the outside, the outside of the outside's inside…yes or no?’
Ingram stared at the table spinning round in front of him.
‘Er…— could you let me have that again?’ he asked quietly.
The assembly dissolved in uproar.
‘Failed!’
They shouted.
‘Give him the forfeit.
Failed.’
‘'Fraid that's right…’
The Chairmaster shrugged his shoulders and shook his head at the same time, finally dislodging the reluctant wig.
‘On the table with you.’
Ingram looked at him in disbelief.
‘What…?’
‘You mun stand on the table and sing for us or the Choppers will black-ball you sir, damned if they wilna'…’ he pointed at the board.
Ingram looked doubtfully at the long table, rocking up and down like a lugger in a gale.
To the waiters standing about it seemed to be perfectly stationary, but they were not members of the Chop Society and it was not their table.
‘On ye get,’ the Chairperson waved his hand imperiously.
‘The preferred ditties are rhymes of the nursery time…’
The sign outside the grocer's shop in Queen Street informed passers-by that ‘Henry Lawson's One-Horse Coach Office’ was in the back shop, and that a loud knock on the window was required.
Ingram was in no condition to knock on anything, although his head didn't know that as he leaned forward against the thick bottle glass.
The coolness of the window was soothing to his over-heated nose.
‘Chair, sir?’ a distant voice asked from beside his elbow.
‘Eh?
Wassat?’
‘Chair, sir?
Drury Street Sedan Chairs at your service, master.
Take you to your home, your honour?’
‘Home?
Yes…
Take me…’ replied Ingram distantly, searching for a vertical surface.
His eyes seemed to be trying to imitate a lizard and swivel in opposite directions.
The door of the grocer's shop was flung open with a ‘crash’ and a small rotund figure, angry as a bee that has sat on its own sting, buzzed past the rubber merchant and accosted the sedan-chair operator.
‘Get oot o' my bit,’ Henry Lawson growled.
‘This here is horse-cab land, so it is.
This is my customer.
Aren't ye, master?’
He pulled the unresisting Ingram towards him.
‘He's askin' for a chair,’ the carrier motioned his partner, the back half of the sedan chair pair, to help him corner the hapless Ingram's custom.
‘Naw he's no,’ Lawson's three assistants emerged from hiding behind the turnips and leeks.
‘Here's a horse waiting for ye sir.’
Ingram was propelled towards an open phaeton and a patient old nag.
‘Sedan chairs are just good for keeping oats in.
Their days is over, so they are,’ Lawson called over his shoulder.
‘Horses is the things of the future.
Horses is the boys.‘
‘Future?’ asked Ingram blankly to the back of someone's head.
‘Aye sir,’ replied Lawson breezily, bundling the merchant into the little carriage.
‘Horses is progress, so they are.’
‘Progress?’ replied Ingram with a great effort.
‘Does that mean…will I get where I'm going to…to…’
‘Oh aye, sir, ‘Progress’ is my motto.
If you can remember where you want to go, my horses will guarantee to get you there.’
ALL IN A FLASH 1772 A.D.
Scotland ‘s greatest natural resource is not coal, oil, nor even the industry of its people, it is ideas.
A vast inshore field of Scottish genius was struck in the latter part of the 18th century.
It was called the ‘Scottish Enlightenment’, and it was fuelled by great minds and hearts.
Men like Adam Smith, Professor of Moral Philosophy in Glasgow who gave up his post to become tutor to the son of a Duke, met Voltaire in Paris, and discussed with him, by proxy, the political theories of Benjamin Franklin, father of the American Constitution.
David Hume the philosopher, James Watt the Engineer, Syme, Symington, Professor Black…
Deep well-springs of ideas were tapped and a new Renaissance set in motion by men who were unafraid to let their spirits roam in the new universe of science and invention.
The Scots have always numbered the multi-talented among their congregation, the ‘lad's o' pairts’.
A man o ‘pairts is essentially a practical dreamer, his feet on the earth and his head in the clouds.
He is someone who feeds off flashes of insight, like bolts of lightning from a clear blue sky.
In the late 18th century, the intellectual air of Glasgow and Scotland was alive with the electricity of imagination.
For a time a few gifted minds became a collective powerhouse, charged with a brilliance that still shines like a lighthouse from the badlands of ignorance.
Those were the days of the Scottish Enlightenment.
ALL day long the midnight sky built its bastions of cloud over Fenwick and the south.
Slowly, almost imperceptibly the towers and battlements grew, reaching upwards, the darkness of a bad dream devouring the last of the day.
Watchers on the Springburn Hill saw the shadows creep across the valley until the city lay at the bottom of a deep pit of shadow, dwarfed by a gargantuan wall of night that marched across the southern hills from Cathkin to the Gleniffer Braes.
Benjamin Franklin was delighted.
Having received an honorary degree from St Andrews University, and through his friendship with Principal Robertson of Edinburgh University, had managed the business of a Divinity Degree for his friend Sam Cooper.
Franklin had also been invited to advise Glasgow University in the matter of a lightning conductor.
Since his famous experiment in 1752 when he flew a kite during a thunderstorm, and via a key and a wet thread safely discharged the power of a thunderstorm into the earth, his lightning rods were much sought after.
He had first installed conductors on the roofs and spires of tall buildings in his home town of Philadelphia.
He was toying with the idea of bifocal spectacles on the eve of his appointment as Ambassador to France, and the future held a key role for him in the drafting of the American Constitution.
Ben Franklin was a ‘lad o' pairts’.
No one knows how Franklin survived his experiment with lightning.
Discharges can often involve 20,000 amperes at temperatures of 30,000 degrees centigrade.
As the storm broke over the High Street and a great fork of raw energy stabbed downwards, it struck the very tip of the copper spire of the Old College.
The incredible power was channelled harmlessly down to earth.
Glasgow's first lightning conductor drank the power of creation and waited for more.
As for the vast energy of the lightning itself…?
It was an unknown; electricity, uncontrollable and dangerous.
When asked what use it was, Franklin gave the same  reply as when he saw the first balloon ascent in 1783…’
What use is a new-born baby?’ he said.
Like the lightning conductor, the University waited to channel the energy of a coming storm, the new-born power and majesty of original ideas and invention that would spread from Glasgow and across the world.
PEOPLE POWER 1783 A.D.
No newspaper in history has ever had such a lead story for its first ever first edition as the Glasgow Advertiser and Glasgow Herald, 207 years ago.
I remember the long faces in the Tontine Coffee House at Glasgow Cross on the morning of 27 January 1783 when the news broke.
Peace had been made between the British, French, Spanish and Colonial Governments.
The United States of America was born.
During the War of Independence Glasgow merchants had found it hard to believe that anything could ever threaten their old, safe monopoly in sugar, cotton, and the ‘golden weed’.
The city had raised troops to fight for the Government, and the British army, a great continental power, could hardly be bested by a ragged colonial army and a handful of farmers and fur-trappers!
But the American War of Independence was not about territories and Powers, it was about freedom and liberties, and the victory was forged as much by the quill pen as the sword, by the men who wrote and signed a document not unlike the Declaration of Arbroath in content, the Declaration of Independence.
Glasgow and west of Scotland sons were as much a part of the company of the ‘Founding Fathers’ as they were involved with the vested interests of the Tobacco Barons.
The Scots spirit of liberty, frustrated at home, had been exported to magnify the noble principles that helped create a new world across the wide Atlantic.
Of the 56 signatories of the Declaration of Independence , nine were first or second generation Scots; nine of General Washington's 22 brigadier generals were Scots; nine of the 13 governors of the newly created United States were Scots or of Scots descent, and the Reverend John Witherspoon, formerly Minister of the Laigh Kirk in Paisley, was the only cleric to sign the Declaration of Independence.
He was also the first man to use the word ‘Americanism’ in 1781.
THE Reverend John Witherspoon looked at his turnip watch as the bells of Princeton University chimed the hour, and exclaimed, ‘Indeed, sir, we have played our part’.
His companion nodded and smiled.
The two strolled across the neat lawn before the Professor's Hall.
‘All of us,’ he agreed, glancing up at the circle of 13 stars on the flag fluttering above Princeton in the April breeze.
William Livingstone, first Governor of the State of New Jersey, was the grandson of a Scot, but looked every inch an American.
Tall, thoughtful, a brightness in his eye that hinted at both humour and stubbornness, William Livingstone was an American, but he looked every inch a Scot.
‘It was Scots generosity that founded Nassau Hall and Princeton itself,’ continued Witherspoon expansively.
‘This has moved from its beginning as a Presbyterian College to a major seat of learning.
I pray that the Faculty will continue to be given its part in New Jersey.’
‘Parts are not given, they are written and played by men of moment sir,’ said the Governor quietly.’
Men like your good self, sir.
You, John, signed the Document.’
The Reverend Witherspoon shook his head and grinned at his tall friend.
‘Paisley, Trenton, Washington…it's self-evident.
Some few may write a Declaration, others may sign it, but they are stating what has been God's law from the beginning, ‘That all men are created equal…that…’’ he paused and consulted his watch again, opening and closing the engraved case with a brisk snap.
’…That…’ he continued, ‘is the true power of the people.’
A FINE DAY FOR CHANGING THE WORLD 1780–85 A.D.
When Bonnie Prince Charlie's ragged army marched into Glasgow there were already steam engines pounding away in the mines, but those early beam engines were as crude as the Young Pretender's understanding of popular democracy.
It was not until James Watt, instrument maker at Glasgow University, was given the job of repairing a model Newcomen steam engine, that a major breakthrough was made in the business of powering up the early beginnings of the industrial world.
Watt, out for a sabbath stroll past the Golf-House on Glasgow Green when he should have been in church, had a flash of inspiration that was to change the lives of every man, woman, and bairn on planet earth.
James Watt realised that steam engines as they then existed could not create enough power to be truly economical.
His revolutionary ‘separate condenser’ led to the generations of steam engines that drove countless trains and ships into an ever-expanding world of trade and industry, a future that Watt's insight had created out of the slave and horse-power eras of the preceding 2,000 years.
Watt was not alone as an engineer and canal-builder, and his work laid the foundations of the industrial north of England, together with Thomas Telford of Dumfriesshire, greatest of the early civil engineers, William Symington, who designed and built the first steamship in the world as well as giving poet Robert Burns a rough ride during its promotional voyage on Dalswinton Loch, Henry Bell and his Comet, Nasmyth, there is nae doot that the Scots have a very special genius.
The Scots engineer became as much a part of the legends of the land as Bruce ‘s spider and the story of Sawney Bean.
Every ship, from tramps and puffers to mighty Clyde-built liners racing for the Blue Riband of the Atlantic had its Scots engineer.
Covered in oil, coarse and wholesome as an unwashed tattie, practical, loyal, he loved his engines ‘like a very brither’, cosseting the gleaming machinery, as smooth and sparkling as he was rough and grubby.
Even starships en route through the galaxy to yet another unlikely planetfall, seem to have Scots engineers on their establishment.
But whether the engine in question is a model Newcomen in Glasgow University, or a warp-drive in geostationary orbit over Barnard's Star Six, the hand on the spanner could hardly be anything but home-grown and very likely, Clyde-built.
THE tower of the Danish Church at Well Close stood sharp and clear against the clouds, and a line of rooftops and gables marked the long line of Cable Street and Rosemary Lane leading to Little Tower Hill.
Rooks dipped and wheeled above Tower Wharf, little specks of black above the glittering mud-flats.
St Catherine's Dock was busy as a Hogarth etching and smelt as if something should have been quietly buried a long time ago.
East Smithfield, Nightingale Lane, Burr Street, St Catherine's Way; like London's wall they hemmed in the huge dock area that had seen 11,000 people moved from the crowded houses and thieve'skitchens, and vast amounts of earth shifted to create new hills and rises in Chelsea and Pimlico.
The Irish colony of Knokvergence at Cable Street stood out against the newer buildings of Pennington.
Something was burning in the gardens behind Virginia Street, and a yellow smoke spiralled upwards before being caught by the wind and spread across the eastern sky in flat sheets of opalescent grey.
It was low tide at St Catherine's Dock, and the Thames was about to meet its match.
Two shire horses and 12 cursing, sweating men coaxed the six-ton pump forward towards the quay.
The foreman paused to wipe his forehead with the back of a hairy arm.
‘Heave away there me boys!’ he gasped.
‘PULL, Jacko.
Pull boys…
HEAVE!’
‘Watch it there cap'n,’ warned one of the lead team, straining to keep the main body of the device on an even keel.
‘Yon rope's goin' to jump the groove, so it is.’
‘Keep your boot on it then, Jacko,’ urged the ganger.
‘Pull, damn you…
PULL!
Hold your bloomin' place, you bucket of Hell's slops, you Chinese runner's nark, I'll…’
‘For the love of God, take care, you men!’
Thomas Telford ran the last few yards to the pump site.
With a brief sound of tearing wood and a squeal of tortured metal, the enormous pump slipped, sank slightly, and stood upright beside the river.
‘That's yer pump in position now, Mr Telford,’ said the foreman with a satisfied nod.
‘What's left of it, Mr Bragg.
Look at the state of the casing flanges, will you?
Look at the drop the mechanism has taken from the rollers!’
The foreman cast a professional eye over the indicated damage.
‘A few marks there,’ he said with another nod.
‘Definitely a few, but it's not made of feathers, that, sir, I can tell you.’
‘Nor are my Principals made of gold, sir!’
Thomas Telford waved his hands in the air excitedly.
‘If my design has been broken by its fall, I shall have to…’
‘Here's your other colleeg coming, surr!’
Mr Bragg nodded towards a lean figure picking his way towards them among the splintered remains of the wooden rollers.
‘Would you look at this James?’
Telford gestured towards the pump.
The newcomer smiled.
‘It's solid man,’ said James Watt.
‘Looks all right.’
He took Telford by the elbow and drew him aside.
‘I'm surprised you spoke to the foreman like that, Thomas, what with the labour shortage in London.
There were plenty of hands for your Caledonian Canal, but it has taken us three months to assemble a workforce here at St Catherine's Dock.
How can we site our machines without muscle?’
‘Perhaps we should build machines to site the machines,’ said Telford wryly.
‘There's power enough,’ agreed Watt, taking him at his word.
‘I have found that a horse can raise 150 pounds with ease.
Now if each of these engines for the dock can lift 1,200 pounds, and they can, Thomas, I've checked with my assistant Murdoch five times…then they are not machines at all.’
‘What are they then, pray?’
Telford watched nervously as the team of workmen drifted towards the second pump at the top of the rise.
‘Why man,’ said James Watt, slapping him on the back.
‘They are horses, or as good as.
They can muster the power of 80 horses.
So long as we have heat, water, and reciprocal motion, then we shall also have ‘horse power’.’
THE KELVINBRIDGE THREE-HUNDRED 1800–1803 A.D.
The ‘Auld Alliance’ and the French Connection should more properly be called the Scots Connection.
It dates from the days of Charlemagne, Charles the Great, who signed a treaty of mutual assistance with the legendary Scots King Achaius against the Saxons about 800 A.D. In historical times the links between Scotland and France have been close at every level from the monarchy, to trade and language.
Many Scots words are of French origin, which is bonnie, and an elite guard of the French Monarchy was formed from Scots who journeyed to France as mercenaries.
In 1789 on the eve of the French Revolution ties were still strong between the two nations, but the emphasis of union with England had made Scotland part of a broader European picture.
When the Bastille fell, largely by accident, and the National Assembly declared the French Republic, there were many enthusiastic supporters of the new libertarian principles in Scotland, including Robert Burns.
Before long, however, the euphoria and hope turned to terror and tyranny, and first under the Committee of Public Safety and the Triumvirate, and then led by the Corsican dictator Napoleon, France became for a time, a threat to every nation in Europe.
The great war that ensued and lasted until 1815 was, in many respects, the ‘First World War’, and its conflicts raged across Europe and the Americas.
WAR news arrived by the London Mail Coach at the Tontine Hotel.
When a special event or a victory like the Nile, Trafalgar or Waterloo was to be announced, the Mail Coach and horses were decorated with laurels and a red flag floated from the roof of the coach.
As the coach thundered into Glasgow, the post-horn would be sounded and a blunderbuss fired into the air.
William Wordsworth and his sister Dorothy were staying in Glasgow at the Saracen's Head Inn, and Dorothy records in her diary that the accommodation was ‘tolerable and cheap’.
While in Scotland they called on Sir Walter Scott, but he was out.
They also remarked on the frequent riotous assemblies that seemed to take place in or about the city of Glasgow.
Revolutionary fervour produced discontent at home, and there were frequent uprisings and riots.
These were swiftly put down and the Glasgow Volunteers, as fine a body of men as ever struggled from one ditch to another, were always ready to spring into action at the drop of a rifle.
When news came that discontented workers were marching on the mansion of Lord President Campbell at Garscube, the Glasgow Volunteers were hastily assembled in George Square.
The recommended muster-signal was a wooden rattle operated by some deserving unemployed person with nothing better to do than run around the town making an incredible racket, as opposed to marching on mansions with a view to burning them down.
The bold 300 were ordered ‘up the line’, which is here applied as a military term as this was well in advance of the creation of the Glasgow Underground…they marched ‘up the line’ to the old bridge at Kelvinbridge.
There were no rioters in sight.
In spite of the heat, parties in full dress uniform were sent to scour the countryside.
A bayonet was snapped in pursuit of a threatening dog, but no other contact was made with the ‘hostiles’.
It seems that the Volunteer Cavalry, and Cavalry exist to give tone  to what would otherwise be a mere vulgar brawl, had already dispersed the rioters, after they had rioted along through Garscube and burned the Parish Records in Old Kilpatrick.
The Glasgow Volunteers, disbanded after the Peace of Amiens in 1802 and then called back to the colours again, included the Fifth or Grocer's Battalion , the Canal Volunteers, and the Royal Glasgow Volunteer Horse of 60 men and, presumably, 60 horses.
There were over 5,000 in the Volunteers when they were at their greatest strength and although future years were to see Glasgow regiments of men who fought and died in many lands, the old Volunteers who fought a dog and lost, were soldiers too.
Unless, of course, they had actually ‘volunteered’, in which case they weren't real soldiers.
RATS HAVE NO RIGHTS 1820 A.D.
In the year 1820, 170 years of uprisings and reforms ago, usually law-abiding folk were driven by poverty, unemployment, and hunger, to take the dangerous road to conspiracy and rebellion in an attempt to right their wrongs.
The Industrial Revolution was gathering pace, and the new machines were throwing skilled men out of work.
The prolonged wars with France had geared everything towards the production of material for the army and navy, and that was no longer required.
The ranks of the discontented were also swelled by returning soldiers who found things less rosy than they had hoped.
Unrest was aggravated by an outdated and corrupt parliamentary system.
This was post-Napoleonic Scotland, the age of Count von Metternich, and the re-birth of the ‘old order’.
Repression, Government spies and agents provocateur were the order of the day.
Remembering the bloody tide of revolution in France, paid informers and Government agents lured leading revolutionaries into a trap at Bonnymuir that was to end in transportation for life to the antipodes…
Australia.
It also led directly to the headsman ‘s axe for Andrew Hardie of Glasgow and John Baird of Condoratt in the Parish of Cumbernauld.
Poverty and starvation were no excuse.
Rats in their thousands fed on the grain in the Government stores while the people went hungry.
Those who could survived.
Unlike the rats they had the right to trial and execution if found guilty, but then…rats have no rights.
THE ‘Mason's Arms’ in Cumbernauld Village was unusually crowded.
‘Can I serve ye mister?
Come in if ye will, or half that wet will come in alang wi' ye?‘
The stranger closed the door and elbowed his way past the landlord.
‘I'll have some salt beef and a bottle of brandy.
Over there!’
He nodded towards the far corner, an island of space miraculously untouched by the tide of bodies crammed into the main room of the inn.
‘Aye weel,’ the landlord struggled after him, scrubbing his hands up and down on his apron.
‘Don't mind the crowd, sir, thank'ee.
It's all this talk of er…troubles…’
‘I can do without that,’ replied the stranger brusquely, squeezing his bulk into the corner.
‘Just the brandy and beef will do for now.
Here.’
A silver coin rang tunefully on the scored wood of the little table.
‘Right away sir,’ replied the landlord with alacrity.
He had seen the colour of the money and was already halfway across the room, parting the throng like the Spanish Armada.
When he returned the stranger was rocking back and forwards on his chair, his heels on the edge of the table.
He regarded the approaching host darkly from beneath bushy eyebrows.
‘About time,’ he grumbled.
‘I've walked from Glasgow since noon.‘
‘Oh aye?’ replied the landlord, avoiding his gaze.
‘Ken most of the folk hereabouts?’ demanded the customer, uncorking the bottle with his teeth and filling the grubby glass that had been set in front of him.
‘I might,’ replied the innkeeper suspiciously.
‘Or I might not.
Cumbernauld's no' as big as Glasgow.’
The stranger seemed to nod.
Tearing a piece of beef off the cut with his fingers he popped it in his mouth and swallowed greedily.
‘Thought you might have seen some friends of mine,’ he continued with his mouth full.
‘One's a Condorrat lad.
John  Baird.
Said I'd meet him here.’
He stopped in mid-chew and stared the landlord in the eye.
‘Never heard of him,’ The innkeeper made a show of wiping the table.
‘Naw…’ he edged back into the crowd, turned, and before the stranger could call after him, a voice spoke, close to his ear.
‘Just keep yer heid, son, and this'll no' go aff…’ it rasped.
The stranger half-turned, but a warning pain in his ribs held him still.
‘Looking for Baird, ur ye?’ sneered the voice.
It had an unpleasant, oily quality to it.
‘Weel.
If he kens you too, then it will be a re-union, if not…’ he made a clicking sound with his tongue.
‘What do you mean…?’
‘I mean stand up slowly and make yer way to the back shop and we can all have a wee chat.
No trouble now.
Thaa…at's it…
We're off to join the Provisional Government…in Botany Bay, eh?’ the voice behind him laughed dryly.
‘Is that no' right…
MISTER HARDIE!’
THE TIP-TOE TOILERS 1830 A.D.
New Lanark is beautiful.
When New Lanark was a unique industrial settlement, with over 2, 000 workers, the weaving-mills of David Dale and his son-in-law Robert Owen, the community was revolutionary in character, with a school, a ‘company store’, and a works' canteen, the first in the world.
David Dale had been worried by the anarchistic stirrings in France and Europe and was anxious to provide a working environment that would satisfy and care for his work force, as well as increase production.
According to the poet laureate Robert Southey, Owen called his workers ‘human machines’ and delighted to demonstrate that he was able to make his workers happy at any time.
For all that, New Lanark was a semi-socialist and humanitarian experiment in the midst of universal industrial barbarism.
Vast masses of people were subject to conditions that would barely have been tolerated in the Dark Ages.
Entire families, forced off the land and driven to the cities, found themselves tied to a treadmill of existence that involved the entire family working, quite literally, night and day.
There was no concept of industrial safety, no minimum wage, no law against child labour.
It was slavery in all but name, and names meant little to those who had to endure it.
New Lanark was the exception, but in the mines and mills of the west of Scotland, there was only one law and one policy….
MARY and her brothers were asleep in their bed.
‘Mammy!
’ Mary uttered as she stirred in her sleep, scraping the back of her elder brother's leg with an uncut toenail.
‘Ya wee devil,’ cried her brother as he punched his brother in the small of the back, received a savage kick for the injustice, accompanied by cries of ‘It wisny me’from both ends of the bed.
Before long the coffin-like space of the box bed was a threshing mass of children of all sizes pulling, biting, scratching.
After a few minutes the noise began to subside.
Exhaustion triumphed over hurt pride and other parts of the anatomy.
A further five minutes saw the entire family asleep again, the battle in the bed forgotten, a violent expression of servitude to the Cotton Masters.
Their mother, pale as the highland moon that she had known as a child, slept like a ghost embroidered on smoke.
Her husband was nowhere to be seen.
Without warning the air was split by a high pitched banshee wail, rising and falling on a sliding scale of pain that would have made the slates fall off the roof if there had been any.
Another day of dreadful toil had come to the industrial ghettos of early Victorian Glasgow, a world often forgotten and ignored, a world echoed throughout Britain where families lived and died bounded by a few streets, walled from the world of green and life by an invisible fence, a dead hand that bound them in chains of language, and rags, and marked them for life more surely than any thief was ever branded at Glasgow Cross.
The street was black as night which was not surprising .
The sun would not rise for five hours yet.
It was November and the white rime of frost formed a dim halo at the feet of those fortunate enough to have clogs.
The street was full of people.
A dark mass trudged towards the entrance to the mill, lit by two lanterns.
The grey folk were funnelled inside.
The gates shut with a ‘clang’ and the evil wailing ceased.
Mary stood on tip-toe and plucked dry cotton dreff from among the spinning wheels.
On either side as far as the eye could see, long lines of children, dwarfed by the  adults stooped over the restless machinery, reached or crawled, snatched or darted, in and out of the network of rattling belts and hissing pipes, playing a constant game with death.
She felt her eyelids dropping and woke just in time to feel her hand being tugged towards the throbbing drums.
Wheels spun, and spread, and crushed, and flattened, and the calico, bright with blue and pink flowers, rushed down the endless miles to dress the market place of the world…
Blue was popular that year.
DEAN PLACE 1846 A.D.
There were never any metal gods or iron horses in Glasgow.
As soon as steam trains were invented, up and running, they became the tools of the industrialist and of the punter on holiday, noisy, smelly, usually late, and the last word in ways to go down the coast.
The canal system felt the pinch.
It had been possible to board a steamer for Norway at Port Dundas.
The overnight sleeper to Edinburgh, popular with honeymoon couples, was a sedate and leisurely way to travel.
Attempts to prove that canals were safer than railways, and, ‘a man could not live at speeds greater than 30 miles an hour’, were doomed to failure.
The new railway companies like the ‘Glasgow to Garnkirk’ were already beginning to spread a web of track and sleepers from the city to the mines and forges, beaches and bathing huts of the West.
OLDER than canals and trains, the stagecoaches still plied the virtually nonexistent roads.
One gentleman who braved the bumps and pitfalls of the post-coach from England in 1846 was Thomas de Quincey, the son of a Manchester merchant.
He rattled into Glasgow one fine afternoon with his books and manuscripts, pipes, packages, and his precious hoard of opium.
What to the Russians is a ‘dacha’ and to the Scots is a ‘but and ben’used to be found in fair numbers along the east end of Cathedral Street…’summer quarters’they were called.
Like the legendary Atlantis, the street pattern of the 1840s has become completely submerged by a whole new ball game, several primary schools, and a generous sprinkling of inner-city whin and bashed saplings.
In the days of de Quincey, the Royal Infirmary end of Cathedral Street, near where the Blackies and the Collins bible empires thrived, was a warren of gardens and lanes…
Love Loan, Angel Close, North Portland Street by the Common Gardens, Cherub's Wynd, and passing Balmano Street where Doctor David Livingstone and ‘Paraffin’ Young shared digs, Dean Place, where de Quincey, the author and rambler, studied and ate the dreamflower up a close.
Thomas de Quincey rented a single room from a long-suffering lady called Mrs Isa Tosh.
He lived in the top attic right, up against the east end gable of the building.
He must have had as fine a view of the burgeoning industry of Glasgow, as he had of the stars when he peered up at the heavens from the University Observatory at Dowanhill.
Sitting in his gambrel shack on the skyline, brains fairly addled with hallucinogenic drugs, de Quincey was left very much to his own devices by the good Mistress Tosh.
Among the dream visions that came to the strange visitor to the Clydeside were ‘The Spanish Military Nun’, ‘The Revolt of the Tartars’, and ‘On the knocking at the gate in Macbeth ’.
De Quincey was more or less in hiding from Edinburgh people to whom he owed large sums of money, so Glasgow, a thriving and blackening metropolis of 365, 000 souls, was the ideal place in which to eat your opium and keep your head down.
A FISH, A GIANT, A BLACKSMITH, AND TWO GODS 1856 A.D.
There were Dram-Divans and Music Saloons, the Hairy Man of Java, kilted magicians and panoramic views of Volcanic Eruptions and Satan ‘s Revolting Army.
As well as the mixed delights of the Glasgow Fair and a wee burst of the cholera mixed in with bread riots, the 1850s saw giant strides in the techniques of battleship-building, and the amount of noise that could be generated in the interests of progress.
WHEN Robert Napier bought four acres of Carntyne and added it to his Parkhead Forge, it was to create something that would become a cross between Hell and Armageddon for the thousands who worked there.
Napier also employed about 15,000 men in the Vulcan Forge between Washington Street and McAlpine Street, and extensive construction yards at Govan, but Parkhead Forge was to be a tumult of fire and heat for 100 years.
It lit up the night sky above the East End of Glasgow like a burning city that was never consumed, every night flaring up again and again with a distant tumult of mountains of slag and iron, drinking the cold air and casting their baleful glow on the clouds that spread over the Valley of Pandemonium.
Four mighty steam-hammers pounded iron at Parkhead — Chromis, Cyclops, Tubal, and Vulcan, served by a gigantic crane called Hercules.
Tubal and Vulcan laboured to make the four-and-a-half inch thick steel plates for the Royal Navy's first all-iron warships, HMS Terror and HMS Erebus .
Even after this, there was one wooden warship built, but with the metal Warrior of 1860, the days of the wooden walls of England, and Scotland, were numbered.
The iron-clad Monitor and Merrimack hammered away at each other in the American Civil War.
There were also the ‘Popoffkas’, two circular Russian battleships that weighed 2,490 tons and went precisely nowhere.
It was impossible to know which direction they were going in.
The age of modern naval warfare was at hand.
At the heart of the universe there was fire.
The universe had been enclosed with wood, but there hadn't been enough to go round, and through the gaps nothingness waited, strips of bottomless black stuck on the rosy sky.
‘Gonny wipe ma' eyes, Jim?’
Alec stood his ground and hauled on the heavy chain.
Forty tons of Hell bubbled overhead as the dark crucible dipped slowly towards the pit.
Jim reached across and wiped his mate's forehead with an oily rag.
Immediately Alec's eyes filled with sweat again and he strained to hold the delicate balance of the bucket of fire as it moved lower and closer to the shape carved out of the ground.
Jim took up the slack on his own chain and four others, like the Casting-Master almost naked except for a blackened leather apron and tight-fitting skull cap, pulled and cursed the liquid iron on its descent to the earth.
‘Easy now,’ Alec shouted.
‘Left draggers tight up!
Loosen a bit left draggers…
JUST A BIT!
CHRIST!’
They all held their breath in the stifling heat.
Tons of liquid yellow-white metal tilted slightly, directly above their heads.
A solitary star plummeted downward to bury itself in the sand beside Alec's foot.
He bit his lip but stood his ground.
‘Easy…
Easy…’
Creaking and swaying ominously, the crucible moved  away from them inch by painful inch.
‘Ready for yer tilt now!’ he called out, his voice echoing round the vast wooden space.
‘Tilt her down…
SLOW…’
A tremor ran through the earth beneath their feet.
Balancing 40 tons of liquid metal above your head would be enough for anyone.
Add a small local earthquake and most men would have given up the ghost.
But this was work.
Alec MacLean was an earner, and a good one.
Dancing on the edge of a volcano was an everyday challenge for the men of Parkhead Forge.
‘That's Tubal,’ someone called out, gritting his teeth.
The earth shook again.
‘Therr's Vulcan noo!’
Jim leaned back in a tug-of-war with the long iron chain.
His palms were red with sweat and friction.
‘I don't care if Satan's got his teeth in your bum!
’ Alec shouted.
‘TILT WIR IRON…!’
Each man tightened his grip or loosened it, pygmies struggling to coax a reluctant giant into a narrow cage.
The crucible tipped and a trickle of white became a torrent of splashing red and burning fire, and the mould filled with liquid metal.
‘Easy now,’ Alec was more relaxed as the last of the metal dropped into the sand.
The earth shook again as two mighty hammers pounded cooling plates of iron.
The pit in the sand, now filled with burning liquid, was forming a scum of slag.
Several men reached forward with long-handled rakes to clear the surface.
‘That's that.’
Alec scratched the singed hairs on his forearm.
‘I hope there's something good for my tea.’
‘Are ye not for a wee something after?’ queried Jim, taking his apron off.
‘We'll be away any minute now.’
‘Naw, naw,’ Alec steadied himself as the ground shook again.
‘You know what herself is like.
If I'm late I'll get a right hammering.’
MACARTHUR'S GUARD 1861–1865 A.D.
America was the place.
It still is, but back in 1861, 129 years of black-eye peas and porridge ago, the United States was faced with a terrible conflict.
The American Civil War, the first ‘modern’ war with ultimately more than a million men under arms, divided families and friends as much as it split a great nation in two.
The war cast long shadows across the Atlantic.
Glasgow had close ties of blood and interest with the Southern States of the Confederacy.
Reconditioned Royal Navy ships were turned into Confederate blockade runners by Clydeside arms dealers.
Raiders like the Savannah,most feared of the Southern privateers, were secretly handed over to the Confederates in the Azores, by a merchant class who had helped finance and develop the southern plantations and economy.
Of 8,855 miles of five-foot gauge railroad laid across the Southern States, most had been engineered by Scots.
ABRAHAM Lincoln, advised by a Pastor who used to take care of St Enoch's Church in Glasgow, sent out a call for volunteers two days after Confederate guns fired on Fort Sumter, the Union Garrison in the harbour of Charleston, South Carolina.
Among the first to respond to the new President's call for 75,000 men was John MacArthur, born in Elderslie in Renfrewshire, and Commander of the Highland Guard of Chicago.
Chicago had been founded by John MacKenzie, a Canadian who lived from 1763–1823.
By 1850 there were nearly 5,000 Scots in Illinois.
MacArthur's guard was a formidable force.
General ‘Little Mac’ McLellan sat back on his horse and looked up at the sky.
It was a golden autumn in the hills about Antietam Creek.
President Lincoln had his victory and 11,500 Northern soldiers and over 9,000 Southerners lay dead.
General Robert E. Lee had almost won the day but had retreated to Virginia in spite of a final attack by the last of his reserves under General Hill.
A few days later, on 22 September, President Lincoln would announce the Preliminary Emancipation of Slaves.
It had all hinged on one of MacArthur's Guard finding three cigars.
The air was full of falling leaves — red, gold, some reduced to a filigree of veins like a sketch of a leaf drawn in the misty air.
The river was carpeted with them, turning and dipping in the fast-flowing waters as they swept towards the Chickamaw Weir and Sharpsburg Corners.
General Lee had entered Maryland with 50,000 men, but the Brigade that was skirmishing its way towards Harper's Ferry had left nothing behind but blackened camp-fires and crushed grasses, while the advance line of MacArthur's Guard moved warily upstream in the late evening in pursuit .
‘That's a day old.’
Trooper Kean kicked at the ashes of the camp site and hunkered down beside the bushes.
‘If that,’ replied Tom Wilson, sniffing the air.
‘Where's the Naragansett?’
He looked about him nervously.
‘Tracker's gone up the line.
Orders.’
Jim Kean stood up stiffly.
‘This damp gets ye.
Wonder where the Rebs are?’
‘Wee Mac knows, but he's no' tellin'.
MacArthur's waiting for word and then we'll be on our way, don't you fret yourself, Jim, son.’
‘Here.
What's this?…
A smoke!
’ Jim Kean stooped and picked up something  from beside the ash-cold camp fire.
‘Ceegar!
Smoke these later when we can mak' a light.’
He took the paper wrapped round the three precious cigars and threw it away.
‘Reb's gettin' careless or in a hurry.
Could be a good sign, that.’
‘Wait a minute, will ye?’
Tom Kean strode across the clearing and picked up the discarded paper.
‘We can't light anything the now,’ urged Jim.
‘MacArthur'll flay us.
Field punishment No 1 the very least.’
Rifle in one hand, Tom flattened the crumpled paper against his knee and frowned.
‘Don't be daft,’ he said.
‘I'm not going to set fire to it.
I'm…’ his frown deepened as he read the crabbed hand scrawled across the paper.
‘Here!’ he exclaimed with growing excitement.
‘Do you know what this is…?’
‘If I had a magnifying glass screwed intae ma heid I might,’ his friend replied scornfully.
‘You tell me, or is this a guessing game?’
‘This…’ said Tom Kean carefully, reading the paper again to convince his brain as well as his eyes,’— is General Robert E. Lee's orders to his Commanders for the battle…we've found their plan of action wrapped round three cigars.’
‘We'd better take it back to Brigade,’ said Jim, turning.
‘You keep the paper, I'll haud on to the cigars.’
THERE'S NO ONE IN FOREVER 1862 A.D.
In the opening decades of the 19th century Glasgow woke up and found that it was no longer an ancient market place reached by tree-lined avenues.
Foundries and mines, factories and tenements were spreading outwards from the old heart of the town, and an ever-present pall of smoke and soot hung in the air over the river.
By the mid-19th century the Machine Age had arrived with a vengeance, which was only fitting, since that Age had itself begun in the west of Scotland.
STARK horror inhabited the closes and wynds of the overcrowded metropolis.
An investigator of the time, identified only as ‘Shadow’, reports, ‘I visited a low shebeen, not 200 yards from Central Station.
Inside there were a dozen poor people.
But for one or two better clad of the group, the place might truthfully be designated a shopful of rags.
One young man is leaning back upon a seat, dead drunk.
In less than two minutes a wreck of a woman staggers, rather than walks towards the counter.
She presents a broken tea-cup to the landlord, who charges four pence for whisky.
Two other women lay upon the counter a pickle-bottle and a glass vessel of a kind which altogether defies description.
Both are partially filled with whisky and the victims leave.’
Crime and passion were not the prerogatives of the poor.
As well as dens and thieves' kitchens like the Bush and Tontine Closes, polite society had its problems also.
Sandyford place was fairly polite.
Constable Campbell, lately arrived from Keppoch near Oban, and youngest of the ‘B’ Division force, was already running over the evening's instructions in his mind when he left the temporary barracks, a Methodist Chapel, and set out to patrol his beat.
He had been asked specifically to look out for prostitutes in the back lanes near Sandyford Place.
Complaints had been received from local residents that their wash-houses were being abused, and he expected that by the end of his beat at 6 a.m. he would be busy enough.
He patted his side pocket.
The letter to his father, a ploughman, was still there.
He would try and remember to post it in the Sandyford Toll Receiving House on the way back, if nothing else intervened.
He plodded up the street.
All was quiet.
It was July and still light, but most of the better-off inhabitants of this end of Sauchiehall Street were away for the summer.
They would have houses or lodgings down the coast, and the families would decamp to Largs or Argyll until the weather broke.
Occasionally, the head of the house would commute up and down the river by paddle steamer during the week, visiting the Stock Exchange and attending to business, but apart from those few and the servants, the street was deserted.
Colin Campbell strode through the lengthening shadows, pausing now and then to try a door handle before moving on.
A caricature of a dog was sitting on the lawn in front of one of the town houses as he passed, and it laid its head on its paws and looked at him with dark eyes.
‘All away, laddie?’
Constable Campbell asked.
The dog watched the retreating policeman's back philosophically and closed one eye.
Constable Campbell rounded the corner into Sandyford Place about quarter to nine.
It was Saturday, and the long street was still, empty as only Glasgow can be during the summer, a stage set patrolled by a solitary policeman.
Something very like a shriek, hastily cut off, sounded in a basement, but Colin Campbell, looking back to see if the dog was following, heard nothing.
He stopped at No 18 and tried the handle.
All was secure.
The door of No 17 opened and he half-turned.
Two women came out, obviously servants.
They took no notice of him and stood on the front step, talking in low voices.
One was a stout, red-faced woman with a straw bonnet and blue ribbons.
The other, a maid or tweeny in No 17, had thin, wispy dark hair, and a white apron.
That was the night that Jessie McPherson was chopped into little pieces by a meat-cleaver.
The Flemings were all on holiday except, that is, for old Mr Fleming.
When his son came back on Monday he found his old father resting in bed.
Everything in the house was neat and tidy, and the kitchen was spotless, but there was no reply from Jessie McPherson.
When they broke down the door the remains of her body were found scattered over the floor.
This was the first case investigated by the Glasgow Police as opposed to the Procurator Fiscal acting together with Sherriff'sofficers, and they were determined to get a conviction.
The Constable could identify neither of the two women he saw in the doorway of No 17.
The lack of evidence and the circumstantial nature of the testimony caused a public outcry.
Jessie McLachlan, a friend of the murdered woman, was almost certainly innocent.
She claimed she and the murdered girl had been drinking with the old man, and that he had killed her friend, but the old man was acquitted and McLachlan was sentenced to hang.
She was reprieved, and served 20 years in Perth Prison.
Even in areas with more than 500 people to the acre, murder remained an uncommon crime in Glasgow, as it does today.
The celebrated cases make the point that in spite of its ill-deserved reputation, Glasgow is actually more peaceful than a lot of other places I could think of…unless, of course, you were an innocent wee serving lassie in 1862.
IF A MAN ANSWERS 1876–83 A.D.
The telephone has been ringing in Glasgow for over 100 years.
It's about time somebody answered it!
It was Scotsman Alexander Graham Bell who first gave meaning to the expression ‘If ye want me thungummy, ring me.’
Bell had been a teacher of the deaf, but one day, while he and his assistant Thomas Watson were trying to adjust a fault in Bell's new ‘musical telegraph’, he heard a ‘twang’ coming from the receiver.
Bell began to experiment, and within a year, on 10 March 1876, Watson heard the first words ever spoken on the newly invented telephone, ‘Come here Watson, I want you.
‘It is said that Watson replied, ‘Is that you Mr Bell?’ but since there was only one telephone in the whole of God's creation at the time, Bell ‘s reply to HIM is not hard to guess at.
In 1878 Bell travelled to Scotland and London on his honeymoon, taking the opportunity to present a pair of ivory telephones to Queen Victoria.
1879 saw Glasgow's first telephone exchange, the Douglas, named after Douglas Street.
Within living memory, like mine for instance, it was possible to dial numbers beginning D.O.U….
The ‘Douglas’ was installed for the use of doctors, and was closely followed by subscriber exchanges for other businesses like the Iron Consortium, otherwise known as the ‘Iron Ring’.
Within a few years over 800 exchange lines and 300 private lines were in use operating from the new headquarters of the amalgamated telephone companies, the National Telephone Company Headquarters at 13 Royal Exchange Square.
Bells were rung at either end of a conversation to signal the beginning and end of the call.
Exchanges were even open on a Sunday!
There was a lot of bell-ringing at the time, but then, 1883 was the year of the Dynamitards and the Daphne disaster.
THERE was a blue-red-chrome yellow-pink light in the long hallway, outlined with a sharp glare, where the sun caught the bevelled glass surrounding the stained-glass panel in the doorway.
Severe oak, polished to within an inch of its late-lamented life, lined the walls to the door of the morning room.
An umbrella stand conversation piece, largely fashioned from the remains of some unfortunate denizen of the rainforest in imperial Ilorin, but lately conquered somewhere north of Lagos, was dappled in a garish replica of its native twilight.
A picture of Mrs MacKenzie's brother George in the uniform of an Assistant District Commissioner, hung square and true above the aspidistra in the copper pot.
Further down the hall where the colours of a middle-class afternoon could not reach, a strange box of wood with cloth-covered wires, clung to the wall like an intruder from tomorrow's mail-order catalogue, stark, mechanical, and not at all decorative.
The peace of the terrace and the quiet of the afternoon, shaded by the elm trees opposite the Western Cathedral, was shattered by a tinny ringing sound.
It continued intermittently, shattering the peace of the hallway as the dust motes drifted past in the beams of coloured light.
For a long minute nothing happened.
Suddenly the sound of running feet could be heard approaching from the depths.
The door at the end of the hallway was wrenched open with a ‘crash’ and Delphinia MacKenzie, her hands white with flour, pounded down the carpet with as much grace and haste as her station in life and her stays would allow.
‘Oh bother!’ she allowed herself a wee expletive and reached for the telephone daintily with whitened fingers.
Cook had the afternoon off and she had been coming to grips with her occasional souffle, when the ‘monster’ had started its cacophony.
‘Hello?’ she asked, holding the wooden earpiece as close as she could without upsetting her hair.
‘Hello?’
‘Hello subscriber?’ said a disembodied male voice.
‘I have a Mr Dougal for you.’
‘Oh, er…yes,’ said Delphinia, glancing at her reflection in the mirror.
She was in no fit state to receive a call from a gentleman.
‘Very well,’ she added nervously.
‘Hello?’
She looked at the earpiece and blew some flour off the metal diaphragm.
‘Yes?’ she asked.
‘Who is it?’
‘Delphinia?
This is George.
George Dougal.
Is John in at this hour?
It is most urgent that I speak to him.’
‘No…er George, Mr Dougal.
Is he not at business?’
‘Why no…is he not at home?’
‘Er no, should he be?
Perhaps he is at his club.’
A dry laugh echoed down the wire from Buchanan Street.
‘No gentleman is ever at his club to answer a telephone call.’
The voice became grave.
‘I must contact him.
Must speak with him.
There has been a terrible disaster.’
‘Not another one?’ said Delphinia.
‘I am afraid I don't understand,’ George Dougal sounded puzzled.
‘Mr Dougal,’ continued Delphinia patiently.
‘This telephone has rung four times in this house since it was installed in January, and the first call brought us news of the Glasgow Ribbon Society, the Fenian Dynamitards destroying the Tradeston gas-works in which my poor husband has substantial interests.
The other two calls were from my mother.
Pray, what is the ‘disaster’ that you speak of?’
‘Our new steamer at Linthouse…the launching your husband sent me to…the Daphne !’
‘Well?’
‘It has capsized.
I fear 200 working men are drowned in the Clyde.’
The earpiece fell from Delphinia's hands and she stared into space.
‘Hello…hello.
Please ring your bell if you have finished your conversation…’ the operator's voice cut in.
She picked up the earpiece.
‘Mr Dougal.
Are you still there?’
‘Yes.’
‘I'll tell my husband the moment he arrives home from…the moment he arrives home.
Where shall I tell him to contact you?’
‘I'll wait by the telephone,’ came the crackling reply.
‘There may be more news.
I'll ring immediately there is.’
‘More news…?’
Delphinia stared at the mirror blankly.
‘Perhaps you should write.‘
LAST OF THE RAT-TAIL BURNERS 1877 A.D.
The dark nights of Glasgow became a ‘laze of gas-lit glory’ after the Glasgow Gas Company was formed in 1817.
On 5 September 1818, James Hamilton, grocer extraordinaire and showman by nature gave the first public commercial showing of the new ‘light-brackets’ by installing ‘sex jetties’, or six of the ‘wee lights ‘, as we might say today.
This led to an invasion of courting couples in his doorway, looking at the wonderments of the bright peep, and the Trongate being described as ‘among the best-lit streets in Europe’.
The old Theatre Royal in Dunlop Street soon followed, and it seemed that a new age had been ushered in as the gas light glinted on the crystal chandeliers and the illuminati of Glasgow clustered like moths about a bundle of bunsen-burners.
The old Corporation bought out the two private gas companies in 1869, and by 1877 vast strides in the world of Glasgow by gas-light resulted in the universal installation of Siemen's regenerative lamps and Sugg's argand lamps.
Electric street lamps were still eight years away in the future, in 1894, and 1,000 years away from the old pre-Suggs rat-tail burners and the ‘Rat-Tail’ men who lit them.
A DROP of ink drifting downwards in a glass of clear water, night darkened the cup of the valley.
Old Betsy blew on the crinkled taper and it burst into flame.
Sheltering it with a hand the colour of yellow smoke, she shuffled across to the table by the far wall and lit the candle.
Shadows fled into every corner of the poky little room as the flame flickered, shrank, a knife of burning air in the damp room.
‘That's yer tea out John!’
She turned towards the dim glow of the fire in the grate.
‘John!
Ye'll need to get out to your work!’
The figure curled up in the chair by the fire, stirred and yawned toothlessly.
‘Is it that…time already.’
His jaw cracked as he gave another cavernous yawn.
‘I jist dropped aff!’
‘You've been snorin' in that chair all efternoon, John Williamson,’ his wife said, lifting the old coat off his knees.
‘Me snore?’ he said incredulously, standing up and stretching.
The cold pipe fell off his knee.
’ I'll be needin' mair shag and all,’he bent and picked up the clay stump and peered into the empty bowl sadly.
‘And the shoppie'll be shut now.’
‘You'll get a fill off Grantie when ye meet him on yer rounds,’ his wife pulled the chair back from the bare table.
‘Now come and get yer food.
You've a night's walkin' ahead of ye and there's a fair bite in the air.’
‘All right, all right ,’ John Williamson grumbled as he made his way to the table and sat down.
‘That's a good bit of herrin',’ he said appreciatively, looking closely at his plate.
‘Better than your eyesight,’ said the old woman, standing next to him and looking at the grey in his hair.
‘It's as well seein' it's your last night at the leery work.’
John said nothing.
He broke off a piece of bread, took a sip of beer, and attacked the herring with a knife and spoon.
‘Bit salty,’ he mumbled, chewing with difficulty.
‘It'll dae, though.
Seem to have lost my appetite.’
‘You'll have plenty of time to get your appetite back after the night,’ said his  wife.
‘Come on now, ye've never been late in 30 year at the lightin'.
C'mon now, John.’
He pushed the plate back and squinted up at her.
‘You are in a fair hurry to get rid of me?
The bidey-in waiting in the close, eh?’ he grinned.
‘Get on with ye John Williamson.
I'll ‘bidey-in’ ye.
There's the Tolbooth clock at eight.
I'll keep the fire at a glow for ye comin' in.’
‘Well, last night then,’ he stood up.
‘That's me, last of the Rat-Tail men.’
‘Well, ye said yourself that thae new Suggs Lamps don't need a mannie with a tinder pole.’
‘Aye, there'll be new leeries, younger wans with gas sticks to licht the elements.
Just as well it's not me.
I don't trust these modern lichts.
I'm glad I'm the last wan…’
‘I'll be glad when you're back.
You'll be late…’
She heard him picking his way carefully down the spiral staircase at the back of the tenement and stood by the window, looking down into the street.
Faint starlight glimmered on the steep sloping rooftops, the milky way a net of luminosity beyond the black silhouetted chimneytops of the Bell o' the Brae.
Bobbing lanterns wove in and out of the goods trains in the College Rail Yard.
As a young man he had walked past the University to light his lamps, but the Old College had gone, removed to the rural splendour of Gilmorehill in the 1860s.
The High Street had been left to the pimps and the down-and-outs, and in the ancient College grounds where once the Black Friars had taught and studied in a universe made of crystal spheres, there was only the clang and clatter of brake couplings and buffers.
The Collegium had surrendered to the night-shift.
After a few minutes a little flame blossomed at the far corner.
It was followed by another and another.
The last of the Rat-Tail men walked on down the High Street towards the Cross, stars his calling-cards.
THE DYNAMO KINGDOM 1888 A.D.
In the 1880s Glasgow's Victorian prosperity was approaching its peak, and the noon-tide of Empire was to witness the arrival of electricity, the cable subway and the electric trams, photography, St Andrew's halls, the Great Exhibition of 1888, 1901, and on into the new century, hospitals, bridges, effort and endeavour.
These were the days of the Second City.
A scant 100 years before there had been none of these things, and the world was powered by horses and lit by candles.
Glasgow was for long suspicious of ‘the electricity’, and St Enoch's Station and the General Post Office remained the sole public buildings lit by the new method until the 1890s.
At last, the Corporation bought the Mavor and Coulson works, and a new power station was built in Waterloo Street.
The day of the great switch-on was 25 February 1893.
There were 18 miles of electric cables and 13 dynamos at the 1888 exhibition, but the star use of the ‘new force of the new age’ was the Fairy Fountain, lit by ‘Electric Rays’from 18 arc lights shining through cells of coloured glass, and using a quarter of a million candlepower.
SADIE watched the two workmen hammering at the brass plates.
‘Are you glad we came, Agnes?’ she asked her friend who was standing back a little from the craftsmen as they worked.
‘Oh…yes,’ Agnes gripped the brim of her straw hat nervously.
‘It's marvellous, so it is.’
‘This is a real Indian Street,’ grinned Sadie expansively.
‘There's jewellery, sweetmeats, native pottery.’
‘Why is it in the dynamo shed?’ asked Agnes, nodding towards the humped giants glistening and spinning in the distance.
The air was full of the smell of ozone.
An occasional spark crackled along the cable strung from the iron beams.
‘Oh, is it?’ replied Sadie distractedly.
She held up a pair of earrings, a composite of Benares Brass and delicate enamel.
‘Is that not lovely?’ she asked.
‘Beautiful,’ Agnes snorted.
‘And just where would you wear them, Sadie Dale, eh?
Mr Crum would dismiss ye on the spot if you presented yourself at the warehouse wearing those…those…dancing girls’ things…probably send me packing as well if I was along with you.’
‘Oh but they are beautiful,’ Sadie replaced them on the tray with a look of longing.
The earring-maker paused at his work and smiled at them.
‘Oh come away,’ Agnes said, shocked.
‘Sa…dee…’
She tugged at Sadie's sleeve and they walked on down the long aisle of the hall.
‘There's surely other things to see except these decorations?’
‘Oh yes,’ said Sadie, opening her pamphlet.
‘There's a section for Women's Art and Industries, or we could see Royle's Self-Pouring Teapot.
The Engineering Place is a bit smelly,’ she giggled, ‘but there's galas on the Kelvin…with gondolas.’
Sadie was a good reader.
‘What's ‘Gondolas’?’ asked Agnes.
‘Member…there was that row in the Council.
One of the high-heid yins wanted to have 20 gondolas, but another councillor said they should only get a male and a female and breed them.’
‘Och…
I don't know anything about politics,’ Agnes pouted.
‘Lets get on and have a wee something to eat.
Not by the river though.’
‘Why ever not?
It's lovely.
The Groveries…’
‘They are calling it the ‘Seweries’.’
Sadie stopped, her hands on her hips.
‘Agnes Dooly, we have a whole day to enjoy ourselves.
We can see the whole world here, the Empire, that's the same thing as the whole world, and you'll profit by it.
Help ye in conversation with nice young clerks, and that.’
‘I'm hungry.’
‘Well we'll go to Lyon's Bishop's Palace Temperance Restaurant.
That's bonnie.
It says here the waitresses are all dressed as Mary Queen of Scots.’
‘She got her head chopped off,’ Agnes snorted.
‘Agnes Dooly…
I've a good mind to go to the Bodega Bar with ye…they sell alcoholic beverages.’
Agnes gripped her hat with both hands.
‘Sadie…you wouldn't!
Unaccompanied ladies don't…’
‘Well just you behave yourself then,’ said Sadie firmly.
‘We'll go on the switchback railway then.
That'll give you a reason to hold on to your hat.’
DON'T STEP ON THE RAIL 1898–1900 A.D.
There was never anything like the trams.
By 1894 Glasgow Town Council, the same august body that had fought at Flodden and given its trousers to the Bonnie Prince, changed its name and became ‘The Corporation of Glasgow’.
This was the name, together with that of James Dalrymple, emblazoned on the ‘caurs’ from 1902.
Dalrymple presided over the halcyon days of ‘c'moan or get aff’ until his  retiral  in 1926, and Dalrymple's days saw the expansion of the system to 100 miles of track and an annual profit, together with a yearly 300 MILLION passengers, not all on the one tram of course.
It all began on 13 April 1898 with 37 miles of the Corporation's very own tramway track and an extra four miles kindly leased by Govan.
The first service ran between Springburn and Mitchell Street, then Glasgow Cross on 23 January 1899, and Ovrenewton via Eglinton Street, Jamaica Street, Union Street, Renfield Street, and Sauchiehall Street, for the incredible electrifying cost of £32,610.
By 1903 there were 385 electrics in operations, 103 conversions, and 42 salt trailers.
A few years earlier it had been calculated that if the populations of modern cities continued to increase in the 20th century, so would the horse-traffic, and that by 1960 cities like New York, London, and Glasgow, would be 100 feet deep in horse manure.
By 1903 the spectre of that environmental disaster had vanished.
DIGGING her fingers into Agnes's padded shoulders and squirming a little, Sadie moaned, ‘My whalebones are killing me!’
Agnes looked up and down the street anxiously.
‘I'm black affronted , so I am.
What if somebody was tae come by?’
‘Huh!
Let them!’
Sadie was defiant.
‘Look at that!’
She lifted the hem of her skirt a little, which didn't take much doing since it was practically touching the ground.
A neat pointed toe and a tight row of buttons climbing her calf revealed themselves.
‘Scuffed!
I knew it!’
‘Sa…dee!
See you and yer whalebones and yer ankles!
Ankles can drive men mad ye know.’
Sadie looked at her scornfully.
‘Aye.
Maybe.
If I knew any.
Do you know any?’
‘Any what?’
‘Men!’
Sadie gave her friend a hearty ‘dunt’ with her linen handbag.
‘I don't know what ye mean,’ Agnes sniffed and stared up the street defiantly, ‘…and I don't want to know.’
‘What about Kenneth, then?’
Agnes looked at Sadie out of the corner of her eye without turning round.
‘Oh…him?
He's a nae-user.
He telt me he was to get promoted to Under-Presser in Gentlemen's Separates, but I canna see that happening.
He's nae sense of responsibility.
Now thon Davie Gregor…
HE'S got ‘Boyd's Separates’ written all over him, so he has.’
She nodded, agreeing with herself.
‘Ach, so has the Evening Times,’ said Sadie dryly.
‘Here's oor caur.’
The motor tram rattled down the road at a steady 15 miles an hour.
‘Oh God!
A Motor-School Car.
It's full of drivers learning no' tae stop.’
g
‘Oh, yer language!’
Agnes's plucked eyebrows shot up at an odd angle.
The tramcar thundered past.
Twenty trainee drivers, moustaches bristling, risked a backward glance at the two lovelies at the fare stage, before riveting their attention once more on the words of wisdom being spouted by the clean-shaven official in command of the steering handle.
’…and a cyclist must be allowed time to free himself from…’
The tram dwindled into the distance, scattering sparks on the pavement, and the street was quiet once more.
‘If I was a toff I'd have a watch,’ said Sadie glancing at a wrist that needed no additions.
‘We'll be late for the Tivoli, so we will!’
‘I hope it's good.
It's fourpence, and I've got to give my mammy my wages yet.’
Agnes peered inside the shapeless felt bag covered in black jet that styled itself a purse.
‘It's the best pit in Glasgow.’
Sadie extracted a well-thumbed programme.
‘Betty gave me this.
It's got aw'thing on it.
See!’
She began to read aloud.
Sadie was a good reader.
‘Monday 22 January 1900.
The Cast includes a Comedienne, Burles…
Burl…
Actress and Dancer, Miss Lottie Lunn, Madam…waselle…
Ra…fine and her Female Troupe of Performing…’
She paused.
‘Oh.
Sorry, that's just Performing Monkeys, no ‘female’ at all.
It's Arthur Farren that's the Female Impersonator…and there's…’
‘Here's the caur noo!’ said Agnes, interrupting her.
‘About time, and all.’
The open-topped Standard Tram, brass rails glistening and wooden blade-guard jutting out at the front, ready to usher the unready and the steamboats aside, clattered to a stop.
The girls prepared to clamber aboard.
‘Oh, wait!’ said Agnes, agitated.
‘Come on,’ Sadie pulled at her sleeve.
‘The conductor's waitin'.’
Agnes looked up at the young man and simpered.
‘That's the rain oan.
Will I get an electrical shoak of I put my fit oan the rail?’ she asked.
‘Not unless you put the other one on the overhead wire,’ said the conductor.
‘C'moan or get aff?
If it's no oan then it's aff!’ he added sagely, ringing the bell.
The girls went inside and the tram for Anderston thundered down the road into the 20th century.
GOAL! 1898 A.D.
Scotland v England, the REAL ‘old’ firm and the oldest international fixture in the world, was first played in 1872.
The People's Palace opened its doors and its Winter Gardens to a stupendous half a million visitors within the first five months.
Well-known painters of the day showed off scenes of Glasgow, and John Knox's ‘Trongate’ drew admiring crowds.
All that was a drop in the Clyde compared with the crowd at Celtic Park in April 1898, when 50,000 turned up to see THE game…and the rest!
THE road to Celtic Park was paved with punters.
Every Street in the Gallowgate and the Calton had become a parking place for horses, hansom cabs, buses that could well have been the ‘taxis of Waterloo' if Napoleon had been on our side, broughams with the seats held together by faith and carpet tacks, open coaches decorated with scraps of cloth and coloured paper, growling, fuming motor-cars…the invasion of the East End of Glasgow was total.
Trams like tins full of pilchards with brown bowler hats on, crept along Great Hamilton Street, or the Gallowgate behind the Victoria Biscuit Works.
Hordes on foot thronged the streets leading to the ‘Great Gemme’; Rowchester Street by the Tramways Depot, Henrietta Street at the Cattle Sheds opposite the cemetery yonder, Campbellfield Street by the Rag and Boot Factories.
The football crowd was at fever pitch.
An army of Glasgow's Finest, together with soldiers, manned barricades, specially erected iron fences, and wooden railings, funnelling the massive crowds towards the field of the Thistle and Rose.
There was to be no repetition of the disaster two years previously in 1896, when a crowd in excess of 60,000 had spilled on to the pitch.
It was the punters who remained in the stand that ‘persuaded’ the invaders to get off the field, by the simple expedient of throwing bottles and pies at them, beer-cans not yet having been invented.
The Roman Emperor Antonine, while he would have looked in vain for the wall he built across Scotland 2,000 years before, would have been quite at home in the vast amphitheatre of Celtic Park.
Red-coated, kilted soldiers ringed the pitch.
Trumpets sounded, press-men hoisted their notebooks and their Kodaks, and cinema newshounds began to crank the handles of their cameras.
The players ran on to the field and the roar was heard five miles away at Kelvin Park, where preparations were already in hand for another Great Exhibition to be held in 1901.
From the beginning, the match was a struggle for Scotland.
English wingers Bloomer, Spikesley, Wheldon and Smith drove a wedge in the Scots defence and England scored early.
By the second half Scotland was fighting for her life, and a missed tackle gave the opening that led to the home team's great goal.
Still fighting back, with Doyle tackling Athersmith, striking, and almost giving Scotland her second goal of the match, the final whistle went.
The score was Scotland l England 3.
The crowd went home quietly via the 300 pubs that were to be found in the East End of Glasgow in the good old days.
The general consensus was that the Scottish Selectors were at fault in putting up a team that couldn't beat half-decent third-raters.
At 3–1, 50,000 disgruntled punters melted away like snaw aff a dyke.
Those were the days.
SHAKE, RATTLE, AND CESSNOCK 1900 A.D.
Once under the Kelvin and twice under the Clyde, the making of the Glasgow Underground began in 1891 and involved two enormous explosions under the Clyde to open up twin 20-foot holes for the tunnels.
The grand opening was in the Christmas season of 1896 on 14 December.
Glasgow took to the subway with a will, but an unexpected flood of passengers and an accident that injured 19 people, closed the circles until January the following year, when the Glasgow Subway Railway Company began operations in earnest.
Almost 1,000 years after its beginnings, Glasgow approached the new century in a mood of careful optimism and vast industry.
Wealth, culture, and international adventure had turned a tiny collection of huts into a huge sandstone metropolis.
Like the sand under Argyle Street where the new subway ran down to the river, the fortunes of the future were already shifting.
No one knew it then, but the first shadows of a terrible war were gathering, hidden by the glory of an Empire that coloured one-fifth of the map of the planet Imperial Red.
DAVIE Gregor was a ‘masher’.
His thin, aristocratic face, fixed in a much-practised expression of confident disdain, crowned his gleaming white celluloid collar like a fresh pie on a paper doily.
Striped blazer with brass buttons, tennis ‘whites’, blue shoes with white spats, a pair of kid gloves held casually in his left hand, here was young, working-class Glasgow out on a spree.
It was la belle age , and elegant ironwork enclosed almost everything, even the stained-glass compartment dividers on the underground train bound for Cessnock and the mysterious ‘south side’.
He slipped his arm protectively round Agnes Dooley's shoulder as the carriage dipped and the leading compartment turned through almost a complete right angle.
The radius of the curve in the track was almost as narrow as his trousers.
‘Have ye had a nice day, darlin'?’ he asked.
‘Oh the best!
’ Agnes snuggled up to his manly breast-pocket.
‘The yellow ice-cream fudge, the fountains…everything.
It was like a dream, so it wis.’
He cleared his throat.
‘Are we going to be courtin' regular?’
His face donned a mask of decisive coolness and he twiddled the end of his moustache without letting go of his gloves.
‘Are we…dearest?’
Agnes blushed.
‘We've only known each other a year.’
‘One year and two months, to the very day,’ he said firmly.
‘I feel like…’ he paused, watching the tunnel walls racing by outside the window.
‘I feel like this is OOR subway, Agnes.
You're special.’
‘Oh Davie!
You're just saying that!’
‘We're under the Clyde now,’ he cast an intellectual eye at the roof of the carriage.
‘Just think of all those tons and tons of water over oor heads.
That's engineering, you know.
We can do anything these days.’
‘Oh…
Davie…’
Agnes's eyes shone.
Someone had left a copy of the evening paper beside him, and he picked it up and glanced at the headline.
‘Cape Colony and Natal…’ he muttered.
‘What was that darlin'?’ asked Agnes, showing an interest in his every word.
‘Cape where?’
‘This is great news!’
He looked at her, pointing excitedly at the paper.
‘See here, darlin'.
There's going to be a war with the Boers.
They must be daft to take on the British Empire.
Don't they know we canna lose?’
Agnes looked doubtful.
‘There's soldiers for that kind of thing, aren't there?’ she asked.
‘I heard about this today from auld Timmins, him that's the under-manager to Brackenridge in Soft Bric-a-brac and Genteel Furnishings.
He knows aboot current affairs.
There's men from the town wanting to join up all over, and there's enough for two serving companies frae Glasgow already.
What do you think of that Agnes?
Wouldn't it be fine?’
‘Where is it?’
Agnes was definitely worried.
‘Oh.
Africa.
It'll not affect the shops or the trams or nothin', so don't you worry my pet lamb…but wouldn't it be exciting?’
‘Davie.
You're not thinking of…of JOINING the army, are ye?’
‘I want you to be proud of me, Agnes.
Start oor life an’ the new century with me in uniform.
Grand, eh?
Start the way we mean to go on…’
REMEMBER TO PAY THE FERRYMAN 1902 A.D.
The first ferries across the Clyde in the early 19th century were large rowing boats, but after a tragic sinking, the first steam ferries were introduced by the Clyde Trust in 1865.
Within five years they were carrying over seven million passengers a year.
At Clyde Street alone paying punters pushed out the boat to the tune of 5,680 passengers every day.
The North Rotunda, now a first-class restaurant, and its sister dome on the south bank, were the termini of the Glasgow Harbour Tunnel.
This was operated by a series of huge lifts at either end, and horses, carts, and thousands of Glaswegians made the daily descent into the Stygian depths beneath the cold waters of the Clyde.
Elevating deck ferries, introduced in 1890, finally vanished from the river-crossing scene in 1966.
The Clutha River-Buses operated their 12-strong fleet on the run between Stockwell Street Bridge and Whiteinch, all for the standard charge of one penny.
The Cluthas could carry 360 passengers, and in the 60 years from the turn of the century the entire population of Glasgow must have moved back and forwards across the Clyde annually without ever getting its collective feet wet.
A FINE rain was falling, filling the air with insubstantial droplets of water that seemed to hang suspended in limbo above the cobbles.
The billposter attempting to paste the second of his ‘Cooper and Co's Teas’ posters on the hoarding watched the paper slowly curl back from the wall and drop on to the ground.
He lifted his collar philosophically, leaned against the hardier Theatre bills that he had stuck there the day before, and lit his pipe.
It was four o'clock and already getting dark.
A leerie walked past, lifted his long pole, and opened the glass panel at the front of the nearest gas lamp-post.
There was a soft ‘plop’ and the blue light welled out of the mantle as he closed the door, deftly trapping the light inside.
Shadows wavered backwards through the green railings and down on to the sunken slipway leading to the chain-ferry.
On the other side of the river opposite the outflow of the Kelvin, lamps were also being lit in the Pointhouse Inn, and the choppy river waters reflected the lights, struggling to shine in the damp, smoky air.
There was a subdued ‘clanging’ from Henderson's Shipyard at Meadowside to the left, and the passengers waiting for the ferry on the Govan side at Water Row, could see the glow of fires where the boilermakers were busy putting the finishing touches to the Anchor Line's new flagship, the Columbia .
A crowd of Glaswegians waited patiently for the ferry.
A scant quarter-mile away, but almost invisible from the Govan bank, the ferry was moving slowly out into midstream.
The chains took up the slack and emerged from the river, long dripping lines of rusty tension, bound to the circular ship with its two little funnels.
Gripping the chain with determination the ferry hauled itself bravely through the grey twilight.
At this hour on a winter's afternoon, before the works came out, the crowd was mixed.
Later it would be a solid mass of grey serge and flat caps, blue pipe-smoke mingling with the breath of 1,000 workers in the chill air.
Two women with shawls wrapped tightly about their ears and heads were deep in conversation, their low voices barely audible to themselves, let alone the other 30 or so damp travellers awaiting the arrival of the ghostly ferry.
Some mill-workers on a mid-shift and a group of men  crossing the river to look for work made up the rest of the throng, with the exception of a portly little man with a bowler hat, waistcoat and watch-chain, a foreman from one of the Govan yards on an errand for the Head Office.
The ferry drew close to the bank and the crowd surged forward.
The bill poster had moved on to dryer pastures and all the gas-lamps were now lit.
For 300 years part of the Minister's stipend in Govan was the first salmon drawn from the river each year, but this was 1902.
There would be no salmon, not this year.
THIN ICE IN SAUCHIEHALL STREET 1905 A.D.
Every ‘Toshie’ watcher, and there are many devotees of the great Charles Rennie Mackintosh from Hill Street to Hiroshima, knows that Glasgow was once thought of as the very acme of a Tokyo for tea-rooms.
Those were the days when what are now old-time good manners and fashions were the newest of the new, and Kate Cranston's wasp-waisted Mackintosh Tea-room, the Willow, was but a sapling in the street it was named after — Sauchiehall Street means the Street of the Willows.
Together with Buchanan Street and Argyle Street, they were as well, if not better, known as Regent and Bond Streets in the heyday of brown derbys and the Delhi  Durbah.
The expression, ‘Up Sauchie, doon Buchie, and alang Argyle’, which referred to nocturnal activities that ran parallel to the day-time ambience of these great Clydeside boulevards, might also have included Blythswood Square, once home of the infamous poisoner Madaleine Smith, and latterly, numerous other ladies with hearts of loose change and the instincts of a blushing tarantula.
SAUCHIEHALL Street was the place to be seen of a Friday or Saturday evening, and not only men but unaccompanied young ladies would stroll up and down in their finery, smoking in public.
There were plenty of eating places about the heart of the city.
There were chop-houses with fine cooked sirloins of beef, and lobsters, black as coal and swivelling their eyes on sinuous stalks, or still as Sunday and red all over.
Tubs of oysters from the sea-lochs vied with clams and other sea-food brought to what was, after all, one of the greatest ports of the Empire.
There was an American bar and a Bodega, resurrected from the Great Exhibitions.
Patrons could drink ‘American Style’, with an entire bottle of Bourbon to mark for themselves while nibbling on cinnamon bark, stuffed olives, pickled herring, cloves, or dry salt crackers.
Downstairs smoke-rooms sent the odour of fine Havana leaf up into the street to mingle with the scent of fresh-roasted coffee or the exhaust of an occasional motorcar.
Primarily, between the marble staircases of the Grosvenor and Waterloo Rooms of this world, there was life — rich, content, brash, and above all, utterly and completely confident that tomorrow would hold the same as today, if not a few ounces, inches, or a pickle-jar more for all concerned.
There had been an attempt at a revolution in Russia, but then nobody concerned themselves much with the eccentricities of the world south of Cathcart or east of Camlachie, unless it might touch on trade.
The Royal Navy stood between the sanctity of Saturday nights and the rest of the world.
‘It's Sadie, Sadie Blaine…with an ‘E’,’ she smiled shyly.
The band struck up another pastiche of Strauss and the tide of skaters waltzed round and round in a hypnotic swirl of hats and feathers.
‘Pleased to meet you,’ Bobby Coul held tightly on to her gloved hands, as much to stop himself from falling as anything else.
‘Good band, eh?
Hope you don't mind me asking you up.’
Sadie looked up at the tall boy coyly.
‘No.
No.
Not at all.
I like the skating.’
‘Come here a lot, do you?’
‘Oh, not very.
Once in a blue moon, in ectual fect.’
A few bools crept into her mooth.
‘Nice cless of people come doon here.’
She was lying.
She came to the Skating Palace in Sauchiehall Street nearly every Friday night, and certainly every Saturday.
Ever since her friend Agnes had married Kenneth Milligan from Drapery their paths had separated.
Agnes was expecting her second now and Kenneth, back from the wars was re-installed in the upper levels of the department store in Buchanan Street.
The pressures of wedded bliss excluded Sadie as effectively from the life of her former friend as if they had been on different continents.
Sadie was about to become 22.
She felt ‘on the shelf’ and a burden to her parents.
She had a good career behind the counter in Ladies' Separates, but no desire to become a spinster.
Her mother had said nothing to her, of course, but every glance, every cup of tea was full of unspoken reproach.
Sadie gripped her partner's hand tighter although there was no danger of her falling, not yet at any rate.
‘Where do ye work?’ she asked casually, making the question sound as disinterested as a comment about the weather or the conductor's handkerchief.
‘Work in Glasgow?’
‘Oh…
I'm a student,’ the young man laughed.
‘Materia Medica.’
Sadie's heart sank.
Why could she never meet anyone of her own class?
Her father was a good man, and always paid his way, but he was an upholsterer.
A student!
‘Oh…that's nice,’ she forced a grin and loosened her grip.
He wobbled suddenly and slipped sideways.
‘Oh…not very good at this yet!
‘He steadied himself, holding on to her shoulder.
‘I hope…you don't mind a man…leaning on you,’ he asked with an innocent smile.
His straw boater was new and his plus-fours neat, but there was something of the air of a little boy about him.
He needed looking after.
Sadie looked boldly into his brown eyes.
‘No…not at all…’
The pheasant on her hat was long dead, but the bird of hope in her breast took wing.
‘I'll show you how.
Watch my feet.
You'll be good at learning, being a student, and that….’
They skated off together as the band began a new German waltz.
THAT'S MY BIT OF SKY 1912–1914 A.D.
On the eve of the Great War the entertainment world in Glasgow was going great guns.
The Admirable Crichton was on at the Royalty, the Three Ragtime Boys at the Alhambra, and at A. E. Pickard Unlimited's Panopticon (Doors open at six during the Spring holiday), there was ‘Fancy Fair and the Laughter Mirrors’.
The Panopticon and Pickard's Waxworks, formerly MacLeod's Waxworks, in the Trongate near Glasgow Cross, had a reputation as eccentric as its owner.
Albert Ernest Pickard, once the ‘millionaire’ candidate for Parliament in the Maryhill Division, was the eminence grise behind the ‘Hall of Laughing Mirrors’and ‘The World's Thinnest Man’.
Chaplin and Stan Laurel appeared on stage at the Panopticon, but even these pulsars in the milky way of mirth had the feet ca'ed from under them by Fergus the Legless Leprechaun.
FERGUS sat in a glass case resplendent in Limerick Green.
Every hour on the hour the glass case was opened with some ceremony, and the wee man would sign copies of his autobiography.
That was the main, but not the only cause of the subsequent riot, when the bonnie lieges, not a few ‘in drink’ as they used to say at the magistrate's court, toppled the case over with the luckless, as well as legless leprechaun still inside.
The main complaint was that the whole thing was a fraud, which could be proved because, as everyone knew…leprechauns canna write!
When it came to Glasgow fun Fergus stood alone, but Lord Roberts, that same whose statue and cuddy stand in splendid isolation looking down on Kelvin Park from Park Circus, told the graduation audience in Glasgow University in 1913 that, ‘Britain stands alone still’.
He begged that a citizen army should be formed, declaring, ‘an untrained man with a rifle would be useless in modern warfare’.
As the armed alliances of Europe, intertwined in a deadly dance and wrapped around with train-timetables, struggled into the nightmare to come, nobody realised what modern war was going to mean, least of all Lord Roberts.
Halley's Comet, back for a re-run of the Norman invasion of England and King Harold's unfortunate compulsion to look up, plummeted past the outwardly serene blue-green island of earth.
On 4 August 1914, Great Britain, together with her Dominions and Colonies, declared war on the German Empire.
The Austrian Empire, the Russian Empire, the French Republic, ‘poor little Belgium’, everybody fought for the privilege of committing social and collective suicide on a spectacular scale, and for no particular reason.
People THOUGHT there were reasons.
National pride, unbridled aggression, living-space, colonial ambitions, sea-power, honour…the world of the Laughing Mirrors was forgotten .
No one wanted proof or reasons, which was just as well…there were NO reasons.
The bells in the Tolbooth Tower rang out and Cameron of Lochiel was not in town.
If he had been he would not have been alone.
Almost 3,000 people filled the space in front of the ancient tower, and spilled into the railway station and down the steps.
They hung from railings and lamp-posts like baskets of old clothes.
The square was a sea of flat caps, all tilted upwards towards the notices plastered on the medieval stonework.
‘I canna help it,’ shouted Tam by way of apology.
‘It's thaim at the back shovin'.’
‘S'awricht, Tam,’ Wull was endeavouring to stand on tip-toe, but so was everyone else.
‘Still up though,’ he added, peering over the shoulders of the man in front.
‘Same mobilisation order.‘
‘Och, that's been up for days,’ replied Tam scornfully.
‘General Mobilisation of all regular and special reservists.
Naval boys are away and all.’
A subdued murmur became a roar as a number of soldiers pushed their way through the crowd towards the tower.
‘Hull-aw…what's up?’ said Tam, taking off his cap and scratching the back of his head.
‘New bulletins.
Ye can see through the back.
It's…it's printed in RED!’
‘Aye, look,’ yelled Wull in excitement.
He threw his cap in the air and whooped for joy.
‘Look!
They're pastin' them up all over the Cross.
Hooray!
BRITAIN AT WAR!’
Someone started singing ‘God Save the King’ and soon everybody was joining in, thousands of strong hearts and lungs, shipyard workers, foundry men, train drivers, some still on strike, were swept away by the tide of emotion.
‘Is this no' great?’
Wull shouted, tears streaming down his cheeks.
‘War!
War!
It's like hogmanay…!’
‘Yer no' wrang,’ Tam replied, slapping him on the back.
‘We've goat the best Navy, the best aw'thin'.
We'll knock them oan their knees by Christmas…the hale jing bang o' thae Proosians.’
‘It would be grand to see the cavalry chargin' and the cannons and that like thon play at the Royal we seen.
Bugles blowin'!
Here…’ he paused and looked at his friend.
‘Tam.
Do you fancy it, eh?’
Tam looked slightly taken aback.
‘What do you…’ his eyebrows shot up.
‘Are you talkin' about what I think ye are talkin' about?’
‘Aye!’ the bunnetless Wull nodded vigorously.
‘Let's jine up.’
‘If I went tae fight the Germans ma wife'd kill me,’ said Tam with awe.
‘Oh here,’ replied Wull.
‘That's right.
We might get killed deid.’
‘Don't be daft.
That disny happen these days.
This is a modern war.
C'mon.
Let's be the first.’
‘It wis my idea.
I'm gane.’
Wull pushed his way towards the soldiers.
‘Are ye comin' Tam Slater?—’ He paused and half-turned.
‘Yer no…feart?’
‘I half-killed a man for sayin' that once tae me,’ replied Tam, abashed.
‘Here…mister,’ he yelled out and struggled to the front.
‘Here.
We want tae jine…afore it's all over…’
OK, WEE MAN? 1914–1916 A.D.
The first Christmas of the War was the Christmas when everybody thought it would be over.
After the deluge that decided the first battle of Ypres, King-Emperor George V arrived at the St Omer Headquarters of the British Expeditionary Force in Northern France, and went away again.
The days of death rolled on inexorably towards the ending of the year.
Then it was Christmas Eve 1914, and from ‘Wypers’ to the Masurian Lakes a strange event occurred.
The troops of both sides stopped fighting in many places.
They exchanged addresses, bits of old sausage, gave each other presents of socks that their wives and sweethearts had knitted, and hoped and pretended, that it was all over.
CHRISTMAS was over but the war was not.
Following months of preparation the mood of the Allies in Greek Lemnos was one of excitement.
British action, thought to be carefully camouflaged, had been obvious to the Turks for weeks.
Greece was full to the brim with German agents, and the Greek King, Constantine, married to the Kaiser's sister Sophia, held the rank of Field Marshal in the Imperial German Army.
Lemnos was not a very clever place to choose as a base for British operations.
The troops landed at Gallipoli, 3 Australian Brigades at Ari Burnu from HMS Ribble ,Usk ,Chelm and others, and a host of ships and battalions , signals corps,fusiliers , ambulance and Anson battallions .
On HMS River Clyde and attendant ships were the Royal Munster Fusiliers , 2nd Hants. (less two companies), a field corps of the Royal Engineers, a GHQ Signals Section, and three subdivisions of the 52nd, the Glasgow and Lowland counterpart of the 51st Highland Division.
The wee men were there in force.
All across the little bay west of Seddulbahir, the very southernmost tip of the Gallipoli peninsula , there was ‘standing room only’ for the Allied Army.
None of the 70,000 English, Scots, Irish, and Anzac troops expected the reception that awaited them, and the rain of death that would greet them from the machine-guns of the Turkish 9th Division, hidden in the hills above.
Between the Western Front and Gallipoli, men were in short supply.
Kitchener's ‘Your Country Needs You’ poster was plastered up all over Glasgow.
Recruiting was taken in hand by Lord Provost Sir Thomas Dunlop and the former Lord Provost Sir Archibald McInnes.
Altogether, Glasgow provided 26 battalions , like the 15th, 16th, and 17th battallions of the HLI, the latter including many members of the Tramways department, becoming known as the ‘Tramways Battalion ’.
The 16th had close ties with the Boys' Brigade, with flags presented by the Trades' House of Glasgow.
The 17th had four Companies to begin with, recruited from the Royal Technical College, F.P.s of city schools, and from the businesses and trades of the city.
The Chamber of Commerce Battalion — known as the ‘featherbed’ because of its comfortable initial billet in Troon — and the others went south.
They were in the trenches by Christmas 1915 and eventually, from July 1916, in the carnage of the Somme.
The Somme dragged on through July, a futile and terrible battle of attrition that cost hundreds of thousands of lives, through Aubers Ridge, Delville Wood, where the Cameronians had a section of trench they called Buchanan Street, and into a dreadful September, when Haig decided to try and break through on the Somme with a secret  weapon, the tank.
It was four weeks since Z-day and the opening of the battle.
Nothing was gained either way.
Much was lost.
When Lloyd George talked about the Empires and Kingdoms, kings and crowns of Europe falling like withered leaves, he should have been talking about the millions of ordinary people, the music and laughter and minutiae of countless lives, washed away like a child's map drawn on a slate left out in the rain.
In over four years of ‘The Great War for Civilization’, something that could never be assessed had been crushed by the imbecile violence of the Great Powers.
When Peace came on the 11th hour of the 11th day of the 11th month, the citizens of Glasgow at home and abroad were elated, relieved, delighted, and very, very tired…
THE CLOUD-WALKERS 1919 A.D.
It might have been Icarus and Pilcher, instead of the Wright brothers…!
Glasgow had taken wings at the end of the 19th century.
Percy Pilcher, a naval architect at Glasgow University was experimenting with a powered glider and, but for the tragic accident that ended his life, would have entered the history books as the first man to fly an engine-driven aircraft.
The First World War saw enormous advances in flight technology, and Glasgow was a major centre for aircraft production.
On 13 July 1919 the first two-way crossing of the Atlantic was completed by the Beardmore-built R34, which made the flight to Minneola in the USA in spite of carrying the world's first airborne stowaway.
It was Glasgow-born American Lieutenant Arthur Whitten Brown and Captain John Alcock who had first flown an aircraft across the Atlantic one month earlier in June, and their terrible journey in a giant biplane bomber powered by Rolls-Royce engines was very different from today's high-cruising world of in-flight movies.
THE land lay in the quiet light of a golden afternoon.
Gentle valleys climbed gradually to rolling uplands, which were in turn pierced by towering crags and cliffs.
On some of the cliffs there were castles, clinging impossibly to sheer faces and ragged outcroppings.
A few were connected with neighbouring towers by spidery bridges, 1,000 feet above ravines of deepest blue.
Shadows ran down like rivers from the airy uplands, filling the depths with a gathering chill.
Towering over all, their inaccessible faces as high and massive as peaks on the moon, a gigantic range of mountains tipped with red ringed the quiet valleys.
There was a growing sound of thunder, low at first, then gathering force, the deep-throated rumbling filled the afternoon with vibration and threat.
Steadily it rolled, the onrushing wave of sound leading the storm, like a tidal wave echoes some distant catastrophe.
Deep and steady, seeming to fill the land with its sound, an earthquake in the air, the rumbling grew steadily closer.
Without warning, a huge biplane burst from the side of a cloud-mountain, scattering castles and crags in puffs and wisps of smoke, its shadow gliding ahead, rising and falling as it sped across the wide landscape of cloud.
A valley broke, its sides drifting apart to reveal a sparkling sea, 3,000 feet below.
‘That's the last of the chocolate,’ Arthur Whitten Brown tapped the altimeter.
‘What was that, Arthur?’
John Alcock turned towards his navigator.
Whitten Brown held up the empty wrapper and shook his head.
‘There's the sandwiches and beer!’
Captain Alcock shouted.
‘What's our position?’
Whitten Brown leaned forward and smoothed the transparent cover on the chart open across his knees.
‘Our total path is 1,900 miles,’ he muttered to himself.
’…Journey should take all of 16 hours, mean speed 120 miles per hour.’
He looked up.
‘Here,’ he said firmly, pointing with his indelible pencil at a point mid-way between Newfoundland and Ireland.
‘We can expect to sight land here, about Bantry, or maybe Cliffden, allowing for the wind speed.’
Captain Alcock watched the needle on one of his gauges warily.
‘The extra fuel is holding up…better than 18112-pound bombs.’
He laughed.
‘Smith and his brother are going to attempt the 11,000 miles from the UK to Australia in another Vickers.’
Whitten Brown folded his map carefully and wiped the rain off the leather cover with his flying-glove.
‘I suppose we'll see passenger flights after this, ‘he looked thoughtfully at a bottle of beer.
‘Still, they'll be protected from sleet and hail, enclosed like the H12 .’
‘The Large America ?
She's a flying-boat.’
One of the Rolls-Royce VIII engines gave a throaty cough and resumed its serene drone.
‘So will we be, if anything comes unstuck.’
He looked beyond the scudding clouds to the sea far beneath.
‘You know, the future is with flying-boats.
Cheaper than building runways.’
‘Let's just make our own landfall,’ the Captain buttoned his collar as the rain began in earnest.
‘It will likely either be an Irish bog or the drink for us.’
‘Don't they go together?’
Whitten Brown gave in to his instincts, and since they were cruising at 20,000 feet they were definitely higher ones.
He opened the bottle of beer.
‘I'll take the drink,’ he said.
IT WAS RED 1919 A.D.
Civvy street was full.
That was because there were over four million men being demobbed at the rate of 10,000 a day.
The War was over, Rutherford split the atom on 3 January 1919, and the workers' war had just begun.
With the sea-routes open again trade picked up for a while.
Prices had been driven up 125 per cent since 1914 and the wave of nation-wide strikes and industrial unrest that had been coming to a head on the eve of the great conflict, burst into flame.
Trade Union membership had risen from four million in 1914 to eight million in 1918.
Campbell Steven, John Muir, the ILP ‘philosopher’, Jimmy Maxton, Neil MacLean the publicist, Manny Shinwell, men thought of as ‘the new Covenanters’ took up the banner.
It was the same banner that flew over the columns of marching men converging on the Women ‘s Battalion guarding the Provisional Government in St Petersburg…the same banner that was raised in front of the crowds surging into George Square in Glasgow.
It was red.
HARRY McShane was a fighter, but then, so was his friend Johnny Milligan.
They had plenty to fight for.
Out of a population of 1,081,600, over 40,591 families lived in single rooms, and 112,424 in ‘room-and-kitchens’.
The Anderston Unemployed Committee had decided to use their meeting to mount a boycott of the Argyle Picture House.
The manager was refusing to allow the Committee to use the hall for nothing.
It began to look as if a wee riot might be in order.
Then there was the police baton charge.
In Hydepark Street, Harry McShane broke through a police cordon by running at it backwards.
Another meeting was held, a second cordon formed, and Harry pulled Milligan against the wall as the policemen rushed by, waving their batons.
McShane, one of the driving forces behind the Hunger Marches of the 1930s, and Milligan, a founder member of the British Communist Party, hid in a pub and downed a few pints until a party of workers arrived from the Gorbals to rescue them.
With difficulty McShane restrained his saviours from starting an all-out street war with the police.
It seemed as if Glasgow was on the brink of revolution.
The frosty pavement in front of the Royal Technical College in George Street was crowded and the ice in the gutters cracked by countless tackity boots marching into George Square.
Hands that did not hold banners and placards were thrust deep into pockets, and every street was thronged with lines of men pouring into the heart of the city past the ‘Chambers’.
They skidded and slid down Montrose Street past the Maternity Hospital, they shoved and jostled through the Candleriggs, blocking traffic in front of the Sheriff Court; they poured past the great arches of St Enoch's, Central, and Queen Street Stations, filling the Square to overflowing.
Trams stood marooned as they were engulfed by a rising tide of workers demanding a hearing.
The air was heavy with the threat of revolution and reprisal.
All the way from Springburn the cobbles were cracked and broken.
A gas lamp on the corner of Glebe Street near St Mungo's Academy was askew.
The pavement beside Alen Glen's was smashed and a Corporation junction box that had stood outside Jackson's Dog House in Dundas Street lay up a close.
The tanks were coming.
Silently, ranks of police edged their steaming mounts closer to the crowds, hemming them in.
In the city where James Watt had harnessed the pressure of steam to create the Industrial Revolution, thousands of men and women were being driven into  the Square by the piston of Government, fearful that another revolution was in the making.
Manny Shinwell stood in the back of a lorry, speaking bravely and loudly.
A great roar swept from every throat as the vast mass of grey parted and a single flag was raised above the heads of the throng.
Simple, uncompromising, the cloth hung limply in the frosty air.
Like the poppies in Flanders it was red as blood.
Police whistles blew, the shouting turned to screaming.
The revolution-that-might-have-been was over for the day.
The Strike continued.
A REAL SWEETIE 1920 A.D.
It was boom time and depression time.
There was rationing at home and war in Ireland.
Hemlines were up and tunes like the ‘Black Bottom’ and the ‘Charleston’were part of a new sense of freedom that could be seen every night in Glasgow at over 50 ‘Palais de Danse’.
The delights of the ‘Pally’ of your choice could be sampled for the princely sum of sixpence, and girls in page-boy cuts and boys with paraffin on their hair, shuffled around the polished wooden ‘flerr’to the strains of ‘Broadway Baby’; the twinkling glass stars of the mirrors hanging from the ceiling spun them round and round, moths that nested in a box-bed in a single end, and danced at the Butterfly Ball.
The twenties had not quite started roaring for the Clydesiders.
There was a sugar shortage as well as a miner's strike.
The domestic sweet-ration was to be increased by a quarter ounce to help the thousands of war-widows the Government thought ‘were gainfully employed’ in running the myriad sweetie-shops of the Second City of a battered Empire.
SADIE cuffed the wee boy who was playing with the leather strap that opened the front window and settled down to watch the world rush past and eat her batter.
Gino's chipper in Duke Street, near where she normally boarded her tram after work, charged one penny for a bag of crispy batter, and if you were lucky, there might be a nice piece of fish, or a stray lump of white pudding hiding among the golden, greasy flakes.
She crunched appreciatively and watched the urchin out of the corner of her eye.
She was sure the conductor would put him off.
There was enough dirt on his knees to grow potatoes, and his short trousers obviously belonged to someone at least three years younger, but he gave her a toothless grin, slid back in his seat and picked his nose.
She turned away and looked out of the window.
The tram was careering towards Dennistoun and was just passing the Eastern District Hospital.
A Tennent's steam lorry, belching oily wood smoke because of the coal shortage, clanked past in the opposite direction, a rag-and-bone cart overtaking on the inside.
It was tea-time and the streets were busy as people walked home from the many small factories and warehouses in the East End.
Bigger employers, like the vast Beardmore's factory at Parkhead, as well as many of the shipyards, employed people who lived within a mile's radius, but there was large-scale unemployment, and many now had to travel miles to work.
She remembered the tea-time throng before the war, when she was ten and working illegally in the Biscuit Factory near Bridgeton.
The crowds were thinner now.
So many men had been killed or wounded in the war, that it would be ten years before another generation would fin the gaps.
The wounded and disabled, of course, would not be returning from work or anywhere.
Sadie's Dad had died at Gallipoli, and her mother had to make do with a tiny pension and the income of the shop.
The ‘shop’ was the front room of their ground floor flat.
In Glasgow, a flat was a room and kitchen, and during the day, jars of ‘Bull's Eyes’, penny sookers, sherbet packets, chocolates, ‘Grannies’, and the other sweets slowly re-appearing on the market, filled the spaces where Sadie and her mother spent their evenings after their tea.
‘Tea’, in the lands of the tenement canyons was not a mid-morning ‘tiffin’, but the evening meal.
Between the sweetie shop and Sadie's earnings in the hosier's they barely managed.
The door of the front compartment opened and Sadie held her money out.
‘I've nae tickets, but I'll gie ye a chip,’ Dierdrie sat down noisily beside her friend.
‘Naw,’ Sadie refused with a polite shake of her head.
‘Fullup, so ahm ur.’
Dierdrie accepted this formal rebuff and stuffed the remainder of her chips and peas into a small but sensuous mouth.
‘Good, that.’
She wiped her lips on the paper and crumpling it up, tucked it demurely between the seat and the wall.
‘Goin' oot the night?’
The tram whined and sparked as it pulled up at the fare stage near the Dennistoun Palais and Whitehill Street.
‘Nae money.’
‘Want a sub?’
Dierdrie, a sorter in the ‘Offal and Lights’ section of the abattoir at Bellgrove, was relatively ‘flush’.
‘I couldna',’ Sadie looked away with just the barest hint of a micro-second's hesitation.
‘I'll get it when ye've goat it.
We've been pally for years Sadie.
Here, ma Da'll only get it if you don't.’
She held out a shilling.
‘Thanks then,’ Sadie took the coin quickly and stuffed it in the pocket of her coat.
‘We're on for the night then?’
Dierdrie leaned forward, peering up cheekily at her friend's averted face.
‘Aye,’ Sadie turned, smiling reluctantly.
‘Aye.
Mammy willny mind.’
‘That's settled then,’ said Dierdrie cheerily, absently cuffing the small boy, who was still picking his nose.
The music stopped with a roll on the drums and an accidental ‘toot’ from the saxophonist, who was a painter and plasterer to trade.
There was very little painting work about at present so music and plastering were currently his major occupations.
Sadie let go of the young man's lapels, smiled grimly, and limped across the floor to Dierdrie, waiting by the fan-shaped mirror.
‘How did you get on, Sadie?’
Dierdrie asked, trying the feather in her hair at another angle.
‘Och…terrible.
Mine was all feet…and hands!
Whit about you?’
‘Ye widny credit it!’
Dierdrie stuck the feather in the band at the front and squinted at herself.
‘Mine was an undertaker's apprentice with a gammy knee.’
‘Did he have black hair and yella teeth?’
‘Aye.
How did you…?’
Sadie's reflection grinned at her.
A third figure swam into the blue-green fan of the mirror.
‘Hullaw…rerr,’ he said.
‘Back again fur mair.
Ur ye dancin'?’
‘Aw’ I've left ma eyelashes in the ladies,’Dierdrie squeezed past.
‘There ye are, Sadie…
Therr's a man askin' ye tae dance.’
‘MAMMY!’ 1926–1929 A.D.
Winston's Water-Lions and Diving Nymphs were appearing at the Glasgow Empire, busily proving themselves as ‘the aquatic marvels of the 20th century’.
At the Metropole, the eager theatre-goer could revel in That Fantastic Fantasy…
It'll Ticklem or Rips Raps,presented by a powerful cast of gifted comic thespians including Cullen and Carthy, a double act, the Wee Mon, and the popular Will E. Wont E. Beanland.
In spite of this galaxy of stars and performing dugs and the like, the Theatre with a capital ‘T’ was up against it, which doesn't mean the wall of the Theatre next door.
The cinema was moving in.
This was particularly appropriate because the ‘Flickers’ did just that; they moved, ran, fell off bridges, drove trains through parlours, rode wild horses, attacked poor wee Indians, flew aeroplanes, and rammed just about every aspect of everything that normal people never did, on to a square screen in the local box of delights known as ‘The Picters’, ‘The Flicks’, or if you came from Clarkston, High Burnside, Shawlands or Jordanhill, ‘The Cineemaaa’…
IN the early twenties the genre of the moving pictures went through the cultural life of the lieges of the auld toon of Glasgow, like a dose of the Epsom.
Glasgow began building picture houses like there was no tomorrow, and by the early thirties there were more cinemas in Glasgow than in any other city in Europe.
There was also a boom in organ-building and piano-playing because music was not only ‘the food of life’ as it always has been, but also the mood background to films.
Pictures were completely and utterly silent except for the whirr of the projector, or the mutterings of the projectionist when he changed reels and dropped one.
Round about this time the Salon in Sauchiehall Street was showing Rob Roy, Scotland's Wonderful Adventure , filmed at Aberfoyle and Stirling.
It was advertised as, ‘The loves, romance, and adventures of Rob Roy, well-known outlaw and Highland Chief’.
Rob Roy was played by David Holburn, the Duke of Montrose by Sir Simeon Steuart, the ‘Dougal Cratur’ by Alec Hunter, Sandy (The Biter) by Tom Morris, and Rab, Rob's eldest son and apple of his sporran, by the athletic heart-throb Bob Celino, who couldn't talk anyway.
The whole silent performance was accompanied by specially arranged bagpipe music and ‘orchestral diversions’.
The stalls cost one shilling and three pence and the stately elegance of the circle a whole two bob.
The climax of the evening was perhaps on the premature side, as the star of the saga, David Holburn alias Rob himself, appeared complete with fake beard on stage before every performance, ‘Just tae greet ye.’
It is possible that the greeting was not all that one-sided.
And then…as if people had not been hearing things since Noah hit his thumb with a hammer, SOUND arrived.
On 7 January 1929 the Coliseum in Eglinton Street opened its doors to miles of queues, and the original Jazz Singer starring the original Al Jolson.
There is currently another ‘Al Jolson’ in Glasgow who would be better off singing in a silent movie, so it is important to remember that there was only ever one real ‘Al’, and he regaled Glasgow with ‘Mammy’and the rest in real sound for a six-week run.
Pringle's Picture Palace in Sauchiehall Street was the first picture-house in Glasgow when it opened in 1907, and the Electric Theatre, also in Sauchiehall Street, the first purpose-built movie-house in 1910.
By the thirties there were picture-halls galore, over 130, and with more cinemas than any other city in the world outside the United States, Glasgow was no mean Cinema-City.
A FAIR COP 1927 A.D.
The Glasgow Gangs grew out of the First World War, when those too young to fight or know any better began to hang around street corners.
Before long youngsters fell under the influence of older men, forming into ‘gangs’ like the Redskins, the Black Hand, the South Side Stickers, the San Toi, the Parlour Boys, or the Beehive Gang.
These were not the ‘professional’ gangsters of Chicago and New York, hoodlums and racketeers.
Glasgow gangster Frank Murphy changed his name to Frank Earn and went on to win the Scottish Welterweight Boxing Championship, but he was the exception.
Most of the corner boys were experts in their preferred weapons, the bottle, the half-brick, or the sharpened pick-axe handle.
All through the twenties the gangs became increasingly violent and there were constant running battles between the South Side Stickers and the San Toi.
Each of these master gangs had ‘satellites’, smaller groups that supported them at need and stayed in the general area.
Gang battles became open street-warfare until the appointment of Yorkshireman Commander Percy Sillitoe to the ‘plum’ £1,500-a-year job as head of Glasgow's Constabulary.
He smashed the gangs partly by using charges by mounted police, known as ‘Sillitoe's Cossacks’.
He also introduced police call boxes to Glasgow, invented the check pattern on police hats, and by reducing police manpower from 11 to seven divisions, saved enough money to buy modern police cars.
Following a visit to Edgar J. Hoover and involvement in a machine-gun shoot-out in Chicago, Sillitoe returned to introduce the UK's first radio cars to Glasgow.
Sillitoe broke the power of the gangs forever, but there were still ‘terrortories’ where invisible borders drawn by fear and ignorance crossed otherwise ordinary streets.
IT was Friday night in the Gorbals.
Bull Hughes was making his way down the stairs from the hoose, a single end top right off Cumberland Street.
He paused beneath the gas jet on the second landing, licked his fingers and tucked the ends of his fine dark hair behind his ears.
He looked at himself in his mind's eye, squared his shoulders and carried on down the stairs.
His shadow swaggered after him.
He paused again at the next landing and peered out of the open window into the back-court.
The grey tenements walled in the space completely.
A thousand windows, some reflecting the dying light of the day, stared down with him at the trampled earth, the lines of washing-poles, the puddles.
Middens and wash-houses, already deep in shadow, echoed with the shouts of half-glimpsed children at play.
Two small boys ran from the damp gloom of a back close, closely pursued by a third, who raced after them, swinging something over his head, then hurling it high in the air.
It arced across the well of the court, striking the smaller of the two in the back.
He ran on laughing, used to having rats thrown at him.
Bull leaned out of the window, gripping the edge of the crumbling sill with spotlessly clean hands.
His bitten fingernails scraped the grey sandstone.
‘Hey…
Danny!
Get up thae bliddy sterrs.
Yer Mammy's wantin' ye!’
The rat-thrower paused, looked up, and grinned.
Blue eyes twinkled in a face the colour of burned chalk.
’…
You hear me?’
A flock of birds passed overhead, sensing the barrenness of the space beneath them.
‘Aye,’ replied a wee voice below, recognising the threat.
‘Here ahm ur…’—
Bull turned and leaned against the wall, waiting as feet scampered up towards him.
‘In ye get, ya wee bastard,’ he said affectionately, ruffling the urchin's brown locks as he ran on past.
‘I'm awa’ oot.’
As the elder brother, it was his privilege and his right to ‘go oot’ whenever the fancy took him, especially as he was a toiler.
His brother vanished upstairs and a door, seldom locked, opened and closed noisily.
‘I'm awa’ oot,’Bull challenged the damp walls of the close like a cockerel on a midden.
He hunched his shoulders and stamped his way defiantly down the rest of the stairs and out into the cobbled street.
Birds and beasts have senses we do not have.
They can see and smell lines and shapes that lead them through the darkest night, point out lines of demarcation, isolate territories.
Bull sniffed the rain on the evening air and hurried down the street towards the corner pub.
An invisible line ran past the corner, left at the second gas-lamp, straight as truth across the grass beside the upright sleepers that lined the railway track, and on towards the enemy territory of the Baltic Fleet.
Heat and smoke buffeted him with welcoming arms as he entered the bar.
It was crowded with heavy drinkers.
At the bar stood several men, well-dressed, hair slicked back, sharing the knowing sympathy of lions waiting until something passed that struck them as worth killing.
But lions kill to eat, and these were creatures of another breed.
Next to them stood the second rank of drinkers, ‘troops’ of the gangs, not yet vicious enough to challenge the leaders or even each other, unless they were mob-handed.
Other locals, not directly involved with the gangs, but basking in the glory and  the protection bought rounds of drinks or waited for a chance to join in the conversation.
There were one or two figures in the corner who were hopelessly drunk.
As Bull watched, an elderly man with his glasses hanging from one ear bent backwards at a strange angle, as if he was made of rubber, and slid off his seat.
No one took any notice of him.
There were no women.
This was a men-only bar.
‘How's the man?’ enquired one of the toughs as Bull strode up and joined them.
‘Aw’ right, well?’
He smiled and the long scar that ran from his forehead to his chin became a livid white.
‘Aye,’ Bull replied laconically, accepting a glass of whisky and a pint of pale beer that appeared in front of him.
‘Nae rumbles?’
‘Na,’ replied the other, draining his glass and sweeping the company with a slightly glazed aye.
‘Aw’ feart efter the last go.’
He turned and stood with his back to the bar, relaxed, like a cat.
‘Nae wunner.’
He spat into the sawdust on the floor.
‘There's still an account tae be settled.
I'll have that bastard Kyle that runs wi' them.
He wisny there.’
‘Gonny call him oot?’
Scarface turned towards the gantry and waved.
A whisky appeared in front of him.
‘I'm gonny stick him for thon Seturday.’
Bull searched in his pockets for a cigarette.
‘Here ye are, Bull,’ a man in his twenties, thick-set but already balding, held out a crushed packet of ten Woodbines.
‘Tryin' tae be funny Harry?’
Bull asked.
‘Where the hell did ye drag thaim up frae?
I want a fag that's no' been given a doin'.’
Harry had tensed at the criticism, but Scarface laughed and the whole bar started roaring at Bull's subtlety and wit.
He took a fresh cigarette offered by somebody else, lit it and then blew the smoke in Harry's face.
Nothing was said, but his Lieutenant knew he had been reprieved at the last minute.
‘Well,’ Bull continued.
‘I'm gonny cut thon Kyle and dae the rest o' thaim and aw', and I says nixt Seturday at Adelphi, thon wey at the back to the auld bridge at the green.’
He opened his jacket and tilted back on his heels.
Two mother-of-pearl handles jutted out of the top of his waistcoat pocket.
‘I've been saving these weapons up for him,’ he continued.
‘Nothin' but the best.’
‘Aye,’ replied Harry.
‘That's the wey, Bull.
Nothin' but the best.’
THE FIREMAN AND THE ORPHEUS CHOIR 1931–1935 A.D.
Ports, especially great ports, are never quite where they seem to be — a corner, a quay, the light filtering past funnels and masts on either side, there is always something that belongs to other places and other times.
From the times of the original Glasgow Harbour at the Broomielaw in the 1660s, the atmosphere of the Clydeside had been acquiring something of the West Indies, the South China Sea, the coasts of Africa and India, and all the magic, terror and richness of the seven seas of the world.
The Broomielaw Quay was enlarged as years went by and after the arrival of steamships, created and born on this very river, the quays on the north bank were completed past Finnieston and down to Mavisbank by the 1880s.
The vast shipyards that stretched back from either bank of the Clyde led to deep cargo-handling docks, graving docks and the opening of the first, the Queen ‘s, by Lord Provost James Bain on 18 September 1877.
Ultimately there were five, and the last and fifth of the great docks, which included the Rothesay, the Merkland's Lairage, the Yorkhill, the Queen's, the Prince's and the Kingston Dock, was the King George V Dock.
Spanning three centuries, the wooden quays and piers of early dockside beginnings expanded until there were more than 12 miles of berthing for ships of every size and purpose.
In a very real sense there were two Glasgows and the second city was the one that clustered along either bank of the River Clyde and all the way to Clydebank.
Ships filled the river, ships were built by the river…ships like 534.
Although the early ‘fire’ of the Red Clydesiders lost much of its impetus in Westminster as the years went by, it was Maxton's fellow social crusader David Kirkwood who was responsible for the announcement by Neville Chamberlain, then dealing with bits of paper as Chancellor of the Exchequer, that work was to be resumed on hull 534 in Clydebank.
These were the words that Kirkwood hoped would, ‘sentence Clydebank to life’.
On the morning of Tuesday, 3 April 1934, at 7.40 a.m., the workers marched into the yard to the skirl of the pipes and began to clean away the rust and the nests of rooks that had appeared in the giant skeleton of the hull as it lay neglected during years of depression.
Nobody knew then what the great ship, 1,018 feet long and with a gross tonnage of 80,000 tons, would be called.
She would employ 250,000 men and women in over 80 British towns and cities, and drag 1, 006 tons of chains after her into the Clyde at her launch, but she was still 534 until the day a city went to sea and the farmer's field was flooded across from the Glasgow Road.
WILLIAM Milligan Robb was made in Clydebank.
Clean-shaven and with a full head of greying hair, he was known as a gentle man, but nobody crossed him.
He could ‘clear a bar’ without interrupting his conversation.
Officially titled ‘Fireman’ he was the stoker in the boiler house of the enormous Singer Sewing Machine factory off Kilbowie Road.
His wife, blind for many years, was a pianist for the Glasgow Orpheus Choir and William Robb had built her a complete organ which occupied one wall of a room in their home in Singer's Buildings.
The stoking, the music and the difficulty with which he could be knocked over, earned him something that even Mr Singer himself couldn't buy — respect.
Respect was grudgingly given in Clydebank, a ship-building and factory town.
Everything was hard to come by at the moment.
Apart from the rusting cathedral of steel and rivets towering above Brown's, the abandoned 534 , there were no ships being built.
‘Pint, Tam.’
Fireman Robb shouldered his way through the bat-wing doors of the ‘Seven Seas’ on the corner of Kilbowie Road.
He tapped his pipe out on the edge of the gleaming spittoon and looked up and down the bar.
A man sitting in the alcove beneath the etched glass window depicting ‘The Pacific’, stood up and walked across.
‘Bill.
.?’ he asked.
Fireman Robb half-turned in the act of paying sevenpence to the barman.
‘Who…?’
His bushy eyebrows shot up in recognition.
‘Danny!’
He clapped the newcomer gently on the shoulder and the bar shuddered.
‘How have ye been?
Where have ye been keepin' yourself?’
Danny Crombie recovered slightly and smiled.
‘Haven't seen YOU either, Bill…been down south, looking for work.’
Bill Robb took a sip of his pint.
‘Any luck?’
He wiped the froth off his upper lip with a finger and drank deeply.
‘Nothin'.
Nothin' doin' at all.
I've been everywhere.
Sunderland, Newcastle, Liverpool.’
They both looked up.
The ‘Seven Seas’ was full of the strains of the big hit of 1934.
The bartender was whistling as he polished the glasses.
‘T'was on the isle of Capri that I met her…’
Bill Robb winced.
‘D'you have to?’
He looked over the top of his glass at Erch the barkeeper, who paused in mid-shine.
‘Everybody likes that.’
Erch gestured with a soapy hand at the vibrating cloth speaker of the wireless.
‘Not everybody,’ Fireman Robb put down his glass and stared at him in silence.
Erch switched the radio off and resumed his washing and polishing.
He was no longer whistling.
The doors burst open and a small man wearing an enormous cap rushed in, accompanied by a blast of cold air from the Glasgow Road.
‘Have ye heard the radio!’ he shouted, rushing up to the bar.
‘It's not THAT good,’ replied Bill Robb with a grin and Danny nodded.
‘Aye it is, aye it is,’ gasped the little man.
‘It's…the…’ he choked.
‘The shipyard,’ he continued with difficulty.
Erch turned the bakelite switch and twiddled the dial all the way from Hilversum to Daventry and back.
‘Naw, it's…’ began the wee man agitatedly, then the calm voice of Queen Margaret Drive flooded the ‘Seven Seas’.
‘It has been announced by the Chancellor Neville Chamberlain that work will recommence on the hull designated 534 in Clydebank.
Now cricket.
England were all out for five at the…’
The last words were drowned out as four or five people produced as much sound as several shifts of riveters on a super-liner.
‘Who would have thought it?’ asked Fireman Robb, puffing as he lit his pipe.
‘Funny though…’
‘What is?’ asked Danny and the wee man together.
‘Hearing about Clydebank on the radio,’ replied Fireman Bill, blowing out a cloud of smoke that would have done credit to the Queen Mary .
THE NIGHT RAINBOW 1933 A.D.
At 3 a.m. on the night of 31 October 1933 a piece of heaven fell on Ruchill.
SADIE and John Hemphill were finishing their evening meal.
John pushed the plate away from him and stuck his thumbs in his braces.
‘Well darlin'?’ he smiled across the table at his wife.
She lifted the tea-cosy off the pot and pointed the spout meaningfully at him.
He shook his head.
‘Not for me.
I'd better get on my way.’
‘Your piece box is on the table at the door.’
She picked up a small piece of paper lying beside her and began turning it over and over in her fingers.
‘What IS that?’ he asked, holding his hand out.
‘You've been playin' with that for hours.’
She handed it to him without comment.
‘Oh aye!’ his face lit up with a smile.
‘I mind that!
Where was that?’
‘That was us when we all worked in the shop, afore the War.’
‘Oh aye…?’ he frowned.
‘Who…?’
She took the photograph back from him and reached inside her apron pocket for her spectacles.
‘There's me, and Millie Dooley, thon big bossy boots Aggie…’ she smiled to herself, remembering some imagined riposte 30 years ago.
‘There's wee Bobby, him that got lost at sea.’
‘Aye, Jutland, I mind now.’
He reached for the tea-pot.
‘And there…’ she stood up and walked round the table, placing the browning photograph firmly in front of him on the bright red and white of the American-cloth table cover, ‘there's…’she pointed to a figure dimly glimpsed beside a pillar in the background.
‘Naw it's no'…’ he leaned forward.
‘That's you right enough.
Same ears.
See.’
She pointed again for emphasis.
‘Next to the overhead wires for the money-carrier.
THERE!’
She pointed again in exasperation.
‘I see.
I see.’
John sat back and looked up at his wife.
’‘Member we all went to the Great Exhibition thon time at Kelvingrove?’
’…and Millie was sick on that man's hat when we were oan the roller-coaster.‘
John sighed.
‘Aye…’
Sadie sat down again and nibbled her bread and dripping.
John was still looking at the photograph.
‘Think I've changed much?’ he asked.
Sadie looked across at the open, honest face of her husband.
She had seen it every night and morning for at least 15 of their 18 years of marriage.
‘No' very much darlin',’ she smiled at him.
‘Same ears.’
Across the canal beyond Cadder, the sky above the Western Necropolis and St Kentigern's Cemetery was black as the Earl o' Hell's waistcoat.
The silver shield of the moon was rising in a cloudless frosty sky, and the November stars wheeled low.
The great nebula of Andromeda, was a misty smudge in the belt of Orion lying on the jagged edge of High Possil.
John blew on his clenched fists and drew his knees closer to the brazier.
He had finished his piece over an hour ago and the night was wearing away towards dawn.
A distant clock in Maryhill to his left began to chime and was answered by another, far off in Springburn away beyond the football ground and the timber basin.
It was 3 a.m. on the edge of Ruchill, and the watchman was doing his job.
He reached across into the back of the hut for his piece-box.
He nearly fell off his bench, groping behind him in the darkness, and heard the metal box clatter as it slipped past his fingers.
Peering down at the ground between his feet, John saw the box, its lid stamped ‘J.M.’ in sharp Roman capitals by a pal in the dye-works across the road.
He could see it…?
Light flooded the earth in a cool many-coloured glow.
He sat up and stared at the sky in wonder.
John had travelled half the world in the merchant navy and seen many strange and wonderful things, both sober and not-so sober.
He had never seen anything like the night rainbow.
For almost ten minutes an arch of subtle colour, like the wings of a vast angel, spread out across the sky on either side of the moon.
From the Maryhill Paper Works to Possil Loch the bridge of colour stretched over the city of Glasgow.
Tenement rooftops like giant steps climbed the hills about him, their tiles and chimneys, lit by the true colours of the night, pale silver and green, deep carmine and chrome yellow, a wavering purple-blue.
Sadie couldn't sleep.
She had never got used to the hours since John had been made redundant when all the ships were laid up.
She frequently sat up in the wee sma' hours staring out of the window.
Not long up, her cambric dressing-gown was held tightly about her throat as the chill seeped through the air.
Crossing to the window of the best room, she scraped the rime of frost off the inside of the pane with her fingernail and looked out into the darkness.
It was full of colour!
The spirals and stars of frost on the window were stained with pastel hues, as if droplets of glowing inks had been scattered across the icy glass.
Away over towards the canal beyond the golf course, a bridge of coloured light arced to the silent earth just about where her husband would be just now, crouched in his little watchman's hut, at the foot of the night rainbow, where a piece of heaven had fallen to earth in Ruchill.
THE ROWAN AND THE LINDEN 1934–1937 A.D.
The crowd scrambled away as the Clyde burst its banks and flooded the fields.
When the people stopped and turned, their socks and shoes full of muddy water, they were rewarded with a sight none of them would ever forget.
The biggest, safest, and most powerful ship in the world, the Cunard White-Star Line Queen Mary rode the middle stream in serene majesty.
A cheer went up from 1,000 throats, greeting the floating city as it towered above Clydebank Town Hall.
It wasn't the end.
There were warships to be laid down.
Work was returning to the yards and down the river.
Men who had formed associations to go hill-walking, cycling, even mountaineering, clutching pamphlets like Initial Efforts on the Boulder Face,or Coping with Crevices,and spent long days toiling up braes and free-wheeling down glens, now had a wage to earn.
The inhabitants of the closes and the tenements had headed for the high ground, leaving the trams and turmoil behind for the mist, the heather, and a good brew-up in the but and ben.
For a brief time the descendants of those Highlanders who had been forced down into the valley to find work a century before had returned to the land of their fathers.
Now they were back in the Lowlands again, once more bound to the rivet-gun and the crane, the furnace and the foundry.
They were needed.
Europe was drifting towards another war.
The previous year, on 9 February 1933, the Oxford Union had voted, ‘That this house will in no way fight for King and Country’.
It was unthinkable, and yet everybody thought about it.
There was revolt in Catalonia, with martial law declared throughout Spain and street-battles in Madrid.
Many Glaswegians were to join the International Brigade within a few years, Scots like James Robertson Justice, pointing rifles upwards at the Heinkel 111 and Junkers 52 of Adolf Hitler's Luftwaffe.
General Mao-Tse-Tung was leading an army of 100,000 peasants on a long march south through Sianfu.
The new German Führer had exacted an oath of ‘unconditional obedience’ from all the officers and men of the German armed forces.
Better than most, the men in the yards knew it.
War was coming…again.
FREDERICK White walked briskly along the Unter den Linden towards the Brandenburg Gate.
He was concentrating on demolishing the last of the lime and liquorice sweets he had brought with him in his haversack from Partick, and he trod purposefully on the wet red leaves with his hiking-boots as he strode along.
There were at least two miles to go.
In the distance the pinnacle of the Monument, its golden figure of Winged Victory hovering impatiently over the autumn mists, pointed the way.
A knot of men stood on the other side of the broad avenue as he walked through the gate.
Beyond them, the rib-cage of a gigantic prehistoric leviathan poked upwards, black against the delicate hues of the sky — the remains of the burned-out Reichstag .
The men watched him silently as he strode on, their brown shirts at one with the autumn in the Tiergarten , as colour drained out of the world in preparation for winter.
After a few minutes one of the men detached himself from the group and walked after Fred at a smart pace.
Fred reached the zoo end of the Ku'damm, the most fashionable street in Berlin, broad and busy with the traffic of a great capital in the middle of Europe.
The cafe/1s were full of well-dressed people, portly men reading the paper, ladies with cloche hats  smoking cigarettes in metal or ivory cigarette-holders, armless ex-soldiers begging for a pfennig.
He decided against a tram and turned towards the underground station at the Wittenberg Platz, a neo-classical building complete with the purity of doric capitals and pediment.
One or two of the shop windows nearby were lacking glass, while others had a white star painted on them.
Not the Ka de We on the corner.
Frau Goebbels shopped there.
No stars were necessary.
He entered the station and walked down towards the trains, kilt swinging, leaflets tucked beneath his jacket.
The long passageway towards the platform was spotless, gleaming like a hospital ward.
Approaching rapidly with measured pace from the other end, a detachment of soldiers marched towards him.
In full kit with helmets a dull grey, they stamped on three abreast.
The officer was very tall.
He was one of the old school, part of a military family since the days of the Grand Order of the Teutonic Knights.
He probably thought of Adolph Hitler as an Austrian upstart, and the rest of the Nazis as gangsters and scum, but he obeyed orders, and Hitler was Chancellor.
Expressionless, their ill-fitting jackboots thumping up and down as they marched, the soldiers approached the lone kilted figure.
Without so much as an order, the line parted, one and two, and flowed on past Fred White without even breaking step.
One soldier's glance flickered briefly towards his kilt, but there was no other sign of recognition as they marched on and up the stairs.
Perfect discipline, perfect order, perfect cleanliness.
He crunched the last of his sweets and gave a leaflet to a passer-by.
The man was a Jew, but to Fred he was a German.
They all looked the same to him.
The man hurried on, throwing the leaflet in a waste-paper bin as soon as he was around the corner by the newspaper stand.
A figure in brown detached itself from the shadows, reached into the bin with a look of disgust on his face, and pocketed the crumpled paper without reading it.
Fred stayed on the train all the way to the Grunewald, a huge area of forest and lake south of Berlin, large enough to harbour ferocious boar, as well as innumerable cafes and restaurants, beerhouses and secluded dells.
In the days of the Weimar Republic, artists, writers, cabaret entertainers, and gypsies would meet in the woods and entertain each other and the day-trippers.
The area was still packed at weekends, despite a frenetic quality to the enjoyment; and, it was the same sun and the same lake as it had always  been, dotted with the yachts of the rich.
Fred White and Sandy, the friend he had agreed to meet here, sat on the shore and watched people splashing about in the water.
‘Any left?’ asked Sandy, lying back on his elbow and chewing a blade of grass.
The vast bulk of an airship droned overhead and slipped behind the trees on its way to Templehof Aerodrome .
‘A few,’ replied Fred, reaching inside his jacket and producing half-a-dozen crumpled leaflets.
‘You need to watch who you give them to,’ he added with the understatement of youth.
‘I hardly met anybody that looked ‘right’ all the way from Alexanderplatz to the Zoo.’
Sandy stood up and dusted off the seat of his shorts.
‘The people look tired and afraid to me,’ he said, hands on hips.
A yacht crewed by a man and three laughing women careered dangerously close to the shore.
‘Nobody will listen, except the converted, the communists and that's nae use.’
‘Aye well, I'm knackered.’
Fred stood up.
‘I've walked halfway across Berlin for the International Anti-War Youth Movement, and I'm for a swim.’
An elderly lady who had once asked Franz Liszt for his autograph, felt quite faint as Fred took off his kilt and reached for the laces of his boots.
‘Race ye!’ shouted Sandy, already in his bathing-trunks.
Together, they splashed out into the cold clear waters of the lake.
A figure in a brown shirt stepped out from behind the bushes and stooping, picked up the leaflets that Fred had left lying on his jacket.
He blew a whistle and a group of men marched down the path with precision, and stood silently on the shoreline.
‘Oh Christ!’
Fred shook the water out of his eyes.
‘Storm Troopers.’
‘Pretend ye don't understand,’ said Sandy urgently.
‘The worst they can do is send us back tae Glasgow.’
MY TOY BLUEBIRD 1937 A.D.
Glasgow grew ever outwards in the thirties, swallowing up the countryside in huge bites as poured-concrete bungalows sprouted out of the fields of Newlands, Merrylee, Cathcart, and all points south.
In Merrylee Park, Newlands 130 bungalows went on sale for £25 down in cash with 21 shillings a week to pay.
The offer included free removal and no legal fees.
MacTaggart and Mickels's showpiece, Broom Estate in Newton Mearns, included bungalows with loggias, a word unfamiliar to Glaswegians in general, but obviously a bargain at the price.
The entire estate was enclosed with glass walls that could be folded back, ‘should the weather prove sufficiently clement’, and some of the bijou residences were also graced with towers and castle-like turrets.
Most of these desirable ‘town cottages’ were in the £450-£750 range.
Something really up-market with walnut veneer in the kitchen and a hand-painted dado in the inside toilet and perhaps, the very latest in all-metal window frames, might break the £1,000 barrier.
Not many teachers bought bungalows.
Students were on a grant of £40 a year and a primary teacher's salary was £18 a month.
Schools went in for a lot of physical education, ‘drill’, which involved jumping about in a drafty hall with your skirt tucked into your knickers  if you were  female.
Sometimes the bicycle shed was pressed into service for ‘physical jerks’ or a quick sortie with the bean-bags, usually in bare feet.
In some schools the janitor was responsible for drill, although by the enlightened year of 1937 this was being phased out together with the use of wooden rifles.
With income tax at three shillings in the pound,diphtheria , bronchitis, tuberculosis, and scarlet fever combining with the efforts of the ubiquitous ‘nit’, teachers in schools in the industrial districts led a very different life from the polite school environment of the West End or the South Side.
Sometimes bungalow-land and the world of the tenements met, however, and Scotland remained a body politic with democracy as its core and Glasgow its heart.
EMILY MacPeake turned the corner from Merrycrest Avenue into Ashlea Drive and then left up Merrycroft Avenue.
The juniper in No 26 next door was looking as tired as she felt as she opened the gate.
David had been promising to paint the new metal design for two weeks now, ever since they had had it fitted.
If they had realised when they answered the advertisement in the Evening Citizen that it was bare metal, they would have gone elsewhere.
David was not very handy.
‘He can't knock a nail in a wall,’ his mother had said before they married.
She was wrong.
He could knock nails in walls.
The drawback was that they fell out again.
Painting gates, fences, and the like was not exactly in his line either.
He was a young and hopeful solicitor, still very junior in the practice.
Most of the other people who lived in the street were professionals, a doctor, two more lawyers, a manager.
There were one or two teachers, but they were, like herself, working wives, a rare phenomenon in largely working-class Glasgow.
But this was the land of trimmed hedges and chuckies in the path.
Window-cleaners called here, there was the occasional gardener, and bread, milk and newspapers were delivered.
It was a quiet street, not two years old.
Emily and her husband, and little Alexander were the first residents at No 28.
The hedges were just beginning to take a firm hold, and the lawns still showed the geometric pattern of the turfs as they had been fitted together.
She walked up the path, her sensible shoes making a crunching sound on the  gravel, and searched in her handbag for the key to the front door.
Before she could fit it in the lock the door opened.
Alexander stood looking up at her.
‘Hello, Mummy,’ he said, hugging her knees.
Mrs Dooley, the lady who ‘did’ for them and was at home when Alexander arrived back from school, hovered in the background beside the hat stand.
She looked worried.
‘Is everything all right?’
Emily closed the door behind her and took her hat off, shaking her hair loose.
‘Oh yes, Mrs MacPeake.
Fine.
Aired the beds like you told me and cleaned the shoes.
I hung the carpets out and gave them a good beating.’
‘It's just that I thought there might be something wrong…’
Alexander ran off down the hall and vanished into the sitting-room.
‘Well, not…wrong, exactly,’ Mrs Dooley lowered her voice and adopted a conspiratorial air, not easy for someone as broad as she was tall, and given to smiles more often than frowns.
‘It's Alexander…’
Emily started forward but the redoubtable Mrs Dooley laid a reassuring hand on her arm.
‘It's all right,’ she whispered.
‘It's just…he's brought someone home for tea.’
Alexander was sitting on the carpet.
Next to him, his back to the gramophone, his friend Danny was looking at one of the Meccano magazines he had been given.
Danny's freckled face and upturned nose was crowned by a shock of bright red hair.
Short trousers, grubby knees, odd socks, and a pair of indescribable shoes that had belonged to his elder brother, completed the picture of a happy child, unlikely to be able  to spell simple words like ‘class’ for a very long time.
‘Here's a great crane, Lexy,’ he leaned forward and shoved the magazine in front of Alexander who was busily driving a toy lorry into an invisible garage.
‘Oh yes,’ replied Alexander.
‘You need a Number Nine set to make that.
I've only got a Seven-and-a-half.
Dad says he will get me more Meccano at Christmas, but I want to buy a pulley and those thick flange-plates in Wylie Hills on Saturday when I get my pocket money.’
‘That would be great,’ said Danny without rancour.
‘Could you make it then?’
Alexander thought better of lying.
‘No,’ he said.
‘But I could make the aeroplane.
There's an Imperial Airways ‘Heracles’, the one that flies to India.’
They both knelt on the carpet and peered at the large magazine, turning the pages.
‘I'll show you my Meccano Club Certificate after tea,’ said Alexander expansively to his new friend.
‘If Dad comes home early we might get my Hornby down off the top of the wardrobe.’
‘Is that ‘00’ gauge?’asked the urchin knowledgeably.
‘No, ‘0’.
But I've got a station and porters, and some milk churns.’
‘What else have you got?’
Danny asked, eyes wide.
‘This!’
Alexander held out a yellow box.
The words ‘Dinky Toys’ were printed on the outside in red.
There was a picture of a long, terribly modern-looking car with fins sticking out the back.
‘Want to see?’
Alexander opened the box and took the contents out without waiting for an answer.
‘It's Sir Malcolm Campbell's.
He did 129 mph in Switzerland and captured the world land-speed record.’
The door opened and his mother came in.
‘Hullo Mum!
’ Alexander stood up.
‘I've brought a friend to tea.
This is…‘
‘Hullo Miss MacPeake,’ said wee Danny, standing up and hanging his head.
His palms were still red from the belting he had got for talking that afternoon.
‘Oh you know Danny, Mum?’ said Alexander cheerily.
‘I was just showing him my new Bluebird.’
TOWER OF THE LATE EMPIRE 1937–1938 A.D.
It was the year of the 39/6 pence washing machine in Lewis's basement.
A hundred warplanes were scouring the east coast of Scotland for a vanished prototype Vickers Wellesley bomber whose crew of three had ‘sandwiches and coffee sufficient for a 12-hour flight’.
Glasgow's great blackout experiment, affecting 400,000 people and covering the triangle from Glasgow Cross to Springburn and Shettleston, brought a deeper night to the city in those darkening days.
In England, a Scots Magistrate at Bow Street ordered that bagpipes were a noisy instrument and unsuitable to be played in Regent Street.
Back in sunny Glasgow, under a placard bearing the words ‘Dinny Doot Him’, Harry Hayward Dinney, ex-pugilist, wrestler, self-styled ‘Birdman of Argyle Street’, was arrested for touting his ‘Genuine Nightingale Warblers’ without a licence.
There was talk of building an air-raid shelter for 250,000 people under Hampden Park, and while plans were being made to dig down beneath the city, in another park, Bellahouston, work was far advanced on the tremendous Empire Exhibition and a tower that would rise 300 feet above Bellahouston Hill, 470 feet above sea-level.
Tait's Tower was to be the symbol of the progress that peace and tomorrow must surely bring.
ANDY pulled back the spring-loaded handle of the machine and released it with a thump.
‘Come on, ya wee toe-rag!’
The silver ball sped up the slight incline lighting up the Bakelite mushrooms as it struck them,ricocheting back and forwards, up and down, before vanishing down the hole in the corner.
It was the last one.
He pushed the wooden frame of the machine violently with the heels of his hands.
The coloured numbers that had flashed into life all across the face of tomorrow-land vanished again.
‘TILT!’ said the sky accusingly.
‘Toe-rag!’ he muttered, picking up the drink that had been standing on the glass above the labyrinth of numbers and wires.
The street door behind him opened.
A tram whined and groaned past and the door closed again.
‘That the Exhibition?’ joked Tam, pointing towards the futuristic city with his cigarette as he walked up.
‘Aye.
Ye wish,’ replied Andy laconically, draining his glass.
‘It's comin' on though,’ Tam waved to the barman and held up two fingers.
The barman laughed and began to pull a couple of pints.
‘I was lookin' for ye,’ continued Tam breezily.
‘If ye can bear to pull yourself away from thon American machine, there's more overtime goin'.
Baxter wants workers for the Sunday.’
‘This is the first afternoon aff I've had in five weeks,’ Andy accepted the cigarette and lit it.
‘That's good.’
He took the cigarette out of his mouth and blew on the glowing tip.
‘How dae ye mean ‘good’?’
Tam looked puzzled.
‘No' the OT, ya steumer!
The fag.
We used to get them for one penny the pack in the navy.
Naw.
The overtime's no good, but I'll dae it.
It's money isn't it?’
Tam paid for the drinks and they walked across to a table by the door.
‘He wants you up the flange-plates,’ said Tam as they sat down.
‘How me?’
Tam waved the paper-boy across and bought the Evening Times .
‘Says he only wants the best men up the top of the tower.
’ Tam opened the paper and began to turn the pages.
‘Aye, well.
Suppose so,’ said Andy, sipping his pint and accepting the flattery with good grace.
‘The Glasgow Steel Roofing Company's daein' well enough out of building Tait's Tower.
I might as well and all.’
‘Look at that!
’ Tam folded back the paper and pointed to the banner headline.
‘The Italians and the Germans are still at it in Spain.
Where's next?’
‘Aye, weel, it'll no' be Govan anyway,’ replied Andy sagely.
‘They couldna' get their tanks over the holes in the road.’
Thomas Tait in the lead, closely followed by Jack Coia, Basil Spence, T. Waller Marwick, A. D. Bryce, and other members of the team, the architects picked their way through the mud and piles of bricks that were to become the Empire Exhibition.
As controlling designer for the exhibition, Tait, together with Coia and Spence, mounted the hoist and began to ascend the half-completed tower.
As they rose upwards into the damp air the site spread out before them on either side.
South towards Cardonald, with the Cat and Dog Home in the distance, lay the facade of the Palace of Industry, from this height, a gentle curve with long glass galleries running backwards towards Bellahouston Drive.
Directly in front of the main entrance, the central avenue was already flanked by the futuristic blue and white towers of the Scottish Avenue and the Pavilions, with the Palace of the Arts closing the end of the triumphal space.
The monumental curves and square buttresses of the United Kingdom Government Pavilion and the sweep of the pillared Concert Hall already dominated the far spread of the exhibition site.
Holding his hard-hat on with one hand, Tait pointed to the left.
‘Did you see the spec’ for the funfair?’he asked the others crowded on to the rattling platform.
Jack Coia nodded.’
It'll be the largest in Europe — 16 acres.’
He looked across at his current projects, the Palace of Industry, North and the Roman Catholic Pavilion.
‘The show needs to be seen from this height!’ he shouted as a rivet gun started battering the iron frame of the tower behind them, ‘but it's not a domestic environment, not at all.’
‘People would love to live at this height above the ground,’ said Basil Spence.
‘Glasgow would be the better for thoroughly modern apartment towers…perhaps in the Gorbals…’
‘You'll be sick if ye eat ony mair o' that, Alexander,’ said Mrs Dooley.
‘Yer mammy said see an' not eat too much at the Exhibition.’
Alexander pushed the last of his toffee bacon and eggs into his mouth with a sticky finger and pointed towards the ‘Rocket Railway’.
Mrs Dooley followed his gaze and shook her head.
‘Oh no…!
I read the wee book.’
She took the official guide out of her handbag and peered at it.’
See,’ she said triumphantly.
‘A wall of death, 60 feet in diameter.’
‘Oh…pleeese!’ wheedled Alexander, picking at her umbrella.
‘There's the water-dodgems then, or the Crooked House of Horror, and there's 50 ‘Brooklands Racers’, the Magic Carpet Tower, Foster's Furious Loop-o-Plane…’
Mrs Dooley believed Alexander needed a firm hand.
‘Not today, mister blister,’ she said.
‘C'mon and see the nice Tele-Vision, whatever that is.’
She leafed through the guide book.
‘There's five underground stations pumping watter 80 foot intae the air frae 50 foot pylons.
Whit aboot that, eh?’
Alexander sulked.
She straightened his school cap and took hold of his hand firmly.
‘Well ye'll do as yer telt!’ she said with a frown.
’‘Mon and look at the nice show in the League of Nations place, or thae big battleships and bombers painted on the walls over there.
Now THAT'S educational…’
A FEW OF THE BRAVE 1939–1941 A.D.
It was only half-past ten in the morning, but the trams were full of people, mainly women on their way home.
They had been queueing since early morning in front of the larger shops and the department stores in Sauchiehall Street, Renfield Street and Argyle Street to buy blackout cloth.
Everyone on the trams and buses was carrying bales and bundles, so that the freak morning rush-hour looked like an immense double-decker funeral cortege, winding its way out of the centre of Glasgow in every direction.
Over eight miles of black cloth were sold in one day.
Men who only went into a shop for ‘baccy’, matches or a paper, were sent round to the local grocer's and butcher's shops to buy up everything that wasn't nailed down.
Hoarding was frowned on, but tinned beans and peas, sugar, flour, anything that could be stored, was soon piling up on top of wardrobes and in garden sheds.
Some people travelled out of the city to outlying towns and villages in search of provisions, plundering the general stores of Kilsyth and Kilmaurs, Bargeddie, Stepps, Drymen and wherever available transport would take them.
Another exodus began at 6.30 a.m. on 1 September 1939, when Glasgow children  began assembling at 57 schools, 70,000 weans scrubbed and labelled for a bewildering adventure.
Every child had a gas mask and a suitcase, or paper parcel.
That night as the lights dimmed across the Clyde valley and the blackout curtains went up, the future of the great city of Glasgow, its children, tried to sleep in faraway beds on the other side of the darkened hills and starless lochs.
Air-raid wardens in tin helmets watched the skies and silence descended on the empty streets.
It was 13 and 14 March before Clydebank, Dalmuir, and Yoker felt the full force of the German terror-attacks.
On the night of the 13th, 237 German bombers dropped 204 tons of high explosives on the Bankies.
The gigantic Singer's Wood Yard, site of the largest clock in Europe, blazed like a beacon, a tram full of people was hit, and as 55,000 struggled to escape, Scotland's first refugees trudged outward from the wreck of their blazing homes.
Radnor Park, Mount Blow, the Holy City were blasted by incendiaries, and a solitary ME 109 flew up Kilbowie Road strafing  the tram that stood on the swing bridge by the canal.
Earlier, in May 1939, No 602 (City of Glasgow) Squadron received its first spitfire, also becoming the first Auxiliary Unit in Britain to be equipped with the new 1000 H.P. 8-gun interceptors.
The men of 602 were part of that group of young men who gave the greatest gift of all in 1941, when the Battle of Britain stopped the Nazi war-machine over the fields of southern England, the Scots accounting for 130 of the 175 enemy aircraft downed.
The reputation of 602 had gone before it.
Within a few weeks of the outbreak of war, the Luftwaffe had a new name for the east coast of Scotland where the skies were patrolled by the young men of the City of Glasgow Squadron, and its leaders, Wing Commander Farquhar, Group Captain the Duke of Hamilton, and Squadron Leader Johnstone.
The Germans called it ‘Suicide Corner’.
THE air war had started in Scotland.
The first pilots to send Luftwaffe bombers spiralling down to crash into the sea were boys, auxiliary pilots who until a few months before had been flying antiquated Gloster Gladiators.
They crossed the bridge of childhood's end on the afternoon of 16 October 1939.
About nine that morning a German pathfinder had been reported over the Firth of Forth.
HQ realised that an attack was coming.
The boys of 602, sitting at their camp tables reading Picture Post or playing chess were scrambled and their marker moved into the Forth Sector.
Wing Commander Douglas Farquhar looked out of his cockpit window and down to the left.
There was a shortage of Brownings, and his little flotilla of airborne cavaliers in their Supermarine Spitfire MK 1s, powered by 1,030 horsepower Merlin II engines, were only armed with four machine guns each.
Far below he could see the lacework shadow of the Forth bridge on the glittering estuary and the long dark lines of the cruisers Edinburgh ,Southampton , and further out, the destroyer Mohawk , under way for Rosyth after convoy duty.
There were no further reports of enemy aircraft, and Douglas ordered his men to land in Fife and re-fuel.
The boys of 602 were on their second cup of tea and the ‘Spits’ half-refuelled when a full-scale bombing raid, the first attack on Britain of the war, began out in the Forth.
Twelve German HE 113s were bombing the Forth Bridge.
The aircraft was known to the German Air Force, or Reichsluftfahrtminsterium for short, as HE 100 D, since the appellation ‘113’ was considered unlucky.
It was.
Douglas scrambled his men and they were airborne within minutes, roaring up into the cloud-flecked sky above the waters of the Forth.
A train puffed steadily across the bridge as spouts and plumes of water stalked up the middle channel towards it from the sticks of bombs raining down.
Tensely, the airmen looked below and saw the crowded train reach the North Queensferry side in safety.
It was then they realised that the German target was not the bridge but the warships in the Firth of Forth.
A bomb missed the Southampton by the breadth of the Admiral's Barge, and another showered the Edinburgh with shrapnel.
The real fire-fight developed over the stricken  Mowhawk  which was hit several times and her captain R. F. Jolly, R. N. was fatally injured and a number of his crew killed.
Without warning, 602 and the Edinburgh Squadron pounced on the Germans, screaming down out of the sun and spraying the marauders with concentrated machine gun fire.
The battle broke up into a series of duels across the skies of Scotland, from Edinburgh to North Berwick.
The Germans were also exploring the quality of resistance in the North, and looking on Scotland, with its coasts so close to Scandinavia, as a possible ‘soft option’ for raids and attacks to the south.
They were wrong.
The douce denizens of Edinburgh looked up in sudden amazement as a Heinkel thundered low across the rooftops beloved of Baillie Nicol Jarvie and disappeared beyond the hills, a spitfire hanging grimly on to its smoking trail and blazing away at it with all four guns.
That same Heinkel managed to escape to the Firth of Forth, turn, and move back for another attack run.
This time he was caught by Douglas Farquhar, the officer commanding 602.
Douglas chased the German back over Edinburgh again for a second time, so low that ‘grannies’ fell off chimneys and empty cartridge cases rained in back-gardens.
A second spitfire came to Douglas's aid and the Heinkel was sent crashing to its doom in the water beside Port Seton.
The first raider had been downed only a short while earlier by Archie McKellar, who saw the attacker crash into the Lothians.
Picturesque cobbled Crail was startled when a third Nazi attacker crashed on the coast nearby.
A fourth was shot down by concentrated anti-aircraft fire.
The battle took a little over half an hour.
The air war had started.
Sir William Wallace would have been proud of them.
THE SHEPHERD WILL TEND HIS FLOCK 1944 A.D.
Towards the end of the Second World War Glasgow became one of the busiest ports in the western world.
As preparations moved ahead for the invasion of Europe, the American Army was landed in Scotland at the Gareloch and Loch Ryan.
Churchill's ‘Mulberrys’, the artificial harbours to be used for the invasion, were constructed on the Gareloch, and capital ships by the dozen, aircraft carriers, cruisers, battleships and destroyers — all lay off the coasts of the west or sailed into the Clyde.
The Glasgow docklands area became a vast storage base with enough emergency supplies to feed the entire United Kingdom.
The hundreds of thousands of letters sent ‘somewhere over there’ were handled through the Port of Glasgow.
The yards were centres of tireless industry.
Ships were built and repaired day and night; over 200 aircraft carriers, almost the same number of cruisers, 34 mighty battleships.
In all, 25, 000 ships were re-fitted and repaired, and almost 2,000 actually built from the keel up.
The Clyde was alive with effort, delivering an unending tide of steel down the slipways and into the Clyde.
The city of Glasgow soldiered on.
There were plenty of soldiers to help it.
Every night the BBC played the national anthems of all the allied powers, and those under Nazi domination.
There was the ‘Stars and Stripes’, the ‘Internationale’ the ‘Marseillaise’, the Polish, Czech, Yugoslavian, Greek, Bulgarian, Rumanian anthems, and many more.
It was a World War, and most of its nationals were in uniform.
Sometimes it seemed like most of them were in Glasgow as well.
THE jeep crawled along Argyle Street and turned right into Union Street by the all-night ‘Boots’.
‘Sure you know where we are Ben?’
Corporal Riley was perched on the spare wheel at the back, ‘Looks like Brooklyn.’
He stared up at the taped and blackened windows passing slowly on either side.
‘Sure is dark in Glasgow!’
‘Have I ever got us lost before?’
The driver, a tall, Bostonian with a taste for Mahler and strong bourbon made the ideal paratrooper.’
Rusty said the Central Station Bar.’
He pulled over to the kerb and struck a match, shading it with his hand.
‘Should be up here somewhere.’
The pencil lines on the back of the Lucky Strike packet that were supposed to represent the commercial heart of Glasgow, somehow didn't match up with the darkened canyon they were driving along.
‘Say,’ said Riley.
‘Here's one of their trams.
Maybe someone could tell us where we are…. if it stops.’
Ben Gratzler, Harvard and Mullen's Bar at 29th on Dearborne, was a graduate of the School of Action.
That's why they had given him his Wings.
He waited ‘till the tram drew abreast of the silent jeep and leaped on to the running board beside the driver.
Ben Gratzler was trained to drop behind enemy lines, kill the signalman, and take over the running of a foreign railway system without stopping for breath.
The No 18 tram for Springburn was not a problem.
‘Say,’ he asked the white-faced driver with a cheery grin.
‘You wouldn't happen to know where this here Central Station is, would you buddy?‘
‘Er…this is the…the front of the tram.
Y…you get on at the back,’ replied the driver in a squeaky voice.
Getting his breath back he took the handle from  Ben and stopped the tram gently.
‘You gave me a helluva fright,’ he said.
‘Ye canna’ just stop trams in the middle of the street.
You ARE on our side, aren't ye?’
Ben roared with laughter.
‘You Scotties are gr…eat.
‘Our side…!’
He laughed uproariously and slapped the driver on the back.
‘Sure you haven't seen Central Station?‘
‘We are right in front of it,’ said the driver.
‘Nae lights.
Ye get bombed in this country if ye show a light.
Now will you either pay yer fare or get off ma tram!’
‘Great, great,’ replied Ben, still laughing as he jumped down and rejoined his comrade in the jeep.
The tram clanged its bell and rattled off angrily into the gloom.
Several cars, headlamps painted deep yellow or with brown paper covering all but a central strip of the light, started up and resumed their journey in the wake of the No 18.
‘Just queueing up,’ Riley nodded at the cars.
‘They waited while you were talkin' to that guy, Ben.
These Limeys sure love queueing.’
‘Scotties,’ Ben corrected him.
‘Great little guys.
Limeys ain't got no sense of humour.
‘You on our side?’
He started to laugh.
‘What was that?’ asked Riley, endeavouring to keep up as the big man strode up the steps to the station concourse.
‘Are we on their side?’ said the giant, roaring with laughter.
‘That sure is rich…!’
Vladislaw Podgorny wanted beef.
‘I'm tellin ye there's nane,’ Isa was adamant.
‘Come and look for yourself.
There's nothin' ‘under the coonter’ here.’
‘Please?’
‘Och give him a sandwich, Isa.’
Sergeant Morrison put his mug of tea down on the greasy bar and turned.
‘You wan o' the Czechs at East Kilbride?’
‘I'm not supposed to say where from,’ said Vladislaw.
He paused for a moment.
‘No.
Not East Kilbride, Poland.’
‘Oh aye,’ said Sandy Morrison with sympathy.
‘Isa.
Gie the man a sandwich.
He's lost his country.’
Isa reached up on tip-toe and took a white cloth from the top of the gleaming tea-urn.
‘Here.’
She used the cloth to slide back a hot glass plate and extract a rather tired looking object.
‘Sandwich,’ she said putting it on a plate bearing the legend LNER.
‘Tomato.
Nothin' to do with me.
All we've got.
Winston Churchill widna' get any better.’
‘Ahh,’ said Vladislaw, happy to call anything that was edible, beef.
‘Thank you madam.’
He clicked his heels.
‘Here, none o' that language,’ said Isa, narrowing her eyes.’
This is a respectable Railway Station Buff-et, so it is.’
‘Don't be daft,’ grinned Sergeant Morrison.
‘Madam’ means ‘Mrs’in Polish.‘
‘I don't care if it means ‘Your majesty’ in flair Polish,’sniffed Isa haughtily.
‘He needs tae watch what he says’.
There's enough o' these furrin' sodgers come in here and try it on.
Here!
’ She turned towards Vladislaw who was happily munching his cardboard sandwich.
‘Where's yer money?’ she held out her hand expectantly.
‘P…ease,’ said Vladislaw, his mouth full.
‘Money.
Gelt.
Ackers…a tanner…’
He looked puzzled for a moment, then turned towards Sergeant Morrison and winked.
‘No zank you,’ he grinned and clicked his heels again.
‘Polish officer not accept money.’
Isa was trying to retrieve her jaw from the counter when the door opened and two Americans walked in.
‘This is the place sure enough,’ said Corporal Riley as they walked over to the Bar.
‘Americans,’ said Isa, slipping behind the tea-urn to moisten her eye-brows with her fingers.
‘Can I help youse boys,’ she smiled archly, the hand with the wedding-ring firmly in her pocket.
‘Sure can, lady…how about a beer?’
‘Make that two,’ said Riley.
‘Your a ‘lady’ now,’Sergeant Morrison smiled at Isa.
Ben turned towards him slowly.
‘Say again?’
Sandy Morrison, only slightly over six feet, held out his hand.’
Welcome to Glasgow, pal,’ he said.
Riley looked up at the tall Scotsman and nudged Ben in the ribs.
‘Sure he's on our side?’ he asked.
THE KYLES OF GLASGOW 1947 A.D.
Since the beginnings of the Glasgow Fair 1,000 years ago, the good people of Glasgow have been determined to enjoy themselves during the annual beanfeast.
Gone were the days of dancing bears and ‘Wild Men of Java’ when hundreds of steamers plied the Fair Fortnight waters of the Clyde at the golden turn of the century.
The Brodick Castle and the Ivanhoe,the Glen Rosa,resplendent in the colours of the Campbells of Kilmun, the Jupiter and the Jeannie Deans, and the Waverley, last sea-going paddle steamer in the world, built for LNER.
Through two world wars, slump and revival, a diminishing fleet had followed the magic wake to Ayr and Saltcoats, the Cumbraes, Brodick, Dunoon, and of course, that name that is synonymous with the Broomielaw, a look at the engines, and the subtle aroma of chips and vinegar on a summer's evening beneath the palm trees of the Kyles of Bute, Rothesay.
After the war, Rothesay saw a revival of its fortunes with a contingent of naval ships based in the harbour, depot ships and submarine crews to augment the trippers and holiday makers who returned to their old haunts after six years of weary conflict.
THE first sight of Rothesay Pier with its clock tower, the Skeoch Woods beyond, spelt two weeks of freedom for more mammies and daddies than there are spokes in the wheels of a paddle-steamer.
Rothesay Pavilion, the Glenburn Hotel, slot machines and sunburn, and a new invention on an island granted its Royal Charter by the King of Scotland in the year 1401…the Co-Op Holiday Camp.
‘We're awfy fortunate in wir neighbours,’ Isa McGhee offered her companion a boiling.
‘On ye go,’ she urged.
‘That's what yer sweetie ration is for, I always say…holidays…’
‘I won't say no, then,’ Masie Toal dug her hand into the paper bag.
‘Sorry!’ she grinned awkwardly as her fingers searched the recesses of the paper and found nothing.
‘Poke's empty, Misees…
Misees.
. eh…’
‘Oh sorry, Misees, eh…’
Isa apologised.
‘That's me gassin' away.
Never get the chance, normally speakin'.’
‘Oh, where'd ye work?’
Masie Toal ducked as a seagull dive-bombed a passing matelot.
‘Catering,’ replied Isa without looking up.
She rummaged about in her brown paper carrier-bag for a few minutes more.
‘Sorry,’ she said.
‘Those bairns of mine are away with them.’
Masie nodded sympathetically.
‘Mebbe it wis yer man.’
‘Him?
The Thing?
He wouldn'y take a poke o' soor plooms unless it had a pint o' heavy at the bottom.’
‘Mine's the same.’
Masie tucked her hair into her headscarf and turned away from the wind.
‘They're aw' the same,’ Isa lifted her knitting out the carrier together with a badly printed pattern clipped from a copy of The People's Friend that she had found on the train to Wemyss Bay.
‘They've been gone a good while.’
Masie looked up at the smoke belching from the red funnel.
‘Your weans were that keen on seein' the engines.’
‘Aw they'll be up to somethin', nae doot,’ Isa's needles clicked and the paddle-wheels of the Jeannie Deans churned on remorselessly through the grey waters of the Clyde, ‘Chunk…chunk…chunk…’
Behind them the shore was already a dimly glimpsed grey line, the individual details of buildings, or a car driving along the shore road, lost under the hazy shadow of hillside and moor beyond.
The lithe vessel left a white wake that stretched all the way back to the long iron and glass walkway of the railway terminal, a thin cord of foam linking the crowded paddle-steamer to a solid world of steam trains, corner shops, and utility furniture.
‘But darlin', the boys wanted tae see the engines,’ Charlie McGhee protested as he struggled on to the bus with three suitcases and an early afternoon hangover.
‘So ye said,’ replied his wife, somewhere in the crush behind him.
‘Just get on.
I'll see you later.’
‘Ye can see me now, more's the pity,’ he grumbled as he pushed his way to the back, treading on a few feet in the process.
‘No' at the back!’
Isa screamed over the heads of the struggling mass of men, weans, dogs, and luggage.
‘That's the bumpy bit.’
Charlie remembered the assault on Monte Cassino with affection.
‘Canny move,’ he shouted back.
‘This is it.’
The bus threw itself into gear, coughed, and started off noisily.
Everyone still standing, and that was at least half the passengers, did a little backwards dance and righted themselves by the simple expedient of taking hold of the person or object closest to them.
The engine of the bus protested bitterly and the close air filled with the heavy smell of petrol as they started up the steep brae.
The holiday had begun.
THE ELEPHANT WAS IN STITCHES 1951 A.D.
It was the year of the first 33 rpm long-playing record and the big hit was ‘Shall We Dance?
’ The United Nations had forces in Korea, the first H-bomb was tested with what was called ‘success’, and a great plan was developed to divide Glasgow up into ‘Comprehensive Re-Development Areas’.
A model was exhibited in a basement near Byres Road that showed a garden Glasgow, green spaces and stands of trees punctuated by pretty towers and an ultra-modern sunken railway system.
Models are not the real thing, and what looked like the something from the future world of Dan Dare on the cover of the new Eagle comic was to be and feel quite a different slab of concrete.
The Gorbals re-development was not to be announced until 1955, but in the land of the prefab, the outside toilet, and the lobby-dosser, the world was long overdue for a change.
In 1951 the population of Glasgow was 1, 055, 020 but new towns like East Kilbride, Irvine, Livingstone, Cumbernauld, and Glenrothes were to bring that total down to just under 900,000 by the early seventies.
The Glasgow of 1951 was still the old Glasgow.
Anderston was a warren of narrow gas-lit streets, of tenements linked together by a spider's web of overhead tram wires, swaying in the wind above the cobbles.
Wilson's Zoo and its sad lion had given way to the brave attempt to create an early ‘Safari Park’ at Mugdockbank.
Calderpark Zoo in Broomhouse was building up a collection of small furry things and a few larger ones, and Easterhouse, Garthamlock and Ruchazie were still bramble-filled lanes between the Edinburgh Road and Stepps.
This was pre-Renaissance Glasgow, blackened with soot, full of heavy industry and shipbuilding, the park divided by the River Kelvin dominated by the grey gothic spaceship of Glasgow University Tower.
Near at hand, on the other side of the Kelvin, the filigree pinnacles and spires of the Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum resplendent in its dress of Locharbriggs red stone outside and white Giffnock inside.
The interior was paved with polished Italian, Belgian, and Norwegian marbles in a variety of designs, cool, full of an Aladdin's Cave of objects and pictures, entertaining and informing the Glasgow way.
By 1951 the Art Galleries had been doing just that for 50 years.
THE wee boy's best shoes clumped on the polished floor as his elder sister let go of his arms.
‘I'll push it for you.’
She pressed the button on the side of the glass case and the cut-away wooden model of the steam engine began pumping its red and yellow striped piston up and down.
They walked away, and the exhibit, full of inertia and its own importance, continued to slide and pump long after they had walked on into the next display.
The Art Gallery was a box of delights of heroic proportions.
Samurai warriors of the Shoguns rubbed shoulders with Eskimos and headhunters.
Pots and vases from the dawn of human history, armour for the ‘small man’ of the middle ages, swords as long as a medium-sized lamp-post, delicately inlaid flint-lock pistols and hunting rifles, rooms and rooms and rooms full of dust-motes dancing in shafts of sunlight, the smell of wax and leather, the long shelves of dead things.
Here lay the Siskin and the Lesser Redpoll, the Snow Bunting, the Roseate Tern, the Ptarmigan, white as drifted snow, the Raven, black as midnight ink.
‘I want to see the animals!’ the wee boy ran on ahead into the main gallery.
His sister followed reluctantly.
‘You know I don't like them,’ she said, standing behind her little brother and looking away.
‘Interested in Zoology?’ asked a tall, white-haired gentleman standing nearby.
‘He loves them,’ said the girl politely.
‘They just look dead to me.’
‘Well, I hope they are,’ the man laughed and took his pipe out of his mouth.
‘I think the tigress and the lion mounted on artificial rocks are especially fine.
It was Doctor Absalom, you know.
He started the illuminated Habitat Groups under the arches.’
He looked at the displays with pride.
Beneath the embossed title ‘Scotland’, an unfortunate eagle flew ‘by wire’ above a painted heathery hill, swooping over the cloth glen on some startled creatures clustered on the plaster earth.
‘Then there's ‘Africa’!’
Their self-appointed guide waved expansively at the huge panels of glass on the other side of the hall.
The girl followed his glance and looked at those triumphs of taxidermy with distaste.
She recognised the stitching that had been used on the elephant.
The old man recognised something of himself in the picture, stepped back and narrowed his eyes.
The figure in the painting spoke of the human spirit and looked out at the world with a serene timelessness, and eyes that knew the great gift of being a master and an artist.
Fur collar hunched round his shoulders, flat hat askew, he was surrounded by a background warm with a sense of movement, an atmosphere thronged with the memories and moments of a long life.
Here was one of the finest pictures in the Art Gallery's collection, one of a life-long series of self-portraits by…
‘Who's that picture of, an auld wumman in a fur coat?’ asked Jim Jackson.
‘I often wonder, ye know.’
‘I see no one here but Rembrandt van Rijn,’ said the old man.
‘Naw.
Naw.
The name's Jackson.
Just come here for a bit o' peace and quiet.
It's aye quiet lookin' at the auld pictures.
Maist of them is in flats, backrooms and that.
Best place fur them, ha, ha!’
‘What do you mean?’ asked the old man, curious in spite of himself.
‘Aw,’ continued the worthy.
‘That Burrell things.
They've nae room for it , here at Kelvingrove, so it's kept all over the west of Scotland hidden away.’
He tapped the side of his nose knowingly.
‘Supposed to be worth a million pounds,’ his voice sank to a whisper.
‘But that's shocking,’ said the visitor.
‘Can't something be done?’
‘Aw I don't know.
Don't know anything about art, like, but I know what I like.
No' that modern splashes oneywey.
Mind ye, they've goat the money tae build anither Gallery, but yon Burrell said it had to be outside of Glasgow so the fog and smoke and that disna' get the pictures.
You know,’ he nodded towards the Rembrandt self-portrait.
‘I've often walked past that picter.
Reminds me of somebody.’
He stared at the old man.
‘You've been here before.
I've a great memory for faces, great.
I could go away and draw yer face for ye.
Jackson the memory man.
When DID I last see ye here in the gallery…let me guess now.’
‘I must be going, perhaps another time,’ the old man excused himself and walked away quietly towards the Flemish Room.
‘I've seen that face SOMEWHERE before…’
Rembrandt van Rijn, an old man in a fur coat made up of colours that breathed, looked out calmly from his gilded frame and watched the light change in the silences of the Art Gallery in the afternoon.
ROCKIN' THROUGH THE RYE 1958 A.D.
The end of kisses and cuddles on the red and green divans of the Green's Playhouse, electric trains to Airdrie and Dalmuir, a mass-murderer loose in Lanarkshire, and ‘Rockin' Through the Rye’.
Change was in the air of Glasgow as surely as Bill Haley, his kiss curl hanging limply over one eye, was singing ‘Rockin' Through the Rye’ and driving an entirely new breed of Glaswegian wild with frenzy…the teenager.
The Gartocher Bar had stood in Shettleston Road since 1688.
‘Modernised’ in 1937 by architect William Ross, the charm that had survived Jacobites, Weaver's revolts, football fracas, and the decline of Empire, had been given a chic exterior of faience and rustic brickwork.
It was only just getting over the shock 21 years later when an apparition sauntered past St Paul ‘s School and round the corner of Gartocher Road into Shettleston Road.
The jacket drooped.
It hung limply from the tubercular shoulders of its master like a wet rag on a cardboard donkey.
Tailored for length, the jacket complemented trousers narrower than the art-deco drainpipes on either side of the ‘Gartocher’ across the road.
The toes pointed slightly outwards and so did the shoes, a pair of the finest winkle-pickers that ever threaded the eye of a needle.
As for the wearer, or bearer of these tokens of the new age that was dawning in the East End of Glasgow, he was just a laddie.
He had more cream on his hair than the Scottish Dairies, and sidelocks swooping down on either side of a pasty jowl.
These had been brought up sharp in a mathematically exact line by one of those old-fashioned razors that the previous generation had employed for more antisocial purposes.
He was a teddy-boy.
IT was early evening in September, and the sky was already losing its lustre as Wully Gurk, the Ted of Balgair Terrace, made his way towards the cafe.
The southern sky lit up as the Clydebridge works dumped its slag and the colours of fire and smoke drifted among the faint stars.
Wully's grandad had been ‘lifted’ down at Carntyne that afternoon.
A crowd of eager ‘punters’, and the illegal betting-shop on the waste-ground at the back of Budhill Avenue were also carted off lock, stock and blackboard.
This meant that his grandad was temporarily unavailable for a ‘tap’, but there was bound to be someone in the cafe who would stand him a coffee.
A group of teenagers sat, wedged in behind the fixed tables and seats in the alcove.
The cafe was divided up by glass partitions, engraved with pictures of propeller -driven aeroplanes emerging from gigantic cloud banks, or simply rays of sunlight darting here and everywhere, right up to the edge of the bevelled glass.
Luigi bustled up to the group.
‘Two coffees, one milk-shake, one sundae.
The bananas have ran out,’ he said apologetically.
‘Hope they paid first!’ said Sandy brightly, and the girls laughed.
‘What you say?’
Luigi opened his purse and searched for change.
‘I was saying, if the bananas have ran out, I hope they…aw, forget it Luigi.
How much is that?’
Luigi looked at the order on the table, nodding his head and moving his lips silently.
‘Four and six,’ he said.
‘Please.’
He held out his hand.
‘We'll all just pay for our own.’
Meg, a brunette with a little too much make-up on, pushed her coins towards Sandy.,
‘No.
That's all right,’ he brushed the money away with the back of his hand, his heart sinking.
‘I can manage.’
He handed the four and six to Luigi.
‘Not goin' to bite the half-crown, are you?’
‘Eh?’ asked the little man.
‘Why?’
‘We thought that Italians always tested the silver to see if it was real.’
Luigi pretended to cuff him across the ear.
‘Good thing I know you are cheeky,’ he smiled.
‘I was in prison here in the war because I was an Italian.’
‘You've told us,’ replied Sandy wryly.
‘Often.’
‘He's only joking, Luigi,’ said the smaller of the two girls, a red-head.
She leaned across to pat his hand and her foam petticoat burst out of its confines under the table.
‘We always come here.’
‘I know this, I know this,’ muttered Luigi, bustling away.
‘Now I'm busty.’
Shocked giggles and sniggers ran round the company.’
He means ‘busy’,’ said Sandy, blushing.
Sarah shook her red curls and leaned across the table.
‘You've gone all quiet, Rob,’ she said to the boy sitting beside Sandy.
‘I'm thinking,’ he said.
‘Looks like it hurts,’ laughed Sandy, wresting the straw away from Meg and drinking her milk-shake noisily.
‘Oh you be quiet,’ Sarah slapped him on the arm and he spilled some ice-cream on the table.
‘I like to have a good conversation with a boy.’
Luigi appeared out of the woodwork and mopped up the spilt cream.
‘Now no carry on,’ he scolded,’…or outa you go.’
‘We could talk about the meaning of life,’ continued Sarah, encouraged.
‘Oh no we couldna',’ said Meg.
‘Here's Wully Gurk comin'.’
Wully Gurk sidled up and squeezed himself on to the end of the seat.
The girls groaned.
‘No' crowdin' you cats, am ur?’ he asked pleasantly.
‘OK, baby?’
Meg looked at him angrily.
‘I'm no' a baby!’ she said.
‘Suit yourself, doll,’ replied Wull, picking a speck of dust off the velvet lapels of his jacket.
‘Hey Luigi!’ he called out, half turning.’
Gies wan o' yer frothy bopper stoppers and make it snappy pappy.’
Luigi continued polishing his new coffee machine.
‘Hey!’
Wull produced a comb out of his breast-pocket and slicked his greasy hair back in slow sweeps.
‘Gies a ‘spresso-presso, daddy-o, you dig?’
Luigi walked across to the little group.
The rest of the youngsters were having problems trying to contain their laughter.
‘You speak to me?’ said Luigi, flicking his dishcloth like the tail of a bull.
‘What a’ you want?’
Wull jerked his head to one side and looked menacing.
‘Get with it!’ he said, slipping his comb back into its holster with panache.
Luigi looked across at Sandy and winked.
‘What he say?’ he asked.
‘He wants a coffee Luigi,’ replied Sandy, choking.
Luigi looked down at the teddy-boy.
‘How do you say in English ‘Have you got any money’?’
Wull raised his eyebrows.
‘Ur you daft or somethin'?
Ye just said it.’
‘Can you pay?’
Luigi was remorseless.
Wull leaned across and pulled back the sleeve of Sandy's jacket.’
Got a watch on?’ he asked.
‘Naw.
Any of youse cats got the time?’
‘Naw.
'Cause you haven't got the money,’ said Meg poking Sarah in the ribs and giggling.
Wull pulled his own sleeve up and down very quickly.
‘Oh!’ he said in surprise.
‘Look at that.
I've tae meet the gang at Kenmore Street the noo.
Nae good if the boss is late!
’ He laughed heavily, stood up, squared his non-existent shoulders, and walked towards the door.
‘See ya later alligator,’ he waved his hand and pretended to be chewing something.
‘Nota if I see you first, crocodile,’ muttered Luigi, patting his new espresso machine affectionately.
THAT MACKINTOSH FEELING 1960 A.D.
I remember 1960, long before Glasgow was locked in the grip of a Renaissance.
Renaissances do happen occasionally.
They descend on Glasgow whenever a few people with talent appear.
The cultural revival has been planned for years by members of the good old Council, members that prefer to stay in the background, having achieved the astounding feat of legislating and pedestrianising their way through the licensing laws, to an atmosphere of continental cultural Bonhomie from Blairdardie to Baillieston.
It is only too easy to forget that there was a time when the fragile flower of Glasgow culture might just as easily have been swept up by the great philistine scaffy man of indifference.
Glaswegians are many things, but they are not indifferent.
A Renaissance had last happened in the days of the ‘Glasgow Boys’ and the other artists, architects and the like at the turn of the 20th century, and one of the stars of that re-birth of style and innovation, was the late, great son of a police superintendent, Charles Rennie Mackintosh.
There was a man at the bottom of Sauchiehall Street.
Andrew was a cross between Dennis the Menace and Jean Paul Sartre, and in the late forties and fifties his flat was full of the aroma of coffee made with milk and boiled in a saucepan, and the company of people like Davy Donaldson, Alfie Avella, Bill Henry, Bet Low, Ernie, a motor bike philosopher who pre-dated Jack Kerouac by 1,000 years, and various other artists, and literati, who were encouraged by Andrew to give up their jobs driving buses or whatever and accept the roving hard-luck life of the creative.
This was in a city still grey with rationing and demob suits, but it was a beginning.
ANDREW put down his binoculars and moved away from the grey lace that hung from the curve of the curtain-wire in front of his window.
‘Come in, boy, come in,’ he waved to a comfortably dusty easy-chair beside a pile of books and papers.
Andrew Taylor-Elder was an enigma with many variations.
He was said to have had a family in Belgium at one point, known Janke Adler, met Gauguin in a park, scribbled all over the statues at L'Ecole des Beaux Arts when a student in Paris, and lost all his money when the Japanese had the bad taste to conquer his rubber plantations sometime during the confused struggle for Manchuria during the opening stages of the last big one.
He was, in fact, a Socrates of no mean accomplishment, and had given his life over to making people think, never an easy or popular task.
The flat, just across the corridor from the School of Modern Languages, was something of a crucible for the variety of aspiring hopefuls and creative folk who occasionally called on the recluse.
Few emerged from Andrew's company unchanged.
Some loved him, others hated him, but everyone respected what little they ever found out about this strange ‘refusenik’ who was part of no group or establishment, yet managed to affect so many people's lives.
The visitor sat back and watched the alchemy of the coffee take shape as the slightly stale odour of boiling milk permeated the room and steamed up the windows that looked down into Sauchiehall Street.
‘Well boy?’
Andrew asked.
It was the kind of question that demanded an answer.
‘Been up at the School today,’ replied the visitor.
‘He's been up at the School!
’ Andrew raised his eyebrows and confided in the corner of the room.
‘The boy's been at school!’ he laughed.
‘We set fire to it,’ said the visitor, anxious to make some kind of philosophical statement.
‘Oh yes?’
Andrew yawned, decanting the stewed milk into a heavy mug, granules of coffee bean floated on the surface.
’…But did you LEARN anything?’
‘I said…’
‘I heard you the first time, boy.’
Andrew sat down on the corner of the bed, his aged and baggy trousers flaring about him like the leggings of a geriatric Zouave.
‘We used to do that sort of thing in Paris.
Climbed over the railings when the place was shut and did all sorts of things to the statues and the balconies.
So.
Set fire to the place!
Nobody will notice.
If there was a helluva crash along the road and 19 buses fell off the bridge into Queen Street Station nobody would notice.’
‘I know,’ said the visitor, nodding agreement.
‘Ah.’
The eyebrows shot up again.
‘Know, do you?
If I said to you, ‘I saw a chair going down the road yesterday and…’ you would interrupt and say, ‘That belongs to Mr So-and-So, 316 Carphalute Quadrant North, Lesmahagow, AND his dog has the croup, and last year he lost his…‘’
‘I don't know everything!’ protested the visitor, sitting forward in his chair.
‘Glad to hear it,’ Andrew smiled.
‘What else have you been doing?’
‘Well, I climbed up on the roof through the window of the ladies’ toilet, and hung a string of underwear from the Mackintosh Bird…for charity.’
Andrew roared with laughter.
‘Good!
Good!
There's hope for the boy yet!’
‘Yes,’ the boy continued.
‘You should see the roof.
Nobody ever goes up there.
The rest of the Mackintosh building is beautiful, the corridors twisting inside it like a folded castle in coloured stone, the light from the stained glass in the inch-thick doors…’
He became excited.
‘But Andrew, the roof is marvellous!
It's like Gaudi in Spain.
Mackintosh has covered the place in arches and ceramics, what Benno Shotz would call ‘Kerramiks’, and there are little twists and spirals of metal and stone.
It's a sculpture garden above the eye-level of the birds.
And when you look about, there is the city, grey on grey, flowing outwards in every direction.
The only green is the green of the copper domes, and…’
Andrew interrupted him…’
Something else was ‘set fire to' today.’
The boy ignored him and continued, enraptured.
‘I climbed into the little turret down from the Bird.
They had to get old Mr Letham in his green coat and brass buttons to struggle up and get the flag of clothes down, but up there, the last name carved in the sandstone right up there on the corner looking down over Glasgow, was in 1910.
Now there's mine in 1960…50 years later.’
‘Nobody else mad enough to crawl over the rooftops for 50 years!’
Andrew complained to the ceiling.
‘I said that something was set on fire today.’
‘So did I.’
‘No, I said it next, boy.
You were.’
The visitor sipped his coffee and looked at the impish old man with his goatee beard.
‘If I was a person who believed in such things…’
‘What things, and do you?’ interrupted his visitor.
‘Not telling,’ said Andrew,l'enfant terrible to the last.
‘But you are, boy.
You are telling me that up there on the stone face of Glasgow your soul was set on fire.’
= A STREETCAR NAMED AUCHENSHUGGLE 1962 A.D
Tollcross and Parkhead, Scotstoun, Cowcaddens, London Road, the voyage of discovery to Auchenshuggle, and ‘The Land of Oz’ at the Roxy, Maryhill.
Nights of fog and days of rain, cobbles and kerbs, and bagwash in a pram, land of the hard man and the wee hauf, the upper cottage flat and the fossil groves of tenements, where ships sailed by the end of the street, and the closes echoed with the cries of skelped weans and the rumble of passing trams.
When the last tram ran through Glasgow in September 1962, and two days later, the Burgh of Clydebank ran its last tram, it was like the loss of some favourite place and time a vision of childhood vanishing down the sink in the wash-house.
Men, women and children of all ages, wept openly at the going of the blues, and the yellows, the white and the green and the orange, the last of the ‘Standard Bogies’, the Cunarders, the ‘Coronations’ and the single-decker from Dalmuir.
They were all there on the last day, even down to the original.horse-drawn trams, rattling or gliding past in stately line-astern, a fleet from decades gone, past the Central Hotel and the ‘Mal’, up Hope Street, and bidding farewell to Argyle Street under the gateway of the Hielan' Man's Umbrella .
TEENY McGuire shouted from the kitchen, ‘Gonny turn that aff!
I canna’ hear it with this watter runnin'.’
‘It's no' you that's watchin' it, anyway.
I'm waitin' for my results to come up.’
The tap in the kitchen was turned off and there was a moment's silence.
Teeny appeared in the doorway, wiping her hands on the dish-towel.
‘See you and yer coupon!’ she said.
‘Are we goin' out the night or not?’
‘Aye darlin',’ her husband clasped his knees and leaned closer to the flickering grey screen.
‘In a minute.’
‘No' in a minute.
You didna' hear a word I said, did ye, John McGuire?
Well, I just hope it comes up, that's all I can say.’
‘The boys in the work won last week,’ he replied, reaching for the ‘coupon’and the picture on the screen faded to be replaced by strident music.
‘Aye, alang with about 10,000 ither folk.
How much did they get again?’
‘Twelve pound sixteen and eightpence.’
‘Fine, fine,’ snorted Teeny.
‘We can go and visit Senga and thaim in Southern Rhodesia.
He's daein' fine now.
Livin' off the fat o' the land oot therr.
No' like Porkheid, I kin tell ye.
’ She turned and vanished into the kitchen.
The sound of running water returned with renewed violence and John leaned forward and turned up the telly.
‘And now for the football results…’ the announcer said in perfectly modulated Standard English.
‘Scottish League Division One…’
Several miles away in Queen Margaret Drive, a BBC technician knelt down beside a music stand and gently pulled a strip of card aside revealing some names and numbers.
In Parkhead John McGuire watched the black and white screen with a tense fascination that would not have been unfamiliar to Christopher Columbus when he first saw the West Indies float over the Caribbean horizon.
‘Cowdenbeath 6…
St Mirren 4.
Queen of the South 0…
Airdrieonians 2.
Third Lanark 2…
Partick Thistle 2.
Celtic I…
Rangers 1.’
The voice droned on and John scribbled ‘X’ s or ‘O’s frantically, occasionally muttering to himself.
‘Home, Away,’ or ‘Bugger’.
‘It's out!’ the voice floated through from the kitchen with a smell of fresh chips and hot beans.
He continued scribbling.
Teeny appeared in the doorway.
‘I said…your tea is out, John McGurie.
It'll get cold.’
‘Minute…’ he replied without looking up.
‘I said…’
‘Teeny!’ he shouted standing up and knocking his packet of cigarettes and lighter on the floor.
The dog ran under the table.
Teeny opened her eyes wide and gaped.
‘John…
John’ she said in a whisper.
‘John.
Ye…havna’?’
‘Naw,’ he replied angrily, crumpling up the pools coupon and throwing it at the television set.
‘I havna’.’
It was Sunday, and dead as the proposal to market a can of ‘Diet Guinness’.
John McGuire was slightly the worse for wear after his night out with his wife.
Nothing moved in the entire length of Westmuir Street.
Beardmore's loomed like a sleeping giant over the hill, and down towards Shettleston Road a break in the clouds painted a fleeting blue on the topmost windows of the tenements.
A cloud of steam crawled slowly upwards from the chimney of Wellshot Baths.
They were cleaning the steamie.
John walked down the hill, on his way to meet some of the lads in the town.
To have a drink on a Sunday, he had to be a ‘bonna-fide traveller’, and had to go at least three or four miles before he would be served.
He walked on manfully, cutting down Springfield Road towards London Road.
In the distance he could hear a familiar rumble growing louder.
A ‘Coronation’ tram, No 1174, swayed into view and he began to run for the stop.
His feet and his heart pounded faster and faster on the pavement and he found himself racing neck and neck with the tram as it approached the fare stage.
Without stopping, the double-decker tramcar, its lights blazing, whined away into the distance.
John stood, leaning against the upright, panting noisily.
‘Missed the tram, did ye?’ asked an old man leaning against the close mouth.
‘Looks like it,’ gasped John.
‘Last wan, that,’ the old man tapped out his pipe on the wall where the railings had been taken away to make munitions and never replaced.
‘There will be anither in a while surely?’
John was getting his breath back.
‘Naw.
Yer wrang there,’ the old man smiled.
‘Nae mair.
That wis the last wan ever.’