

Does Area Team Organization Make a Difference?
ROGER FULLER and ALISON PETCH
Roger Fuller has held research posts in universities, a local authority and the National Children's Bureau.
Alison Petch has undertaken research in a range of social policy areas, in both local authority and university settings.
They are currently at the Social Work Research Centre (SWRC), University of Stirling, which is jointly funded by the Economic and Social Research Council and the Scottish Office.
SUMMARY
The paper describes early stages of a programme of research designed to investigate the effects of different ways of organizing social work teams.
Initially conceived as an attempt to study the relative effectiveness of specialist and generic team organization, the focus has been broadened to encompass a range of wider and sometimes cross-cutting organizational variables.
After a brief review of attempts to specify organizational characteristics and of the methodological problems they pose to the researcher, a preliminary study is reported.
This compared services to the elderly delivered by teams exemplifying some of the more prominent organizational types.
The study tentatively identifies a number of factors which distinguished between teams in social work activities and in rudimentary measures of client outcome.
The dimensions of further work which would fill out these early findings and explore further organizational effects are sketched.
Few would dispute the diversity manifest in the organization of social services delivery, both amongst area teams (Challis and Ferlie, 1987) and at secondary level (Challis and Ferlie, 1986).
Yet this considerable variation in organizational model appears to arouse remarkably little interest in its consequences.
The initial (naïve) enthusiasm of the researcher with a new line of enquiry is greeted with a seeming conspiracy of silence.
Perhaps to some extent this represents a legacy from Seebohm, a queasiness at what may be inaccurately interpreted as a retreat from the generic ideal.
Perhaps it is an acknowledgement of the genuine complexity of the issue, likely to be deepened by the uncertain light cast on the future of the area team by the Griffiths recommendations (Griffiths, 1988) for the development of the case-manager role and   other significant changes in service delivery.
Perhaps, more cynically, it reflects a weariness on the part of those subject to multiple restructurings on the apparent whim of new management.
The initial interest of the Social Work Research Centre was in the desirability and feasibility of comparing the effectiveness of generic and specialist modes of organization.
Early conceptual clarification (Petch, 1987) confirmed both greater diversity than the simple dichotomy and the presence of alternative dimensions, for example decentralization and accountability, which both parallel and cross-cut the organizational debate.
In this paper we trace the main contributions to the debate and then present the results from a first attempt, with one client group (the elderly) and with a small number of teams (four), to pin-point differential outcomes amongst the most prominent models of area team organization.
The literature in this area is fragmentary and tends either to be definitional or descriptive.
In the wake of the Seebohm Report (1968) there was extended debate both of potential definitions of specialist and generic and of the specific interpretations which were intended by the Report.
More recently, there have been a number of attempts to capture and characterize the patterns that are actually emerging in departmental organizations.
There is also the recurrent debate over the degree of specialization that should be incorporated in social work education.
The semantics of what was originally conceived as a specialist-generic debate have been explored in particular by Vickery (1973) and by Hey (1979).
Vickery points to the distinction between a generic training or a generic profession and the notion that the individual worker should be generic, suggesting that ‘the concept of the generic in social work is probably only valid at a fairly high level of abstraction’(p. 262).
The interpretation intended by Seebohm remains uncertain and as with much legislative debate it may be less than profitable to seek exactitude in a vague formulation.
Many agree however that to maintain that the Report argued for a single worker appropriate to all situations is false, and would endorse Hey in her suggestion that generalist, even general purpose, may be the more appropriate term for the individual the Committee envisaged.
At the opposite end of the spectrum, there were problems also in the definition of specialization.
Hey (1979) suggests that Seebohm employed a variety of understandings, shifting from concentration on closely defined function to notions of distinctive competence.
Vickery (1973) argues that it is only the latter, based on knowledge and skills that are at an advanced level rather than merely different, that should qualify as specialization.
Hey, in reviewing the nine recommendations by Seebohm relating to the organization of workers and to  specialization, concludes that three elements are critical — the kind of work, the branch of work and the level of work.
Despite the definitional problems, some would argue that some form of specialization is an inevitable feature of organizational development.
For professions in a complex society, the question becomes not whether to specialize internally but how to co-ordinate these specialities into a comprehensive whole (Leighninger, 1980, p. 2).
The challenge is seen as identifying the optimum level of specialization before alleged dysfunctions of fragmentation and introversion emerge.
Both for the UK (Stevenson, 1968) and for the US (Leighninger, 1980) the evolution of the generic-specialist debate in the context of professional development has been traced.
The need for a common base is presented and Leighninger highlights in particular two recent models of integration, the skills generalist with a common repertoire of concepts, skills, tasks, and activities, and the knowledge generalist with a cohesive core of common knowledge.
Any consideration of the knowledge and skills debate almost inevitably leads to attempts to clarify the nature of the social work task itself (Gordon and Schutz, 1977; Gross et al .,
1982).
It may be more profitable however to resist such diversion and to retain the focus on this distinction between knowledge and skills.
Hey (1976) for example examines the practice of specialists (by client group) and concludes that what many cite as their distinctive attribute is the element of knowledge.
She identifies five types of knowledge which she found common to different specialisms, including knowledge of legislation, of statutory and departmental policy and procedure, of statutory and voluntary resources, of patterns or syndromes specific to the group, and, where work was multi-disciplinary, of the value systems and work processes of the other occupational groups.
By contrast, particular skills tend only to be identified by those who have specialized by method of intervention (for example, marital counselling) or by client sub-group (for example , fostering and adoption).
This distinction appears potentially important and one which in turn generates other questions.
Does the worker embark on a specialism having already acquired particular knowledge and/or skills (and if so how), or is there an assumption that by specializing this knowledge and/or skills may be attained?
An imaginative range of possibilities for specialization have been mooted, varying from the client system (for example, individual, family group, community) or the type of problem (for example , delinquency, bereavement, addiction) to the change objectives (for example , social rehabilitation, behavioural change, motivation), level of intervention (for example , psychotherapy, information giving, education) or specific  treatment method (Vickery, 1973; Cypher, 1980).
In practice however only specialization by client group has become an established model, although increasingly there may be some evidence of a diversity of specialisms being adopted within client groups, most particularly within child care.
More importantly, however, the model alone is not sufficient, for it must be placed in the context both of the individual social work team and of the local authority department as a whole (Hill, 1980).
Most specifically, which types of specialist focus demand a particular team structure; which alternatives can function on both an individual and on a team basis?
Furthermore, how should the particular configuration of, for example, the community social work team (promoted by one of its main advocates as ‘true genericism’,(Jordan, 1982)) or the intake team (Gostick and Scott, 1982) be encompassed?
Those who have attempted empirical mapping of the prevalence of different organizational types (Challis and Ferlie, 1986, 1987; Cypher, 1980; Howe, 1980, 1986) have charted the increasing emergence of a process of specialization, characterized by Cypher as ‘specialization by stealth’, and often accompanied by some hierarchical classification of both client and worker.
This mapping is by definition descriptive in character and as such unconcerned with the effects of the different organizational types it reveals.
The intention of the comparative research by Black et al .
(1983) to examine how social work delivery should best be organized (particularly in rural areas) held more promise in this respect, but in the event the argument becomes somewhat diffuse, the rural-urban dichotomy apparently not validated and the status of various organizational differences uncertain.
Indeed they argue that differences between teams are neither evident nor important.
Nonetheless there are important reminders that any study of team level effects should not be divorced from considerations of the broader political and organizational context.
A more useful, albeit theoretical, contribution is made by Challis and Ferlie (1987) when they ground their discussion of the various organizational developments in an examination of different criteria of efficiency, arguing that ‘the attempt to disentangle the arguments for various alternative approaches to traditional generic practice into their expected contributions to different aspects of efficiency provides an agenda for valuable research’(1987, p. 165).
In seeking to contribute to this research agenda we need to address a number of issues which emerge both from this earlier literature and from some initial observation in a number of social work teams organized in differing ways.
How, for example, is an organizational type to be defined and how many are to be selected?
Is the area team to be the focus or is organization at secondary level to be addressed?
Are we to concur with Stevenson's conclusion (1981) that ‘it is hard to see how  we can escape in general in organization of service from the broad client groupings, now so deeply entrenched in social service provision and in the linkages which are required with other professions’(p. 100), and if so how are we to select client group(s)?
From whose perspective are we interested in the problem?
Our primary concern above dictates the inclusion of certain client outcome measures across the organizational types, but are we interested also in outcomes as perceived by the client, the worker, by management or by other agencies?
More specifically, what should be the specific outcome measures that are selected and to what extent should they represent ‘final’ outcomes or more intermediate measures that may signify process?
Central to the whole debate, however, it should be borne in mind that in order to differentiate between different organizational types it would be necessary to demonstrate, firstly, that workers in different models behave differently and secondly, that this differential behaviour has an effect.
Initially, the three key research questions are therefore:
Do individual social workers work in different ways in teams of different organizational types?
Do any differences in ways of working arise from the organizational differences?
Do any differences in ways of working have an effect on outcomes for clients in terms of services delivered and hence effectiveness?
In seeking to explore the effects of different organizational types, a particular concern must be to devise a methodology sufficiently robust to counter the argument that any emerging differences may be a corollary of the differential skills of the particular workers who happen to occupy the posts in the different teams.
The assertion that ‘good’ workers are good and ‘bad’workers bad irrespective of location (and that that is all that needs to be said) must be displaced or qualified by a demonstration that organizational form exerts an influence.
THE PRELIMINARY STUDY
The methodological challenges sketched above are considerable, and seemed best tackled in a stage-by-stage manner.
Research began with the aim of seeking to establish that any effects of organizational differences are researchable.
A preliminary study has compared social work response and service delivery across organizational types, with the objective of seeing in what ways these differed, and whether any differences could plausibly be related to the factors (for example of  knowledge and skill) said to distinguish in broad terms the organizational types.
The field was delimited in a number of ways:
1.
Representatives of four obviously contrasting types of team organization were selected, comprising generic and specialist teams, a team of individual client group specialists, and a team espousing a Community Social Work (CSW) approach.
While the latter belongs to a separate organizational dimension, it seemed of interest to test the feasibility of addressing the issues that the ‘community’ approach might raise.
2.
The focus was on a single client group (the elderly).
This choice had advantages of feasibility, but was not made without the reservation that advantages for the generic approach might lie in its ability to transcend client group stereotypes; this seemed less of a problem, however, with elderly people, who fall rather less ambiguously into a self-contained category of client than some others.
3.
Full control of potentially contaminating factors was not sought, and is probably not feasible.
Such factors include levels of provision, ‘secondary’ organizational factors (that is, at levels other than that of the team), worker idiosyncrasies, and demographic characteristics of areas served.
Ideally, the teams studied might have been serving similar populations with similar levels of staffing and other resources, and the samples might have been carefully standardized.
The study, however, was dependent on teams volunteering to take part, and even without this it is difficult to imagine a design which would match teams on all dimensions.
A degree of standardization was, however, attempted with the sample, which was to consist of those cases (whether new referrals or existing cases) for whom an assessment was made for one or other of three specific types of service provision: residential care (‘Part 4’ in Scotland), respite or short stay care, and day care.
As might be expected this resulted in the reduction rather than the elimination of disparities between the samples, some of the problems being discussed below.
The target was to obtain a sample of thirty cases, of whatever case category, in each team area.
The sample was to be obtained retrospectively: teams were asked to identify relevant cases dating from at least twelve months before the data collection point.
Information was extracted from case files.
The data comprised some thirty variables, including basic personal data, referral and allocation, assessment, service provision, details of continuing involvement and re-referral.
The use of files imposed limitations on the types of valid and reliable data that could be obtained; data analysed represented a compromise between these limitations and what were thought to be useful indicators of the manner or  style of assessment and service delivery.
In addition there were a small number of semi-structured interviews in each area with social workers.
THE TEAMS
The four teams were:
a)
a team specializing in work with elderly clients (Team A);
b)
a generic team with individual workers having generic caseloads (Team B);
c)
a generic team in which individual workers specialize in client groups (Team C);
d)
a generic team adopting a CSW approach (Team D).
Team A operates in a city, covering a geographically-defined area within it of approximately 95,000 population.
The team specializes in work with the elderly, and consisted at the time of five full-time equivalent (FTE) qualified social workers.
Their specialized working is recognized as creating staff development problems and it is agreed that they may devote up to fifteen per cent of their time to work with other client groups; in addition they take part in a duty rota, and thus handle the full range of initial enquiries.
Team B is based in a small town and covers a mixed area of small towns and villages, serving a population of about 14,000.
The team consisted of four FTE social workers and a 1/3 FTE social work assistant (with a part-time social work assistant post unfilled).
Each member works with the full range of referrals.
Team C operates in a medium-sized town with some outlying rural areas and serves a population of about 13,000.
The individual worker who specializes in the elderly is a social work assistant, who carries a caseload of approximately sixty.
Team D operates in a rural and mountainous area, and serves a scattered population of approximately 12,000, which includes numbers of ‘incomers’ and has in addition a floating holiday population.
The team consists of two full-time social workers and one half-time, in addition to a team-leader who carries a caseload.
FINDINGS
Data collected from files yielded a set of variables for three of the four teams on referrals, initial response (allocation and assessment), services provided, and subsequent developments.
In Team D, however, the data  collection strategy failed to produce a comparable sample, for various reasons concerned in part with the way the CSW approach operated (see below).
Main comparisons are therefore based on three teams only.
It was an entirely open question whether these data would show any relevant differences of procedure and practice at all.
In what follows the similarities and differences are briefly summarized.
In some instances two of the teams are similar, while the third differs; in others, all three differ.
Teams A, B, and C are similar in that for a client to obtain a service, the case is allocated after referral to a social worker who assesses the circumstances, makes a recommendation, and if applicable follows it up.
The procedure in Team D is less easy to categorize; in new referrals it is much the same, but these may constitute a somewhat lower proportion of the team's work.
The structure appears therefore to be rather more fluid.
The assessment commonly takes as its main form one or more visits to the client and clarificatory discussion with them of the reasons why a service is being sought and of the implications of providing it.
Behind this basic structure, teams were found to differ on a number of variables.
Unless otherwise stated, differences reported between teams were statistically significant at the 0.05 level, sometimes with variables collapsed or dichotomized in view of small cell sizes.
REFERRAL SOURCE (see Table 1)
The specialist team, whose individual members maintain links with particular health centres, had more health centre referrals than the others, while the individual specialist more self and family referrals.
SERVICES REQUESTED
A rather higher proportion (n.s.) of referrals to the specialist team came in the form of requests for general assessment rather than for specific services.
When referral sources were examined in the light of this, it was found that medical and family referrers were each making different kinds of demand in the three areas.
In two of the teams the majority of requests for residential care came from health centre staff, while in the third (the individual specialist) self and family referrals accounted for most of these.
RECOMMENDATIONS (see Table 2)
The specialist and the generic teams made substantially more recommendations of ‘no further action’ following assessment than the individual specialist, who always recommended a service.
The specialist team displayed a slight tendency (n.s.) to recommend a wider range of alternative services.
NUMBER OF VISITS
During assessment, it was more frequently the case (approaching significance) for the specialist team than for the other teams that more than one visit was made to the client.
RESPONSE TIMES
Immediate response (allocation and visiting) can be distinguished from ultimate response (recommending and activating service-provision).
In the early stages the generic team responded more quickly, but the specialist team completed the assessment process sooner.
SERVICE RECEIVED (Table 3)
If we consider the three services which formed the criteria for inclusion in the study, one or other of those was received by 35 per cent of cases in the specialist team, by 38 per cent in the generic team, and by 87 per cent in the team with an individual specialist.
If clients placed on waiting lists are added, the figures are 42 per cent, 48 per cent , and 100 per cent respectively.
The differences here between the first two teams are insignificant, but the difference between them and the third team is striking.
Though because of small expected frequencies it is difficult to demonstrate significance, the specialist team seemed more likely to provide an alternative service than the generic team.
Thus, of the clients who did not receive the residential, short stay, or day care, other services were either provided or arranged for 20.6 per cent of cases in the specialist team and for 6.9 per cent of cases in the generic team.
In the remainder of the cases in the first two teams, either no service was offered, service was declined by the client, or the assessment was preempted in some way (for example, by the client entering hospital).
The closest correspondence between services requested and those received (Table 4) was found in the individual specialist worker's cases.
Differences here clearly warrant further investigation, and when revealed to the participating teams provoked considerable discussion.
CASE CLOSURE
The specialist team closed a larger proportion of cases within six months, and the specialist worker kept open a strikingly larger number of cases beyond nine months.
The generic team occupied an intermediate position.
POST-ASSESSMENT ACTIVITIES
Cell sizes became too low here to establish significance, but the following trends were apparent in the data.
In terms of visiting and recorded contacts with other agencies, the specialist team displayed a clearer pattern of activities than the other teams: while cases remained open they visited more, and did not ‘monitor only’; if closed and re-opened, cases came back for re-assessment in fewer numbers; and in both categories the rate of contacts with other agencies was higher.
While cases remained open, re-assessment for one of the same group of services took place to a more marked extent in the generic team and by the individual specialist than in the specialist team.
Both the generic and specialist teams received higher rates of re-referral (that is, of the sample clients) than the individual specialist, who, however, kept cases open for longer periods.
THE COMMUNITY SOCIAL WORK TEAM
In Team D it proved impossible to identify sufficient cases.
This was partly due to certain features of record-keeping practice, but more  particularly there were simply insufficient relevant referrals over a reasonable period.
At the relevant time there existed only one day-care place and severe restrictions on access to Part 4 accommodation.
‘Softer’ data were, however, gathered: interviews were held on a small number of cases, and a single case-example was further explored through the use of a vignette based on an actual case from another area, a technique which may be further developed in future work.
Given the likelihood that in a CSW team there is both a tendency to keep files open to reflect the ‘streetwork’ and informal contact that is maintained, and a probability that intervention will occur prior to demands for day or residential care, the strategy adopted may have identified only a minority of the cases actually dealt with.
This, as might be expected, is an extreme example of an issue that applies also in other areas: differing and sometimes intangible conventions on what constitutes a live, closed, or dormant ‘case’.
‘Caseness’ may be blurred in a setting where relationships with the community are close.
Examples were given of regular meetings or occasions which enabled workers to identify and keep track of people in the community, regardless of whether they had the status of an active case.
These included weekly meetings (formal and semi-formal) with Health Centre staff, some of whom wore more than one hat and could therefore speak from different perspectives; regular visits to lunch clubs, where lunch was shared with attenders; visits to old people's homes.
These activities could well take place in other areas, but the impression given in Team D was that this kind of informal or semi-formal engagement with vulnerable sections of the community, recorded only patchily, constituted a prominent part of the social work approach.
The difference is best illustrated by a case example.
A referral was received concerning an elderly woman who knew that residential care would be necessary at a future point; she was assessed in the normal way, and placed on the waiting list.
The case remained technically open for some time, with sporadic review rather than monitoring (because, it was said, anything requiring active intervention would have been readily made known); finally events made residential care inevitable, and were immediately notified by the GP.
The placement was duly made, several years after the first formal contact.
The case remained open after placement, and would be subject to six-weekly review within the home.
As the team leader was chair of the allocation and review committee, he was well aware of the current situation, though entries would not always be made in the social work file.
What we appear to have here is a system where the structure of intervention, as displayed in the file data in other areas, bears only an indirect relationship to what actually happened in Team D. (The  specialist worker in Team C may have been operating in ways that in some respects are not wholly dissimilar, but the approach of the specialist team would seem radically different).
A higher proportion of the CSW team's notional ‘elderly’ time was devoted to work with people not yet clients, or ‘not exactly’clients (whether they were regarded as open cases or not seemed to be a matter of chance).
This aspect of the work is difficult for a case-by-case research strategy to identify firmly.
It relied on an effective flow of information between agencies (see below) and from the community and was undertaken with a view to avoiding crisis intervention and undue reliance on statutory services.
Social networks, for example, might be fostered for those at risk of becoming isolated.
These activities might be characterized as preventive rather than casefinding.
The relationship between Team D and other agencies (or other parts of the SWD) is complicated (or perhaps, for the participants, simplified) by the inter-relatedness of the system components in the area.
Thus, for example(as mentioned above), the team-leader also chairs the group which allocates places in homes as they become vacant, and is heavily involved in sheltered housing and housing association allocations: at one point the district nurse ‘tripled’ as health visitor and midwife.
One evident result of this, whatever others there might be, appears to be that much information about clients and potential clients is shared informally, so that, for example , information could come ‘straight from the surgery’ in advance of a more formal notification of the episode which triggered the eventual admission of the case outlined above.
DISCUSSION
From these summarized findings it is possible to derive tentative profiles of the activities of the first three teams.
These profiles obtain their distinctive features only in comparisons between teams, since no norms, whether of ‘good’ or of standard practices, were sought.
The specialist team receives more referrals from medical sources and more in the form of requests for general assessment, though these are not synonymous.
They carry out rather more visits per case during assessment.
Relatively high use is made of the NFA recommendation, and a wider range of services are both recommended and provided.
A lower proportion of their clients receive one of the three main services for which they were referred.
The team processes cases more quickly and closes them earlier; of those that remain open, relatively few are reassessed, but cases tend not to be kept open for ‘monitoring only’.
The generic team is often in a middle position in the items recorded.
It  has no particular pattern in its referral sources, and assessment visits are at an ‘average’ level.
Its initial response is relatively prompt.
It also recommends NFA quite often and recommends and provides rather fewer alternative services.
The provision of the main services is at a level similar to the specialist team's.
There is a higher incidence of clients refusing services.
While cases remain open, more clients are re-assessed, and after closure more are re-referred.
The individual specialist receives notably more self and family referrals, often, in what may be historically special circumstances, for day care.
The response times are ‘average’ and somewhat fewer visits are made during assessment.
No use is made of the NFA recommendation, and, uniquely, all clients receive one or other of the main services, almost invariably that which was requested.
After completion of assessment, cases are kept open, though with fewer re-assessment episodes, and of those which are closed there are relatively few re-referrals.
There was no clear-cut expectation beforehand about how successful the research strategy would be in identifying differences in procedures and outcome between the teams studied.
Some differences have been noted which do not appear to be trivial.
Of those which are more than mundane, or artefacts of administrative or file-keeping practices, some can be accounted for in terms of plausible expectations of the organizational models, others only indirectly so, and yet others more difficult to explain.
It remains to discuss how they might be characterized, interpreted, and used as a basis for further work.
If we may greatly oversimplify, it could be said that discussions of team organization in relation to client groups tend to be cast in the form of a set of claims made for the advantages of specialization.
Insofar as advantages are claimed for genericism, they are based on wider issues than those arising from the specific client group.
(It might be noted in passing that there were scarcely any examples known to the social workers from any team of elderly people being referred from households where other family members were also clients.)
As was noted earlier, proponents of specialization claim, among other things, that it permits a greater development of knowledge and/or skills, and that it facilitates liaison with other agencies through increased awareness of how other disciplines work.
There is a contrary view, articulated, for example, by Black et al .
(1983), that practice is essentially similar across organizationally differing settings, which make little impact.
We cannot, of course, be confident at this stage that such differences as were found are the product of any one variety of team organization.
Such an ascription of effect to cause could only be in the form of hypotheses, of varying degrees of face plausibility.
There are, however, glimpses of findings that are consistent with the  features claimed for specialization.
Thus the observer looking for evidence of ‘knowledge, skills, or expertise’ in the activities of the specialist team might see it in their tendency, relative to the generic team, to visit more and to recommend and provide a wider range of services; to make fewer offers of service that are refused; and to encounter fewer occasions on which re-assessment is thought to be necessary.
The patterns hinted at in the data on the post-assessment engagements with clients could be construed as revealing a greater sense of purposefulness in the work undertaken.
There are likewise signs at the referral stage of closer liaison with other agencies.
Less tangibly, there was noted in the interviews the tendency for the specialist team members to be somewhat more articulate in the responses they made.
These ‘glimpses’, however, are tenuous, and no doubt capable of alternative explanations.
They are also primarily based on comparisons between the specialist and generic teams.
The activities of the individual specialist are a complicating factor.
Where we might have expected these to vary in the same direction as the specialist team's, they in fact exhibit a different set of distinctions, particularly in the high rate of service provision and the trend towards maintaining cases as live.
Indeed they share certain features with the CSW approach.
Underlying some of these findings, however, is the further complication that the specialist team explicitly seeks to operate a policy of high throughput and speedy processing and closure.
For this the data provide some support.
The existence of a specialist team, it may be argued, provides a clearer opportunity for a specific model of service to be developed and implemented.
A model of this kind seems to require managers to have confidence in social worker judgement about closing cases, which may be easier to achieve in a specialist context.
This points up the possibility that the organizational differences built into the preliminary study may be only surface ones, masking ‘deeper’ structures of thinking about the nature of social work.
Yet another complicating factor is that the account given of the generic team's work with elderly clients is bound to be only a partial exemplification of whatever advantages may be claimed for the generic model, whether of professional practice or of staff development.
Even if the tentative identification of the advantages of specialist working for this client group were to be confirmed by more extensive data, it may well be that they could be offset by other features of a generic social work service to the area.
Similarly, little justice has been done to the CSW approach in the study, though a prospective approach is likely to yield more comparable data.
Finally, the study captures only work undertaken with clients who have entered the social work system.
There may well, as we saw in  discussing Team D, be organizational factors which influence access to client status.
These qualifications made, there remains a set of findings difficult to reconcile with Howe's (1986) proposition that ‘the work controls the worker’— though admittedly this was advanced in a context which excluded the kind of organizational influences the present work has begun to tackle.
It is also at odds with the reported findings of Black et al .
(1983) cited earlier.
On close examination of the latter's findings, in fact, it is difficult to say on what precise evidence they base their view, that ‘this question of [specialist-generic]labour division’(p. 215) is without either impact or (by implication) interest.
FURTHER WORK
A degree of confirmation for the ‘hypothesis of difference’ between organizational types has been obtained, though with research instruments that seem blunt when compared with the complexity of the issues raised in the initial part of this paper, and with data that must await fuller statistical validation.
The status of these differences is therefore equivocal.
To explore them more fully, both as to their ‘true’ nature, and as to their relationship to the organizational types, a second phase of the study will need to collect additional data.
These will include the following:
1.
An increase in the number of examples of each type of team would serve to reduce the uncertainty about whether the differences found are causally related to the way the team is organized, rather than, say, the product of idiosyncratic differences or of secondary factors.
It should be noted that an organizational type unrepresented so far is the reputedly widespread model whereby there is informal specialization by client group through weighted caseloads (which may or may not be similar to the model exemplified by Team C); and that it may not be easy to find many examples of the Team A type.
2.
The inclusion of the full range of work with old people would reduce uncertainties about the equivalence of the client samples, and may reveal more marked differences of social work approach.
3.
The collection of information about clients' backgrounds and their ‘problems’, and about carers, would likewise permit greater confidence that like was being compared with like (or point to interesting differences), and enable some analysis of the matching of responses to needs.
4.
An audit of levels of provision (including staffing), coverage of the elderly population, together with clearer data on non- or pre-case activities, would further illuminate questions of differential access.
It may be thought that without some measures of the quality of services provided, either by the yardstick (if such exists) of agreed views of what constitutes good practice, and/or through more refined measures of client outcome, the study would still fall short of the kind of conclusions about relative effectiveness that would be sought.
The challenge here would best be approached through a series of sub-studies.
The creation of a large stock of basic monitoring data would permit the identification of particular sub-groups of clients, and/or of particular teams or departmental mechanisms, which could be studied in greater depth.
This would be likely to include the tracking through services and follow-up of groups of clients, through detailed description and in depth interviewing of professionals, clients, and carers, and would be designed to get closer to measures of quality of care and of outcome.
There are tricky design and methodological issues which would need to be worked out, as foreshadowed earlier in this paper and by no means fully resolved in the preliminary study.
We have seen in the preliminary work that some, perhaps superficial, differences in procedures have been observed to distinguish between the (again perhaps superficial) differences of the ways in which these particular teams are organized.
These differences might be represented as those which mark off the specialist team from the others.
However, the specialist team is distinguished by a particular approach, featuring high throughput of cases, and it has to be uncertain at this stage whether this is a consequence of its specialism or of an underlying distinction in the conception of social work that it may represent — what we have called a ‘deep’ structure.
One way of putting this may be to contrast a view of intervention that sees it as being essentially brief, focused, and assessment-based, and one that conceives intervention, whether explicitly or implicitly, as being a longer-term and more broadly supportive enterprise, in which social care planning and ‘networking’ have a high profile.
Future studies, it is hoped, will address these themes in the context of services to other client groups.
Elderly people were chosen for initial study as being both a self-contained group and of medium to low priority.
In activities with children and families, said to dominate generic teams' caseload, or conversely in definitely minority areas such as work in the field of mental health or (in Scotland) with offenders, the scale as well as the content of the work are likely to exert their own effects.
At the same time, there are a number of other much-debated and longstanding issues which would connect closely with the findings and  interpretation of a larger programme of studies: the decentralization debate; the tension between professional development and autonomy, on the one hand, and on the other the existence of accountability and resource-rationing mechanisms; the nature of supervision and the role of the team-leader/manager.
The list could be supplemented by the potentially profound effects of any future development of the case-manager role, with or without full devolution of budgetary control.
This is, of course, to start many hares; while it would be foolish to try to pursue them all in any one study, the concept of a stream of work, held together by a common focus on the effects of organizational difference and permitting the exploration of particular issues as they arise, is a daunting but attractive prospect.
Developmental Social Care: Experimental Community Mental handicap Teams in Nottinghamshire ADRIAN WEBB, JILL VINCENT, GERALD WISTOW and KATHIE WRAY
SUMMARY
Social care is an important field of practice in which policy proposals and prescriptions need to be tested systematically against field experience.
The article returns on research evaluation of a ‘field experiment’ in the use of multi-disciplinary teams to develop as well as to deliver services.
Although based in the care of people with learning disabilities, the work outlined and the conclusions drawn have a far wider relevance.
They relate to such key issues as: the long-standing debate about specialist and generic modes of working; the advocacy of teams based in small neighbourhood patches and the assertion that such teams are the best way of working with informal networks and non-statutory agencies; the official enthusiasm for ‘mobilizing resources’ and casting social services in an enabling role: and the advocacy of a demarcation between ‘purchaser’and provider roles.
Above all, the article addresses the issue of how sufficient, varied, a responsive services may be generated in order to make a reality of community care.
The importance of social care can hardly be overestimated.
It involves very large client groups (elderly, physically disabled, and mentally ill people as well as people with learning disabilities); constitutes one of the major tasks of the personal social services; and it is an arena in which hopes and aspirations have consistently been disappointed (Walker, 1982; Webb and Wistow, 1986; Martin, 1987).
Yet the post-Seebohm decades have not resolved the question of how best to set about it or what, quintessentially, should be the role of social workers within it (Webb and Wistow, 1987; Pinker, 1990).
These shortcomings lie behind the proposals and policies outlined by the Audit Commission (1986), Sir Roy Griffiths (1988) and the government in its White Paper,Caring for people (1989).
But these pronouncements should not be taken as the fount of all wisdom.
Ideas developed and tested in the field should also command attention and in this paper we highlight one, highly pertinent, innovation in social care.
Although the article concerns the use made of multidisciplinary teams working with people with learning disabilities in Nottinghamshire, it has much wider significance.
The research provided an opportunity to study social workers in a role much beloved of politicians and policy advisers in recent times, that of enablers (rather than direct providers) and social care planners.
These roles were pursued at a time when the ideas, language, and values underpinning social care were changing rapidly and when resource constraints were worsening.
The teams were as committed as any minister or pundit to widening choice, responding
sensitively to consumers, individualizing service provision and engaging with the local community, but the going often proved to be tough.
Whether and how the brave new world of social care promulgated by government can be operationalized must in part be answered by reference to the experiences gained in field innovations of the kind we studied.
However, our research also illuminates the long-standing debate in social work about the merits and limits of genericism and specialization and about how best to engage with people's supportive networks and local agencies as well as with people as individual clients (Bulmer, 1986; 1987).
SOCIAL CARE FOR PEOPLE WITH LEARNING DISABILITIES
Services for people with learning disabilities remain almost as unsatisfactory as in other fields of social care (Wistow, 1985), and the best way to use social work skills is still a matter for debate.
However, the National Development Group for the Mentally Handicapped (1977) provided a major lead when they recommended the creation of Community Mental Handicap Teams (CMHTs).
By 1982 seventy-one CMHTs were known to exist in England (Plank, 1982); by the late 1980s the figure had risen to 341 (Brown and Griffiths, 1990).
The original model was that of a multidisciplinary team, with social workers and community mental handicap nurses (CMHNs) as core members.
The teams were to be specialist in focus and expert in approach and were to serve areas of 80–100,000 population.
The model accorded quite well with the idea of locally devolved team work (Hadley and McGrath, 1980), but contradicted the long-standing beliefs in genericism (Pinker, 1990).
The role of the teams was to deliver, but above all to co-ordinate, community services.
They also provided a focal point for developing ideas about ‘normalization’ and the provision of individually planned packages of care (Brown, 1990).
These were essential steps forward, but were they enough?
Community care has disappointed not just because social work — or other professional time — has been at a premium, but because services have been lacking.
Indeed, one motif running throughout the history of social work has been the disparity between ‘diagnosis’ and ‘response’.
Skill in analysing and assessing problems and needs has not always been matched by sufficient, sufficiently varied, or sufficiently effective ways of responding.
Early work on clients' own perceptions emphasized the lack of practical responses and the heavy reliance on ‘talk’(Mayer and Timms, 1970), however helpful that may itself be (Phillimore, 1981).
In this sense, social work has been struggling to free itself from the same trap as much of British industry.
In the absence of marketing and production systems capable of producing what the consumer wants, both have had to engage in a ‘hard sell’ of that range of rather standardized services actually on offer.
Paradoxically, social work has also had to ration the supply of those services.
Neither field social workers nor commercial sales forces should be placed in such an unenviable, and unnecessary, situation.
The way forward involves the production of more and better services, but that in turn implies an effective flow of information about what consumers really need and want, and a strong link between field workers and the planners who determine the services to be produced.
This was the central theme of the Griffiths Report (1988), but the suggested solution — the separation of ‘purchasers’ and ‘contractors’in order to create a quasi-market — may not be the complete or only answer and may actually impede the flow of information from consumer to service planner.
The Nottinghamshire CMHT experience goes to the heart of this dilemma.
THE NOTTINGHAMSHIRE MODEL
Community care — perhaps most especially for people with learning difficulties — should be about expanding the opportunities available to clients and their carers by providing new and varied types of service.
The Nottinghamshire CMHTs were deliberately designed to meet this challenge head-on.
For the social services department (SSD) deficiencies in the level, range, and quality of services in the community were perceived to be the crucial problem to which CMHTs potentially afforded a solution.
Two imperatives flowed from this perspective.
First, that the central task for CMHTs, at least initially, was developmental — especially the development of new forms of, and alternatives to, residential care.
Second, that to carry out this task the teams needed to be protected from the everyday pressures of casework.
This immediately implied that the developmental role was, at least initially, to be  quite distinct from routine casework support for clients and carers (which was to remain the responsibility of generic area teams).
While many, including the majority of the Barclay Committee (1982), had argued for a unified view of the social work enterprise, Nottinghamshire social services department had taken the unusual decision to separate out elements of the social work role for essentially practical reasons.
By creating a few developmental teams covering comparatively large areas, Nottinghamshire had also departed radically from the National Development Group for the Mentally Handicapped (1977) model of a CMHT.
They had initiated an experimental effort to pioneer a form of what may best be called developmental social care.
It was an interesting move pregnant with unforeseen circumstances, not least the concern and misunderstanding to which it gave rise locally.
For funding reasons, health service membership of the teams was slow to build up in the early 1980s and key actors in the local health services were never entirely happy with the developmental role assigned to the CMHTs.
For them, the priority was the provision of direct social work support and advice.
Indeed, by the end of the study, the largest of the health districts within the county was beginning to establish family support teams alongside the developmental CMHTs in order, itself, to ensure that social casework support was available.
Despite this lack of real consensus, the social services department forged ahead in 1982 with the establishment of twenty-one social work posts in five teams (covering the whole county) whose geographical areas were influenced by health as much as SSD area team boundaries.
Three Senior Professional Officers (SPOs) were rapidly appointed to County Hall posts to act as a channel of communication for the CMHTs (for the sake of simplicity, the key contribution of the SPOs is subsumed to a large extent within our discussion of the CMHTs).
The teams were introduced at an auspicious moment in that the social services department budget had improved suddenly and substantially, enabling the CMHTs to be staffed with social workers specifically appointed for their commitment to the developmental ideal.
The teams were also given an initial recurrent budget of £40,000 (1982 prices) from which to pump prime small initiatives.
However, the major task of service development involved field level identification of needs and opportunities, followed by close liaison with staff at County Hall so as to shape and influence the normal planning of capital and recurrent programmes within, and beyond, the social services department.
To succeed, the CMHTs needed to engage with local communities, develop new services on the ground, and also exert ‘bottom up’ pressure on strategic planning processes.
By the canons of the ‘Going Local’ movement (Hadley and  McGRath , 1980; Hadley,et al .,
1984), the  populations served by the CMHTs were too populous and geographically amorphous to permit genuine and close engagement with local communities.
Whether the teams could overcome this handicap while also exerting influence at higher levels seemed highly doubtful.
Formal guidelines covering team objectives and operational policies were at a minimum in 1982.
Indeed, one of the key features of the Nottinghamshire initiative was that it occurred in somewhat of a policy vacuum.
There was no clear philosophy of care (such as normalization) and policy was still influenced greatly by the capital programme juggernaut — including commitments to new, forty-bed hostels.
However, the core task of creating alternatives to traditional residential services was located within a broader remit:
i)
to identify the needs of the client group;
ii)
to create and support alternative forms of accommodation;
iii)
to develop community support systems;
iv)
to act in a specialist advisory capacity to existing services.
In effect, therefore, the CMHTs were being required to act as local change agents, responsible for creating additional services in the community and mobilizing resources to sustain them.
This role, and the relationship of CMHTs to area teams, was controversial inside the social services department as well as within the health service.
The area teams naturally felt that the appointment of new social workers in CMHTs should relieve the casework pressure on themselves; from their perspective the developmental role appeared open-ended and almost self-indulgent.
This perception was heightened by the zeal with which some of the five CMHTs set out to protect the purity of their developmental work and their freedom from routine casework — and by the decision of all the CMHTs to begin their work by undertaking an exhaustive survey of all identifiable people with learning difficulties (and carers) to establish their needs and preferences.
THE RESEARCH GOALS AND STRATEGY
The research began, with the CMHTs, in 1981 and the final fieldwork was completed in 1989.
The object was to monitor change in the services provided in Nottinghamshire and to evaluate the work of the CMHTs.
Given their developmental role, three issues were especially important.
1.
the extent to which the teams would be able to preserve space for development work rather than be drawn into a crisis oriented casework load;
2.
the effectiveness of CMHTs in generating new services;
3.
the extent to which they would be able to mobilize ‘community resources’.
One of the characteristic defects of much evaluation research in social work has been the limited amount of systematic data on exactly what social workers do in practice (Carver and Edwards, 1972; Goldberg and Warburton, 1979; Goldberg et al .,
1985).
In this instance, however, it was especially important to measure in some detail the tasks undertaken at field level.
The ability of the teams to preserve space for the development role could not be assessed unless their work was closely monitored.
A Work Activity Analysis was therefore undertaken in 1984 and again in 1987.
This consisted of a meticulous recording of activity diaries by each member of each team for seven days.
A new, precoded, form was completed for each new activity undertaken; the research instrument therefore differed from the more conventional diary approach in which the work done in specific time periods is recorded (Mintzberg, 1973; Stewart, 1988).
All diary recording is arduous and this was no exception.
However, despite the demands which it placed on subjects and researchers, it resulted in surprisingly complete and detailed records of work done.
Changes in the service system in Nottinghamshire were monitored using a wide variety of sources.
Although official records might be expected to give an accurate picture of changes in the range and scale of provision, a considerable amount of work was necessary to establish even this basic framework.
A very extensive programme of interviews and participant observation generated assessments of the work of the CMHTs and of the changes in the service system.
The object was to gain information on the nature, style, and use made of new services; on modifications/improvements achieved in existing services (for example, the ‘regime’ and method of operation in hostels and day centres); and on the views and evaluations of each of the key actors and interests (for example , area teams, health service management, and the CMHTs themselves).
These data were essential if we were to undertake a pluralist evaluation (Smith and Cantley, 1985; Room, 1986) reflecting the diverse perceptions of the CMHTs and their work.
THE CMHTs IN PRACTICE: DEVELOPMENT OF CASEWORK?
The areas served by the five teams established initially are summarized in Table 1.
Newark and Bassetlaw, the areas with the smallest numbers of potential clients, cover the largest geographic areas; the pressure of   potential demand in South Nottingham was especially great.
It is apparent that the CMHTs and their territories were never designed to undertake ‘patch’, or neighbourhood based, team work.
The total populations served ranged from 100,000 in the case of Bassetlaw to 370,000 in South Nottingham.
Following the restructuring of the National Health Service in 1982, the County area was served by three district health authorities.
Resources were unevenly distributed by health authority and by CMHT from the start, not least in terms of hospital provision for mental handicap (Table 2).
This basic pattern was further complicated as hospital closure programmes progressed and patients were moved back to their health authority of origin.
Local authority day care provision was available in each CMHT area prior to the creation of the teams, with the exception of Newark; an additional building programme in the mid-eighties filled this gap and augmented provision in South Nottinghamshire and Central Nottinghamshire (Table 2).
The location and management of the CMHTs varied.
Bassetlaw and Central Nottinghamshire had sites which housed both social services and health service staff.
The two City teams shared premises which housed social services and some health service staff (the therapists but not, until late in the day, the CHMNs), but in Newark the social services and health service staff were separately housed for most of the study period.
That the two City teams were housed together reinforced, even if it did not fully explain, the notable enthusiasm for a purist model of the developmental ideal within these teams.
These teams (and the Central Nottinghamshire team) were line managed direct from County Hall by the SPOs, who had a broad managerial remit for all social services field services for people with learning difficulties.
The other two teams were line managed by their local Area Directors, but also worked through a Senior Professional Officer for some purposes.
As always with matters of team work, the basic environmental factors differed from case to case and complicated any analysis of what constitutes a ‘team’(Marshall,et al .,
1979; Payne, 1979; Lonsdale et al .,
1980; Stevenson, 1981; Parsloe, 1981).
Despite the policy commitment to developmental work in Nottinghamshire social services department, the CMHTs were under great pressure to take on a normal casework function even in advance of developing needed services: health service priorities favoured immediate casework support; area teams in the social services department hoped to off-load casework with mentally handicapped people — not least to focus more fully on work with children and families; and the social workers recruited to the CMHTs were confident in their casework skills but needed to adopt new roles, skills, and ways of working if development work was to become a reality.
The difficulties and tensions of undertaking developmental work once CMHTs take on a normal caseload were amply illustrated by many members of ‘traditional’ CMHTs (casework and co-ordination) who attended seminars organized during the course of the research (Grant et al .,
1986; Brown and Wistow, 1990) and by Brown's (1990) research on CMHTs.
Casework loads tend to be dominated by short-term (or even crisis) work; service development — which demands long lead times — is easily squeezed out.
Any failure to develop and promote a range of options — or the production of services ill-suited to real needs — deepens the likelihood of casework becoming trapped in a rut of ‘patch and mend’ activities.
Given the pressures, how did the CMHTs fare in practice?
Work patterns (Table 3) varied by team and by profession, but there was surprisingly little variation over time.
A few general points are worth highlighting.
The first is the comparatively low level of traditional   casework initially undertaken by the social work staff in the teams, and the substantial involvement in service development.
The second is that there were variations by team which reinforced what our interviews and observations had identified, namely, that different philosophies prevailed — the two city teams being developmental ‘purists’, Bassetlaw championing an ‘integrated casework and development’ model and the others taking up intermediate positions.
Nonetheless, the evidence is unequivocal, the social work members of the teams adopted — and maintained — a service development approach which was very pronounced indeed in some cases.
The health service members (principally community mental handicap nurses and therapists) were almost an exact mirror image — they concentrated on a casework approach — although there is some slight hint in Table 3 of a shift towards more service development activities over time.
Strong pressures notwithstanding, the social workers undertook a substantial developmental role.
But this is an incomplete and potentially misleading story.
The largest single category of activity — overall and notably for social workers — was ‘supporting services ’.
This involved a very wide range of tasks associated with identifying individual needs, matching people to appropriate service developments, supporting volunteers and helping prepare people and their carers to make use of services (for example, helping people to develop group living skills in a group home, helping parents plan to ‘let go’ and supporting residents in their new homes).
These tasks were largely the direct product of successful service development and, at times, they threatened to squeeze out the development of new services.
In summary, the development role was successfully protected from the pressure of unmet casework demand but not at the ‘expense’ of  traditional social work activities.
Many support activities utilized traditional social work skills and were indistinguishable from much social work practice.
By the lights of the Barclay Report (1982) the CMHTs comprised variations on an interesting model of how to achieve ‘community social work’: they mixed casework, group work and the mobilization of community resources with social care planning activities, but the precise mix varied in each of the teams.
What was most striking about the CMHTs, however, was that each of the teams sought to become involved with people with learning disabilities primarily in order to achieve planned changes in lifestyles, choices and opportunities .
They were less involved in thinly rationing existing services than is often necessary in social work and more able to concentrate help so as to provide a relatively complete service capable of achieving significant change for some people.
CMHTs AS INSTRUMENTS OF SERVICE DEVELOPMENT
How effective were the teams in developing services?
The principal task initially was to create a wider range of accommodation services.
As Table 4 indicates, substantial changes took place in the structure of residential services in Nottinghamshire over the period of the study.
Between 1982 and 1988, the balance of agency provision shifted markedly as did the nature of that provision.
Thus the contribution of social services, health and the non-statutory sector moved from some 15 per cent, 80 per cent and 5 per cent respectively, of all residential places in 1982 to some 30 per cent , 40 per cent and 30 per cent in 1988.
In other words, health ceased to be the dominant provider of residential care while social services and the non-statutory sectors moved to positions of parity.
Growth in the latter was, however, considerably more rapid than in the former, reflecting the availability of social security funding for residential services provided by the independent sector (Baldwin et al .,
1988).
It also reflected the way in which financial plenty was transformed into famine within the social services department during the 1980s (Stewart and Strewart, 1986).
Many social services developments as well as the joint National Health Service/Housing Association projects were similarly dependent on social security benefits for their viability.
Thus, some 400 of the 914 residential places available in the community were being substantially supported from such sources by mid-1988 compared with a maximum of forty-seven such places in January 1982.
Alongside (and reinforcing) the shift in responsibility for  residential care from health to other agencies was, therefore, a shift to social security budgets as a major source of development monies.
Accompanying these changes in the balance of provider roles was a significant change in the kinds of accommodation provided.
In part, this reflected the greatly reduced role of hospital services, which fell from three-quarters to little more than a quarter of all residential places.
Significantly, however, as Table 4 also reveals, very little of the replacement residential stock took the form of traditional hostel services: only 32 of the social services department's additional 161 residential places were located in hostels.
These 32 places, moreover, were an inheritance from the capital planning approach which pre-dated the department's establishment of the CMHTs.
The remainder of the department's new places were provided in warden-aided schemes, unstaffed houses and the new adult placement service.
Growth in voluntary sector provision, with which CMHTs were also associated (see below), was similarly concentrated in smaller scale housing-based services.
The extent of the transformation in provision is indicated by the reduction from forty to six places in the average size of residential units across the system as a whole.
On average, social services provision accommodated three people per unit (or four if the adult placement scheme is excluded), compared with seven per unit in the voluntary sector and the National Health Service (excluding hospitals).
Accommodation provided by the private sector was somewhat larger with an average of ten residents per home.
THE CMHT ROLE
As the above data suggest, residential services in Nottinghamshire not only expanded considerably over the period of the study but much of the new development took place in non-traditional residential services of the kind that CMHTs had been charged with promoting.
How far, then, were CMHTs associated with such developments?
Table 5 shows that the teams were involved in the development of 163 places in 50 units between 1982 and 1988.
(They were also wholly responsible for the creation of a further 37 places in the adult placement or ‘fostering’ scheme, but these have been excluded from the following analysis.)
The figure of 163 places represented approximately:
one third of the new residential places established in the system as a whole;
45 per cent of the new places in alternatives to traditional residential services;
three quarters (73 per cent) of the places created in the local authority and voluntary sectors.
Thus, as Table 5 demonstrates, the teams were the principal vehicle for residential developments in the social services department and also made a significant contribution to such activity in the voluntary sector.
It should be emphasized that the CMHTs frequently worked in partnership with other elements of the voluntary and social services sectors (see Table 5).
At the same time as setting up and equipping new residential  projects, the CMHTs also played a major role in preparing and supporting residents through, for example: assessing and training individuals with a mental handicap; enabling parents ‘to let go’; and either directly providing or facilitating continuing support for residents.
The Adult Placement Scheme was a small but valuable part of the provision of accommodation.
However, as with all fostering schemes, it was seen as more than just a means of putting roofs over heads.
In particular it provided flexibility by including a significant proportion of short term placements.
Inevitably the staff time invested in generating placements through this scheme was considerable.
The scheme began with six carers in 1984; this had become 49 by the spring of 1988.
At the end of 1988 there were 56 carers, 21 of them specializing in short-term care; a total of 87 people had been placed in the scheme during that year.
Further long-term placements were achieved in 1989 with additional people also using the scheme on a short-term basis, but the temporary (Joint Finance) financial support for staff running the scheme and changes in social security and housing benefits were constraining growth.
The Welfare Rights programme was one of the first successes to complement the work on alternative forms of accommodation and one of the most effective means of mobilizing non-social services resources.
A pilot scheme, using one welfare rights worker, indicated the potential of a specialist approach to welfare rights which concentrated solely on the needs of people with learning difficulties: it raised an extra £20,000 over and above existing benefits.
Six specialist workers obtained a total of £306,794 in the first four months of operation of the full scheme in 1985.
In 1986, after one year of operation, the six workers had completed 627 claims for a total of £769,757.
More than 50 per cent of all existing adult claimants seen were receiving less than they were entitled to, many by quite substantial amounts.
By 1989, the two Nottingham teams alone had 750 cases on file and 360 individuals and families were helped during the year.
The scheme has placed very considerable extra resources in the hands of mentally handicapped people and their carers and thereby extended choice and independence.
Because they were specialists, the welfare rights officers rapidly became skilled and knowledgeable in interpreting regulations as they applied to mental handicap and established valuable ‘precedents’ as time passed, but obtaining adequate benefit support nonetheless became more difficult in the closing phase of our research due to changes in the social security system.
The initial survey of all people with learning difficulties in the County in 1982–3 had revealed many social and leisure needs, not least a need to maintain and extend the provision of playschemes in the summer holidays.
Initially, provision was modest: each team ran one scheme for  one, or in one case two, weeks in the summer holidays in 1982 and 1983.
By the end of our fieldwork, however, all the teams were offering a variety of schemes of one or two weeks duration in the summer and some additional provision was made at Easter and Christmas.
In total the number of summertime schemes had risen from five in 1982 to twenty by the end of the period.
But the range of the provision had expanded more dramatically than the basic numbers suggest.
Schemes existed to cater for children with profound handicaps and with major behaviour problems; for children with a mix of abilities and needs; for children of different ages; and for children who, with some help, were capable of mixing readily with non-handicapped children.
As the programmes developed, some teams began to include a range of options to meet different needs and preferences.
For example, the team at Newark offered carers a choice of a two week playscheme, a one week playscheme plus attendance at an ordinary playscheme supported by a volunteer, a one week playscheme with the option of special care weeks at the day centre, or a one week playscheme plus two days per week of special care throughout the summer holidays.
The playschemes not surprisingly led on to the development of holiday and weekend breaks, but other social and leisure activities also came to the fore.
The varied needs of carers were beginning to be taken seriously.
Parents' groups deserve special mention.
If the idea of mobilizing community resources is to mean anything at all it must include helping parents and other carers to meet, and clarify needs, expectations and possibilities for further development.
Without this kind of activity, the difficult balance to be struck between essentially paternalistic decision taking and responsiveness would be all the more likely to swing towards the former.
Parents' groups come and go whether or not there are CMHTs and it is difficult to be precise about the CMHT contribution in this field.
However, two facts suggest that the time and priority which teams gave to supporting and promoting parents' groups was highly influential.
First, the number of such groups increased significantly.
There was a minimum of 22 active groups in the County at the end of our fieldwork, most of them having been established during the lifetime of the CMHTs.
Second, many of these groups were special in some important sense.
For example, one group focused specifically on the particular problems and needs of Asian parents, another was for older parents and carers, and several groups provided significant elements of direct service.
This last category included five groups associated with Mencap Homes Foundation projects which while benefiting from CMHT support were part of a wider supportive structure, but they also included four other groups which were primarily assisted by the teams.
One such  parents' group provided parent support, training, day and evening activities, holidays, camps, and overnight stays in its own house; another ran a training house, provided overnight and weekend stays, and — starting in 1989 — ran a registered (staffed) home and an unstaffed home.
Whilst most parents' groups continued to focus on mutual support, these examples of service provision represent a considerable net addition to the facilities available in the County; they also reflect the powerful moral and practical support given to the development of parents' groups by the CMHTs.
DEVELOPMENTAL CMHTs: A SUCCESS STORY?
Despite the many developments initiated by the CMHTs, there can be no single judgement of their achievement.
They can be seen as a roaring success, a qualified success, or an expensive diversion.
The judgement depends upon perspective and on the definition of success employed.
However, certain features do stand out:
virtually no-one in Nottinghamshire would deny that the creation of the CMHTs galvanized the social services department into further action;
a majority of the people we interviewed (the dissenters were clustered in one of the three health authorities) felt that the developmental CMHT was an imaginative and beneficial way forward in the Nottinghamshire context of the mid-eighties;
few would deny that the CMHTs almost immediately ran into problems due to the squeeze on local authority budgets and found themselves scrabbling around for alternative resources;
even fewer would deny that the CMHTs were precipitated into a virtual policy vacuum and were in effect used as one means of developing a broader framework rather than as a means of implementing an already established strategy.
This last feature of the Nottinghamshire story, at least, is not entirely to be recommended — though it has, in fact, been widely repeated around the country.
Are there other, more positive, features of the Nottinghamshire experience from which lessons can be learned?
The CMHTs undoubtedly developed a significant range of new services.
Health authority staff, not unreasonably, felt that this was at the cost of forgoing routine casework support for a wide range of people (horizontal efficiency) and from their point of view, therefore, the developmental role of the CMHTs represented an unacceptable  opportunity cost .
Leaving this aside for the present, however, was the service development activity effective, and cost effective?
The cost effectiveness of developmental CMHTs is inherently difficult to assess.
It required twenty or more social work staff — plus three senior professional officers — to develop or support the new services created in Nottinghamshire.
By comparison, one of the matching health authorities would claim to have de-hospitalized over a hundred patients in a short time through one specialist developmental officer alone.
The comparison, of course, is useful only as an invitation to further assessment.
Health authorities in general can call on a wide range of hospital and other staff in the course of de-hospitalizing patients, they have enjoyed their own financial resources from which to fund such developments and they have had the lucky coincidence of a rapidly expanding private residential sector funded by the social security system.
Social services staff would also argue that health authorities can move people quite quickly — even precipitately — from hospital to residential care with limited preparation and with little need to negotiate with emotionally involved parents and carers.
By comparison the CMHTs were a readily identifiable and costed group of specialist development staff covering all aspects of the developmental process; they had to rely on gaining access to other organizations' resources; and they intentionally eschewed traditional residential care — especially private residential care.
They saw a large part of their task as negotiating with and between carers and handicapped people — often painstakingly and over long periods — in order to gain a commitment to and an acceptance of a change in lifestyle.
Above all, the CMHTs pointed to the heavy demands implicit in their own definition of success: the creation of a full range of services, not just alternative accommodation, and responsiveness to continuous changes in need and capacity rather than a once and for all move from one living environment to another.
Indeed, for the CMHTs a group home which ‘collapsed’ was a success if the residents moved on to more appropriate environments.
For a health service observer such a home could easily be seen as a failure.
The truth is that the health authorities and the social services department engaged in different types of service development, in different contexts, with different resources and with different outcomes — even though a surprisingly uniform ideal of community care was upheld at the local level throughout the service systems.
Direct comparisons of effectiveness, let alone cost effectiveness, are therefore impossible.
What was most encouraging was the extent to which common goals and ideals were backed up by local collaboration and a significant amount of interaction at the field level; what was most disappointing was that this  continued to be overlaid by an enduring legacy of suspicion — even hostility — at more senior levels.
This legacy was crystallized into a particular criticism of the developmental CMHT approach by staff within one health authority.
They pointed to inadequate integration: of CMHTs and County Hall; of field level development and strategic planning and management; and of service development and routine casework support.
They felt a failure to handle strategic issues (for example, negotiations and relationships with the voluntary sector) at the appropriate higher levels resulted in CMHTs being forced to tackle tasks which were ‘beyond them’.
There can be no doubt that the gradual trial and error approach to strategic policy formation and to establishing a division of labour and sensible working relationship between County Hall and the CMHTs consumed time and energy.
But it had its positive aspects.
The social services tradition of top-down capital programming, which was not untypical at the time, was replaced by one in which most new services were — at minimum — strongly influenced by a bottom-up CMHT input; an input characterized by detailed knowledge of people's real needs, preferences and capacities.
Moreover, especially as monies became tight, much new provision was actually developed and provided within local communities using resources other than those available within the social services department itself.
The CMHTs were enablers and they gave active support at the birth of a more mixed, and more responsive, range of services.
The field workers gained first-hand knowledge of the frustrations and weaknesses of welfare pluralism, but they were also encouraged by experience of its strengths.
LESSONS FROM POLICY AND PRACTICE?
The five CMHTs varied greatly in their precise method of operation and these variations were hotly debated among themselves at times, but they all engaged in service development and came to see the generation of personal treatment plans as a prelude to service development rather than as being constrained by the existing service stock.
The key to this was that they all began life with a strong philosophical commitment to development and were given some of the new, additional staff needed in order to give life to this philosophy.
This is the first lesson to be learned from the positive aspects of their work.
A trenchant commitment to the philosophy of individualized, bottom-up service development is essential, not a diversion .
It is also, more generally, the essence of what the Barclay Report (1982) was seeking when it characterized social care  planning as one of the core roles in which community social workers should be engaged.
A second lesson — or cautionary note — bears directly on the government's enthusiasm for separating out ‘purchaser’ or ‘provider’roles in order to create a quasi market in social care.
This idea potentially oversimplifies the actual process of offering vulnerable people choices which might result in their leading fuller lives.
New opportunities cannot be designed and prescribed by one group of people, produced by another, and offered as discrete choices to ‘consumers’.
Enabling an adult with learning disabilities to gain in independence, while enabling parents to ‘let go’, is a continuous and long-term task involving advice, support and the testing and modification of new possibilities (for example, living in a group home).
As social workers have always known, the ‘product’ is in fact a ‘process’— an explanation and acceptance of change mediated through social relationships — not a standardized item of service.
Any attempt to inject market disciplines must take account of this essential feature of social care (social work) if it is to be constructive rather than destructive.
And the needs of people with learning difficulties and their carers, above all, cannot be defined and prescribed independently of the process of encouraging and helping them to welcome opportunities and change.
Another lesson to be learned from the Nottinghamshire experience, and from the work of Challis and Davies (1985, 1986a) is that small specialist teams covering large geographical areas can as readily engage with local and family networks as patch based generic teams .
Working with networks ought to be a fundamental social work skill capable of being exercised almost regardless of organizational characteristics.
But the geographical areas served do obviously make a difference.
These CMHTs were in some respects advantaged by serving large areas because ‘community of interest’ is as important if not more so for people with learning disabilities (and their carers) as is community in the sense of neighbourhood.
If they had served small areas, the CMHTs would have had great difficulty in liaising with the specialist facilities and organizations (statutory and non-statutory) which characterize the mental handicap field and which necessarily tend to cover large areas if not regions.
Generic social work with the general population in closely knit communities may obviously be best achieved through small, patch-based teams; but no organizational arrangement is universally valid irrespective of context and it is damaging when fashion seems to dictate otherwise.
An overall conclusion on the developmental role is not too difficult to discern amongst the different assessments.
All the authorities acknowledged that the most desirable situation would have been a well  established developmental role complemented by routine casework services.
The problem was the lack of resources; a choice had to be made.
In our view, routine casework unsupported by an active programme of service development would have been of little value and would probably have degenerated into a frustrating cycle of ‘patch and mend’ crisis management.
Giving priority to developmental work was appropriate in the circumstances of Nottinghamshire in the mid-eighties and still remains so in many respects.
Yet the policy and organizational context frustrated the development role in important ways.
The CMHTs and SPOs operated without the benefit of a clear service philosophy for too long and had to invent it as they went along.
Moreover, the SPOs — who were intended to be the key link between ‘bottom-up’ development and strategic planning — had large managerial responsibilities and were grafted on to the developmental CMHT model rather than being key initiators of it.
However, given a clear strategic framework, and careful integration of the strategic and field levels,the developmental CMHT provides an attractive model for the bottom-up generation of consumer responsive services .
Moreover, development work is not in opposition to more traditional social work activities, rather it is an essential range of skills — and even more essential philosophical commitment — which focuses on the pursuit of ‘vertically efficient’ work.
It locates casework within a planned programme of change in the lifestyles, choice, and opportunities of people who need — and can be helped to benefit from — such change.
Development work of this kind is the epitome of an ‘enabling role’, providing that term is not defined in a very restricted way; it can actively support a consumer-responsive, mixed economy of welfare.
It is a potentially valuable model for working with a range of client groups.
Actively to create room for such development work seems essential precisely because field workers who are hard pressed by a burden of routine and less focused casework demands cannot create such room for themselves.
However, to create room by choking off routine casework demands must be controversial.
Despite strenuous effects to commit resources to services for people with learning disabilities, Nottinghamshire social services department could not avoid making this policy decision — a decision which was sorely tested.
Their perseverance revealed the obvious: needs and capacities continue to change after a person has been de-hospitalized or moved from the parental home to a group home — and the developmental role has therefore to be seen as a permanent not a temporary one.
It is a much needed long-term approach to widening life chances for people who can all too easily be consigned to standardized services and to cramped, narrow, and stultifying lives — but it requires significant resources.
Some of the resources required were ‘mobilized’ from elsewhere, but this success should not be applauded uncritically.
Like many voluntary organizations in the 1980s, the CMHTs scrabbled around, often at great expense in terms of time and frustration, to stitch together small pockets of resource — often on a short-term basis.
They relied heavily, for example, on one-year posts funded by government ‘pump-priming’ schemes to support the services they developed.
They also depended for a large part of their work on clawing money out of the social security system and on getting alongside other centrally funded bodies such as housing associations.
As penniless brokers they often had to dissipate energy on make-do and mend activities.
This did not look like a cost effective national strategy for community care.
Widespread ‘pump-priming’ and ‘mobilizing of resources’can waste the limited resources available if the well-spring has in fact run dry.
The final lesson is therefore the one underlined by Sir Roy Griffiths (1988) and in an entirely different way by Challis and Davies (1986b): resources and expectations must be in balance.
Moreover, expectations can themselves compete and conflict.
What Challis and Davies (1986a) have called ‘horizontal efficiency’ involves spreading resources across the full range of potential clients whereas ‘vertical efficiency’requires a concentration on those most in need of help.
The former is the politically safer route, but the latter is essential to effective social care.
The stark fact is that Nottinghamshire could not afford to do both and generated local controversy by protecting the vertical efficiency of the developmental approach at the expense of fieldwork support for the many.
Yet this dilemma is generated nationally, not locally, by the failure to match resources and expectations.
One can reasonably doubt whether the government's White Paper (1989) policies will resolve this problem.
Strengthening Professional and Paraprofessional Contributions to Social Service and Social Development EDWARD ALLAN BRAWLEY and RUBEN SCHINDLER
Allan Brawley is Professor of Social Work at The Pennsylvania State University where he teaches social policy and social work with the ageing.
He has a doctorate in social work from the University of Pennsylvania and is the author of numerous publications, including The New Human Service Worker (Praeger, 1975),Mass Media and Human Services (Sage, 1983) and with Ruben Schindler, Social Care at the Front Line (Routledge, 1987).
Ruben Schindler is Dean of the School of Social work al Bar-Ilan University, Israel, where he teaches social policy and social work supervision.
He has a doctorate in social work from Yeshiva University, New York.
His work has been published in Britain, India, Israel, and the USA.
SUMMARY
Based on a long-term research project that has generated data on paraprofessional social service personnel in fourteen developed and developing countries, this paper presents some findings that, if acted upon, could strengthen the contribution of both professionals and paraprofessionals to social service and social development goals.
The type of front-line workers who are generally regarded as paraprofessionals have always been important participants in social service activities throughout the world.
This continues to be the case in the countries studied.
This article identifies conditions under which the service activities of professionals and paraprofessionals can be more productive and where their joint contribution to human well-being can be enhanced.
Based on research carried out on paraprofessional social service personnel in fourteen developed and developing countries — Australia, Britain, Canada, Denmark, India, Indonesia, Israel, Japan, The Philippines, South Africa, Spain, Uganda, the US, and West Germany — over the last seven years, this paper presents some findings that, if acted upon by social service organizations, social work education programmes, and   paraprofessional training programmes, could strengthen the contribution of both professionals and paraprofessionals to social service and social development goals.
Paraprofessional workers are defined as those persons who are engaged in the provision of social care or social services to individuals, families, groups and communities but who do not have professional training or qualifications.
They may have received some college training, participated in in-service training provided by government agencies or employers, or received no specific training for their jobs.
Our previous research had confirmed that paraprofessionals (whether they be neighbourhood workers in Israel, home helps in Britain, village workers in India or day care workers in the USA) perform a variety of important functions in the social services around the world.
In fact, it is fairly clear that these workers play a vital role in safeguarding the health and well-being of large groups of needy people.
In this paper, we identify a number of conditions that seem to be conducive to their optimum level of functioning.
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
As noted earlier, the findings reported here flow from an international comparative research programme that has been sustained over a seven-year period, beginning in 1983.
Previously the authors had carried out research on paraprofessional social service personnel in their own two countries — Israel and the USA (Brawley and Schindler, 1972; Brawley, 1975; Schindler, 1980; 1982).
In 1983, in order to extend the international scope of our work, a survey questionnaire that had been pre-tested with social work educators from Australia, India, Israel, and the United States was mailed to all member colleges, universities, and national affiliate associations of the International Association of Schools of Social Work and to a list of individuals who had been identified as experts on paraprofessional social welfare personnel in their own countries or internationally.
In response to this survey, we received 150 completed questionnaires from 45 countries.
The number of usable questionnaires received from each country ranged from zero to fifteen.
In order to be sure that our data would be as reliable as possible a decision was made to report only on those countries from which we had received at least three questionnaires among which there was a high level of agreement.
This decision eliminated all but the following thirteen countries: Australia, Britain, Canada, Denmark, India, Indonesia, Israel, Japan, The Philippines, South Africa, Uganda, the USA and West Germany.
The major findings from  this survey were reported earlier (Brawley and Schindler, 1986; Schindler and Brawley, 1986).
Between 1984 and 1990 in-depth studies of paraprofessional social service personnel were carried out on-site in Britain, India, Israel, Spain and the USA, in order to examine in more detail the trends and issues revealed by our international survey.
In carrying out these in-depth studies, standard procedures followed in international comparative research on social welfare policies and services were used (see, for example, Kahn and Kamerman, 1976; Rodgers, 1979; Higgins, 1981).
National, regional, and provincial social welfare legislation and government reports, relevant locally-generated research findings, and appropriate sections of the professional literature in each country were reviewed.
Key informants in universities and government agencies provided assistance in locating and gaining access to the relevant documents.
As well as serving as informed sources themselves, they helped identify additional experts who were interviewed.
Direct field observations of professional and paraprofessional social service personnel at work and in training were carried out in each country.
By moving from a broad treatment of paraprofessionals on a global scale to detailed examination of the training and use of these workers in a number of specific countries, we have sought to capitalize on the complementary strengths of the ‘macro’ and ‘micro’approaches to comparative social policy analysis (Higgins, 1981).
(Additional data and findings of this relatively long-term research process have been reported in Schindler and Brawley, 1987; 1990; Brawley and Schindler, 1989; and Brawley, 1990).
These findings cover a broad range of information and issues, including identification of factors that have contributed to the widespread use of paraprofessionals around the world, detailed descriptions of their roles and utilization patterns, the nature of their relationships with professional colleagues, the types of training they receive, and the career paths open to them.
In this paper, we focus on those results of our research that (1) suggest that profession-centred approaches to social service provision should be modified;(2) team models of practice need to be more widely adopted;(3) both professionals and paraprofessionals need specific training for effective team functioning;(4) paraprofessional training must affirm and build upon indigenous characteristics and skills; and (5) more attention needs to be devoted to career advancement opportunities for paraprofessional personnel.
A number of examples of positive action in different countries are noted.
CHANGING PROFESSION-CENTRED MODELS OF SERVICE
Front-line paraprofessionals perform a multiplicity of service roles and functions in relation to a wide variety of client groups in all kinds of social welfare and social development programmes throughout the world (United Nations, 1980, p. 39).
This continues to be the case in all the countries we studied, although their potential is rarely fully developed and utilized.
In some instances, their work supplements the work of professionally-trained personnel; in other situations, they function independently of professionals; and in many parts of the world they are the only people available to provide front-line services to people in need.
This is particularly the case in less developed countries and in the rural or other underserved areas of more developed countries.
In all countries that we studied paraprofessionals constitute the bulk of the social welfare work-force.
In light of these findings, we suggest that social work needs to move away from profession-centred approaches to education and practice and towards a reconceptualization of its place in social welfare and social development efforts.
Social workers are committed to promoting the well-being of individuals, families, groups, and communities and are expected to identify, develop and mobilize available resources to meet people's needs and help them function at their best possible level.
Since paraprofessional social welfare personnel are an important resource for meeting people's needs, one would assume that policy makers, social service administrators and professional social workers would view them in this light and would do what they could to support and develop this valuable resource.
However, our research indicates that this is not happening, primarily because there has been a failure in most parts of the world to recognize or accept the critical role played by paraprofessionals in social service delivery, little effort has been devoted to the clarification of appropriate paraprofessional roles and functions and to their training and deployment, and too few social work education programmes are training social workers to work alongside paraprofessional personnel.
However, despite this disappointing state of affairs, we identified some encouraging developments in several countries that can serve as guide posts to more appropriate and effective development and deployment of professional and paraprofessional resources.
THE POTENTIAL OF THE TEAM MODEL OF SERVICE DELIVERY
Based on our studies, we see particular merit in team approaches to the organization of social service staff at the local level.
In several of the countries we studied, we found strong evidence that good results can be achieved by community-based teams consisting of professionally-trained workers and a variety of paraprofessional personnel who bring their joint efforts to bear on a range of client and community needs.
For example, it is now more than twenty years since team models of social service staff deployment began to be strongly advocated in the United States and, although actual research on this approach has been limited in recent years, good results were reported from the use of social service teams in a variety of settings, including mental hospitals (Barker and Briggs, 1969), public welfare departments (Schwartz and Sample, 1967) and elsewhere (Brieland et al .,
1973).
Based on their extensive studies on behalf of the National Association of Social Workers into differential use of social welfare personnel, Barker and Briggs (1968) developed a fairly sophisticated conception of how the social service team would work, and they offered it as an alternative to previously specified models of staff differentiation and utilization.
The team model has gained considerable support in Britain in recent years, based upon the positive results achieved in a variety of settings (Payne, 1982), including in locally-based ‘patch’ systems of service delivery (Hadley and McGrath, 1980; 1984).
The Barclay Report (1982) on the role and tasks of social workers recognized the limitations of the prevailing ‘one case/one worker’ approach to social service provision and felt there was some merit in the neighbourhood- or community-based model of practice, using teams of diverse personnel, led by a professionally-trained worker.
The Report acknowledged the problems involved in determining the levels of difficulty and complexity in the work that has to be carried out in the social services and the barriers that exist to sharing this work among different kinds of personnel but concluded that ‘nevertheless, some distinction in work levels is possible and necessary in our view, and this is most practicable where there is close teamwork and an emphasis on ‘team responsibility'’ for cases,(pp. 137–8).
The team approach, in modified form, using case managers to co-ordinate team efforts, has received strong support in the recent Griffiths Report (1988) and subsequent White Paper (1990) in their recommendations regarding care for people within the community.
In India, we found some interesting experimentation with health care teams in rural areas.
The front-line members of these teams are local  women recruited and trained to provide primary health care to their villages.
For example, the Jamkhed Comprehensive Rural Health Project (Arole and Arole, 1984) uses mixed professional-paraprofessional teams organized in a three-tier system.
The first tier consists of paraprofessional village health workers, resident in each village, who are expected to provide primary health care to everyone in the village.
These village-based health workers are helped to carry out their functions by a mobile team leader (the second tier of the system) who is generally a nurse, physician, or social worker.
The team leader is based at a district centre or subcentre and visits each village in his or her area on a weekly or bi-weekly schedule.
The role of the team leader is to support the village health worker in her activities by providing consultation, treatment that is beyond the skill of the village worker, and referral of patients who cannot be treated in the village to the main health centre (the third tier) in Jamkhed which has facilities for diagnosis, acute care, in-patient treatment, and training.
All members of this three-tier system are trained as a team and function as one.
The value of the kind of team approach which operates in Jamkhed is beginning to be recognized in other rural areas in India.
Clearly, the structure and mode of operation of mixed professional — paraprofessional teams will vary from one setting to another and it needs to be acknowledged that in a variety of situations it would be an inappropriate social service practice model.
However, in those situations where professionals and paraprofessionals are working alongside each other, the team approach seems to be gaining wider acceptance as its potential for making optimum use of available personnel resources is being recognized.
MODIFYING PARAPROFESSIONAL AND PROFESSIONAL TRAINING
In most countries and in most settings, paraprofessionals tend to be the workers who have the most frequent and regular face-to-face contact with the clients of social welfare services.
This makes it especially important that they be carefully selected for the work they do, that their tasks and functions be appropriate and clearly defined, and that they receive whatever training is needed to ensure that they can perform their jobs adequately.
However, only a small fraction of the paraprofessional work force around the world receives any kind of training beyond the most rudimentary orientation to their jobs.
To the extent that training is provided, it varies greatly in nature, quality, duration, and goals.
Except in a few isolated instances, there has been little systematic  planning in relation to most countries' social welfare personnel training needs and resources and there has been very limited involvement in find some countries and schools of social work that have adopted a comprehensive approach to social service personnel training and development and are directing their efforts toward maximizing the contribution of all available human resources to their country's or region's social development goals.
For example, in India and some other developing countries, there has be&n some effort to redress the imbalance between professional and paraprofessional training.
There is increased recognition that concentrating limited national training resources at the professional or university level is not likely to have much impact on the service needs of people at the grass roots.
Greater attention is now being given to the training of front-line paraprofessional personnel in order to have a greater impact on the country's social development needs (Pathah. 1983).
This shift in emphasis is not limited to the developing countries.
In Britain also, there is recognition that the progress that has been made in the last fifteen years in increasing the pool of professionally-trained social workers must be matched by similar efforts to upgrade the skills of the paraprofessional work force if the quality of social service provision is to be adequate.
This does not mean that the training of professionals is not considered important, only that it should be placed in proper perspective and that it should be accompanied by the training of the front line paraprofessionals who constitute the bulk of the social service work force (CCETSW, 1975; 1981; 1987).
Not only are the priorities between professional and paraprofessional training being reviewed but the nature of professional education is being reassessed in some countries (Pangalangan and de Guzman, 1980).
For example, in India, graduate schools of social work are a major training resource for the social welfare services but some observers suggest that their educational approach might not be congruent with local needs and might not be making their best contribution to the nation's social welfare and social development goals.
There is a feeling that they need to develop educational approaches that are based on indigenous conceptions of social service rather than Western urban industrial models and that they should be seeking ways of maximizing the contribution of front-line personnel, either through the direct provision of training or by teaching their graduates how to train and make optimum use of front-line workers (University Grants Commission, 1980; Siddiqui, 1984).
While these shifts in emphasis have special relevance for countries in the less developed regions of the world, they are also applicable to the more developed countries.
In Britain, Canada, Israel, and the US, for example, there is reason to believe that professional levels of social work education should be placing a higher emphasis on training social workers to function in social service systems that use a broad range of personnel.
Rather than concentrating almost exclusively on the training of direct service practitioners, they should probably be devoting more resources to training professional personnel who will function in indirect service roles, directing, co-ordinating and supervising the work of paraprofessional personnel and providing appropriate in-service training for them.
Despite the positive results achieved by the mixed professional/ paraprofessional social service teams to which we have referred and the efforts being made in some countries to promote that model of service provision, little is being done in schools of social work to provide professional social workers with the type of skills needed for that kind of practice.
Little attention is given in social work education to team models of practice, team leadership skills, supervisory techniques appropriate for different types of paraprofessionals, etc., in spite of the fact that the need for this kind of curriculum content has long been recognized (Purvine, 1973; IASSW, 1979; Pangalangan and de Guzman, 1980; Barclay Report, 1982).
Indeed, early research on the use of paraprofessionals in the US indicated that a major barrier to the optimum use of this category of social service personnel was the lack of appropriate training for the professional staff who supervised and directed their work (Denham and Shatz, 1969).
Our research confirms that it is vital that professionals be properly trained to work with paraprofessional personnel.
For example, in Israel, a special project designed to improve the performance of indigenous paraprofessionals in their work with a variety of needy groups, including families on public assistance, homebound elderly persons, residents of low-income housing projects, and discharged prisoners, the best results were achieved when ‘parallel training’ was provided for the professional social workers and indigenous paraprofessionals involved (Kestenbaum,et al .,
1987, p. 10).
The directors of this project found that it was not enough simply to do what is usually done when there is a desire to maximize the performance of paraprofessionals, that is, to provide them with appropriate training.
It was also necessary to provide complementary training for the professional members of the social service teams.
They note the seeming paradox of stressing that a crucial element in the performance of paraprofessional workers is the preparation of the professionals who will supervise and direct their work but are unequivocal in their conclusion that ‘the role of the professional worker is clearly pivotal in the successful functioning of the professional/paraprofessional team’(Kestenbaum et al .,
1987, p. 12).
An especially positive finding in regard to training concerns efforts in some countries to develop comprehensive as distinct from the more usual ad hoc approaches to paraprofessional training.
For example, we were impressed by the work of national statutory bodies in Britain (the Local Government Training Board, the Central Council for Education and Training in Social Work and the Care Sector Consortium of the National Council for Vocational Qualifications) in developing and promulgating models and standards for paraprofessional training.
In particular, CCETSW's (1987) efforts to take a comprehensive approach to social service personnel training, to promote partnerships between employers and educational institutions at the local level, and to issue nationally-recognized credentials for persons who complete approved training, are impressive.
Also noteworthy is the new but so far untried National Vocational Qualification (NVQ) system that will use a national modularized competency-based set of training packages and standards to provide training and advancement opportunities for paraprofessional social service personnel (NISW and SCA, 1989).
These constitute the most systematic national approaches to social service personnel training that we were able to find.
While we do not suggest that they are applicable to or practicable in other countries, we believe that they have features that are worthy of consideration elsewhere.
In Britain and Japan, the use of correspondence courses (often in conjunction with television) are important training mechanisms for front-line social service personnel (Open University, 1989; Open College, 1989; Japanese National Committee, 1982).
Indonesia and Israel's attempts to develop a comprehensive approach to paraprofessional training using a national training curriculum (with appropriate areas of specialization) offered through a number of training centres in different parts of the country are also noteworthy.
These latter examples may be more appropriate for those countries or regions with large rural populations or that do not have a well-developed system of local educational institutions comparable to the community colleges, technical institutes or the like that are found in Australia, Britain, Canada, Denmark, and the US.
INDIGENOUS PARAPROFESSIONALS AND COMMUNITY EMPOWERMENT
Front-line paraprofessionals are more likely than their professional colleagues to share ethnic, cultural, class, religious, language, and other characteristics with the clients and communities they serve.
This indigenous dimension is widely recognized as an important element in the  paraprofessional's value and effectiveness.
Not only is the social distance between service providers and clients reduced but service practices are more likely to be adapted to local needs when paraprofessionals are employed in front-line service roles.
Based on our research, we concur with the earlier observation that ‘paraprofessionals who come from the communities which they serve have been found to be more effective in working with the people as they have close ties and may have insights and information not readily available to the outsider’(IASSW, 1979, p. 8).
For example, our research suggests that it would be doubtful if the kinds of front-line care, including family planning services, that are being provided in rural areas of Indonesia and India would be as acceptable or effective without the participation of village-level workers who are familiar with the local language, culture, religion, and way of life.
Similar observations could be made about front-line paraprofessionals in all the countries we studied who are drawn from local communities or who share common experiences and characteristics with client groups.
In developed and developing countries alike indigenous paraprofessionals seem to be more effective than professionals in working with certain clients and communities or at the very least they are seen as adding a valuable dimension to social service provision.
This would tend to support the idea that there is an important place for the paraprofessional in the social services whether or not there is a shortage of professionally trained personnel in a given locality.
Questions have frequently been raised about the effect upon indigenous paraprofessionals of the training that is provided for them.
For example, Rigby (1978) has asked: ‘Does the very process of training create a distinction between the worker and his former peers?
If so, is the worker's effectiveness reduced through a loss of relationship and, if it is, can this be avoided?’(p. 15).
These questions cannot be answered definitively.
However, our research indicates that indigenous workers do not have to lose their identification and effectiveness in working with their communities as a result of the training they receive.
Much depends on the nature of the training provided, especially the ethos that guides it; that is, whether it is organization- and profession-centred on the one hand or client- and community-oriented on the other and the degree of commitment on the part of professionals to recognize and affirm the value of indigenous factors and to capitalize upon them.
For example, among the important principles identified by Kestenbaum et al .
(1987) in their efforts to provide training that would maximize the effectiveness of indigenous paraprofessional social service workers was that such training should specifically seek to strengthen those very attributes that enable them to maintain contact with and  work effectively in their own communities (p. 15).
The training they describe affirms and enhances the role of the paraprofessional as an agent of the client group or community that is being served rather than as an arm of the worker or the social service agency.
Although this approach may be more ambiguous and more difficult to implement than more common practices, it seems to result in services that are more fluid, creative, and egalitarian and potentially more responsive to client and community needs.
Our international studies revealed instances where indigenous workers were used as buffers rather than bridges between social service organizations and professionals on the one hand and minority groups and deprived communities on the other hand.
While this is a very real danger, it is not inevitable.
Again, much depends on the sensitivity and commitment of the organizations and professionals involved.
The employment of indigenous paraprofessionals has been linked conceptually to worldwide efforts to promote local citizen participation in decision-making and action on their own behalf and a mechanism for developing or strengthening indigenous community leadership (IASSW, 1979).
This was the case in a number of countries in our study, including Indonesia, Israel, the Philippines, and Uganda.
Although these efforts have taken quite different forms in different parts of the world, most have been based on the broad underlying philosophy that social development goals are likely to be achieved more readily if those groups most directly affected (local communities or recipients of services) participate in the planning and delivery of services.
While these efforts to involve local citizens (particularly disadvantaged groups) in decision-making in relation to social planning and development have not always been effective (Boaden et al .,
1982; Jain, 1986), under the right conditions they can be (Levitan and Taggert, 1976) and indigenous paraprofessionals can make a particularly valuable contribution to these efforts because of the unique bridging function they can serve between service providers and service recipients.
Once again, whether they are permitted to perform this valuable function will depend on the degree of commitment of public officials, social planners, social service agency administrators, social workers, and other professionals to genuine client and community participation and empowerment.
CAREER DEVELOPMENT AND ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY FOR PARAPROFESSIONALS
Many countries are experiencing difficulty in ensuring access to employment for all persons available for and desiring work, while social needs  on a massive scale go unmet (Nowotny and Neveu, 1987).
As was recognized in the US in the 1960s (David, 1965), the social services have the potential for providing rewarding and socially useful employment for a large proportion of the work-force that cannot be absorbed by other sectors of the labour market.
The social service jobs that can be developed and filled most easily are, of course, those at the paraprofessional level.
Our research confirms that, to the degree that new entry-level social service jobs have been created, these have not often been accompanied by the development of opportunities for career advancement for the incumbents.
Our data confirm that the paraprofessional work-force world-wide is predominantly female and, in many instances, these workers are drawn from low-income and otherwise disadvantaged racial, ethnic, religious, or other minority groups.
While employment in social service jobs or social development programmes can be an important step toward greater economic well-being for many, failure to provide realistic opportunities to progress beyond low-level jobs falls short of a full commitment to social, economic and political opportunity for the people involved.
The types of jobs provided may simply reinforce the marginal status of many of these workers, that is, maintain them in an essentially peripheral position in society so that their access to economic rewards, dignity, and power remain severely limited (Scott, 1984; Larwood,et al .,
1985).
The degree to which opportunities for either vertical or horizontal career mobility have been developed for the paraprofessional social service worker is highly variable among the countries we studied and between geographic areas within these countries.
What is clear is that, with few exceptions, the major avenue to career mobility in most countries is through formal post-secondary education.
This poses enormous problems for developing countries with severely limited educational resources, especially in the rural areas of those countries.
Even in the more developed countries (for example, in Australia, Canada, Denmark, and the US) where the structures necessary for educational and career advancement are more widely available and accessible, there are often barriers confronting the individual social service worker.
While all the steps and grids of a career lattice may exist in principle, in most instances only a small proportion of the paraprofessional work force have access to or can take advantage of existing formal training opportunities.
In an attempt to address this situation, alternative approaches to worker certification and improved opportunities for advancement have been developed in some countries.
For example, in the US, two that appear to have some merit are the Certified Human Service Worker assessment procedure (National Commission for Human Service  Workers, 1983) and the Child Development Associate training and assessment programme (Office of Child Development, 1974).
Approaches such as these that assess a worker's competence against nationally-established standards and that issue a qualification regardless of a person's formal academic background need to be developed for larger groups of paraprofessionals.
In Britain also, several types of paraprofessional training programmes have been developed that provide useful avenues for career advancement.
One of these which originally led to the nonprofessional but nationally-recognized Certificate of Social Service (CCETSW, 1975), has now been incorporated into a new and alternative route to a full professional social work qualification for some of the kinds of social service personnel we have referred to as paraprofessionals (CCETSW, 1989).
Another training programme — the In-service Course in Social Care — also leads to a nationally-recognized certificate (CCETSW, 1981; 1987).
Although this credential does not confer professional standing, it does signify that the holder has undergone a nationally-approved training programme.
At least in principle, this can improve the holder's chances for promotion to a more responsible paraprofessional position that brings higher status and salary.
It can also improve the possibility of moving to a more desirable job with another employer or in a different geographic area.
The new NVQ training and assessment programme that we mentioned earlier also holds great promise for expanding the career advancement opportunities for paraprofessionals in Britain.
A major advantage of the above examples is that they do not require participants to give up their jobs or move away from their homes and families to undertake training.
Another advantage is that they have fairly flexible admissions standards.
This means that unnecessary barriers are not created for the great majority of paraprofessionals who must keep working to support themselves and their families and who often do not have the formal academic credentials necessary for university entrance.
Furthermore they include provisions for the assessment of prior learning and portability of credits that can be accumulated and eventually applied towards a formal qualification.
In all the countries we studied there is a need to work toward developing more rational and systematic personnel systems that recognize that there are many types and levels of jobs in the social services and that clarify the nature of these jobs and the specific skills and knowledge required to perform them.
At the same time, different types and levels of training (formal and informal, traditional and untraditional) should be made available that correspond roughly to the jobs that need to be done.
The missions of these different educational and training programmes and how they relate to each other must be made clear.
If the two  sides (jobs and training) of the human resource equation could be brought into closer relationship with each other, not only would the contribution of available personnel, including paraprofessional staff, be maximized but opportunities for career mobility and social and economic opportunity would be increased.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
The findings of our research indicate that paraprofessional personnel perform the bulk of face-to-face social service and social development activity around the world.
Since this situation is likely to continue for the foreseeable future, professional social workers and social work educators need to modify their profession-centred view of service provision in order to make the best use of available personnel.
Our data also suggest that the team model of professional/paraprofessional staff deployment has high potential for maximizing the contribution of available personnel to the helping process and, if paraprofessional social service workers are to function at their best level, not only do they require appropriate training but professional workers also need to be trained to work with them.
The emphasis of paraprofessional training needs to build upon and extend the qualities and skills that these workers bring to the team rather than to concentrate on socializing them to professional or organizational ways of doing things.
On the other hand, professionals must be trained in group leadership and team building skills, supervisory techniques appropriate for work with paraprofessionals, and methods of conceptualizing and organizing the helping function that enable it to be accomplished by the combined efforts of professionals and paraprofessionals.
If conscious efforts are made by professionals and social service organizations to strengthen the role of paraprofessionals as arms of the community rather than primarily as arms of the agency, then indigenous leadership and empowerment can be promoted.
Finally, we need to continue to recognize that paraprofessional social service jobs are a way out of poverty, unemployment, underemployment and other forms of deprivation for large numbers of people around the world.
Having recognized that, we must avoid the danger of maintaining paraprofessionals (most of whom are women and many of whom are members of disadvantaged minority groups) in marginal positions in society by locking them into low-status and low-paying jobs.
Appropriate opportunities for advancement (promotion, better pay and other forms of recognition for increased skills and experience) must be provided if we are to live up to principles of social and economic justice.
The Cognitive-Behavioural Approach with Depressed Clients MICHAEL J. SCOTT and STEPHEN G. STRADLING
Dr Michael Scott is a Senior Research Social Worker and Senior Counselling Psychologist with the Liverpool Personal Service Society, where he directs the Centre for Cognitive Behaviour Therapy.
He is also an Honorary Research Associate in the Department of Psychology at the University of Manchester.
Dr Stephen Stradling is a Lecturer at the University of Manchester, where he runs a modular M.Sc., in Applied Psychology, lectures on research methods and is involved in research on a range of applied topics.
SUMMARY
The recent cognitive revolution in psychology has meant that an individual's behaviour is now rarely viewed in simple behaviourist terms as solely a product of rewards and punishments, but is seen as influenced by the individual's own, often idiosyncratic, view of their situation.
This new paradigm has enabled the development of highly structured and usually brief interventions in many areas of individual emotional problems.
This paper describes Individual and Group Cognitive Therapy with depressed clients and cites two recent outcome studies.
The contribution of Cognitive-Behaviour Therapy (CBT) to this area of emotional distress is noted with the caveat that its effectiveness has been more thoroughly studied in this area than in others.
The origins of Cognitive–Behaviour therapy may be traced back to the philosopher Epictetus, who in the first century AD wrote ‘People are disturbed not so much by events as by the views which they take of them’.
More recently this notion has been systematized into the various forms of Cognitive–Behaviour Therapy, the most popular of which are Cognitive Therapy (Beck et al .,
1979), Rational–Emotive Therapy (Ellis, 1962), and Stress–Inoculation Training (Meichenbaum, 1985).
The Cognitive–Behaviour Therapies share a central assumption that the response of a person to a situation is not simply a product of external rewards and punishments but is influenced by the individual's idiosyncratic interpretation of their situation.
The Behaviourist's stimulus response, S→R, model of human behaviour is thus extended to include a mediating variable: stimulus → appraisal → response.
To take an example, suppose two mothers regularly go for coffee in each other 's homes and take along their respective toddlers, and that one parent gets quite distressed at the children running riot around the house whilst the other is seemingly oblivious.
Here the situations are the same for both but their response is different — one parent may be up and down shouting requests and injunctions to the children, whilst the other sits calmly drinking coffee.
In Cognitive–Behaviour terms these parents' emotional responses would differ because their appraisals of the situation differ.
The development and maintenance of the distressed parent's emotional state may be represented by Figure 1.
The sequence in Figure 1 begins with the children's boisterous behaviour.
The distressed parent then has an automatic thought that, since she cannot control their behaviour, she is a bad person.
(Automatic Thought 1 may be traceable to a more wide ranging silent assumption that to be worthwhile she must get everything ‘just right’.)
This global negative self-statement brings emotional distress which is intensified and maintained by Automatic Thought 2 ‘that to be distressed is a sign of weakness’.
Figure 2 indicates that cognitions — memories, thoughts, images — can have an important influence on emotional state.
However, current emotional state can, itself, influence what is remembered from the past — a phenomenon known as mood congruity (Blaney, 1986).
In depressed mood compared with elated or neutral mood, the relative probability of recall of material of negative tone is enhanced, whereas the relative probability of recall of positive material is decreased.
There is then a reciprocal interaction between cognition and affect and one can, in principle, influence this interaction through either.
In Cognitive–Behaviour Therapy, the chosen path of influence is via cognitions.
To return to the example, the non-distressed parent may choose to make explicit to the friend her own thinking, such as‘well, the children do usually obey us and every parent gets wound up from time to time with their child’.
The non-distressed friend would here be in the role of a social worker inviting the distressed friend to consider a possible alternative interpretation of the situation.
The Cognitive–Behavioural approach encourages clients to check out how accurate their representation of a situation is.
The social worker helps clients become aware of information processing biases that can distort the sense they make of a situation.
An example of a processing bias would be the use of a mental filter — characteristically homing in on the negative in a situation and leaving the positive out of account.
The biases in information processing can lead to dysfunctional beliefs.
For example, people who habitually discount compliments are likely to form negative beliefs about themselves.
The modification of dysfunctional attitudes is a key concern in Cognitive–Behaviour Therapy.
However, often the best way of challenging a dysfunctional attitude is to test out the validity of the attitude, for example a client who believed he could not stand going to a party might be invited to test this belief out by going, for at least part of the time.
In this way behavioural assignments form an integral part of Cognitive–Behaviour Therapy.
This approach suggests that experiences, often occurring in childhood, may lead people to the formation of dysfunctional assumptions about themselves and their world.
See Fig. 2.
These assumptions form a template or schema with which the information about environmental events and self is processed.
If subsequently a critical incident happens which is pertinent to the individual's particular dysfunctional assumption, then, rather like a key fitting into a lock, the dysfunctional assumptions are activated.
For example, a person who early on in life formed the assumption that they had to have everybody's approval in order to be happy, could become depressed if they did not subsequently secure the approval of someone important to them.
They may, for example, have suffered redundancy or have difficult financial problems, but these events would not be directly impinging on their particular vulnerability.
However, a person who based his or her sense of worth entirely on achievement would be much more likely to succumb to depression in the event of such employment problems.
Once activated, dysfunctional assumptions produce ‘negative automatic thoughts’—‘negative’ in that they are associated with unpleasant emotions and ‘automatic’in that they pop into people's heads rather than being the product of any deliberate reasoning process.
These may be interpretations of current experiences, predictions about future events, or recollections of things that have happened in the past.
They, in turn, lead on to other typical signs of depression: behavioural symptoms (for example, lowered activity levels, withdrawal); motivational symptoms (for example , loss of interest, inertia); emotional symptoms (for example , anxiety, guilt); cognitive symptoms (for example , poor concentration, indecisiveness); and physical symptoms (for example , loss of appetite, loss of sleep).
The  lowered mood itself increases access to negative memories, serving to maintain the depression.
In this way a vicious circle is set up.
AN OUTLINE OF COGNITIVE THERAPY
Cognitive therapy is aimed primarily at modifying the dysfunctional silent assumptions held by Beck et al .
(1979) to underpin depression.
Typically, individual therapy involves 12–20 sessions of 45–60 minutes over a three-month period.
In the first phase of therapy the emphasis is behavioural, aimed at increasing the client's sense of mastery and achievement.
The second phase is more cognitive, aimed at the identification and modification of the dysfunctional silent assumptions.
In part this is achieved by setting up ‘behavioural experiments’ to test out the silent assumptions and in part by ‘Socratic dialogue’with the client as to the validity, consistency and utility of these assumptions.
For homework, clients are encouraged to complete a daily record of dysfunctional thoughts in which the situations that lead to emotional upset are recorded, automatic thoughts that lead to the upset are set down, and rational responses to the dysfunctional thoughts are recorded.
Unless the client has something very pressing, that it is agreed must take precedence, the thought records from the previous week are reviewed at the beginning of the session.
A CASE EXAMPLE OF COGNITIVE THERAPY FOR DEPRESSION — ENID
Enid was 47, married with three children at home, and was referred to the social worker by her GP for help with her depression.
At assessment she was found to be severely depressed with a score of thirty-two on the Beck Depression Inventory (Beck et al .,
1961)— into the severe depression range.
She hated her job as a typist which she found boring, and there were financial difficulties as her husband was a self-employed handyman.
Her husband became irritable when he was not working.
She had had no previous treatment for any emotional difficulties.
She was sexually assaulted as a child and the recent publicity had brought it all back to her.
In her words ‘I find myself blaming this for my self-hate, my lack of confidence, my feeling of, ‘how can anyone love me’’ She had kept this a secret and this was the first time it had been put on paper.
At the end of the initial assessment interview, Enid was given a copy of Beck and Greenberg's (1974)‘Coping with Depression’ article which provides a summary of the rationale for cognitive therapy and an outline  of the counselling programme.
She was also asked to keep a diary of her week, monitoring the extent of her sense of achievement and pleasure in the various situations she was in.
The second individual session began, as do all sessions, with a review of the homework assignment.
Enid's response to the ‘Coping with Depression’ article was very positive, and this is usually predictive of a good response to counselling in the long term (Fennell and Teasdale, 1987).
She felt reassured from the article that other people suffered the same symptoms as she did, and could already identify her own propensity to jump to the conclusion that people looked down on her in the absence of any hard evidence.
Inspection of Enid's diary, however, showed that there was very little in her week that gave her a sense of achievement or pleasure.
A list was drawn up of events that had, prior to depression, given her a sense of achievement and pleasure.
They included taking lessons for her advanced driving test, watercolour painting and gardening.
The social worker discussed with Enid the possibility of planning such events into her week.
Enid felt she did not have the concentration for advanced driving or painting but thought she could probably try gardening.
However, when the practicalities of gardening were examined, it was difficult for her to timetable it in.
On the one hand she thought she would possibly enjoy a hour's gardening when she came home from work and that it would help her unwind, but on the other hand her adult children and her husband would expect tea at 6 p.m.
The social worker helped her examine more closely the cognitive ‘roadblock’ to action, and she conceded that she was jumping to conclusions that they would be annoyed with her if she postponed tea until 7 p.m.
However, whilst agreeing they might not be annoyed with her, she thought she would feel guilty if she did not start tea until 6 p.m.
At this point the social worker introduced the notion of emotional reasoning, which suggests that ‘feelings of guilt are not necessarily evidence of guilt’.
Though the early stages of cognitive therapy are primarily behavioural, one often has to introduce cognitive material in order to facilitate tasks.
The latter stages of cognitive therapy are more explicitly cognitive and clients are asked to monitor their down-turns in mood using a Thought Record.
The following is an example of one of Enid's Thought Records:
After four weeks into cognitive therapy Enid was only mildly depressed with a Beck Depression Score of fourteen — in the mild depression range (10–20).
However she indicated that she still felt guilty a good part of the time.
The guilt feelings related in part to the sexual abuse in childhood.
There were a number of aspects of the abuse that bothered Enid, particularly that she ‘should’ have played the whole situation differently, telling her mother about her father as soon as it started.
The social worker helped her question her self-blame:
Social Worker: What stopped you telling your mother?
Enid: My father said I would be sent away if I told her.
I liked it at home and didn't want to go away.
Social Worker: That sounds a good reason for a 9-year-old not to tell her mother.
Enid: I suppose it was.
Social Worker: Then how could you have played it differently?
Enid: I don't know.
Social Worker: Can you be guilty of something if you don't have any other choices?
Enid: Well no, but I feel guilty.
Social Worker: Does feeling guilty make you guilty?
Enid: No, but I did get some pleasure from the abuse.
Social Worker: Why is experiencing some pleasure in that situation blameworthy?
Enid: You shouldn't because it is wrong.
Social Worker: It may be wrong, but you couldn't then make your body not a body which was the only way then you could make yourself not experience some pleasure.
Enid: I see what you mean.
Social Worker: If a 9-year-old was sitting next to you expressing the guilt you have expressed, what would you do or say?
Enid: I would just give them a big hug and tell them not to be silly.
Dialogues such as the above are central to cognitive therapy, focusing on the client's negative view of themselves, the future and the world — Beck's Cognitive Triad (Beck et al .,
1979).
In this extract the social worker focuses on the first aspect of the triad and explores with the client whether she is consistent in  their guilt reaction.
The social worker finds the client applies one set of rules to herself and a very different set to other people.
THE RESULTS OF TWO COGNITIVE THERAPY OUTCOME STUDIES
We have conducted two studies on the outcome of Cognitive Therapy treatment for depression by a social worker, the first using referrals from general practitioners at an inner-city health centre, the second from the occupational health services of large local employers.
Both were in Liverpool and covered a total of 103 clients suffering primary major depressive disorders.
In both studies those referred were preponderantly female and working class as defined in Brown and Harris's study (Brown and Harris, 1978).
Those in the Health Centre study were also mainly single and unemployed, as well as being female and working class.
In both studies we compared the effectiveness of Cognitive Therapy presented in Individual and Group modes.
In the Individual mode clients received 12 weekly 45 minute sessions, while those treated in small groups (4–8 persons) attended 12 weekly 90 minute group sessions which ran alongside an initial three individual sessions each.
(See Scott, 1989a, for more details.)
In the first study we were able to show that clients treated in either mode were significantly less depressed at the end of treatment than those held on a waiting list for the same length of time (Scott and Stradling, 1990), and that this reduction in symptoms was maintained for up to 12 months post treatment — see Figure 3.
The only previous   controlled trial of social work help for depression (Corney, 1981) had found it no better than treatment-as-usual from the GP.
All our clients — both treated groups and waiting list group — were receiving treatment-as-usual and Figure 3 shows that Cognitive Therapy by a social worker, in combination with GP treatment, was clearly more efficacious here than GP treatment alone.
In our second study we sought to confirm our findings that group and individual cognitive therapy were equally effective.
Using clients referred from across the city, they were assigned to either ICT or GCT and followed up at one, two, three, and six months.
Again we found both modes equally effective.
In both studies, then, we were able to show that the results for Group treatment were just as good as those for Individual treatment — and, thereby, more cost effective in use of worker time.
Simply getting depressed clients to work in groups and focus on their problems in living has been found not to effect significant changes in level of depression (Nezu, 1986).
This suggests that our results are not solely due to being in a group but depend upon some ‘active ingredients’ for effective change inherent in the Cognitive–Behavioural approach.
DISCUSSION
THE BREADTH OF APPLICATION OF COGNITIVE-BEHAVIOUR THERAPY
In this paper particular mention has been made of the application of Cognitive–Behaviour Therapy to depression.
In this area a substantial number of well-designed outcome studies testify to the efficacy of Cognitive–Behaviour Therapy.
Indeed, a number of studies have shown that the rate of relapse following CBT is only half the rate for clients taking anti-depressants.
It is now virtually impossible to find a disorder that Cognitive–Behaviour Therapy has not been applied to.
But depending upon the particular disorder focused on there are varying bodies of evidence as to the efficacy of Cognitive–Behaviour Therapy for that problem.
It should be noted also that Cognitive–Behaviour Therapy has been applied beyond psychiatric disorders to the problems of offenders and to people with learning difficulties.
The social worker utilizing Cognitive–Behaviour Therapy should be wary of its indiscriminate use.
The disorders of bulimia nervosa and anorexia nervosa are a case in point.
The evidence of three recent controlled studies indicates that clients with bulimia nervosa can benefit to a similar degree from treatments which cannot be regarded as forms of Cognitive–Behaviour Therapy (Fairburn and Cooper, 1989).
With regard to anorexia nervosa, Cognitive–Behaviour Therapy has yet to be evaluated.
Cognitive–Behavioural treatments have been the most extensively evaluated interventions of all the psychotherapeutic schools in relation to these disorders and they do indicate that clients benefit in the short term, but little is known about the maintenance of change in the long term.
The research base is more substantial in areas such as Cognitive–Behavioural Marital Therapy, but here, again, some caution is necessary.
Though Cognitive–Behavioural Marital Therapy has consistently been found to be as or more effective than any other type of marital therapy, nevertheless in terms of the proportion of clients that actually improve, the results are quite modest.
Jacobson et al .
(1984) found that by the end of therapy about half of couples showed significant improvement and approximately one-third of couples appeared to be non-distressed.
However, clinically significant improvements were often limited to just one spouse in the couple.
Though the standard approach to agoraphobia is an overtly behavioural one of graded exposure, many of the aspects of exposure that used to be described as ‘non-specific’, such as arriving at a realistic interpretation of the week's events, or at accurate expectations for the  future, or dealing with reservations about treatment, are now described in cognitive terms.
Thus, though exposure-based treatments for phobias have been very successful (for example, Marks, 1987) it is problematic as to what are the ‘active ingredients for change’.
In some cases the efficacy of behavioural programmes has been potentiated by adding explicit cognitive procedures (Mattick and Peters, 1988).
Cognitive therapy has sometimes been accused of being only applicable to the ‘intellectual’ client.
Williams and Moorey (1989) have provided a convincing rebuttal of this notion with their description of its use with clients who have a mental handicap.
They show how the complexity level of the techniques used can be varied to suit the client.
Social workers are often left to deal with those clients who are most difficult to engage in any treatment and most likely to relapse such as drug abusers and offenders.
The cognitive behavioural strategies for the engagement, treatment, and relapse prevention of drug abusers has been described fully in Scott (1989a) and Scott (1989b), whilst Cole (1989) has detailed the specifics of a cognitive-behavioural approach to the problems of offenders.
Cognitive–Behaviour Therapy is sufficiently detailed to equip a social worker with a wide range of strategies he/she can adopt with almost any emotional problem.
Encouraged by the demonstrated efficacy of CBT with disorders such as depression, the social worker can consider that it is at least plausible to use similar strategies with other client difficulties.
Nevertheless, CBT has, ultimately, to be evaluated with each disorder in turn.
If such trials are successful, attention will then turn to examining the mechanisms by which CBT achieves its goals and whether they are in accord with the hypotheses of the theorists.