

Front cover: Bug's breakfast?(see p 133).
(Photo: Robert Brook/The Environmental Picture Library.)
Talking Points
The Society is not responsible for individual opinions expressed in articles and reviews or in reports of any kind.
Editorials do not necessary express the views of the Council.
Women in industry
Last autumn the charity Business in the Community announced Opportunity 2000 , a business-led equal opportunities initiative to improve and increase the quality and quantity of women in the workforce by the year 2000.
This scheme is only one example of an increasing number of measures designed to attract women into and back to work as demographic changes show a decreasing number of people entering the workforce.
Forty three per cent of all workers are women.
The National Economic Development Office estimates that four per cent of middle and senior managers are women.
It is this kind of imbalance that Opportunity 2000 is designed to redress.
But what is the current position within the chemical industry?
We can start by looking at the input figures.
According to the Chemical Industries Association (CIA) four out of 10 graduates entering the chemical industry in 1990 were women.
ICI says that three out of 10 of its graduate intake over the past three years (a total of about 300) have been female.
At Ciba-Geigy the figures are much the same — in 1990 13 out of 34 graduates taken on by the company were women.
All these figures reflect the percentage of chemistry graduates that are female — in 1989–90 34 per cent of the 2210 chemistry graduates were women.
At Shell Chemicals UK (which employs 920 workers, 122 of whom are women) over the past three years women have accounted for 42 per cent of the intake into chemical marketing and 25 per cent of the manufacturing intake.
The figures for women at management level in the UK chemical industry are much more dispiriting.
ICI employs about 26000 people of which 27.5 per cent(just over 7000) are women.
However at middle and senior management levels only about 11 per cent are women (about 1000 out of 8400), although this figure is a considerable improvement on 1984 when it was just four per cent.
If senior management figures are considered, about three per cent(52 out of 1000) are women; five years ago the figure was only one per cent .
The story is the same at other major companies.
At Glaxo Group Research 46 per cent of the 3500 staff are female and 35 of the 280 middle and senior managers (12.5 per cent) are women.
In the UK 1406 women work for Ciba-Geigy — 23 per cent of the total workforce.
There are 12 women in senior management positions within the company, 4.2 per cent of the total.
At Rhône-Poulenc in the UK 26 per cent of the 3364 employees are women.
Rhône-Poulenc Chemicals has 10 female middle managers and one female senior manager; Rhône-Poulenc Rorer (the pharmaceutical business) has 14 female middle managers and one female senior manager; whilst at Rhône-Poulenc Agriculture there are eight female middle managers.
At Shell Chemicals 30 women take up 9.3 per cent of the managerial positions.
At Unilever 12 700 employees out of 31 000 (41 per cent) are female and women hold 15 per cent of management positions (up six per cent in two years).
Some companies are taking measures to improve this situation.
Ciba-Geigy runs company management courses and in recent years there has been a steady increase in the number of women in these courses.
In 1990 out of an intake of 48 on to the new graduates management training course 13 were women, in 1991 this had risen to 30 out of 90.
Comet 1, a course for middle managers, has also seen the number of women attending rise from 12.5 per cent in 1990 to 19.3 per cent in 1991.
In 1989 the RSC published a survey on Education, employment and attitudes of men and women members and, partly as a result of this report, the Women Chemists Committee (WCC) was set up and held its first meeting in March 1990.
The WCC advises the RSC Steering and Coordination Committee on policy regarding women in chemistry.
It also works to promote the entry and re-entry of women into the profession of chemistry — in both industry and academia — and collects and disseminates information about women in chemistry.
It is not that women are no good at chemistry.
In academia Dorothy Hodgkin, Rosalind Franklin, Mary Truter and others are proof of that.
In other spheres Margaret Thatcher, Mary Archer (who chairs the hardship committee at Lloyd's) and Helen Sharman, who were all trained as chemists, could hardly be accused of being unsuccessful.
The problem seems to be that many women are having a tough time making their mark higher up the career ladder.
Part of the problem may lie in society's perception of the roles of men and women.
A recent report from Manchester University, commissioned by the National Association of Schoolmasters, the Union of Women Teachers and the Engineering Council, asked five and six-year old children about which adults should do which jobs.
When asked about the job ‘scientist’, 69 per cent said that it was a man's job and only 9 per cent said it was a woman's job.
Within the RSC the WCC works with the Qualifications and Education Board and the education department to produce promotion material specifically aimed at young women.
Some companies are making strenuous efforts to increase the proportion of women at all levels of employment.
Stressing ‘equal opportunities’, improving maternity leave, providing career break schemes and condemning sexual harassment are all seen as ways of attracting women and ensuring them a fair deal.
A pregnant pause
The issue of combining a career with a family is becoming important to more and more women.
A study from the Policy Studies Institute,Women into engineering and science — employers' policies and practices , highlights some of the problems of combining a career and a family.
The study includes interviews with employees from a number of large UK companies including ICI, Boots and British Aerospace.
A female employee of one of the companies included in the report said, ‘I don't  know very many women who've got high up…
Probably because most of them leave to have families and once they come back they're that much further behind’.
A male employee said, ‘I think there's a lot of drop out for ladies, they go off and have children and then they don't want to come back.
That's their decision and I think that's probably why you don't see as many women higher up in the company’.
A second male said, ‘Women who start families and continue with families don't appear to go through the system…a woman has to decide that she's going to be a career-based woman and not a family-based woman.
‘How patronising do you like your equality?’
Some women choose to take maternity leave and return to work relatively soon after the birth of their child, either through financial necessity or from choice.
In the UK, statutory maternity pay is 90 per cent of earnings for the first six weeks of maternity leave and then a lower rate of £39.25 for a further 12 weeks.
Maternity leave is a statutory 40 weeks maximum with fixed periods before and after the birth (11 weeks before and 29 weeks after).
Most countries within the EC, including Germany, Portugal, Belgium, Denmark and Italy, have introduced the concept of parental leave — a period of leave given to either parent to look after the child up to the age of two — in addition to maternity leave.
Only a few EC countries, including France and Spain, have statutory provision for paternity leave.
Provisions for parental leave range from 18 months' low flat rate pay in Germany, or six months' leave at 30 per cent of earnings in Italy, to three months' unpaid leave in Greece.
In the UK some companies offer better maternity leave provision than the statutory minimum.
ICI's maternity provisions include 52 weeks' flexible leave (ie the proportion taken before and after the birth is up to the mother).
The company also pays the equivalent of full salary (less state maternity pay) for up to 18 weeks, which is payable as a lump sum three months after return to work.
At the moment 250 women have taken maternity leave at ICI.
During the time they have off they are kept in touch with what is going on at work by their line manager.
There is also a system of ‘networking’ where women are put in touch with others who are having or have had the same experience.
Glaxo Group Research has a range of policies to provide support to, and facilitate the easier return to work of, women who have been on maternity leave.
This includes maternity pay above the statutory minimum, a phased return to full time work and the option for part-time work including job sharing.
Under a scheme introduced at Shell Chemicals in February last year women receive six months' maternity pay, half at the beginning of their leave and the rest paid in stages during the first nine months after they return to work.
More than 80 per cent of the women who take maternity leave at Shell return to work and the proportion is higher in senior jobs.
According to Sheila Croft, Shell UK's employee relations development policy adviser, the maternity policy ‘dovetails with our schemes for job sharing, career breaks, working from home and part time working which are open to male and female employees’.
BP has produced a guide entitled Parents and babies , which informs employees who are expecting a child of their rights and aims to make returning to work a much easier experience.
Care for young children
For women with young children, returning to work can be a problem.
Job sharing is one possible option to ease the return to work.
In the 1989 RSC survey 14 per cent of male respondents and 13 per cent of women respondents worked for employers who had officially recognised job sharing schemes.
However, most of the schemes were not applicable to jobs held by the respondents; only two per cent of both sexes had employers who offered job sharing schemes applicable to their jobs.
Crèches at the workplace are still not a common occurrence, although some companies without sufficient demand to make a crèche feasible opt for giving employees financial help with local childcare instead.
Ninety per cent of respondents to the 1989 RSC survey said that there were no childcare facilities at their place of work.
However, although 70 per cent of women expressed a desire for such facilities only 39 per cent of men responded positively.
ICI has crèches at its Runcorn, Welwyn Garden City and Fernhurst sites, has just opened one on Teesside and is planning another at Jealott's Hill.
It has also given a commitment to ‘investigate and develop appropriate child care options according to local needs’, including the possibility of secured places at local nurseries.
This flexible approach to arranging help for childcare has been adopted by several companies.
Ciba-Geigy has no on site crèches or company-wide policies on childcare or flexible working, but does have individual job sharing and term time working arrangements with working mothers.
Glaxo Group Research runs a child minding service managed by the company to give some support to mothers returning to work.
ICI currently has 850 part time workers, who are mostly women and mainly working in job share schemes.
ICI is also promoting the idea of term time only work for mothers with older children.
Career breaks
Combining a family and career are not the choice of every woman.
Some companies now offer career break schemes to give both women and men a longer period of time off — often up to five years.
Attitudes of companies to career breaks differ.
Glaxo Group Research says it does not have a career break scheme because it believes that ‘it would be too difficult for our scientists to keep up with the pace of change if they were away from work for an extended period’.
Ciba-Geigy also has no company policy on career breaks.
ICI, on the other hand, runs a career break scheme where breaks are available for both men and women for a period of between two and five years.
The scheme works much the same as the company's extended maternity leave scheme.
Employees approach their manager to discuss the possibility of a break and if they take up the option they are kept in touch with progress via magazines, company literature etc .
Employees still participate in the company's pension scheme during the duration of their break.
Shell UK also has a career break scheme, introduced in 1989, which allows men and women to take a career break.
Staff who take such a break remain on contract to Shell.
They can take up to three breaks, but the total length cannot be longer than five years.
On returning to work employees are offered a position at at least the same level as their last job.
Staff are expected to work or attend training for up to four weeks a year during a break.
Women returners
Returning to work after a career break can pose problems for both women and men.
A number of organisations and courses exist to make returning easier.
Amongst these is the Women Returners' Network (WRN).
WRN exists ‘to facilitate the return of women to the labour market, to get suitable training and suitable employment conditions’, says Ruth Michaels, WRN president.
It aims to ‘increase the opportunities for childcare, and to encourage employers to think about what happens when employees go off to have a baby and [to consider]career breaks’.
WRN produces a directory,Returning to work , which contains details of courses around the country specifically aimed at women returners.
It also runs workshops and conferences for groups, employers and Training and Enterprise Councils etc .
A recent WRN conference,Share the care and split the difference , was ‘based on the social charter which the EC is trying to bring in and the UK hasn't agreed to yet’, says Michaels.
She insists that even with the provisions of such a charter the idea ‘can only work out in reality if both partners, in fact, share [the childcare], because there is not much point in allowing women the opportunity of going further up the ladder if they continue to have almost sole responsibility for childcare.’
The range of women returning to work ‘is as wide as the range of occupations women work in, although that in itself is restrictive’.
There are courses available to all levels of women returners, including those who want a change of career.
‘Women lose confidence being out of the labour market, men tend to lose confidence if they've been out of work’, says Michaels.
Women returning to work are also handicapped by a lack of information about what help is available to them, a lack of childcare and flexible working —‘if there was a greater variety of working patterns, you would undoubtedly attract more back’, says Michaels.
‘What's happened in the last 10 years and is accelerating very fast is the fact the women are taking less time off’, says Michaels.
In 1984 the average break was three to four years; now many women are returning within nine months.
WRN is working with employers to lessen the effects of a break by keeping in touch — by training, working at home and working two to three weeks a year.
There has been a steady rise in the number of women returners and ‘apart from women who do not want to let go of that career, there are all the millions of women faced with the fact that either their income will enormously increase the lifestyle of their family or without that second income they will be very hard pushed to cover the basics.
Then we have a million households where the woman is the sole breadwinner.
‘I guess that things would have to change very, very materially in conditions of childcare support in this country for us to see a dramatic rise [in women returners].
The government turns its head aside from government support — apart from words — and says that it is either the employers' responsibility or the employees'…
Only three per cent of employers give any sort of help for childcare and I can't really see that increasing’.
Michaels also says that other EC member countries are far more willing to put EC proposals and directives into force than we are.
‘I don't say that everything is rosy in other countries…
But I honestly do think that we are probably at the very bottom of the list for help for women amongst the 12 EC countries — we are certainly regarded so in Europe’.
Women will become increasingly important as prospective employees as the number of people entering the job market decreases and with the advent of a single European market.
Employers who do not offer career breaks and childcare facilities may find themselves passed over in favour of employers who do.
Lisa Oxlade
•The WCC of the RSC has produced Career break and beyond , a booklet that explains the options available to women, and in October 1991 ran a symposium entitled Chemistry — attracting girls, retaining women .
The RSC has a reduced subscription scheme for members on a career break and sees this as a way of encouraging women to keep in touch whilst looking after young children.
For further information contact Dr M. MacKenzie, Membership Affairs Department, Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, Science Park, Cambridge CB4 4WF.
Case study
Barbara Renshaw is a production scheduler with ICI Agrochemicals, Surrey, and has just started a career break.
The ICI scheme is fairly flexible with a maximum possible break of five years.
Renshaw has returned to work after the birth of her first child and employed a nanny to look after the child.
However, after the birth of her second child returning to work didn't work quite so well.
‘I always felt the pull between loyalty to ICI and a working life I enjoyed and the thought that someone else was looking after my children’.
She was aware of the career break scheme through internal advertising at ICI and enquired about the possibility of participating in one.
On expressing interest in the idea ‘I got tremendous support from my line manager and from personnel’.
Renshaw has set a tentative date of mid-1993 for her return, when her youngest child will be at playgroup.
On returning she is guaranteed a job at the same level and of similar content to the one she left, but ‘the plan is that nearer the time I start to discuss my return with management and personnel’.
A manager has been nominated to keep Renshaw informed on personnel issues and developments about the line of work she is involved in.
ICI stipulates that she must work a certain number of days a year to keep in touch.
‘It's fairly flexible, I go in on odd days.
It keeps me in touch and helps the section.
People realise that I am still around.
It's working extremely well, and the money I get helps with childminding costs’.
If the scheme had not been available Renshaw says that she would have considered giving up work, which would have been difficult, or considered some other form of childcare, but it was never really necessary to consider the alternatives because of the availability of the career break scheme.
The scheme, says Renshaw, is very flexible and she has received very good management support.
She feels it is good experience for her children too.
‘They benefit from me being here, but they appreciate that I go out to work occasionally, so it won't come as such a shock to them when I start to build up to going back to work properly’.
New year honours
The following were among the names in the new year honours list:
Knight
Alan Battersby , FRS, professor of organic chemistry, Cambridge.
CBE
Dr Peter Doyle , group research and technology director, ICI.
Prof Malcolm Frazer , CChem, FRSC, director, Council for National Academic Awards.
Dr Alan Hayes , CChem, FRSC, chief executive officer, ICI Agrochemicals and Seeds.
Prof Paul Turner , chairman, Committee on Toxicity of Chemicals in Food, Consumer Products and the Environment.
OBE
John Binnie , deputy chairman, Allied Colloids.
John Hornibrook , director, Roche Products.
Howard Purnell , CChem, FRSC, professor of chemistry, Swansea.
ISO
Ronald Lees , CChem, FRSC, head of Promotion, Planning and Technical Services Division, Laboratory of the Government Chemist.
MBE
Hugh Berridge , chairman, Berridge Environmental Consultants.
H2O and all that
After chemistry in comics, science on cigarette cards.
Reader H. R. Vaughan-Williams sent us this collector's item, which is probably prewar.
We wonder what attainment level of today's national curriculum one needs to reach before spotting that these are howlers.
Analysing LGC's future
As the Laboratory of the Government Chemist (LGC) seeks to carve a competitive role for itself in today's increasingly commercial research environment, the man in charge of its development programme is Dr Richard Worswick, the recently appointed Government Chemist and chief executive of the laboratory.
When it comes to transforming a government-run scientific operation into a commercial venture, Worswick has a wealth of experience belied by his youthful 45 years.
Appointed last April to the post, Worswick already has the background of 15 years with the UK Atomic Energy Authority at Harwell, in a variety of business areas.
The LGC has seen a number of fundamental changes over the past few years, not least its relocation in 1989 from the south bank of the Thames in central London to its present plush premises next to the National Physical Laboratory in Teddington, Middlesex.
In the same year LGC changed to agency status, rather than being run directly by the Department of Trade and Industry, and this involved lengthy examination of the laboratory's financial structure.
With the spring clean now over, the new Government Chemist's principal task is to spearhead the third phase of the business programme started by his predecessor Alex Williams.
Worswick told Chemistry in Britain that the current strategy is to ‘look at where we are going and by which path’.
Customer care and business development are part of that focus.
Worswick is anxious, however, that ‘in moving to a more commercial way of operating, we should retain our underlying scientific strengths’.
With this in mind he has established a small scientific strategic and research programme to look at the analytical programme from a broader perspective.
A chemist by background, Worswick made a switch from research to commercial management quite early in his career.
He took a degree in chemistry at New College, Oxford, and subsequently gained a DPhil in inorganic chemistry.
After a year's postdoctoral research, including a short spell in Sweden on a British Council award, Worswick decided that a long term career at the bench was not for him.
‘I knew I wanted to go into the application of research’, he said.
So he joined Boots in Nottingham, where he was involved in financial planning and longer term planning for potential new pharmaceutical products and facilities.
Three years later, in 1976, he moved to the UKAEA's Harwell Laboratory where he was recruited into a newly-formed section called Future Developments Group, investigating long term opportunities for Harwell, including biotechnology and marine technology.
Harwell was considering diversifying into new non-nuclear areas for the offshore and biotechnology industries.
The laboratory already had a biochemistry team and a presence in biodisciplines, and part of Worswick's role was to find out what the market wanted.
Eighteen months later he moved on into the marketing and sales department, where he was responsible for liaising between Harwell and the EEC.
‘This was in the late 1970s when community programmes were developing rapidly’, Worswick recalled.
During this period, through his constant contacts with officials in Brussels he became involved in club programmes.
He was marketing to the European Commission and to European industry.
In 1981 he moved to programmes and planning, helping to coordinate Harwell's programmes, while still maintaining contacts with the European Commission and DTI officials, and was appointed head of research planning and information services in 1983.
His final position before he left Harwell last year was director of process technology and instrumentation.
Dr Richard Worswick, the Government Chemist
During Worswick's time there, Harwell — as part of the AEA — made the transition to a trading fund (effectively a nationalised company rather than a government department), an experience that taught him a great deal about finance.
His job included the ‘difficult task of reviewing all of Harwell's overhead services’ which resulted in a ‘considerable rationalisation of the organisation’.
This troubleshooting record no doubt stood Worswick in good stead when he was considered as a candidate to head the increasingly market-oriented LGC.
As did his experience of environmental concerns as head of safety branch and then of environmental and medical sciences division which, as he remembers, ‘coincided with the great upswing of interest in the environment’.
A major reorganisation of AEA ensued and nine separate businesses were identified.
As one of the business directors, it was Worswick's job to make sure that the sectors could ‘sit on their own as profitable business ventures’.
After 18 months in the post, Worswick was appointed to the LGC.
‘It is not such a huge change of direction’ he said, pointing out his familiarity ‘with analysis and environmental science’.
The LGC and the AEA are addressing ‘the same issues’, he observed; both are concerned with the requirements of their customers and a commercial outlook.
With the government's policy of creating an internal market, ‘we are going to have to behave much more like a business in getting work for the government’, said Worswick.
‘In some areas we are already competing for that work’.
The LGC has a long tradition of providing support services and policy advice to the government.
In the area of support services, work for government bodies including the Departments of Environment and Health, HM Customs and Excise for tobacco and alcohol analysis, Ministry of Defence for food analysis, for example, accounts for 50 per cent of LGC's activities.
The most important component of LGC's work is analytical measurement, believes Worswick.
‘Analysis underpins every part of our lives’— from consumer products to ensure that paint in toys meets permitted levels, to the food we eat.
‘The onus of proof is on the analytical chemist to show it is what we think it is’.
The world of analytical measurement has come under severe pressure recently, noted Worswick.
‘In the US there are examples where the estimates of the FDA have been challenged.
A lot of lives and trade may depend on these analyses’ said Worswick ‘and it is worrying that analyses done in different places can vary’.
LGC is actively promoting the NAMAS accreditation scheme to ensure a consistent standard among analytical laboratories.
The validation of analytical measurement is an important area of LGC's budget — £3m of its £13.7m turnover in 1990.
LGC also has an important advisory role for government, for example as an official referee when a dispute arises about an analytical measurement, as well as in advising the government on its national biotechnology programme or any scientific aspect of chemistry in which government is involved.
Looking ahead, Worswick believes that LGC's commercial success lies in repackaging its services in a form that suits the customer, as well as developing new services and rationalising old ones.
Future opportunities may be found in developing further the laboratory's work in areas of forensic science, such as drug analysis and questioned documents, both for its existing customers, such as Customs and Excise, and for new customers.
‘We also see opportunities in the environmental area’ he said, particularly the rapidly expanding technical services, for example looking at contaminated land.
LGC's skill is in fine detection, such as identifying the source of a one-off water contamination rather than routine studies, because of the range of staff and equipment —‘We are not generally geared up to carry out analyses on thousands of samples at a time’.
LGC is looking at its existing services such as analysis of food, of food packaging, asbestos etc , and seeking ways of developing and promoting these services in wider markets.
‘We are examining our business focus rather than reorganising it’ said Worswick.
‘The overriding objective is to cover our costs and balance our books’.
The one exception to that scheme is the strategic programme which Worswick has begun to implement.
A business development manager has recently been appointed to carry out a business review survey to help determine where the laboratory should go and how it should develop.
In the shorter term, the LGC already has plans for 1992, its 150th anniversary year.
Celebratory events are being organised throughout the year, including an anniversary conference in Reading this autumn, held in conjunction with the RSC.
A schools' video and a book are being produced, looking back on the history of the LGC.
Deborah Gaskell
Plastic phobia
Robert Olley, of the J.J. Thomson Physical Laboratory, Reading, writes:Professor George Kauffman's article on Chemophobia (Chem.
Br. , 1991,27 , 512) prompts me to follow his question of ‘why do they hate plastics?’
Here, maybe, are a few of the answers:
They do not know one from another.
Plastics have arrived in many varieties within one generation, and few people outside the business really appreciate the difference between polyethylene and polypropylene, let alone the many varieties of polyethylene itself.
Ancient man had hundreds if not thousands of years to get used to each new metal; the aesthetic qualities as well as the performance of individual metals in the home or on the battlefield became common knowledge.
Today, few people would blame metals as a whole when one example failed to please.
Today, the manufacturer can turn out masses of injection-moulded toys without necessarily appreciating plastics as individual materials.
Confronted with equations like ‘one penny saved times ’ and confounded by the producer's sales talk, how is the small manufacturer to appreciate what makes the difference between ‘cheap and cheerful’and ‘cheap and nasty’?
And would the propensity for breaking at awkward moments of nylon clamps, gear wheels in printers,etc be avoided if the properties of Nylon 6 vis-à-vis 66 (not to speak of the more recent nylons now available) were better appreciated?
Bad design of plastic articles.
This must take much of the blame.
At home I have recently seen an otherwise robust learning till from a reputable toy manufacturer, a sewing box and a tool box, all break at the pivot or hinge.
Plastics are light, but the force applied by active children to toys (or the weight of the box contents) does not decrease in proportion, and the articles need to be thicker near such load bearing points.
A reputation for persistence in rubbish.
Plastics are not the villain they are made out to be as regards the volume of waste.
An analysis of landfills shows that thrown away food far surpasses plastics in volume.
Perhaps the phosphorus in the bones thrown away after a chicken-based fast-food meal is a more serious resource loss than the petroleum gone with the wrapper.
Plain snobbery.
No comment necessary.
And now for three suggested remedies:
Fuller education about polymers.
Polymers tend to be left late in chemical education, since for example the synthesis of PVC is on paper much more complicated than that of vinyl chloride.
But mastering any chemical theory first without practical experience can leave the student in a state where he or she knows so much about the sodium atom that he can no longer appreciate the silvery metal that behaves so spectacularly on the bench.
And it would be both cheaper and safer to let secondary pupils play with polyethylene, polypropylene and PET, rather than sodium; they can worry about the formula and synthesis of these materials later.
Forethought in design.
Plastics are ‘cooperative’ in this respect; one can often make a pilot moulding out of clear polystyrene, which under stress emits a visible ‘scream’in polarised light, to test where the forces are destructively concentrated.
I wonder if anything similar is ever done in the case of articles such as those complained of above?
A science of why things fail.
Industrialists have to market their new products without knowing what will happen in 30 years' time, although accelerated weathering or ageing tests may give some idea.
When the transistor came along, we thought that with valves and relays out of the way, electronics would never (well, hardly ever) break down.
Similar optimism seems to have surrounded each new polymer to appear on the scene.
If we really knew what caused actual cases of electrical breakdown or even simple cracking in plastic articles, we might save much frustration, and economic waste in the way of articles sent back.
Perhaps a study of broken or cracked objects from home or workplace could be initiated; a suitable name for such a science might be Euteleology , from the Greek ΕυτΕλησ , meaning ‘crummy’
PERSPECTIVES
Shellfish toxin found
Canadian chemists have isolated and identified a new toxin from Irish mussels.
The toxin, dinophysistoxin-2 (DTX-2,(1)) is produced by phytoplankton, which are eaten by shellfish and retained in their digestive glands.
The researchers say that DTX-2 is biogenetically related to two other agents, okadaic acid and DTX-1, which cause diarrhoea after eating toxin-contaminated shellfish (J. L. C. Wright et al, J. Chem.
Soc., Chem.
Commun. , 1992,39 ).
Jeff Wright of the National Research Council's Institute for Marine Biosciences (IMB) in Halifax, Nova Scotia, believes that the discovery of this toxin could prove to be another useful tool for molecular biologists studying cell regulation mechanisms.
He says that, ‘DTX-2, like its biogenetic relatives acts as an ‘on-off’ switch for certain phosphatase enzymes and could open a door in the cell for us to look inside and see what is going on’.
The compound was discovered when Jacqueline Doyle and Eugene Nixon of the Department of the Marine Fisheries Research Centre, Dublin, alerted Wright to an anomalous result found during routine monitoring of mussels from Bantry Bay, Ireland.
Doyle and Nixon had found that the toxicological activity of the mussel extracts in the rat bioassay was greater than could be accounted for by okadaic acid alone.
HPLC-fluorescence analysis indicated the presence of another compound eluting just after okadaic acid.
Stephen Pleasance of Sciex, Ontario, together with Julie Marr of Fenwick Laboratories, Halifax, and IMB collaborator, Mike Quilliam, examined underivatised mussel extract using a newly-developed GC-ion spray MS technique.
Their results immediately confirmed the presence of okadaic acid and indicated that the second peak was due to an isomer.
Marr also confirmed that the new peak did not correspond to either of the known toxins using the HPLC-fluorescence method and standards of okadaic acid and DTX-1.
A detailed 2-D NMR analysis of the new toxin was carried out in Wright's laboratory with the help of Fenwick collaborator, Tingmo Hu and IMB spectroscopist John Walter.
Diarrhetic shellfish toxins have had a disastrous effect on the seafood industry in many parts of the world.
Wright explains that these toxins probably cause diarrhoea by stimulating the phosphorylation of proteins that control sodium secretion by intestinal cells.
‘The cholera toxin operates in much the same way’, Wright says, ‘however, there have been no reported fatalities’.
He adds that ‘the health and economic implications make the study of these toxins very important’.
David Bradley 
Resistance provides clues
Evidence has recently emerged of a new gene that confers resistance on some bacterial to one of the most widely used synthetic antibiotics, trimethoprim.
If it does exist the gene may help resolve some of the questions about how antibiotics work and give clues for new antibiotics.
Resistant strains of bacteria were detected soon after the widespread introduction of penicillin in the 1940s.
The rapid evolution of bacterial mutation forced a policy re-think in the medical profession about the extent and levels of antibiotic use.
In 1962 trimethoprim (TMP) made its UK debut.
Bacteriologists immediately recognised that it gave them a unique opportunity to study the evolutionary processes governing bacterial resistance — as a synthetic antibiotic it could not be influenced by preexisting resistance genes.
The chemical (2,4-diamino-5- (3,4,5 trimethoxybenzyl) pyrimidine) acts as an inhibitor locking on to the active site of the enzyme dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) which catalyses the reduction of dihydrofolate to tetrahydrofolate in microbial and eucaryotic cells (see figure ).
Since tetrahydrofolate derived factors are essential in the biosynthesis of amino acids, inhibition of DHFR and the consequent depletion of the tetrahydrofolate reservoir slows or stops cell growth.
TMP resistant gram negative bacteria were reported in 1969.
Between 1972 and 1984 tens of thousands were tested for susceptibility to TMP, mainly from urinary tract infections (UTIs).
In the first seven years of the study, resistant strains increased slowly, then peaked and fell back to about 25 per cent.
Resistance to TMP is a growing  problem in developing countries where its use is widespread because it is cheap and effective.
In the UK TMP resistance is strongest in hospitals.
Geriatric units are particularly vulnerable because treatment of UTIs tends to be long term and there is extensive use of indwelling urinary tract catheters.
In 1985 Dr Rosalind Maskell at St Mary's Hospital, Portsmouth, reported a noticeable fall in TMP resistance where two years previously she logged a sudden surge in resistance.
She explained that the decline may have been a direct result of the local publicity given to her earlier concerns, as GPs cut back TMP prescriptions.
Bacterial defence mechanisms to TMP are triggered from two subcellular sources: the chromosomal DNA and the plasmids (free rings of DNA fragments) found in the cells.
The chromosomal defence mechanism operated by conferring increased cell wall impermeability, preventing access by TMP, or by ‘programming’ the bacteria to exploit alternative metabolic pathways to overcome the threat.
In general it leads to low level resistance.
Much research has focused on the messages coming from plasmid DNA which somehow codes for new versions of DHFR, subtle altered in shape (stereochemistry), to prevent the TMP performing its task of inhibiting the active site.
So far in the case of E. Coli seven major groups of plasmid encoded TMP resistant DHFRs have been identified and more will probably be found.
Dr Ken Towner, a microbiologist at the University Hospital, Nottingham, has recently been using DNA probes to identify and classify the various DHFRs (Epidemiol.
Infect.,
Jan 1991).
He believes he has detected in Nottingham the emergence of new types of TMP resistant DHFRs.
He was struck by the discovery of a version of the enzyme which previously had only been reported in a clinical isolate of Salmonella typhimurium from New Zealand
Little is known about the evolutionary relationships between the TMP resistant DHFRs, and full biochemical characterisation may be required to resolve ambiguities says Towner.
Accurate sequencing of the related genes and further X-ray studies are expected to generate additional information on the origin and evolution of bacterial DHFR genes.
Dermot Martin 
Rolling out more ‘buckyballs’
Buckminsterfullerene — that football-shaped 60 carbon-atomed molecular denizen of stardust and soot — is rapidly yielding up its chemical secrets.
Not a month goes by without the journals being crammed full of fullerenes.
For C60 is not the only one.
Since its first reported large-scale synthesis back in early 1990, larger ‘buckyballs’, as the; y have been inelegantly christened, keep cropping up.
This is just a sample of the papers trawled from one journal during one month.
Now two groups have reported very high yield synthesis and separations of fullerenes (see D. H. Parker et al, J. Am.
Chem.
Soc. , 1991,113 , 7499, and F. Diedrich et al, Science.,
1991,252 , 548) from C60 all the way up to C266.
The best of these uses a so-called ‘fullerene generator’(a plasma discharge between two carbon rods), followed by a solvent extraction scheme (as sophisticated as any used by the nuclear industry for separating radionuclides) to obtain the different molecular weight fullerene fractions.
With the advent of fullerenes in macroscopic quantities, chemists have got to work.
C60 was already known to encapsulate metal ions (eg La3+).
Could metal ions be made to stick on to the outside of the fullerene football?
And if so, what would that tell about the way the carbon skeleton is bonded together?
Metals like Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Rh, and VO, all form 1:1 complexes with C60 in the gas phase (to form MC60+) that readily fall apart to leave the fullerene intact (B.S. Freiser,J. Am.
Chem.
Soc. , 1991,113 , 9418).
However, more enduring chemical bonds are formed when C60 reacts with osmium and platinum.
Osmium tetroxide forms 1:1 and 2:1 adducts and, by using carbon 13 NMR it has proved possible to discern C60's two types of C-C bonds (J. M. Hawkins et al, J. Am.
Chem.
Soc. , 1991,113 7770).
Also, by using the C-C coupling constants, Hawkins et al have managed to calculate the percentage s character in the two types of C-C bonds, which confirm the football structure for C60.
Six platinum atoms (and associated triethylphosphine ligands) form an octahedral array around C60 (P. J. Fagan et al ,J. Am.
Chem.
Soc. , 1991,113 , 9408).
This confirms earlier evidence that the double bonds in the geodesic structure are not of equal reactivity.
The one between two fused six-membered rings are the most reactive.
There are 30 such double bonds in the fullerene football but binding of a bis diethylphosphineplatinum group (because of their steric bulk) to one of these protects its four nearest neighbours from further attack.
Benzene is a flat, 2-D molecule that is the archetype for the concept of aromaticity, first enunciated by Kekulé in the 19th century, and later perfected by Huckel.
Buckminsterfullerene has often been thought of as the 3-D equivalent of benzene and so should be ‘aromatic’, which means performing some of the chemical reactions for which benzene is noted.
Olah et al (J. Am.
Chem.
Soc. , 1991,113 , 9385) have been able to polyhalogenate C60 with chlorine and bromine.
It was not possible to ascertain directly how many halogen moieties had ended up on the football.
Olah, however, managed to perform Friedel-Crafts reactions on these polychlorinated fullerenes, which showed that at least 22 phenyl groups had been substituted.
Electrochemistry is also being used to probe the electronic structure of the fullerenes (K. M. Kadish et al ,J. Am.
Chem.
Soc. , 1991,113 7773).
Both C60 and C70 can be oxidised and reduced in solution electrochemically.
Oxidation proceeds via four-electron transfers, followed by chemical reactions with the solutions which render these reactions irreversible.
Kadish has managed five-electron reductions of C60 (although theory suggests that this molecule should be capable of accepting up to six electrons into its lowest unoccupied molecular orbital).
is quite  stable in some solvents, while Raman spectroscopy on the monoanion,(which shows how the negatively-charged football structure vibrates), demonstrates that reduction disturbs the orderly bonding and symmetry of C60.
(M. J. Weaver et al, J. Am.
Chem.
Soc. , 1991,113 , 9395).
In view of the superconducting properties of some fullerene-containing materials, these electrochemical results could prove important.
The initial formation of buckminsterfullerene is also throwing up some surprises.
Some chemists are asking how the carbon atoms sort themselves out when making the football structure.
Hawkins et al tried to answer this, one again using carbon-13 enriched C60 and carbon-13 NMR to indicate the distribution of 13C atoms within the structure (J. Am.
Chem.
Soc. , 1991,113 , 9394).
It turns out that the 13C atoms are randomly distributed within the football.
Earlier mass spectral data had indicated that during plasma discharge, the carbon species ejected from the graphite rods were atoms and possibly dimers.
Combining this with his NMR work, Hawkins concludes that somehow the carbon atoms of any C2 units must disconnect before or after they form the fullerene structure.
Lionel Milgrom 
Memories are made of this
Forgotten that wedding anniversary again?
Lost your keys?
No, you cannot prevent it from happening — but scientists are a bit nearer to understanding what goes on at the molecular level.
Memory — the recording of experience to modify behaviour — is a very complex process and is invested in different organisms at different levels.
Bacteria can show ‘learning’ by the fact that they move in response to a chemical gradient, but this is clearly different from the memory capacity of higher animals and man.
However, memory can be divided into short and long term categories, and scientists think that bacterial short term memory is essentially the same as the short term memory in man.
Daniel Koshland, of the department of molecular and cell biology at the University of California (Berkeley), described his experiments on memory at the recent American Chemical Society meeting in New York.
His team took rat neurons (nerve cells) and grew cell lines in culture to allow them to examine some of the chemical processes that take place.
Neural cells can be kept in good condition in vivo for many hours, and provide a good chemical test system and model for memory.
Cells from the hind brain or medulla (the rat PC 12 line) have been associated with habituation, or a decreased response to repeated stimulation.
HT4 rat cells from the brain surface of cortex showed potentiation, which is an increased response to repeated stimulation.
Koshland used both depolarisation and acetylcholine (ACh) to stimulate the PC 12 cells.
The cell's response to stimulation is to secrete norepinephrine; the amount secreted falls as the stimulation is repeated.
If the stimulus is removed for a period, the cell response recovers, but not to the original level.
This is effectively ‘remembering’— the response is long (hours) in relation to the stimulus (minutes).
This system forms a model for long term memory.
Koshland also found that the depolarisation and ACh acted in similar but parallel ways; habituation to, say, ACh stimulation did not also produce habituation to depolarisation.
The two stimuli thus operate in different pathways within the same neuron.
Further evidence for the existence of the two pathways was that activated enzyme protein kinase C can restore the cellular response to depolarisation, but not to ACh.
This evidence also suggest that cellular memory can exist in the absence of synapses —ie that destroying the connections between cells does not destroy the actual information stored (remembered) within the cell.
This implies that people who cannot remember things may not have lost the information — but   may need to access it differently.
The HT4 cortical cells, on the other hand, did not habituate to depolarisation.
After trying various neurotransmitters the group found that serotonin could potentiate the cell's response —ie enhance the response to stimulation.
The difference between long and short term memory depends on whether certain NMDA (N -methyl-D-aspartate) receptors were activated or not.
A stronger (long) serotonin stimulus causes the release of amino acids which activate the NMDA receptors, leading to long term memory.
A short stimulus gives only a transient NMDA elevation, but if the cells are treated with both serotonin and NMDA, then long term potentiation could be induced.
The team also found that long term potentiation led to the persistent elevation of cAMP in the cells, while short term potentiation was associated with only a transient elevation of cAMP.
However, there may be other mechanisms in operation.
All this needs to be related to the situation in vivo to be of any real use.
The human brain is very complex, having ca 10–12 neurons with ca 10 2 dendrites (connections) per neuron, to interact with other neurons.
‘We can think of neurons as the ‘chips’ and the connecting dendrites as the ‘wiring’, explained Koshland.
He pointed out the importance of having both long and short term memory —‘you don't want to clutter up your brain with information that is irrelevant long term’, he said, giving as an example the way you would look at traffic approaching as you crossed a street — you need to recall the situation for only a few seconds.
When you remember something, the chemistry is the same each time — every time you see Mr Jones, the same pathway is activated.
Scientists believe that often it would be possible to recall ‘lost’ information by constructing a new access path or connection — especially valuable for stroke victims or others suffering memory loss.
There is some evidence that highly educated people recover more quickly from stroke, since they are probably used to accessing more pathways.
It might be possible to aid recall by giving serotonin or another stimulant — and the neural cell cultures will certainly allow scientists to experiment with more drugs.
However, this would not help Alzheimer's patients, whose cells actually deteriorate during the disease.
However, no experiments have yet been done on humans, so it might be best, for now, to keep a diary for your anniversaries.
Plugging the ozone hole
We have schemes to overcome the greenhouse effect by seeding the oceans with iron (marginally feasible), and we have had cranky schemes to pipe ground-level ozone pollution up into the stratosphere to reduce the ozone deficit (not feasible).
It was only a matter of time before somebody thought of seeding Antarctic atmosphere to plug up the ozone hole.
A group from the University of California has published a concept based on our increasing knowledge of the mechanisms of polar ozone loss due to free chlorine atoms (R. J. Cicerone, Scott Elliott and R. P. Turco,Nature , 1991,254 , 1191).
They reason that the known reactions of simple alkanes with atomic chlorine show how it can be done:
Running this through the sophisticated computer models for atmospheric chemistry that now exist, the group calculates that some 50 000 tonnes pa of ethane or propane would have to be injected into the stratosphere to mop up the free chlorine created each Antarctic spring.
Many variables could affect the outcome.
For instance, since nitric acid on water droplets in the polar clouds is an important initiator of ozone loss, the NOx level is crucial.
Several reaction pathways and their rates still have to be explored, and these could radically alter the model calculations.
Not surprisingly, the researchers warn of ‘unintended side effects’ of hydrocarbon injection.
In any case, is it feasible to deliver so large a quantity of hydrocarbons to the required point?
The Californians acknowledge that a fleet of several hundred large NOx-belching aircraft been needed, and even then choosing the right part of the Antarctic vortex system to ensure mixing would be crucial.
Perhaps this is one experiment that had better remain a computer simulation, at least for now.
news review
World recovery is not on schedule
‘The world recovery is not going according to script’ Geoffrey Dicks, a senior research fellow at the London Business School, told delegates at the Chemical Industries Association (CIA)Business outlook conference in London last month.
‘The US faces continuing recession and European recovery is slower than we thought’ he said.
In the UK, GDP fell 2 per cent(estimate) in 1991, against a forecast 0.5 per cent rise — and the figure for Europe is likely to be the same, Dicks reported.
The UK economy ‘was weaker than we thought and exports underperformed our forecast’ he said.
‘It was the domestic economy where recovery failed to take place’.
Domestic consumption fell by 1 per dent ‘whereas we thought it would be up by 1 per cent’ said Dicks, and he reaffirmed his belief that ‘recovery would have to come from domestic consumption’.
The problem is that UK households, like US ones, are struggling to repay the debts they took on in the boom years of the 1980s, he explained.
Following his forecast for a modest recovery in 1991, which did not appear.
Dicks was understandably cautious about 1992.
‘I think the recovery will appear this year, but maybe into the second half.
But given our track record there are risks on timing’ he said.
While the UK's GDP performance in 1991 was much weaker than expected.
It ‘has not been reflected to the same extent in the fortunes of the chemical industry’ reported Richard Freeman, ICI's chief economist and chairman of the CIA Economic Appraisal Committee and Cefic's Economic Outlook Working Party.
Chemical production was stronger than forecast, being flat rather than falling by 1 per cent as predicted.
Imports showed 1 per cent growth, as forecast, while exports grew by 3.5 per cent, more than the expected 2.0 per cent —‘something of a mystery’ said Freeman.
Home demand was down 1.5 per cent, as anticipated.
Statistics for the UK chemical industry, as provided by the government, cannot be relied on, warned Freeman.
Given this, the production index could be revised down to a fall of 1 per cent.
The West European chemical industry will probably have seen a 1 per cent increase in GDP in 1991, Freeman added, compared to a forecast rise of 2.1 per cent.
The UK accounted for the largest downward revision for GDP in 1991, from a 0.5 per cent rise to a 2 per cent fall, noted Freeman.
In the UK, investment during 1991 is estimated to have fallen by 15 per cent in real terms, compared with the forecast drop of 10 per cent, according to the CIA's panel.
The panel had also been over-optimistic on employment which fell by 3 per cent compared to the 2 per cent forecast.
Statistics for individual sectors are particularly unreliable, warned Freeman.
The Central Statistical Office (CSO) is already planning to revise its 1991 figures for inorganic production, for example, by 11 per cent — up from a fall of 11 per cent .
Fertiliser production for 1991 seems to have fallen by 5 per cent, worse than the predicted -3 per cent , and paints saw a similar pattern.
Cosmetic and perfume production appears to have fallen by 8 per cent and detergents by 3 per cent, compared to expected flat growth.
The plastic sector is expected to reflect its depressed market with a decline in production of 4 per cent, while fibres will be up 1 per cent .
‘Pharmaceuticals are the one bright spot, with exports continuing to rise’, said Freeman — production growth for 1991 is estimated at 5 per cent.
A similar figure for organics reflects ‘a return to more normal operations’ after plant closures in 1990, ‘but production levels are weak’he noted.
‘In other West European countries, chemical production is also weak’ added Freeman, ‘it is generally flat with the exception of Germany where production is slowing down sharply.
There are no indications that production is yet on a sustained recovery path in any of the continental European countries’.
Looking at the outlook for Europe in 1992, Cefic predicts a weak 1.9 per cent growth in GDP, compared to 1 per cent in 1991.
Investment will decline by 2 per cent and employment will fall by 1 per cent,ie twice the 1991 rate.
‘…there can be no doubt that the general economic background for the chemical industry in 1992 is less than buoyant’, said Freeman.
UK GDP in 1992 is expected to be up 1.25 per cent, while chemical production growth is likely to be 2 per cent according to the CIA panel.
This weak growth is reflected in the CIA panel's forecast for the industry's sectors (see table ) although, Freeman added, this was derived from the CSO's production figures, which appear to be overestimated.
Pharmaceuticals will again be a star performer, he noted.
UK chemical demand is expected to rise by 2.5 per cent in 1992, and import growth by 3.5 per cent, while exports are expected to fall from 3.5 to 3 per cent .
Investment is forecast to fall by 6 per cent and employment by nearly 4 per cent.
‘Overall, the forecasts are for a year of slow recovery from the 1991 recession, with production, demand and imports picking up and exports slowing a little’ he concluded.
Cefic to lobby for public R & D
The recently-formed Science and Technology Directorate of Cefic, the European chemical industry federation, plans to lobby for better support of higher education and research.
In its new position on European policy for science and technology , the directorate details three main themes to work on:
improved climate for R & D and the exploitation of innovation;
enhanced support for educational institutions as educators and as leading edge pioneers in research;
selective public funding in the areas of research and technological development which will be important for future communal welfare and prosperity.
Dr David Bricknell, director of the Science and Technology Directorate, told Chemistry in Britain that he foresaw ‘a great upsurge in interest in science and technology’.
Improving the climate for R&D meant harmonising regulation throughout Europe and ultimately throughout the world, he said.
He added that governments seriously underfunded educational institutions, which are the traditional home of fundamental research.
The Science and Technology Directorate ‘will badger governments into giving more money to [educational]institutions…it is futile for governments to spend money to increase industry's competitiveness’ it is better spent on projects in educational institutions.
‘If public money is put into R&D in chemistry-industry related areas’ he added, ‘then these areas must be defined by the chemical industry’— all too often projects do not cover areas in which the industry is interested.
The policy paper advocates selective public funding in key areas including biotechnology and life sciences; advanced fundamental knowledge of chemical reactivity and principles of catalysis; reliable synthesis, processing and reprocessing of functional and structural materials; and environmental protection.
The Science and Technology Directorate recently set up a science and technology committee to replace the Cefic R&D committee.
This new committee will have a broader remit than the old one.
Bricknell sees several important issues for the Science and Technology Directorate to tackle during 1992.
These include life cycle analysis and ecobalances ‘to try to clarify what can be done and what is sensible to do and how to do it’ and the proposals for a CO2/energy tax.
Bricknell says that Cefic has responded to the suggestion of such a tax by saying that all it will do is reduce the industry's ability to spend money on new plants and technology.
Instead of a tax Cefic has suggested that help should be given to eastern Europe to help reduce energy consumption.
An example is the recently set up Cefic Environmental Advisory Service for Technology Transfer (EASTT) programme, which aims to help eastern Europe improve its environmental performance and energy consumption.
Alternatively, the chemical industry will enter into a voluntary energy reduction programme to reduce energy consumption by developing new technology and replacing old plant with new.
Controlling CW precursors
As the House of Commons begins its inquiry into illegal exports of chemical weapon precursors to Iraq, the ‘Australia Group’ countries are trying to close loopholes in export licensing.
At the December meeting of the Australia Group in Paris, the UK Foreign Office tabled the code of conduct of the Chemical Industries Association (CIA) as a model for monitoring compliance with regulations.
Justin Stephenson of the CIA said that ‘the UK is ahead of many Australia Group countries’ in its system of export licensing.
‘Others have less effective and more burdensome regimes’, he said.
The Australia Group comprises 20 industrialised nations committed to preventing the proliferation of chemical weapons.
It lists some 50 key precursor chemicals that should be tightly controlled.
These are incorporated in UK export controls, though an Open General Export Licence allows then to be  exported to other countries within the Australia Group.
The CIA's code of conduct, which has been operating since last April, is now an integral part of the association's Responsible Care programme, to which all CIA member companies have now signed up.
The Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry and the British Chemical Distributors and Traders Association also apply it to their member companies.
The code covers both Australia Group chemical weapon precursors and the lists of narcotic drugs and solvents used in illicit drug manufacture, which are covered by the Vienna Convention.
It lays down a system by which a liaison officer in each company is responsible for logging all sales of listed substances to countries outside the EC.
Quarterly returns allow the CIA to monitor trade in these substances and to provide data for the Department of Trade and Industry, the Home Office and Customs & Excise.
The 1992 edition of the CIA's Directory of products and buyers' guide marks the chemicals subject to controls, and the Home Office has welcomed this ‘at a glance’ guide.
Having this system in place alerts companies to suspicious orders, and Stephenson said that CIA members had recently reported shady Yugoslavian and Libyan inquiries to the British government agencies.
Similarly, if an international organisation such as the UN or Interpol has intelligence about a suspicious chemical plant, the liaison system allows the CIA to alert its members.
A list of controlled technologies is being drawn up by the Australia Group and this could be added to UK export regulations this year.
The CIA was concerned that early drafts included common equipment that exists in school labs, which would make the system both ridiculous and unworkable.
The list is being refined to cover only key technologies.
Broadly speaking, the CIA is happy with the government-industry relationship that has developed over export controls.
Stephenson said that ‘the government has done a good job in policy development, without burdening business but with sufficient controls’.
The UK system is being put up as a model to the International council of Chemical Industry Associations.
Stephenson commented that the US system by contrast is highly regulated and covers just about everything.
This puts industry off voluntary controls and it tends to wait for a law to be brought in.
The US Chemical-Biological Weapons Act cleared Congress just before Christmas.
This brings in sanctions against foreign companies found to be contributing to the proliferation of these weapons.
Philips Analytical reborn
Shareholder, investment analyst and press criticism of Philips Analytical's performance over the past two years — not all justified according to Peter Jackson, regional manager for northern Europe — led the company to take a long, hard look at itself.
Over the past 10 years Philips Analytical has grown and diversified away from its core technologies of X-ray analysis and electron microscopy.
However, market research showed that the range of products available from a supplier was much less important to customers than performance, reliability and customer support.
So last year Philips Analytical decided to refocus its attention back onto its existing strengths and expertise and sold its Cambridge-based laboratory instrument business, Unicam, to the US company ATI in April.
The divestment continued in July with the sale of EDAX to HNU Systems.
To streamline its management structure and improve profitability Philips Analytical has instigated ‘Operation Centurion’— a company-wide programme aimed at controlling costs and seeking new business opportunities and partnerships, as well as improving management.
Decision taking has been delegated down the management structure: sales and support staff have more responsibility and freedom to respond to customer needs.
Regional managers for northern, central and southern Europe have also been appointed to ensure that managers look across national boundaries for specialised services if they are needed, giving customers access to a broader scope of expertise.
One of the company's major objectives now is to establish partnerships between itself and the customer — giving benefit to both parties.
An example of this idea is Philips Analytical's partnership with Sheffield City Polytechnic.
The DTI has given the polytechnic an award to establish a technology transfer programme for materials analysis and quality assurance, based on an XL40 scanning electron microscope supplied by Philips Analytical.
The aim is to make the technical and commercial benefits of analytical SEM available to small to medium companies concerned with materials processing and manufacture.
Such companies are unable to use analytical SEM, due to a lack of technical expertise and inability to make the necessary capital investment.
Philips is committed to establishing a joint awareness and user training programme.
In an effort to break into new markets, Philips Analytical has signed an agreement with Shimadzu.
The Japanese giant has agreed to endorse Philips Analytical's XL series of scanning electron microscopes with the Shimadzu name and market them in Japan.
PL drives into pole position
After an extensive survey of available systems, McLaren International, the Formula 1 constructors champion, has chosen Polymer Laboratories to supply advanced thermal analysis instruments to equip a new research laboratory at its factory in Surrey.
Polymer Laboratories is supplying several thermal analysers including a simultaneous thermal analyser and a dielectric thermal analyser, as well as a computer software package for operation and data analysis.
The company hopes that the equipment will help to enhance the performance of the Marlboro McLaren Honda cars and improve crash resistance and other safety features, as well as improving the dynamics of the cars.
Dr Gary Savage, McLaren's development engineer, pointed out that the newly equipped laboratory ‘will have the performance capability in materials science testing which is comparable to any multinational chemical company.
It may even exceed those standards’.
Formula 1 racing cars are now constructed using aerospace technology, and equipment such as that supplied by Polymer Laboratories can be used to simulate the behaviour of materials such as carbon fibres and other composites used in modern racing car production.
Professor Ray Wetton (above), chairman of Polymer Laboratories, commented, ‘we are delighted to be associated with the world championship racing team, and we expect both out development departments to learn a great deal about designing and manufacturing composites’.
Coalite sale
Anglo United is preparing to sell Coalite Chemicals, its speciality chemical business.
Dr Peter Stefanini, managing director of Coalite Chemicals, said that on reviewing its business activities, Anglo took ‘a new view on the chemical division and the liquid fuel division’ and now considers them to be non-core businesses.
Anglo would sell Coalite Chemicals, said Stefanini, ‘if the right sort of bid came along’.
No price has yet been discussed, but rumours suggest that Anglo would sell for about £30m.
However, according to Stefanini, a sale is some way off, Coalite is still preparing a prospectus, which should be available by the end of this month.
Any sale would include appropriate long-term contracts with Coalite Smokeless Fuels, which supplies Coalite Chemicals with coal oil feedstock, and agreement over future environmental liability for the site (Chem.
Br.,1991,27 , 409 and Chem.
Br.,1991,27 , 1105).
results
Allied Colloids announced a 8.9 per cent rise in pre-tax profits to £21.08m for the six months ended 28 September 1991.
Turnover was up 10.1 per cent to £125m.
Johnson Matthey turned in pre-tax profits of £32.6m for the six months to 30 September 1991, virtually unchanged against the same period in 1990 (at £32.5m), according to chairman David Davies.
Turnover was £150.1m compared to £144.6m in 1990.
Elga Group , the water purification specialist and equipment supplier, announced a 52 per cent rise in pre-tax profits to £462,000 during the six months ended 30 September 1991.
Turnover was up 37 per cent to £9.6m.
Degussa saw pre-tax profits fall by 44 per cent to DM 179m (£1 = DM 2.835) during the year 1991–92.
Group turnover was DM 13 350m, representing a 4 per cent decline from the previous year.
The chemical sector showed a 0.7 per cent fall in turnover to DM 4585m, while pharmaceutical sales rose 10.6 per cent.
British Bio-technology Group achieved a total income of £1.95m during the half year ended 31 October 1991, against £2.35m in the previous year Income from Research Division was £342 000 and from Laboratory Products Division was £1.61m.
Total expenses for the half year were £9.22m, up from £5.84m in the previous year.
Rhône-Poulenc announced a rise in operating profits of 8.1 per cent during the first nine months of 1991 to FFr 4887m (£1 = FFr9.68), despite a persistently poor economic climate.
Turnover rose 7.5 per cent to FFr62 843m.
pharmaceuticals
Wellcome news on Aids drugs
Wellcome's share price rose sharply at the beginning of the year after the announcement that a combination of two of its drugs, Retrovir (zidovudine or AZT) and Zovirax (acyclovir), halved the number of deaths amongst Aids patients compared to zidovudine alone.
The results were later played down by the company.
The results of the research, which involved 300 patients in the UK, Australia and Germany, were disclosed by Paul Griffiths, professor of virology at the Royal Free Hospital, London.
The trial was halted after one year instead of the planned three after 20 per cent of patients taking only zidovudine died compared with only 10 per cent of those taking a ‘cocktail’ of zidovudine and acyclovir.
According the Wellcome the study was set up to look at the effect of acyclovir against cytomegalovirus, a type of herpes virus, and was stopped after no difference was found in frequency of CMV disease between patients taking acyclovir and those taking a placebo.
The finding that the death rate of patients was reduced in the group taking zidovudine and acyclovir in combination was a ‘very incidental result’, according to a spokeswoman from Wellcome.
Wellcome would not comment further until the data from the study had been fully analysed, although the preliminary indications were ‘encouraging’.
Wellcome said that the results are consistent with an earlier study, which showed improved survival of patients with advanced HIV infection taking a combination of zidovudine and acyclovir.
The results of this study have been submitted for publication.
A second study into the combined effects of zidovudine with other drugs has also suggested that drug ‘cocktails’ may suppress HIV.
The study looked at a combination of zidovudine with dideoxycytidine, an experimental drug manufactured by Hoffmann-La Roche.
The report published in Annals of Internal Medicine (1 January 1992) was based on a pilot study of 56 patients by Washington's National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.
Researchers found that the combination of drugs reduced the levels of certain types of HIV protein, increasing the number of certain crucial immune system cells that fight Aids for longer than if just one drug was taken.
Anthony Fauci, director of the institute, said that the study indicated that a combination may be more effective than single drug treatment, but the data presented were too preliminary to make a final conclusion.
A study involving 1000 patients is now under way.
Data from the interim analysis of the Alpha trial of didanosine will be analysed early this year.
The Medical Research Council (MRC) and Inserm (France) stopped recruitment to Alpha, the international trial of didanosine (DDI) in zidovudine intolerant patients in the autumn of last year.
More than 1800 patients are involved in the trial which has two options.
Option A is a double-blind placebo controlled trial of two doses of didanosine and option B is a comparison of the same two doses without placebo.
Didanosine, which is manufactured by Bristol-Myers Squibb, was granted a US licence last October for use in patients with advanced HIV infection who were intolerant of zidovudine.
Bristol-Myers is hoping that licensing procedures in Europe will be completed by the end of this year.
Fisons denies FDA allegations
Fisons has denied allegations from the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) against three of its most important medical products.
The allegations appeared late last year in an issue of the FDC Reports (‘the pink sheet’).
The FDA was quoted as saying that the asthma drug Intal, which accounts for about half of Fisons' pharmaceutical sales, was still on sale despite ‘violations’ only because of its medical necessity.
The report mentioned leakage problems with Intal inhalers and ‘deceptive leakage tests’.
The report also mentioned contamination problems during the manufacture of the anti-allergic eye product Opticrom and suggests that ‘beer kegs’ were used for storage during the manufacture of Imferon, an injectable iron.
Fisons said that a number of the FDA's statements need ‘clarification’.
The leaky valves for Intal inhalers were manufactured by a subcontractor and an application was made to the FDA in 1987 to change both the valve and the manufacturing site.
Fisons says that an inspection of the new site by the FDA has produced ‘no adverse observations’.
Fisons ‘strongly refutes’ the suggestion that leakage tests were deceptive, but has amended the test.
Problems with the manufacture of Opticrom, which was withdrawn (as was Imferon) from the US market in 1990, arose from contamination in a microbiology laboratory and not, as the FDA speculated, as the result of an inadequate water system at the Fisons plant at Holmes Chapel, Cheshire.
FDA improvements suggested for the site have been implemented and the validation production of Opticrom is now under way in anticipation of an FDA inspection in early 1992.
Fisons adds that at no time did it use ‘beer kegs’ for storage during the manufacture of Imferon and that the bulk intermediate storage vessels, which looked like beer kegs, have now been replaced.
Despite the recent allegations Fisons says that its relationship with the FDA is ‘satisfactory’.
Fisons' share price dropped after the FDA allegations were made public.
Shares had already fallen at the end of last year after Fisons estimated that the withdrawal of Opticrom and Imferon from the US markets had cost the company about £65m.
Shareholders were reported to be concerned about the company's loss of credibility.
Share prices rose again in mid-January after it was announced that John Kerridge, chairman of Fisons, had resigned for health reasons.
FDA reforms
The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has committed itself to reforms that will speed up the approval of drugs and reduce development costs.
Under the reforms the FDA will continue to use its own inspectors to review innovative or badly needed drugs, but will use outside contractors (from the pharmaceutical industry) to review more routine products such as antibiotics.
The FDA also plans to introduce an ‘accelerated approval’ system for drugs for serious diseases of where no alternative exists.
Although the use of outside contractors will speed up the regulatory process, critics have expressed concern at using the industry to police itself.
The suggestions for the reforms come from the White House Council on Competitiveness.
Also included are plans to allow institutional review bodies, composed of scientists from private companies or universities, to review data from basic phase I clinical trials and relaxing current standards for efficacy to take into account the risk to health that a delay in further drug testing might cause.
The FDA is also willing to consider approval from other countries and hopes eventually to approve automatically any drugs already approved in the EC.
Discussions between the FDA, the Japanese Ministry of Welfare and Health and the EC have led to agreement on proposals to avoid duplication of clinical trials on humans and reduce unnecessary animal testing.
The proposals include abolition of the LD50 test, replacing one year toxicity studies with six month ones and eliminating the duplication of animal reproduction studies.
Biotech drugs
A recent survey by the US Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association showed a 60 per cent increase in biotechnology medicines under development in the US over the past four years.
There are 132 medicines in human clinical trials or at the FDA for approval.
The survey points out that only three biotechnology medicines have been approved in the US during the past year and only 14 in the past decade, and at this rate, it will take 13 years for the 21 medicines now awaiting approval to be passed.
The European biotechnology industry is losing out to the US and Japan, because of the problems of patenting biotech products in Europe.
Of world biotechnology patents recently documented, patents obtained by Europeans accounted for only 19 per cent of the total compared to 41 per cent for the US and 36 per cent for Japan.
This, says Daniel Rahier, assistant director of the European Senior Advisory Group in Biotechnology (SAGB), ‘means that Europe is becoming more production centred and we are losing our R & D capabilities’.
Rahier told Chemistry in Britain that the SAGB has adopted the position that everything should be patentable, including transgenic plants, so that companies could be sure of protecting their investment.
The EC is currently debating draft legislation on intellectual property rights and Rahier expects that the proposals will be discussed and approved at Commission level by mid-1992.
Upjohn appeal
The Committee on Safety of Medicines (CSM) has refused Upjohn's appeal against the suspension of its sleeping pill Halcion (triazolam).
Upjohn will now appeal to the UK Medicines Commission, but the suspension will remain in place until the appeal has been heard.
The original suspension was imposed after the CSM considered evidence suggesting that Halcion was associated with a much higher frequency of side effects that other sleeping medications (Chem.
Br.,1991,27 , 1104).
Upjohn was dealt another blow when sales of the high (0.25 mg) dose form of Halcion were suspended in France at the end of last year, although the low dose (0.125 mg) form is still available.
Prix Galien
The first European Prix Galien has been awarded to Glaxo for ondansetron (Zofran) its novel 5-HT3 anatagonist.
Ondansetron was developed by Glaxo for the treatment of nausea and vomiting associated with cancer treatment.
The Prix Galien, which was a national prize in France, is now awarded for a new medicine marketed in several European countries.
environment
EC needs environment agency
Industry, regulatory bodies and non-governmental organisations are agreed on the need for a European Environmental Agency.
The House of Lords EC subcommittee on the environment has heard evidence from the CBI, the Chemical Industries Association (CIA), HM Inspectorate of Pollution (HMIP) and the National Rivers Authority (NRA), as well as Friends of the Earth (FoE).
All these bodies favoured a role for a European Environment Agency that involved the collection and collation of data from EC member countries.
Representatives from the CBI and the CIA suggested that a European audit body could be set up to ensure that national bodies were enforcing legislation requirements.
HMIP pointed out that an enforcement role for such an agency would be an unnecessary duplication of work already carried out in the UK.
However, Friends of the Earth, whilst supporting the setting up of a European Environment Agency, suggested that an inspectorate attached to the European Commission could have an investigative role in member countries.
The creation of such an inspectorate said Andrews Lees of FoE, would not make the proposed European Environment Agency redundant.
The subcommittee questioned industry representatives on the role companies could play in improving the environment.
Dr Mike Wright, replying on behalf of the CIA, said that the Responsible Care programme currently being implemented in the chemical industry had shown that companies can use self assessment to improve environmental standards.
Dr David Slater of HMIP said that HMIP was very keen to encourage self assessment, especially using continuous monitoring techniques, although the emphasis would always remain on spot checking.
The preference for directives as opposed to regulations for environmental matters has also been repeatedly expressed.
Witnesses said that directives give the flexibility needed by member states.
When questioned about penalising member states who did not comply with EC environmental legislation Andrew Bryce of the UK Environmental Law Association (UKELA) said that penalising member states by  withholding regional grants was ‘a blunt instrument’, because it might affect individuals through no fault of their own.
However Bryce said that UKELA did advocate the use of fines imposed on a country by the European Court as a result of proceedings brought by the Commission.
Lees (FoE) said that countries should be made to restore the damaged environment to an acceptable state through practical action and if the country refused to do this only then should financial penalties by imposed.
Dr Edward Thairs, chairman of the CBI/CIA delegation, said that the situation regarding environmental implementation throughout EC member countries at the moment meant that the ‘UK is at a competitive disadvantage’.
Faster phase-out for CFCs
EC environment ministers acting upon the increasing scientific evidence for ozone depletion, have called for an accelerated plan for withdrawing ozone-depleting compounds.
David Trippier, the UK's representative at the ministerial meeting on 12 December, suggested bringing forward the EC ban on CFCs, carbon tetrachloride and methyl chloroform from 1 January 1997 to 1 January 1996, with halons being banned from 1 January 1995.
(The EC is already ahead of the Montreal Protocol, which only requires bans on CFCs, halons and carbon tetrachloride by 2000, and methyl chloroform by 2005.)
To alleviate industry's problems, the provision for small amounts of halons to be retained ‘for essential uses’ could be retained ‘for essential uses’could be extended to the other products, Trippier suggested.
However, problems have already arisen over the definition of ‘essential’ as applied to the halons.
The EC Commission responded to the ministers by promising to prepare legislative proposals in time for next month's council of ministers meeting.
In the US, the National Resources Defense Council has also petitioned for a faster phase-out of ozone depleters, calling for the CFC deadline to be moved from 2000 to 1995, a 1993 ban on production of methyl chloroform and methyl bromide, and a 2005 ban of HCFCs which are not yet included in the protocol.
Meanwhile, the scientific hypotheses for atmospheric change are becoming complicated.
Although CFCs are ‘greenhouse gases’, their effect in thinning the ozone layer is probably slowing the global warming trend.
Dr Tony Cox, programme director for atmospheric sciences at the Natural Environment Research Council, said that the warming effect of CO2 and CFCs in the lower atmosphere will be greatest at low latitudes, while the cooling caused by ozone depletion is strongest at the poles.
The interaction of these effects is unknown, and neither observation tells us anything about the actual surface temperatures.
However, logically, slowing down ozone depletion could actually speed up global warming.
Cox said that the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), which had only looked at direct CFC warming effects, will now investigate the interactions.
Similarly, IPCC is looking at the possibility that sulphate pollution in the northern hemisphere is reflecting the sun's heat and retarding global warming — another case where pollution control could raise fresh problems.
NRA quality objectives
The National Rivers Authority (NRA) has announced proposals for a scheme to fight pollution and improve the water environment in England and Wales.
The NRA will introduce legally binding water quality standards for the first time for all types of water under its control (rivers, canals and estuaries).
The proposed scheme would give fixed targets for improving the quality of individual stretches of water by specified dates.
The report,Proposals for statutory water objectives , contains a number of proposals which include
a set of ‘use’ categories with appropriate standards covering a wide range of possible uses;
the need to incorporate relevant EC directives;
a new general classification scheme for all waters, which would incorporate standard key chemical tests used in previous water quality surveys together with, for rivers, a new biological measurement based on the extent to which the presence of invertebrates in a water body falls short of what would be expected in a clean or unpolluted system.
Statutory water quality objectives, once set, will be reviewed by the government every five years, or sooner if the NRA considers it necessary.
The NRA is seeking comments on the proposals from interested parties before 10 March 1992.
The NRA has also published The quality of rivers, canals and estuaries in England and Wales: a report of the 1990 survey , which confirms that there has been a ‘real and significant deterioration’ in the quality of some rivers since 1985.
The report shows that between 1985 and 1990 15 per cent of rivers were downgraded, whilst only 11 per cent were upgraded.
However, the survey did find that 89 per cent of rivers, 90 per cent of canals and 90 per cent of estuaries were of either good or fair quality.
The net downgrading can partly be explained by the increase in monitoring by the NRA.
The two hot, dry summers of 1989 and 1990 meant that there was a lack of water to dilute the input of contaminating waste.
But of most concern, says the NRA, was the decline in water quality resulting from excessive polluting inputs from sewage works, industry and farms.
industry
BASF is considering building an isophorone diamine production plant at Seal Sands.
The DM50m (£1 =DM.2.86) facility would have a capacity of 10,000 t pa and could start operation in the third quarter of 1994.
Cetus , US and Chiron , US, the biotechnology companies, have completed their proposed merger following the sale of Cetus's polymerase chain reaction business to Hoffman-La Roche (Chem.
Br.,1991,27 , 886).
The new company, which will be called Chiron, will have 1500 employees, although a reduction of about 10 per cent of the workforce is expected early in 1992.
Ferruzzi-Montedison has announced an investment of $4635m (£1 = $1.85) on environmentally friendly systems and products for 1992–96.
Exxon Chemical has sold its acrylic emulsions business in Turin, Italy, to ICI ICI Resins .
The acquisition will strengthen ICI Resins' presence in pressure sensitive and industrial adhesive applications.
Courtaulds and the Italian company,SNIA Fibre have gained approval from the EC's Mergers Task Force for merging their interests in acetate yarn into a single company,Novaceta .
After setting up this joint venture Courtaulds is merging its remaining acetate businesses and its fine chemical business to form a new business named Courtaulds Chemicals .
Union Carbide is to spin off its industrial gases business to form a free standing company.
In a related move Union Carbide will sell £500m of assets in the next 18 to 24 months to reduce its debt ratio.
Rhône-Poulenc 's Speciality Chemicals sector is to increase xanthan gum production at its Melle, France, site by 30 per cent in the first quarter of 1992.
ICI has split its operation in Argentina and formed a new company ICI Argentina .
The new company will handle the areas of agrochemicals, seeds, public health, pharmaceuticals, specialties, materials and industrial chemicals, leaving ICI Duperial to concentrate on the fields of films, polyethylene, wine chemicals, general chemicals and sporting ammunition.
Rohm and Haas , US, has bought the polymer business of Unocal , which includes six US plants and a technical centre in North Carolina, US.
Sandia National Laboratories and Dow Corning have signed a cooperative R & D agreement to investigate new silica processing methods.
Rhône-Poulenc and Roussel Uclaf have signed development and marketing agreements in the area of crop protection.
Rhône-Poulenc has acquired exclusive marketing rights for Decis insecticide in the US and in return Roussel Uclaf will have access to several Rhône-Poulenc products and technologies in North America.
safety
No room for complacency
The Health and Safety Commission has published its 1990–91 annual report, highlighting the substantial cost of work-related accidents and ill health to industry, in addition to the employee's pain and suffering.
Questionnaires sent out as part of the HSC employment department's 1990 labour force survey showed that only about a third of reportable accidents appear in official statistics, that 2 million people have illnesses they believe are caused or made worse by work, and that work related accidents and ill health are probably resulting in about 30m days off work a year in the UK.
John Rimington, the HSE's director general, warned ‘Big money is being lost.
HSE studies have shown the actual cost of the incidents ranging up to 27 times the insured cost.
Do companies realise that incidents, which are usually preventable, may be costing 10 per cent or more of their operating margin’?
Injury statistics and trends show that after substantial reductions in recent decades, employees fatalities appear to be levelling off at about 1.6 per 100 000 employees and that the reported major injury rate for employees has been stable over the last three years.
Rimington pointed out that the stabilisation of accident levels is the result of a decline in heavy industry and better health and safety regulations.
However, he went on to warn against complacency, as although most large companies are conscious of their health and safety responsibilities, an increase in the number of small companies and contractors may cause a corresponding increase in accident figures.
According to Rimington the key is prevention by education rather than punishment after the event.
The HSE's review of the first year of COSHH concluded that most firms were aware of COSHH and had tried to comply with the regulations, though many had not gone beyond the collection of information about hazards.
However, some companies had failed to realise that assessments made under Regulation 6 should be used to determine what further action was needed to comply with the regulations.
Turning to the chemical industry in particular, Gareth Dykes, head of the HSE's Chemical Manufacturing National Interest Group stressed the importance of self-regulation and called on trade associations to produce practical health and safety guidance for their members.
Helping COSHH compliance
The Chemical Industries Association (CIA) is continuing its efforts to improve industry's awareness of its obligations under the Control of Substances Hazardous to Health (COSHH) regulations, with the launch of a further two booklets,Guidance on collection and evaluation of hazard information (regulation 2)and Record keeping .
The COSHH regulations are designed to protect workers' health by requiring substances in the workplace to be identified and the potential risks to health associated with the use of those substances to be assessed.
With Guidance on collection and evaluation of hazard information the CIA aims to help companies identify hazardous substances and give advice on sources of information, with key tasks listed on a ‘dos and don'ts’ section.
Record keeping applies not to specific regulations, but to COSHH, in general.
Only regulations 9, 10 and 11 have a legal requirement for record keeping but Martin Newell, of the CIA's COSHH guidance task force, believes that well kept records will prove to be a useful source of epidemiological data, as well as an invaluable resource to companies who may find they need to demonstrate compliance with the regulations as a result of litigation.
The new booklets complement those already available on assessments (regulation 6), health surveillance (regulation 11), setting in-house occupational exposure limits (regulation 7), and information, instruction and training (regulation 12) and will be joined by booklets on COSHH and product distribution, contractors and occupational exposure limits for mixtures, during the first quarter of this year.
The booklets will be of use to any industry sector that uses chemicals.
Industry safety profile
The Health and Safety Executive (HSE) has produced a statistical safety profile of the chemical industry.
It provides key statistics on safety matters and concentrates on details of the fatal, major and over three day injuries to employees in the chemical industry between 1981 and 1988–89.
During 1988–89, 4051 injuries were reported — 8 were fatalities, 490 major injuries and 3553 resulted in absence from work for more than three days.
The study found that there are higher incidence rates for all three severities of injury in the chemical industry compared to manufacturing as a whole.
The incidence rates for employees for both major and over three day injuries were, however, lower than in 1986–87.
Fatalities in the chemical industry have remained fairly steady during the 1980s and have been higher or at least feel with those in manufacturing as a whole.
The definition of a major injury widened with the introduction of RIDDOR (The reporting of injuries, diseases and dangerous occurrences regulations 1985 introduced 1986) and therefore comparisons cannot be made with data collected under NADOR (The notification of accidents and dangerous occurrences regulations).
There was a gradual rise during the NADOR years and a gradual decline during the three years since RIDDOR was introduced.
Commentary on over three day injuries is restricted to those collected since 1986 under RIDDOR.
The type of accident is also studied by the report.
Slips, trips and falls accounted for almost a half of all major injuries while injuries resulting from exposure to harmful substances in the chemical industry (15.8 per cent) were, not surprisingly, significantly higher than in the manufacturing industry as a whole (5.5 per cent ).
The report also covers the nature and site of injuries, the age and sex of the injured person, the lifetime injury risk and the number of enforcement notices.
Emergency response
The Chemical Industries Association has updated Chemsafe — a scheme which helps the emergency services tackle incidents involving chemicals being transported on land, sea and by air.
The update includes: a full register of participants; a widening of the scheme to take in distributors and transporters (whether they are CIA members or not); and publication of specific guidelines for making the system work.
Transport hazard report
The report of a five-year study into the risks of transporting dangerous substances by rail and road has been published by the Health and Safety Commission (HSC).
The report,Major hazard aspects of the transport of dangerous substances , focuses on the most significant risks: for example from the road and rail carriage of explosives and certain bulk goods (motor spirit, LPG, chlorine and ammonia) and port traffic in bulk dangerous substances.
It outlines data on trade in all these substances; hazard possibilities and accident records; and quantifies the relative risks, enabling decisions to be made about the safest mode of carriage.
The report is not intended to lead to new regulations but to establish an agenda for HSE work.
Speaking at the launch of the port in London recently, Sir John Cullen, chairman of the HSC, said, ‘The overall finding of the report is that the risks studied are tolerable but not negligible.
And this implies that efforts should be made to see that the risks are brought to as low a level as reasonably practicable’.
He believes that the report will be recognised internationally as a major step forward in assessing the risks of a large scale disaster arising from the transport of dangerous substances near centres of population.
The report is available from HMSO and booksellers (price £7.50).
The same report but with detailed appendices is also available (price £30.00).
research
NERC lives within its means
It is rare nowadays to find a research council able to live within its means and reasonably happy with its situation, but that is the impression that the Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) put over when it launched its annual report.
Indeed, NERC's chairman, Professor John Knill, described 1990–91 as ‘a very good year’.
He puts the success down to the science strategies that NERC adopted in the 1987–89 period, while the new resources gained in 1988 and 1989 are ‘now bearing scientific fruit’.
Knill claims that NERC now involves the whole of the environmental science community.
He stresses the interdisciplinary nature of the research and the elimination of the gap between higher education institutions (HEIs) and NERC's institutes.
Even NERC's directed research is under the friendly title of ‘community research projects’.
Examples of community projects that NERC has set up include the Terrestrial Initiative in Global Environmental Research (Tiger), which includes carbon cycling and trace greenhouse gases, as well as water and ecosystems; the Biomolecules Special Topic, which covers fossil biomolecules; and a Pollutant Pathways project run jointly with the Agricultural and Food Research Council, which is studying leakage from agricultural systems into aquifers and groundwater.
Knill declared that ‘we have at last developed a full portfolio of activities related to global environmental change’.
He acknowledged that it is essential to maintain the balance between basic research and commissioned research.
For instance, Prof Mike Roberts warned that parts of his Institute of Terrestrial Ecology (South) are becoming dangerously dependent on contracts from government departments and others.
Knill said that without such commissioned research ‘there would be a massive depletion in environmental research in this country’, although it can distract the scientists.
There also has to be a balance between responsive and targeted grants.
Knill said that there had been progress in collaboration with HEIs over responsive mode funding and with NERC's institutes.
With money being transferred from the Universities Funding Council to the research councils, Knill felt that ‘there is enough now in the research council system to fully support research grants’.
The chancellor of the exchequer's autumn statement showed a rising baseline for science — a reversal of the trend envisaged in NERC's corporate plan last year.
Knill said that he was satisfied with NERC's allocation from the Science Vote for 1992–3 (see above ), which although showing only a small percentage rise will allow the council to set up two new community projects: LOIS (the Land-Ocean Interaction Study) and Bridge (the HEI-led British Mid-Atlantic Ridge project).
Knill described the importance of LOIS, which will investigate pollution in estuaries and shallow waters, as being out of all proportion to its size’.
AFRC faces new shortfall
The slump in the property market is the latest blow to the shaky budget of the Agricultural and Food Research Council (AFRC).
If AFRC is unable to sell any of its three redundant research sites it will be about £7 in the red next year, according to its director general, Prof Tom Blundell.
Important projects (such as the £1.2m second phase of research on bovine spongiform encephalopathy) could be delayed, he warned.
The new crisis, added to the continuing drain of redundancy payments, is in part an unfortunate consequence of AFRC's very success in refocusing its activities.
Over the past eight years it has halved in size (from 6500 staff in 30 institutes) and simultaneously it has changed its entire research strategy.
No longer do institutes look vertically at one particular product (such as poultry or sheep) but at horizontal themes such as plant molecular biology.
AFRC's change in direction, forced on it by the government's withdrawal from ‘near market’ research, is allowing it to do more of this exciting fundamental research.
It is also extending its horizons: introducing the latest annual report, Blundell spoke of the opportunities of trying to feed the world's expanding population instead of concentrating on parochial matters like European food mountains.
Indeed, Blundell fears that UK food surpluses may be transient because the intensive agriculture that produced them is not sustainable.
His long term vision for agricultural research is to get resources into balance through conservation, recycling and renewal, and to protect the environment.
Options include diversification into non-food uses (such as natural fibres to save petrochemicals), inbred disease resistance to prevent wastage, biological pest control to reduce pesticide inputs, biofixation of nitrogen, and use of information technology (for instance to target pesticide use and reduce inputs).
AFRC pioneered genetic manipulation of sheep to allow them to produce human protein pharmaceuticals in their milk.
Blundell foresees equivalent advantages in transgenic plants for foods, fibres, energy products, pharmaceuticals, organic chemicals and construction materials — in short a return to agriculture as a major source of raw materials.
Already projects are in hand to tailor rape to produce ‘designer oilseeds’ suitable for use in lubricating oils, cosmetics, plastics and pharmaceuticals.
Blundell hails this as making ‘a factory to use the sun’.
Superconductors need a push
The National Committee for Superconductivity (NCS) believes that Britain needs a determined effort to take advantage of the opportunities offered by high temperature superconductors.
In a recent review of the national programme, the NCS called for both its sponsors, the Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC) and the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), to increase their support for the technology.
On the industrial side, NCS wants the remainder of the DTI programme to concentrate on demonstrator projects, with the DTI being more active in its links with manufacturers.
At first, only a small number of companies were involved in the DTI Link programme, but participation has now improved.
NCS wants the DTI to begin planning how the programme should be continued after 1993.
On the academic side, NCS wants the funds to be increased.
Retiring NCS chairman Sir Martin Wood said that it had ‘no axe to grind about the past — nobody knew how promising [high temperature superconductivity]would become.
Now is the time to match what our industrial competitors are doing’.
At present the UK accounts for about 1.5–2 per cent of research spending on superconductivity, and NCS wants this to increase to match the UK share of all research (currently about 5 per cent of the world total).
The academic programme should push harder towards applications, according to the NCS report, with SERC shifting its emphasis towards engineering support.
After a sticky start, the interdisciplinary research centre at Cambridge — which is outside the NCS system — was given a clean bill of health by its SERC review.
SERC chairman Sir Mark Richmond announced that it is being given additional support to help achieve some of NCS's recommendations.
At the moment, much of the basic research is devoted to refining the yttrium, bismuth and thallium cuprates, and finding ways to turn them into useful films and wires.
But part of the NCS programme is devoted to new materials, and Wood acknowledged that it would have to keep an eye open for new discoveries like the superconducting buckminsterfullerenes: ‘synthetic chemists are almost certainly going to find new materials’.
Superconductivity: review of the UK national superconductivity programme , is available from Irene Sullivan, SERC, Polaris House, North Star Avenue, Swindon SN2 1ET.
Youngsters' grant success
A study of young researchers has shown that there is no significant difference in the success rate of younger (under 35) and older (36–45) academics in obtaining external funding for their research in scientific and technological subjects.
The report,Research support for young investigators , by the Science and Engineering Policy Studies Unit (SEPSU) on behalf of SERC, counters concern that young scientists and engineers have problems getting research funding and suggestions that they do worse than older colleagues because they have no established track record.
The report confirms that younger academics appointed under the UGC's ‘new blood’ scheme do better than average in obtaining research funds.
Science budget allocated
The Science Vote for 1992–93 has been divided as follows (£m):
Composites fund reviewed
The government has cut the funding of the structural composites programme that is part of the DTI's Link scheme.
The programme, which was valued at £43m over five years when it was launched in 1989, has had its budget cut to £29m.
The cut is part of a regular review system that adjusts funding to reflect the amount of interest in the programmes.
This is reflected in an increase in funding for the biotransformations project, which a spokesman for the department said had been ‘very successful’.
The value of the project has increased from £3m to £8m.
Research money misses target
The Association of University Teachers (AUT) claims that taxpayers' money, intended for basic research, is being used to prop up industrial and other applied research projects.
A recent policy statement from the AUT,Investing in the future: research and development in the universities , says that the overhead costs of research projects funded by government departments, research councils, industry and other bodies, are not being properly met and so these projects are eating up funds allocated by the Universities Funding Council.
The policy statement also sets out the need for funding, good equipment and career structures for researchers, highlights the needs of postgraduate research students and stresses the interdependence of teaching and research in universities.
in print
Tending the green flame
‘You don't have to be a rocket scientist’ Americans will tell you, implying that average intelligence will suffice.
Well, Andrew Dequasie was a rocket scientist of a sort.
At least, as a naive young chemical engineer he was recruited into a secret US government rocket fuel project in the 1950s.
US forces wanted to use diborane derivatives as missile or aircraft fuels.
Unhappily, not only are the boranes highly energetic, but several are also pyrophoric and toxic.
The title of Dequasie's recently published memoirs,The green flame , refers both to the naivety of the team and the green flame of burning diborane.
Its subtitle,Surviving government secrecy , is also two-edged: sheer survival was sometimes uppermost in their minds at the US Army's Project Hermes (Project Zip to the US Navy).
At one point, Dequasie quotes an anonymous poem he once read in a newspaper:
A little green chemist on a green spring day
Mixed some pretty green chemicals in a green little way.
The green little grasses now tenderly wave
O'er the green little chemist's green little grave.
It did not seem so cute after a massive explosion ripped apart the pilot plant (ironically as it was being shut down for the last time) and killed two of Dequasie's colleagues.
The memoir tells not only of heroic chemical engineering (some of it sounds alarmingly primitive today) but also of bachelor life in upstate New York in the 1950s.
There is plenty of that brand of homespun common sense that seems a trait of chemical engineers of that generation (regular readers of ChemTech will feel at home with this book).
The government secrecy sometimes extended to the people on the plant — the need to know was not always appreciated by those at the top — and the most serious accident was caused by a poorly conceived process change determined by another team.
Conflicting demands and timescales also made the project more difficult than it needed to be.
The fact that the project ultimately failed was not the fault of the process teams, who had successfully made the rocket fuel despite all the handicaps.
A young process chemist could probably learn a lot about real life from this book, and the old hands should appreciate it as well.
Andrew Dequasie,The green flame is published by the American Chemical Society, price $22.95.
Oxford's bible
The Chemistry in Britain editorial office, like many others, contains several battered copies of ‘Collins’— F. Howard Collins' Authors' and printers' dictionary , published at the beginning of the century by Oxford University Press (OUP) and still going strong in the guise of the Oxford dictionary for writers and editors .
This is an absolute treasure house for any editor or writer unsure of a common foreign phrase, an abbreviation, or the spelling of a tricky name — which means all of us at one time or another.
In its sometimes dictatorial and quirky way, ‘Collins’ laid down the law, and many of us are grateful for its guidance.
Now OUP has published a companion volume for scientific writers and editors.
It is particularly useful for those straying out of their specialist field — thus the widely used biochemical abbreviations such as ATP,myc or Gly are there, alongside pimelic acid (chemistry), pi mesons (physics) and Palaeozoic (geology) to take a few at random.
Clearly, it cannot be a comprehensive dictionary of every word used in science, but the editors have shrewdly picked those likely to cause problems or confusion — distinguishing Zygomycetes from Zygomycotina, for instance, or helping to spell Richard Adolf Zsigmondy's name, or reminding how many letters are doubled in old-fashioned arsenurretted hydrogen.
It has its idiosyncrasies, as does every reference book: it does not like including prepositions in abbreviations, thus CSHH is preferred to COSHH; abbreviations are generally capitalised without full stops — except c.c.p. for cubic close packing.
Never mind; it distinguishes FRSC from FRCS (many reference books still fumble that one) and lists sulfur as an American spelling of sulphur, recognising the way people actually use words, not how committees say they should.
The Oxford dictionary for scientific writers and editors is published by OUP, price £14.95.
Freshwater monitoring
Use of plants to monitor heavy metals in freshwater is one of a series of booklets detailing recommended methods for determining the quality of water and associated materials.
This booklet focuses on using tissue analysis, which depends on metal accumulation, to monitor heavy metal levels, but also mentions the use of bioassays and toxicity tests and the measurement of genetic tolerance and community structure (these methods are based on techniques other than accumulation).
All the methods in the booklet are only intended to supplement the chemical analysis of water and sediments.
The booklet includes a short section on identification of suitable species and gives information on sample methods, equipment, treatment and comparison of data.
Use of plants to monitor heavy metals in freshwater , ISBN 0 11 752371 2, is available, price £5.40, from HMSO Publications, PO Box 276, London SW8 5DT; tel: 071–873 9090.
publications
A pocket size environmental business directory that concentrates on solid waste disposal water use in now available.
containing details of industry personnel and companies, together with relevant environmental organisations and personnel,The solid waste and water environmental pocket book can be obtained from Taylor Marketing Services, Oakwood House, 3 Moulton Park Office Village, Northampton NN3 1AP, price £29.
The Royal Spanish Chemical Society has published a Spanish edition of the IUPAC ‘Blue Book’, as Nomenclatura de la quimica organica, Secciones A, B, C, D, E, F y H .
Details are available from Real Sociedad Espanola de Quimica, Facultad de Ciencias Quimicas, Cuidad Universitaria, 28040 Madrid, Spain.
The 1992 edition of The surface coating and raw material directory has been published, and is aimed at anyone engaged in sourcing pre-product or end users looking to extend suppliers.
Copies are available from Cathy Ferris, Industrial Trade Journals, Stakes House, Quebec Square, Westerham, Kent TN16 1TD, price £40 including postage and packing within the UK.
The DTI has published a new edition of its Security export controls (SEC).
The guide sets out simplified security controls for exporters of restricted items to countries listed by the Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls.
A charge of £7.50 per copy is made for bulk orders but single copies are available free of charge from Export Control Organisation, Department of Trade and Industry, Kingsgate House, 66–74 Victoria Street, London SW1E 6SW.
Chemical sciences graduate school finder 1991–1992 contains information on graduate programmes throughout the US and Canada leading to a master's or doctoral degree in chemistry, chemical engineering, biochemistry and related disciplines.
The guide is published by the American Chemical Society, 1155 Sixteenth Street, NW, Washington, DC 20036, US, price $40.
Three free guidance leaflets for chemical manufacturing firms have been produced by the Health and Safety Executive.
Personal protective equipment, Controlling contractors and Are you complying with COSHH ? give practical advice, sources of further information and a list of useful publications.
The three leaflets are available from Health and Safety Executive Information Centres in Broad Lane, Sheffield S3 7HQ or Baynards House, 1 Chepstow Place, Westbourne Grove, London W2 4TF.
Additives and attitudes is the latest consumer focus report from The Leatherhead Food RA.
Topics include consumer attitudes to additives, the influence of additives on food-purchasing and attitudes to ‘natural’ additives.
Copies are available from Richard Swift, the Leatherhead Food RA, Randalls Road, Leatherhead, Surrey KT22 7RY, price £375 to FRA members and £475 to non-members.
in print
Symposium proceedings
The American Chemical Society has published two more books in its ACS symposium series.
Polymeric drugs and drug delivery systems (price $74.95) is number 469 in the series and Water-soluble polymers (price $99.95) is number 467.
For further details contact ACS Distribution Office, 1155 Sixteenth Street NW, Washington DC, 20036, US.
Economic instruments
The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) has published guidelines for the practical application of economic instruments,eg taxes and charges on emissions, waste management and noise.
Environmental policy: how to apply economic instruments , targets economic sectors that have a major impact on the environment,ie energy, transport, agriculture and industry and OECD believe it will prove useful to governments, business, industry and pressure groups concerned about the environment and sustainable economic development.
The report, ISBN 92 64 13568 5, can be obtained from HMSO bookshops or by post from HMSO, PO Box 276, London SW8 5DT, price £15.
Industry guide
Cefic has published a booklet of guidelines for the EN 29000 series of standards.
The booklet is intended to provide a common interpretation of these standards for use by the European chemical industry and certification bodies.
The aim of the guidelines is to establish quality assurance systems for the industry and to create a sound basis for further improvement in the areas of health, safety and the environment.
A copy of the booklet,EN29001, ISO9001-Guidelines for use by the chemical industry , can be obtained from Cefic, Avenue Van Nieuwenhuyse 4, B-1160 Brussels, Belgium.
Food composition
The Royal Society of Chemistry has published the fifth edition of McCance and Widdowson's The composition of foods .
This new extended edition is the result of several years of collaboration between the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Good and the RSC.
The book includes previously unpublished data for over 60 new foods and the nutrient coverage has been extended to include selenium, manganese, iodine, non-starch polysaccharides, fatty acids and cholesterol.
The composition of foods represents the largest single set of official UK food tables to date.
Copies, ISBN 0 85186 391 4, can be ordered, price £29.95, from Turpin Transactions, Blackhorse Road, Letchworth, Herts SG6 1HN.
UK chemical industry
Chemfacts: United Kingdom presents the findings of a detailed survey of the UK chemical industry, focusing on the production and trade of key bulk chemicals.
Information from over 90 companies and data for about 120 chemical products are included.
The book also contains a list of companies, with their headquarters and additional manufacturing and corporate information.
Chemfacts: United Kingdom is available, price £225, from Chemical Intelligence Services, 39a Bowling Green Lane, London EC1R 0BJ.
markets
CFCs
A new study from Frost & Sullivan examines the way that the three largest users of CFCs can cope with a ban on the manufacture and use of CFCs.
CFC substitutes: a technology impact report (TO49)considers how the refrigeration, foam blowing and circuit board industries can substitute for CFCs at three distinct levels: with nearly equivalent chemicals like HCFCs or HFCs; with drastically different compounds; or by using a radically new approach.
The latter two approaches get more attention and recycling is also considered.
The report is available from Customer Services, Frost & Sullivan, 4 Grosvenor Gardens, London SW1W 0DH.
Plastics fall
Figures from the Association of Plastics Manufacturers in Europe (APME) show that sales by West European manufacturers of the two biggest plastics — low density polyethylene (LDPE) and PVC — were hardly changed between 1989 and 1990 (LDPE 3.6m tonnes; PVC 3.9m tonnes), but the other three major products saw volume gains.
High density polyethylene sales rose from 2.2 to 2.4m tonnes in 1989–90 and polystyrene from 1.5 to 1.6m tonnes.
The star performer, as for several years past, was polypropylene, which jumped from under 3.1m tonnes in 1989 to over 3.3m tonnes last year.
For the industry as a whole, however, 1990 had been a bad year, with the Gulf war scuppering much of the expected sales growth, and planned new capacity raising the spectre of price wars and poor returns for manufacturers.
APME president David Beynon said that ‘these circumstances call for a disciplined and enlightened response from the industry’.
Household cleaning
Environmental issues are setting the agenda for the future of the household cleaning and care product market in Europe, but, according to a new report from Frost & Sullivan, some manufacturers and retailers have failed to exploit this in their marketing initiatives.
With the exception of the UK there is little evidence of brands being positioned on an environmental platform.
Green issues, say the report, are setting new objectives for research, development and manufacturing, particularly on the packaging front.
The report predicts that the large number of new product and packaging launches — up to 30 a year in each country for washing powder concentrates and liquids alone — will continue in the future.
The European market for household cleaning and care products is available, price $3300, from Customer Services, Frost & Sullivan, 4 Grosvenor Gardens, London SW1W 0DH.
Natural flavours and fragrances
IAL Consultants forecasts that there will be a growing demand for natural and ‘nature identical’ flavours and fragrances, which will stimulate development of biotechnological production methods.
This is one of the conclusions of an updated and extended edition of its report Overview of the European flavours and fragrances market 
Most large flavour and fragrance houses are already making major investments in biotechnological research.
Enzymic processes and plant cell culture are likely to be among a number of possible methods that will be developed.
Details from Kathy Garcia, IAL Consultants, 14 Buckingham Palace Road, London SW1W OQP.
industry
Ciba-Geigy is considering its Huningue works, Alsace, France, as a possible location for the Biotechnikum multi-purpose biotechnology centre, and is to submit building and operating permits to French authorities.
It is withdrawing its application to build the Biotechnikum at its Basle works.
Akzo , the Netherlands, is to sell its colour concentrates business to M.A. Hanna , Ohio, US.
Allied Colloids has bought Hydrolabs , US, for US$18.5m (£10m).
The agreement is conditional upon certain environmental investigations.
Wyeth (Ireland), a subsidiary of American Home Products, is to invest £37m in a new tableting and packaging operation for therapeutic products, in Newbridge, County Kildare, Ireland.
The plant should create 400 new jobs by 1995 and 500 by 1997.
ICI is to sell its UK-based lime business, part of Chemicals and Polymers, to Minorco , the Luxembourg-based mining group, for £115m.
Atochem has bought the polymerisation catalyst and blowing agent business of the Société Français d'Organo Synthèse, a subsidiary of Rhône-Poulenc.
Rhône-Poulenc and Eastman Chemical have formed a 50–50 joint venture,Primester , to manufacture cellulose acetate.
The new unit will be at Kingsport, Tennessee , US, and capacity is expected to be 60 000 t pa.
Sharq , Saudi Arabia, has signed a contract to double its polyethylene capacity to 280,000 t pa by early 1994.
UCB , Belgium, has bought SmithKline Beecham 's pharmaceutical factory at Limay, near Paris, France.
The acquisition will help UCB extend its industrial operations in the pharmaceutical sector in France.
Perkin-Elmer is to adapt and modernise its site at Llantrisant, Mid-Glamorgan, at a cost of £7.4m.
The project is financed through a £3m grant from the Welsh Office and an investment of £4.4m from the Perkin-Elmer Corporation.
Montecatini , part of Montedison, will start producing polyethylene at its Bayport, Texas, plant by April.
The company will use its Spherilene technology in an existing gas phase plant at the site.
The joint venture set up in 1988 between Degussa , Germany, and the Bhartia Group , India, will start production of precipitated spray-dried silicas this year.
The JV,Insilco , has a plant in Gajraula, in the State of Uttar Pradesh, India.
Orion Advanced Chemical Technologies , part of Ferruzzi-Montedison, and the University of California's Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory are to cooperate in the development of a new process for producing raw materials used by the petrochemical industry from natural gas.
profile
De dye in diem
The Clayton Aniline Company (CAC), which is part of the Ciba-Geigy in the UK, has existed on its present site in East Manchester for the past 116 years.
The company was founded by the French chemist Charles Dreyfus in 1876 for the production of aniline oil and aniline salt.
Within only a few years the company was exporting its products to central Europe, Russia and the US.
Manchester provided a good site for developing a dye industry because it was both at the heart of the Lancashire textile industry and it was close to a developing university.
The Manchester, Stockport and Ashton canal also provided good communications links.
Dreyfus built up the business in the face of fierce competition and the company won a well deserved place in the aniline field, which lasted for over 90 years.
In 1911, the Society of Chemical Industries in Basle, Switzerland, secured the entire shareholding of the Clayton business and took control; so began the Swiss connection.
In 1918, the Basle Community of Interests was set up, comprising SCI Basle (later CIBA AG) the Sandoz Chemical Company and J.R.
Geigy SA.
Later that same year both Sandoz and Geigy acquired a financial interest in CAC and it is now wholly owned by Ciba-Geigy.
The main business of the company is the manufacture of dyestuffs, and intermediates that are part of the dyestuffs chain.
CAC is an international supply point for Ciba-Geigy, with 90 per cent of its manufactured products being exported to Switzerland.
CAC also has international supply points in France, Germany, Mexico, Argentina and the US.
The Manchester site provides dyestuffs for a wide range of uses, including cotton, wool, synthetic textiles, paper and leather.
Recently there has been a change in emphasis within the textile industry from Europe to the Far East, and CAC has had to react to this new situation.
CAC produces around 15 000 tons of finished product each year and employs 750 people.
The workforce has been restricted from 2000 17 years ago and this has been almost entirely due to investment in modern technology.
The company is involved in a wide range of organic chemistry.
Along with the established azodye processes, the company also produces intermediates using nitration, sulphonation, chlorination, oxidation, amination and catalytic reactions and as such CAC cannot be described as a single technology company.
Increasing investment in new technology has provided the way forward for CAC, enabling the company to remain at the forefront of dyestuffs manufacturing.
One of the newest innovations on the Manchester site is the £3m acid tank farm, which was commissioned in June 1990.
This technology is a world's first for Ciba-Geigy, and the new environmentally friendly system will, the company claims, set the standards for similar installations well into the next century.
The acid tank farm now provides a safe environment for storing strong and fuming acids.
As a result of more stringent regulations on atmospheric pollution, new measures had to be taken to ensure the safety of the company's employees and also of the surrounding environment.
The acid tank farm is completely enclosed and the building is kept under negative pressure so that fumes cannot escape into the atmosphere.
As Alan Cantwell, the intermediates manager, pointed out ‘any spillages can be controlled in minutes’ and he was also keen to point out that in the 18 months since it was commissioned, ‘no spillages have occurred’.
Another area in which new technology has been developed is in the manufacture of dyestuffs used in the coatings of carbonless papers (the Ciba-Geigy Pergascript range of colour formers).
These were invented at CAC in 1974.
The new Pergascript plant was commissioned in January 1991 at a cost of £20m.
The new technology has meant many changes in the new plant which now requires fewer operators to achieve productivity levels of two to four times greater than in the older production plant.
The plant runs to pharmaceutical standards and most of the material handling is now fully automated.
The plant is built around a modular system which means the reaction vessels can be used for various purposes and new parts can be added when required.
The building is also more open plan than older buildings with much more space between the respective reaction vessels.
Producing quality products is important if the company is to continue to compete in the international marketplace.
To this end, the analytical department is designing on-line analysers,eg on-line gas chromatography, which can analyse products and intermediates in ‘real time’, and if part of the process does not attain the quality required the computer will work out the modifications needed before the process can continue.
The new computerised processes have meant that the lead time in certain product areas has been shortened dramatically from eight weeks to 42 h.
This is primarily due to process integration —eg filtration and drying have been combined for the first time in the Pergascript operation.
CAC also sees it as important to educate the new plant team in the philosophy of the company —ie economics, social and environmental concerns.
New operatives are routinely seconded from their normal jobs to learn the computer techniques required for the new plant operations.
Alan Cantwell stressed what he called ‘ownership of the plant’.
All the newly trained operatives have an equal share in the running of the unit and all have been involved from its conception.
This gives a feeling of ownership and a ‘pride in keeping the plant working to a high standard’.
Clayton Aniline's new £3m acid tank farm
The environment is also a high priority for CAC and £2m (10 per cent of the project cost) has been spent directly on environmental concerns with the installation of scrubbers and other cleaning techniques in the Pergascript plant.
Alan Cantwell pointed out that this money was spent directly and that CAC got no return on this spending.
Azo-dye production is still the core business at CAC, with four main buildings housing production and the associated facilities.
The technology used is more labour intensive than in the Pergascript plant.
As Dr Wallace Hooper, quality systems manager, points out, ‘the unit operations still use 1960s chemical technology because this is still the state of the art in the field’.
However, computer control has been added to a significant number of reactors (the first computers were installed in 1975).
The main processes involve the high tonnage synthesis of dyes (in large (up to 40m3) reaction vessels) in long campaigns.
As with the other production areas in the plant, safety and ecology are very important.
For example, individual scrubbers have been installed and waste liquids are recovered and treated before being introduced into the environment.
Close attention is given to the safe and hygienic handling of chemicals, and biomonitoring of personnel is done to ensure that the protective systems are working satisfactorily.
Many of the new innovations have only been possible because of the company's commitment to total quality management (TQM).
There have been significant advances in management techniques in industry, and over the past five years CAC has been actively developing ways of transferring TQM education into new working behaviour and attitudes.
There is a commitment within the company to develop worker's skills right down the line, and this has been done through training and education schemes.
One successful scheme has involved shop-floor workers training their colleagues.
The company has found that this is more successful than using conventional training, or senior managers.
This is consistent with Clayton Aniline's commitment to empowerment which is a policy designed to release the talents and potential of personnel at all levels.
Because the company has been on its present site for over a century it recognises its responsibilities to the environment and to the local community.
Chemical companies have changed dramatically over the past 100 years as have public attitudes towards chemical issues.
CAC has found that keeping the public informed helps to create positive attitudes.
The company holds regular liaison meetings with its neighbours and also distributes its regular community newsletter to more than 9000 local homes and businesses.
CAC sees itself as part of the community of East Manchester and this is borne out by the fact that the company is now employing the third generation of workers from local families.
The company is also involved in a project which is intended to ‘bring school science to life’ in the local community by using the so called Ciba-Geigy ‘bicycle pack’, which provides primary school teachers with ideas for classroom science activities linked to the theme of the bicycle.
As a result 20 local primary schools are now involved in the programme, and work is also being done in local secondary schools.
Kurt Huber, managing director, expressed his enthusiasm for the project by saying, ‘the Clayton Aniline Company has played its part in the life of this area for well over 100 years…and this is a further demonstration of our continuing support and commitment to the community of East Manchester’.
new on the market
Electrostatic lens .
The Class W electrostatic lens is the latest addition to the high performance Class range of hemispherical energy analysers from VSW .
It has a wide angle of acceptance resulting in high sensitivity for both small spot (synchrotron, Auger, UPS etc ) applications and standard XPS.
Standard features include true multichannel detection, full computer control and upgradability throughout the range.
Circle 121
NMR analyser .
The new QP20, from Oxford Instruments , is a benchtop NMR analyser which can be used to apply the power of pulse NMR to everyday problems, from moisture in dried materials to solid-liquid ratios in edible oils and polymers.
It can either be used as a ‘black box’ analyser with preprogrammed applications and automatic set-up for simple routine analysis, or as a sophisticated tool for application development.
Circle 122 
Fingerprint software .
Match-Finder is a new software package for chromatographic pattern recognition, or fingerprinting, from Perkins Elmer .
It will be of particular interest to analysts investigating batch-to-batch product variations seeking adulterants in samples, characterising or sourcing raw materials and monitoring for specific components or component mixtures in a complex chromatogram.
Circle 123 
Atomic absorption .
The Z-8200 series of atomic absorption spectrophotometers has been launched by Hitachi Scientific Instruments .
They are available in flame only, furnace only and tandem flame/furnace versions and feature PC control with software operating in the Windows environment.
Polarised Zeeman correction methods have been used to improve the quantitative measurements from flame instruments giving greater stability and reducing spectral noise.
Circle 124 
Residue monitor.
Bristol Industrial & Research Associates has introduced the LiquiTrak non-volatile residue monitor (NRM), which measures residue-after-evaporation levels from 1 to 500 ppb in ultrapure water.
It samples on a continuous basis and determines, in real time, the amount of dissolved, non-volatile solid contained in an ultrapure water system.
It is a self-contained instrument with an internal micro-processor and an external data display.
Circle 125 
UV/Vis data handling .
The 8765 MultiView is a new concept in sample in, report out, multitasking UV/Vis spectrometry, from Unicam , developed for high-throughout research laboratories.
It combines the 8700 series optical bench with a 386 PC operating in Windows.
It can either be controlled directly via a mouse interface or control can be automated using macros to perform repetitive tasks, or more complex operations.
Circle 126 
AA spectrophotometers.
GBC Scientific Equipment has announced the GBC 904 and 905 atomic absorption spectrophotometers with VGA colour video display, designed for routine analysis in the budget-conscious laboratory.
The 905 has single beam optics and the 904 has double beam optics.
Both instruments have automatic setting of wavelength, bandwidth and gas flows, video displays, disk storage and full alpha-numeric keyboard.
Options include four-lane turret and programmable flame control.
The company has also introduced the GBC 918 UV-Vis spectrophotometer — a fully-featured double beam system controlled by an external IBM PS/2 or AT compatible computer offering full colour graphics and complete data storage.
Circle 127 
Pressure reducer .
A new TSI clean-gas pressure reducer for monitoring particulate levels in high-pressure gases is available from Bristol Industrial & Research Associates .
The Model 375547 pressure reducer will monitor process gases continuously, over a size range from less than 0.01 μ m to greater than 0.5 μ m.
It has been designed to work with inert gases and may be used in systems with pressure ranges from 20 to 150 psig.
Its electropolished stainless-steel surfaces allow the instrument to be installed in bulk-gas systems.
Circle 128 
HPLC columns .
A new design for conventional HPLC columns has been developed by Poly-Chroma Research .
The columns are available packed with any of the well known packing media and incorporate a threaded column tube and easy-fit fittings, giving effortless sealing, without constriction of the column tube.
The range of sizes include analytical, semi-preparative and preparative dimensions.
Circle 129 
Gas extraction .
Tekhne has developed an automated gas from oil extraction system.
Amego (Automated Machine for Extraction of Gas from Oil) is a fully automated system which uses the vacuum method without the potentially harmful use of mercury.
Chemists can extract gas from transformer oil, a process which enables operational engineers to monitor potential overheating or electrical problems within oil-filled transformers.
Circle 130 
Digester.
V. A. Howe has announced the Metrohm model 705 UV digester, a complete sample preparation system which uses the technique of photo-chemical oxidation by irradiation with UV light.
The instrument offers simple, clean and environmentally compatible digestion, minimal addition of extra chemicals or reagents, minimal danger of contamination of the sample, and it is ideal for trace and ultra-trace analysis.
Circle 131 
Multi-user system for GC/MS .
The HP MS ChemSystem, from Hewlett-Packard , is a multi-user, multi-tasking, multi-instrument gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer system for work-groups doing high-volume target compound analysis.
Multiple operators can use the system simultaneously accessing data via different HP MS ChemStations and terminals.
Tasks include scheduling and running analyses, acquiring, calculating and editing data, doing QA/QC reviews, generating custom reports and data backup.
The company has also announced a revision of the HP Lab/Ux Lims system that provides users with more sample-tracking and information management capability at a lower price.
Circle 132 
LC/TLC coupling .
Linomat C, from Camag , can be used for the direct on-line coupling of LC/TLC.
Coupling chromatographic methods based on different separation mechanisms can enhance the separation potential of the individual methods.
The most powerful combination is reversed phase gradient elution HPLC and TLC gradient elusion by means of AMD.
Using the Linomat C principle the effluent from the HPLC column is sprayed onto the HPTLC plates.
Hard-cuts can be collected by a choice of three control modes: manual, triggered by the HPLC detector or by a run-time program.
Circle 133 
Controller/data analyser .
T A Instruments has introduced the Thermal Analyst 2200, a controller/data analyser, based on an IBM PS/2 Model 90SX 486 computer.
It has a 25 MHz clock speed, 4 megabyte RAM memory and 160 megabyte hard disk and is compatible with all current TA Instruments modules and software.
The company has also announced Autoanalysis software programs that offer improved productivity for laboratories conducting differential scanning calorimetry and thermogravimetric analyses.
Circle 134 
Polymer HPLC columns .
A new range of polymeric gel HPLC columns produced by Asahi Chemical Industries has been introduced by Rhône-Poulenc .
The series claims to increase the available range of separation parameters such as solvent choice, pH and ionic strengths.
The columns exhibit a lower trace metal content than inorganic oxides like silica and the bead strength and packing density extend column life.
The range is based on beads of vinylalcohol copolymer and includes columns for reversed phase, ion exchange and multi-step separations.
Circle 135 
Elremco has introduced two new gas monitoring systems.
The System 16 and the System 4 input modules are designed to accept virtually any of the standard sensors currently available without any change of hardware.
The systems are software driven.
giving a wide range of user options — the System 16 offers at least 128 different operating modes.
The System 16 is a rack mounted system with 16 alarm modules, while the System 4 is a small wall-mounted sensor  monitoring system designed for up to 4 remote sensors and up to 85 different operating modes.
Both systems offer continuous monitoring of alarm modules with data-logging and full communication between the system and the host computer.
Circle 136 
X-ray fluorescence measurement.
Veeco Instruments has announced the XRF-2000 AT, an X-ray fluorescence coating thickness system.
It has been designed to meet the needs of an average plating job.
A spacious X-ray chamber with a rugged sample placement stage will accommodate a large range of sample parts, including those with odd shapes.
X-ray bean diameters can range from 0.4 to 1.2 mm and a pointer positioning system is used for sample positioning.
Circle 137 
XRD system.
Philips Analytical has launched a modular X-ray diffraction system called X'pert.
The heart of the system is the PW3020 goniometer, which incorporates Philips Analytical's unique optical disk technology to determine the position of the goniometer arm.
Another feature is the system's ability to have twin vertical goniometers mounted on a single central X-ray tube shield.
This allows multiple techniques to be completed without having to dismantle, reassemble and realign equipment between tests.
Application clusters can be set up permanently to meet individual needs.
Philips Analytical has introduced software to complement the X'pert system — APD1700 intended for multi-user VAX applications and PC-APD for MS-DOS.
The X'pert range includes vertical and horizontal goniometers, a choice of generators, sample stages, low- and high-temperature attachments and a selection of equipment to cover almost any application.
X'pert modules are compatible with existing Philips Analytical X-ray diffraction systems and a remote diagnosis option permitting immediate analysis of system performance is available.
Circle 138 
Countercurrent chromatography .
The Kromaton is a countercurrent chromatograph developed by SEAB especially for use in pharmaceutical laboratories.
It will separate and purify molecules ranging from a few milligrams to several grams from solution.
The stationary and mobile phases are both liquids, which prevents overloading and reduces the loss due to absorption and denaturation of molecules commonly incurred by the solid phase technique.
From a volume of 1–3 litres it will provide significant amounts of peptides, antibiotics, tannins, plant extracts, flavanoids and other natural or synthetic products.
Circle 139 
Laptop GC.
Emission Technology Instrumentation has introduced the 10S Plus, a portable PID GC for the rapid detection and measurement of toxic gases and vapours.
Features of the micro-driven GC include: a memory card system on which up to 25 user-created applications can be stored; a GC oven and valve block; wide bore capillary GC columns encapsulated in a novel isothermal oven; and pre-column backflush.
Circle 140 
Structural property analysis .
Using flexible model management and automatic fragment analysis, the SYBYL/QSPR from Tripos will produce accurate models and provide answers about the relationships between properties and structures in unknown molecules.
The system offers custom modelling and statistical analysis techniques plus automatic fragment analysis techniques plus automatic fragment analysis, which makes it easy to work with, while the results are simple to understand.
Circle 141 
Protein structure data .
The molecular modelling software company Oxford Molecular has announced the availability of Iditis, the world's first extended relational database of protein structures, and Serratus, a fully integrated protein engineering source that includes the world's largest non-redundant protein sequence database.
Iditis is a second generation protein database and analysis system, and provides a comprehensive and error free source of protein structure data.
Serratus provides a single composite sequence database and incorporates sequence data — around 35 000 proteins have been sequenced — from all the commonly used databanks.
The elimination of redundancy means that database searches do not return duplicate sequence information.
Serratus also provides a novel sequence features database which can be queried in a similar way to the sequence data.
Circle 143 
Datalogger/photoioniser .
HNU Systems has announced the DL-101 datalogger/photoioniser.
It incorporates the company's own ion chamber, which can electronically zero without the use of zero gas.
The software is designed for surveys, hazardous waste investigations, industrial hygiene applications and leak detection.
Circle 144 
Thermal diffusivity .
The Thermaflash 1100, manufactured by Holometrix, Massachusetts, has been announced by Nortest .
It is the company's second laser flash instrument and is used for measuring materials at temperatures up to 1100°C and can be upgraded for testing at temperatures between 1000 and 2000°C.
It is suitable for testing ceramics, composites, plastics, graphites, heat-resistant metals and alloys.
Circle 145 
Chemical reaction system .
PCLab is a new computer controlled chemical reaction system from Spectrum Computer Services .
It is fully automated and incorporates control of temperature profile, pH profile and reactant additions at specified times and rates.
Other monitoring devices may also be connected and data acquisition is fully automated.
The system consists of an IBM PC compatible computer linked to a reactor assembly, control valves, balances, temperature and pH probes and a peristaltic pump system.
Circle 146 
Microwave digestion .
The MSP-9000 is a microwave digestion continuous flow system from CEM .
It offers high performance in acid digestion techniques overcoming many of the objections associated with traditional batch methods.
Circle 147 
Climate cabinets .
Heraeus has launched a new range of modular temperature and climatic cabinets.
The ‘à la carte’ range allows users to create systems to their own specifications from a wide range of modular components.
Cabinet sizes range from 16 to 1000 I with temperature and climatic options ranging from simple soak testing to sophisticated test screening programs.
The range offers cabinets tailored to specific performance requirements but without excessive performance reserves and complex control systems.
Users will benefit from quick delivery and a high level of quality, performance and reliability.
Circle 148 
Keyboard .
Intek has launched a new keyboard for use on the shop floor in the chemical, plastic, rubber and similar industries.
The Armagard Keyboard is resilient to rough handling, dust and fluids.
Circle 142
in brief Spectra-Physics Analytical has introduced Spectra System, a new modular liquid chromatograph offering GLP validating documentation.
VG Microtech has launched a new electron transfer lens which allows XPS images to be produced using the CLAM2 hemispherical analyser.
The new 1020 LC Plus controller from Perkin-Elmer provides single-point control of an LC system at local level, with real-time display of chromatographs and system status and data handling capabilities which include batch reprocessing and multilevel calibration.
The sales and services operation of Serono Diagnostics has relocated to Technitron House, Unit 2, Redfields Business Park, Redfields Lane, Church Crookham, Fleet, Hampshire GU 13 0RD; tel: 0252–850040.
Sharples Scientific has moved to new headquarters at Top Station Road, Brackley, Northants NN13 5UG; tel: 0280–706003.
Plant Safety , Manchester, has acquired Northern Engineering Technical Services , a subsidiary of Northern Engineering Industries.
Turner Spectrometry , part of VSW Scientific Instruments, has moved to Warwick Road South, Old Trafford, Manchester M16 0JT; tel: 061–881 6213.
Perkin Elmer has launched the FIAS-200 high performance flow injection system for atomic spectrometry, which combines the advantages of the mercury-hydride techniques with those of the flow injection technique.
A new company,Trivector Technical Services , has been formed to provide technical support for Trivector System designed products including the Trilab, Trio and LA ranges of chromatography integrators.
Eco Physics , Switzerland, has appointed Bristol Industrial and Research Associates as UK distributor for its range of gas analysers.
Quantitech , the Milton Keynes-based environmental analysis company, has been awarded sole UK distribution rights for the Lagus range of advanced tracer gas monitoring instruments.
Polymer Laboratories has opened a sales office for customers in Benelux countries in Zeist, the Netherlands.
Parker Commercial Filters , US has appointed Hedley Filtration as its first UK distributor for process filtration products.
Glocon Valve Services has opened a service and engineering depot at Unit 7, Colinwood Court, Brittania Park Industrial Estate, Middlesbrough.
VSW Scientific Instruments has launched a new company,VSI , which will be based in Wiesbaden, Germany.
The company will provide customer support in Germany, Austria and Switzerland.
conferences
Paper.
Developing an environmental policy  , a seminar organised by the British paper and Board Industry Federation and Pira International, will be held on 19 February 1992 in Leatherhead, Surrey.
Details from S. Wallis, Pira International, Randalls Road, Leatherhead, Surrey KT22 7RU; tel: 0372–376161.
Separation technology .
Swansea is the venue for this conference on Current best practice in separations technology , which will take place on 19–20 February 1992.
Details from Conference Section, Institution of Chemical Engineers, 165–171 Railway Terrace, Rugby CV21 3HQ; tel: 078888–578214.
Construction materials .
The SCI Construction Materials Group is organising a conference on Fire properties of construction materials to be held on 20 February 1992 in London.
Details from the SCI Conference Secretariat, 14–15 Belgrave Square, London SW1X 8PS; tel: 071–235 3681.
Effects of harmonising standards in Europe The conference on standards for pressure vessels will be held in London on 25 February 1992.
Details from L. Hide, IBC Technical Services, Gilmoora House, 57–61 Mortimer Street, London W1N 7TD; tel: 071–637 4383.
Groundwater pollution will take place in London on 25–26 February 1992.
Details from A. Wright, IBC Technical Services, IBC House, Canada Road Industrial Estate, Byfleet, Surrey KT14 7JL; tel: 071–637 4383.
Health and Safety .
A seminar for chief executives, directors and senior management on the subject of Health and safety — managing within the law will be held on 26 February 1992 in Birmingham.
This seminar will also take place in London on 24 March 1992, Glasgow on 14 April 1992, Leeds on 6 May 1992 and Bristol on 27 May 1992.
Details from GHS Resources, Wortley Road, Rotherham, South Yorkshire S61 1LT; tel: 0709–558701.
Birkbeck analytical lectures 1992 .
These advanced topic lectures will take place during February and March 1992 in London.
Environmental analysis will take place on 26 February 1992, with Clinical analysis on 4 March 1992 and Special topics on 11 March 1992.
Details from the Centre for Analytical Science, Birkbeck College, Gordon House, 29 Gordon Square, London WC1H 0PP; tel: 071–380 7466.
Hazardous chemicals .
Safer handling, storage and transport of hazardous chemicals will be held in Aberdeen on 28 February 1992.
The seminar will also take place in Liverpool on 10 March 1992, Belfast on 18 March 1992, Glasgow on 10 April 1992, Newcastle on 1 May 1992 and Bristol on 8 May 1992.
Details from Profex, Buckingham House, The Broadway, Stanmore, Middlesex HA7 4DP.
Environmental pigments 92 will take place in Newark, New Jersey, on 3–4 March 1992.
Details from Falmouth Associates, 170 US Route One, Falmouth, Maine 04105, US.
Noise pollution .
Minimising your company's exposure to prosecution and civil litigation from industrial noise pollution will take place on 4–5 March 1992 in London.
Details (see Hazardous chemicals above).
Polymer concrete .
This conference will take place on 5–6 March 1992 in Newark, New Jersey.
Details from Intertech, 170 US Route One, Portland, ME 04105, US.
Recycling 92 will take place on 15–17 March 1992 at the NEC, Birmingham.
It will include a series of seminars that will discuss key issues facing the waste  management industry.
Details from L. Thornley, EMAP Exhibitions, 12 Bedford Row, London WC1R 4DU.
Solid waste .
A conference on The solid waste problem — issues in disposal, recycling and environmental monitoring will be held in London on 18–19 March 1992.
Details from Sira Communications, South Hill, Chislehurst, Kent BR7 5EH.
Food .
FMBRA will be holding a conference on Diet and health implications for the food industry on 19 March 1992 in Chorleywood, Herts.
Details from A. Lonergan, FMBRA, Chorleywood, Herts WD3 5SH.
Measurement .
The National Physical Laboratory's Spectrophotometry and Colorimetry Club and the Ultraviolet Spectrometry Group will be holding a meeting entitled Through a glass darkly — the measurement of haze, hazy solutions, turbidity and diffuse transmittance on 19 March 1992 in London.
Details from T. Frost, Wellcome Institute, Dartford, Kent DA1 5AH.
Environmental responsibility .
How industry can turn green and still turn a profit — balancing environmental liability with shareholder responsibility will be held on 19–20 March 1992 in London.
Details from A. Peters, IBC Legal Studies and Services (see Effects of harmonising standards in Europe above).
Air emissions .
Auditing environmental air emissions will be held in London on 20 March 1992.
Details (see Hazardous chemicals above).
FRC 92 is the fifth international conference on fibre reinforced composites and will take place at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne on 24–26 March 1992.
Details from Plastics and Rubber Institute, 11 Hobart Place, London SW1W 0HL.
Electrolytic processes .
Buffalo, New York is the venue for The design and laboratory study of electrolytic processes , which will take place on 26–27 March 1992.
Details from Dr N. L. Weinberg, The Electrosynthesis Company, PO Box 430, East Amherst, New York 14051–0430.
British opioid colloquium , and interdisciplinary group for those interested in all areas of opioid research, will be held in Cambridge on 30–31 March 1992.
Details from Dr J. Hunter, Parke Davis Research Unit, Addenbrookes Hospital Site, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QB.
Speciality and effect chemicals is the title of the BACS symposium at Chemspec Europe 92.
The symposium will be held in Manchester until 1 April 1992 and will have the theme The changing needs of speciality chemicals in communications, leisure and health care during the 90s .
Details from A.W.B. Cowan, BACS, John Marshall House, 246–254 High Street, Sutton, Surrey SM1 1PA.
Energy .
The Watt Committee is holding its first European conference in Strasbourg on 1–3 April 1992.
The theme will be The rational use of energy and the environmental benefits .
Details from Conference Office, Watt Committee on Energy, Savoy Hill House, Savoy Hill, London WC2R 0BU.
Computer-aided design of new materials will be held at the University of Surrey on 7 April 1992.
Details from Dr M. S. Islam, Department of Chemistry, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey GU2 5XH.
Museums .
An international conference on museums and the public understanding of science will be held on 8–9 April 1992 at the Science Museum, London.
Details from B. Ward, Science Museum Library, South Kensington, London SW7 5NH.
Rheology of inorganic building materials .
This conference and exhibition will take place on 9 April 1992 in London.
Details see Construction materials above).
J. B. S. Haldane .
This centenary meeting will be held at the Science Museum, London, on 10–11 April 1992.
Details (see Museums above).
Edinburgh international science festival will be held on 11–25 April 1992.
Details from Edinburgh Science Festival, 1 Broughton Market, Edinburgh EH3 6NU.
Flavour and fragrance .
The synthesis of flavour and fragrance materials will take place on 28 April 1992 in London.
Details (see Construction materials above).
Energy use and the environment .
This conference, which will discuss Cleaner energies for the future , will be held in London on 28–29 April 1992.
Details (see Effects of harmonising standards in Europe above).
Bioprocessing .
Denver, Colorado, is the venue for this conference on Bioprocessing of metals and effluents 92 on 2–3 June 1992.
Details (see Polymer concrete above).
Phosphorus chemistry .
The 12th international conference on phosphorus chemistry will be held in Toulouse, France, from 6–10 July 1992.
Details from G. Bertrand, Laboratoire de Chimie de Coordination du CNRS, 205 route de Narbonne, 31077 Toulouse Cedex, France.
Cellucon 92 .
This conference on the role of cellulosic materials in selective purification and separation processes will be held on 27–30 July 1992 in Wrexham, UK.
Details from the conference secretariat, Faculty of Science and Innovation, The North East Wales Institute, Connah's Quay, Deeside, Clwyd CH5 4BR.
ICCA .
The fifth international chemistry conference in Africa will be held at the University of Botswana, Gaborone, on 27–31 July 1992.
Details from the secretary (5th ICCA), Department of Chemistry, University of Botswana, Private Bag 0022, Gaborone, Botswana.
EUCMOS XXI .
This conference on molecular spectroscopy will take place in Vienna, Austria, on 23–28 August 1992.
Details from E. M. Schaup, Interconvention Vienna, Austria Center, A-1450 Vienna, Austria.
Environmental chemistry .
This European Environmental Research Organisation conference will take place in Florence, Italy, on 23–29 August 1992 and will have the theme Bioinorganic and biotechnological aspects of environmental chemistry .
Details from Prof A. Bertini, Department of Chemistry, University of Florence, Via G. Capponi 7, 50121 Florence, Italy.
Medicinal chemistry .
The 12th international symposium on this subject will be held in Basel on 13–17 September 1992.
Details from XIIth International Symposium Administrative Secretariat, PO Box 141, CH-4007 Basel, Switzerland.
The diary of RSC-sponsored meetings in the coming month, together with advance notices of forthcoming events, appears in RSC News on p183.
LETTERS
Worrying unnecessarily?
From Professor I. C. Whitfield
Your item Shining examples on phosphorus (Chem.
Br .,
1991,27 1042), prompted a childhood memory and sent me rummaging at the top of the house for 300 Things a bright boy can do , a book presented to me by some relative ca 1928.
There, sure enough, I found the recipe for dissolving phosphorus in olive oil and applying it to the face for a ‘ghost’.
There too was the assurance ‘There is no danger in the experiment’.
I do not recollect that we ever tried it, although my father did bring me home a bottle containing two or three sticks of white phosphorus, at the same time showing me the mark on his thigh where, so he said, a piece of phosphorus has fallen while he was attempting to write on a wall with it.
At that time I was more interested in making fireworks than in ghosts, and again through my father's good offices, I was able to obtain both gunpowder, and materials for making Roman candle balls — dried more or less successfully at the back of the kitchen range.
Maybe that was what started me on chemistry — or at least led to my being a participant one 5 November in filling the iron pots along the portico of UCL with coloured fire, an escapade that led to our being ‘carpeted’ by Sir Charles Goodeve (plain Charlie he was then, and himself in much demand at departmental soirées for his rendering of Canadian College cheers).
Somehow we survived it all, just as I have survived 20 years of a lead-piped water supply and a further 20 years as an adult working in a concrete hut insulated on the inside with sprayed-on asbestos; to say nothing of a like period supervising students using the Haldane gas analysis apparatus, a machine that not infrequently spewed mercury from its taps into the air, whence it fell onto the bench, or sometimes the floor, to be duly swept up by the lab boy at the end of the session for recovery.
At 75 I am still able to wield a pickaxe and to handle livestock around the farm, as well as lighter recreations like dinghy sailing.
Maybe it is due to my always having eaten a diet rich in red meat and saturated animal fats?
Or maybe we all worry too much.
I. C. Whitfield, CChem, FRSC,
Coley Pits Farm,
Wychbold,
Droitwich,
Worcestershire WR9 0BZ.
Inorganic chemistry books
From Dr D. J. Machin, industrial liaison officer
Your correspondent I. F. Ferguson (Chem.
Br .,
1991,27 , 701), is really only displaying his ignorance of the commonly accepted textbooks of inorganic chemistry.
I would guess that Cotton and Wilkinson, Greenwood and Earnshaw and, perhaps, Sharpe are the most widely used texts in this country.
All three of these have entries for strontium in their indices and all refer the reader to an entry for ‘alkaline earth metals’, where yet more information is forthcoming.
Further comment might be superfluous, except to say that the disposal of fission products should interest many chemist but is hardly central to a text on inorganic chemistry.
Letters like Ferguson's are not constructive.
D. J. Machin, CChem, FRSC, Department of Chemistry, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL.
Melling and Ardern
From Guy Baker
From 1959 until I retired recently, I was public analyst at Melling and Ardern, Salford, Manchester.
I am now writing a history of the company in readiness for its centenary in 1999.
I would, therefore, be most grateful to hear from anyone who has any memories or anecdotes of the company pre-1959, whether from customers, employees or other analysts of that era.
G. Baker, CChem, FRSC,
‘Ivy Bank’
Beckford,
Nr  Tewksbury ,
Gloucestershire GL20 7AD.
Professional development
From John M. Riddick
I am writing in response to your recent article The profession of chemistry by W. Fritsche (Chem.
Br .,
1991,27 909), which concerns the role of the chemist in society.
I read with interest the importance of continuing education in order to ensure full professional development of the chemist throughout his/her career.
I suspect that many newly qualified diplomates graduates and indeed postgraduates entering the industrial sector after successfully obtaining their respective qualification, only really explore professional development in the chemistry and technology of their chosen employment, therefore narrowing their general understanding of the chemical sciences.
I am sure that a considerable number of chemists — professionally recognised or otherwise — would be more encouraged to take up continuing education if this led to the award of a recognised National Vocational Qualification (NVQ), or more appropriately a RSC certificate/diploma.
Also, a scheme could be developed using the Analytical Chemistry by Open Learning (ACOL) course.
These excellent distance learner texts could be used on a modular basis, allowing candidates to study for the purpose of expanding their knowledge to obtain a qualification, or to meet the needs of their work.
Open Learning would be extremely useful to chemists unable to attend or travel to an institute of higher education.
It would also be interesting if a similar series of texts could be developed to provide chemists with more specialised or vocational understanding of other branches of chemistry, or even chemical economics or marketing.
This then may allow chemists to upgrade membership or recognised status.
Any course modules successfully completed throughout their career can then be included in a record of achievement, ensuring an up to date record of professional development undertaken.
I an only aware of one such programme in operation via the Open University, whereby Licentiates can transfer to Graduateship after studying RSC recommended Open University third year courses.
I would welcome comments from the Education Division on whether such schemes could be extended and implemented.
J. M. Riddick, LRSC,
24 Milburn Croft,
Seaton,
Workington,
Cumbria CA14 1HP
Dr A. D. Ashmore, RSC secretary, education replies : The main thrust of John Riddick's letter is in tune with the RSC's attitude towards the continuing professional development of practising chemists.
To address some of the specific points raised:
1.
The RSC is working with the National Council for Vocational Qualifications (NCVQ) and the Department of Employment to develop the Indicative register of analytical chemists into a NVQ at level V. The RSC is also contributing to work being undertaken by employer organisations to develop other NVQs, mainly at levels I to III.
2.
There are a number of ACOL based schemes in operation around the country.
The RSC offers one as part of its post experience courses portfolio.
It can lead to a Business and Technical Education Council (BTEC) Continuing Education Diploma on a modular basis and may be used in support of an application for Licentiateship.
3.
More general distance learning provision in chemistry is available through the Open University and Riddick has highlighted opportunities for Licentiates to study for the Graduateship.
Provision exists within RSC regulations for other institutions to offer similar programmes on an ‘associate student’ basis.
4.
The development of high quality open learning texts is expensive and those that already exist in chemistry have in major part been produced using public funds.
Desirable though it may be, it seems unlikely that texts on specifically chemical aspects of economics will be developed.
There already exists a growing range of opportunities for professional development and members (or potential members) would be well advised to maintain a log of their achievements, which could be used in support of job applications or when seeking transfer to another category of membership.
Ed : see also From licentiateship to membership ,(Chem.
Br .,
1991,27 1094).
Tall story?
From I. P. Kilgour
I read, with alarm, an item entitled Cyanide in pool poisons guests at a hotel , in a national daily newspaper.
It appears to have important implications for chemistry, as well as for public health and safety.
The item states ‘Guests at a luxury hotel  were poisoned by cyanide in the swimming pool yesterday.
Experts believe two types of chlorine were mistakenly mixed, causing a violent reaction which produced nitrogen oxide and cyanide gases’.
Can anyone suggest a possible mechanism for the reaction that appears to have taken place at room temperature and in an aqueous medium?
There is a further constraint to the conditions, since a fire spokesman had said ‘Two chemicals had reacted together’.
Is it one of those reactions that occur spontaneously when journalists' ink is mixed with an equal measure of pure ignorance?
I. P. Kilgour, LRSC,
3 Carlton Court,
65 Studley Grange Road,
Hanwell,
London W7 2LU
Exemption from pesticide regulations
From D. W. Lancaster
In reply to Dr Coates' letter (Chem.
Br .,
1991,27 1006), of course I approve of the purpose of the Control of Pesticide Regulations (1986) and COSHH regulations, but it is a ridiculous consequence of the regulations that chemists are deemed to be less well able than commercial fruit growers, for example, to understand that the chemicals involved ‘have the capacity to be potentially lethal if wrongfully mixed, applied and handled’.
Indeed, Coates grants, without a doubt, that I have this knowledge.
In practice, Coates' precept ‘Personal inconvenience is not a valid reason for derogations and exemptions’ depends on who is being inconvenienced.
Looking for support and because I thought the Royal Society of Chemistry would welcome an opportunity of improving the standing of chemists in the community, some three years ago I sent the secretary-general of the RSC a letter very similar to the one published (Chem.
Br .,
1991,27 418).
It was acknowledged, I heard no more.
It is a pity that the special position of chemists was not recognised when the legislation was being prepared, but I believe that a simple procedure could easily be worked out by the RSC and MAFF.
A member wishing to obtain chemicals covered by the regulations for his own use, could apply to the RSC for a statement of his professional standing etc .
On receipt of an application from the member for permission to purchase and use these chemicals on the same basis as farmers and commercial growers, supported by the RSC statement, MAFF would issue a licence to do so.
This is merely an outline of a possible procedure.
A modest fee — say £10 — should silence the cries of administrative expense and inconvenience.
D. W. Lancaster, CChem, MRSC,
1 Willow Cottages,
New Forest Lane,
Old Wives Lees,
Canterbury,
Kent CT4 8BG.
Analysing titration
From L. G. L. Unstead-Joss
Reading David Jones' In praise of titration (Chem.
Br .,
1991,27 1148), I at once came to appreciate why it is that chemistry has so largely lost its appeal to the young: it is because its teaching has lost all discipline, degrading the science from a pursuit of excellence to ‘fiddling the results’.
When I was taught chemistry at Regent's Street Polytechnic in the later 1930s, we 16-year-olds were treated as adults, not incompetents, and were expected to achieve titrations accurate to 1 per cent or less from the moment we began quantitative analysis: for were we not addressed by our splendid lecturers as ‘Mr’?
To earn that morale-boosting address, we were expected to stop being foolish children, abandon sloppy working and ‘spilling liquids’, and behave like responsible folk.
Gravimetric analysis in duplicate was certainly not then unknown, contrary to Jones' experience.
In learning a technique, be it chemistry or life itself, mastery of the methods is the only important thing.
‘Fiddling the results’ should — and I'm delighted to report, often does — land its practitioners in prison, though not often enough.
L. G. L. Unstead-Joss, MChemA, CChem.
FRSC,
4 Liberton Gardens,
Edinburgh
EH16 6JR.
From A. C. Bushnell
It is difficult to share David Jones' enthusiasm for the humble titration when one remembers all the argument there used to be about standardisation.
Until Hopkin & Williams published its paper in The Analyst (1961, p464), every laboratory had its own preferred prime standardisation substance, and if one moved from one lab to another one would find that the primary standard — say sodium hydrogen phthalate, borax or sodium carbonate — produced a slightly different standard acid from the one the old laboratory used.
It was not until one could purchase ready standardised solutions, made in such bulk that the errors evened out, that the arguments ceased.
The problem was not helped by each lab having its own preference for the indicator to be used with sodium carbonate.
I wonder whether the same delusions of accuracy exist with things like the Volhard titration and its questions of whether the sliding endpoint is best avoided by filtering off the silver or adding nitrobenzene.
A. C. Bushnell, MChemA, CChem, FRSC,
‘The Node’,
11 Edale Close,
Leyland,
Nr Preston PR5 2BB.
Melt in the mouth cocoa butter equivalents
From Dr Bernard W. Minifie
I must comment on the Perspective Sensual secrets of chocolate (Chem.
Br .,
1991,27 771).
While the work of Prof Harwood is valuable, cocoa butter is not responsible for the popularity of chocolate.
Cocoa butter alone has a minimal flavour but is responsible for the texture of chocolate and its ability to mould into tablets and to coat confectionery centres.
The sensual — or more correctly sensuous — aspects of chocolate are connected mostly with the fat free constituents developed in the cacao pod during growth, which are enhanced by subsequent fermentation and roasting.
Concerning the world shortage of cocoa butter, this is partly due to the increasing popularity of milk chocolate which, in manufacture, requires added cocoa butter.
Because of these shortages, much research has been undertaken to produce a fat with  cocoa butter properties.
By separating the glycerides from more readily available fats and assembling them in the required proportions it was possible to match the physical properties of cocoa butter.
The first development in this field was the invention of Coberine by Unilever, working with a leading English chocolate company, which was patented in 1961.
More recently other manufacturers have produced similar fats known commercially as cocoa butter equivalents (CBE).
They have been used in the UK for many years and legislation allows the addition of 5 per cent of CBE fats (about 15 per cent of the fat phase), and the product can still be called chocolate.
However, the addition of these fats has not been universally accepted and some members of the EC and the US maintain that the cacao portion of chocolate, which includes cocoa butter, must be from pure cacao nib, which contains approximately 55 per cent true cocoa, otherwise the product must be described as chocolate flavoured.
It would seem that Harwood's product might face the same difficulties.
B. W. Minifie, CChem, FRSC,
Richardson Researches,
26 Grange Road,
Saltford,
Bristol
BS18 3AG.
Cocoa butter has a unique property of ‘supercooling’, which aids moulding of chocolate into bars and small tablets
Confusing chemists with pharmacists
From R. G. Kenzie
I read with interest the article by W. Fritsche and the several letters under the heading Public Image of Chemistry (Chem.
Br .,
1991,27 898, 909).
With the member countries of the EC getting ever closer, I was surprised that no mention was made of the confusion that exists in English speaking member countries between the professions of chemistry and pharmacy.
In no other country in the EC is a pharmacist referred to as a chemist.
I spent my working life in an international chemical company and this confusion was often commented upon by my French, German, Dutch and Italian colleagues.
My point is that before we try to improve the public image of chemists and chemistry, shouldn't we take steps to ensure that the public know which profession we are talking about?
No doubt it will be said that the British public have said chemist when they should have said pharmacist for so long that it would be impossible to change, but the obvious answer to that is that decimalisation presented little problem.
R. G. Kenzie, CChem, FRSC,
‘Wychwood’
All Stretton,
Church Stretton,
Shropshire
SY6 6HF 
Concentrating on ionic strength
From B. W. Darvell and V. W-H.
Leung
Dr G. Hefter and Dr P. M. May have tried wittily to come to the rescue, but by misinterpreting the ‘obituary’(Chem.
Br .,
1991,27 620).
We did not condemn empiricism outright, merely its substitution for reality.
Simply because a variable can be constructed that has a good correlation with experimental results does not make that variable per se a causal entity.
It is this cause and effect relationship that has become quite lost in respect of ionic strength, precisely because the correlation at low concentration is so seductively good.
Their penultimate sentence both betrays their misunderstanding and contains (inadvertently?) the essence of the problem: the phenomena of interest are concentration dependent —inter alia — and therefore correlated with the construct ‘ionic strength’, which is a function of concentration.
Any function of ionic strength will, therefore, be correlated with those phenomena.
Thus, higher polynomials can always be constructed to improve the fit when the simpler model breaks down.
The error is in taking the polynomial to be a structural representation of the system, but the basic underlying fallacy remains.
We repeat: ionic strength is not a solution property.
Hefter and May give us no reason to modify this statement.
Consequently, we feel entirely justified in holding that it should now be abandoned.
Having nothing to offer in its place perhaps makes this pure iconoclasm, but it is meant as a goad to sharper thinking.
Who will rise to the challenge?
B. W. Darvell, CChem, FRSC, and V. W-H.
Leung, GRSC,
Dental Materials Science Unit
The Prince Philip Dental Hospital,
34 Hospital Road,
Hong Kong   
Visualising Molecules
‘When you have eliminated the impossible, whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth’.
When Conan Doyle put these words into the mouth of Sherlock Holmes, he could have had no idea of the tools which would one day become available to the great detective's fellow scientists in their search for truth.
No longer limited to solo celebration and practical experiment, they have the ‘networked knowledge’ of a multitude of colleagues in chemistry, physics, mathematics and engineering, who provide a dazzling range of computer aids.
Today, the chemist looking at — or for — a complex chemical structure or reaction can ‘see’ it on a computer screen.
Every small advance allows him to see it more clearly, more accurately, more affordably.
It can be called up fro vast databases, altered…what if…?
And, in many ways, by a chemist with little if any computer experience.
Highly sophisticated methodologies and algorithms provide reaction retrieval systems, molecular modelling, synthesis planning, property prediction — information on dynamics, flexibility, interactions.
No longer need the chemist be cowed by that other Holmes dictum: ‘It is a capital mistake to theorise before one has data’.
The data are now available as soon as one begins to theorise.
Some of the companies making this possible are presented in the following pages.
You are invited to contact them via the Reader Service Card, and if you contact them by other means it would be greatly appreciated if you would mention that you read them in CHEMISTRY IN BRITAIN.
Tripos
Pioneering Molecular Information Analysis Systems (MIAS)
TRIPOS, the first commercial molecular modelling software supplier, has realised over twelve years of steady growth since 1979 and is one of the leading providers of molecular design and analysis tools and services.
TRIPOS pursues aggressive dual strategies for maximising research profitability and effectiveness: fostering breakthrough scientific initiatives that lead to new chemical entities, and, addressing the critical need for quickly transforming the increasing volume of molecular data into useful research information.
MIAS — Bringing it all together
Scientists  worldwide are facing the ever-increasing dilemma of how to handle vast quantities of data that advances in high technology have made it possible to generate.
TRIPOS' Molecular Spreadsheet™, introduced in 1990, addresses the researcher's need to efficiently handle and examine complex data across the broad range of molecular science applications.
TRIPOS is currently developing SYBYL/NMR TRIAD, an integrated multidimensional NMR package and SYBYL/3DB, a next-generation 3D database management and searching package.
With the Molecular Spreadsheet linking SYBYL/NMR TRIAD, SYBYL/3DB, and the entire SYBYL computer-aided molecular design and analysis program, TRIPOS has established the path for today's researcher to obtain data, store and search in three dimensions and then flow into a wide range of molecular modelling and analysis tools to produce useful information.
The final objective of this molecular information analysis system (MIAS) is to help the customer achieve key research objectives as quickly and efficiently as possible.
SYBYL/NMR TRIAD
This unique new package for first time interweaves NMR data processing, analysis and 3D structure determination, into the fabric of a molecular modelling and analysis program.
SYBYL/NMR TRIAD bridges the gap between NMR data and 3D structures, increasing the speed and accuracy of the assignment of NMR spectra and calculation of molecular structure.
In addition to providing fast and convenient determination of small or large molecular structures, SYBYL's suite of data processing and spectral analysis tools gives complete access to NMR data for a broad range of NMR or modelling tasks.
SYBYL/3DB UNITY
Tripos designed this next generation 2D- and 3D-searching program for corporate and relational database access, conformational flexible searching and chemical registration in conjunction with nine consortium companies, leading scientific collaborators, and strategic software and data suppliers.
TRIPOS' extensive experience and expertise in conformational searching, activity prediction, and 3D visualisation places it in a unique position to produce a single system that unites 3D searching, molecular design and analysis with proprietary activity and property prediction techniques into an effective information analysis environment.
SYBYL, LabVision: Computer-aided Molecular Design and Analysis (CAMD)
SYBYL
TRIPOS' central computational chemistry software program is SYBYL, a comprehensive, integrated suite of tools for computer-aided molecular design, analysis, prediction, and visualisation.
With continuous improvements since 1979, SYBYL now provides results-proven tools for a broad range of scientific research.
SYBYL software modules include:
LabVision™
TRIPOS' LabVision™ software makes easy-to-use, quick-to-learn visualisation   and discovery software available on workstations and desktop computers for laboratory scientists.
LabVision features interactive 3D building and editing of small molecules as well as proteins, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids.
Its visualisation techniques and displays provide insight into the relationship between structure and function through docking, fitting, dynamics and other molecular modelling tools.
Scientific desktop productivity tools
TRIPOS offers scientific software for most personal computers to meet a wide range of research needs.
The packages available include:
ALCHEMY R III — full molecular modelling with essential building, docking, fitting, minimisation and multiple 2D and 3D display modes;
NITRO R — TRIPOS' interactive interface between DOS-compatible or Macintosh II personal computers and SYBYL or LabVision running on a host CPU;
MM2 (87) FOR THE PC — Professor Allinger's industry standard force field available for the PC.
ChemPrint™ — Scientific sketching/drawing input software for DOS-compatible personal computers.
CSC ChemDraw/Plus ™ and
CSC Chem3D/Plus ™ — Scientific sketching/drawing programs for the Macintosh II line of desktop computers;
Third Party Software
Leading molecular scientists worldwide have developed effective specialised software programs noted for advancing science.
TRIPOS is the distributor of many of these leading packages including;
TRIPOS has earned a reputation for outstanding customer support, service and for promoting its customers' effective research in chemical, pharmaceutical, and biotechnology sciences.
TRIPOS' collaborations with leading scientists and strategic alliances with major research organisations links state-of-the-art science with an efficient delivery system for achieving scientists' key objectives.
Chemistry in Britain thanks Tripos for the use of the illustration on the cover of this Supplement.
OXFORD MOLECULAR
Dedicated to solutions
Oxford Molecular is the dedicated molecular science software house of the University of Oxford committed to the commercial development and professional support of high quality computational chemistry programs selected from the world's best research laboratories.
Founded in 1989, the company was the first to be set up by the University's technology transfer unit.
Their range of software, totalling 11 products with more to come, provides solutions to the challenges of pioneering pharmaceutical and chemical research.
Molecular Modelling For All
Nemesis is one of Oxford Molecular's first products developed through collaboration with researchers, providing molecular modelling to users of desktop computers (currently IBM PC compatibles and Apple   Macintosh).
It is one of the first of its kind and won the COMDEF award in 1991 for the most innovative software solution.
Aimed primarily at bench chemists, some of the features of Nemesis include: structure building and editing-on-screen, manipulation of structures in 3-D, conformational searching and analysis using recognised force-field, calculation of partial atomic charges, and the ability to print structures and graphs.
The intuitive interface of Nemesis makes it easy to learn and use.
Pimms provides a graphical molecular modelling interface to Oxford Molecular's specialist software on workstation computers.
In addition to the features found in Nemesis ,Pimms has a 2-D sketch molecule builder and protein display and simulation functions.
Specialist Modelling Tools
New drugs and agrochemicals are often developed by direct modification of an existing compound to mimic or enhance some aspects of its biological behaviour.
Asp (automated similarity package) guides this procedure by providing a quantitative measure of the similarity of the modified compound and the original structure.
Anaconda provides a unique interactive and visual approach to molecular comparison using the gnomonic projection technique.
Cobra is a comprehensive system for automated conformational analysis and 3-D structure generation using artificial intelligence techniques.
It locates the conformation of least energy or a user-specified number of low energy conformations.
Constrictor is a complete distance geometry package for 3-D structure generation, template forcing and docking.
The quality of partial atomic charges is of paramount importance in dynamics simulation of molecules.
Ideally,ab initio molecular electrostatic potential (MEP) charges would be calculated but this would take days of computer time.
Rattler rapidly evaluates a set of high quality partial charges from semiempirical quantum mechanical calculations with a substantial reduction in computational time compared with other MEP methods.
Python combines a spreadsheet interface with statistical analysis, molecular graphics and an extensive substituent property database for interactive investigation of quantitative structure activity relationships (QSARs) and prediction of likely activity and properties of proposed drug molecules.
Antibody Modelling is a conformational generation system to model antibody combining sites based on primary sequence data.
Protein Databases and Analysis
Iditis is the most comprehensive and accurate resource of protein structure information available and provides a complete set of powerful data retrieval and analysis tools.
Serratus is the most comprehensive, non-redundant protein sequence database available to the protein chemist.
Cameleon provides a powerful interactive graphics interface to protein sequence homology modelling.
It aligns two protein sequences interactively.
The commercial and scientific benefits of using computational chemistry software in drug design is recognised by the leading pharmaceutical industries.
Oxford Molecular exists to ensure that the latest research software is made available to them at acceptable prices.
Polygen Molecular Simulations
Polygen Molecular Simulations is an established leader in the development of molecular modelling software, formed by the merger of Polygen Corporation and Molecular Simulations Inc (including Cambridge Molecular Design) and serving the largest customer base in the Computer Assisted Molecular Design (CAMD) market.
The complementary strengths and innovations from both sides of the company have resulted in a complete suite of computational chemistry software packages being available from one supplier across the biological and materials research and development areas.
The scientific network of research centres such as Harvard University, California Institute of Technology, Cambridge University and York University provide the highest degree of input at the leading edge of technology in the field.
The major areas of application that are covered by Polygen/Molecular Simulations are as follows:
General Molecular Modelling
A comprehensive integrated system for the graphical construction, modelling simulation and analysis of molecular structures, QUANTA is designed to accommodate all classes of molecules and macromolecular systems including particular requirements of small organic structures, proteins and peptides, crystal and polymeric systems with complete support for drug-design applications.
The interactive menu-driven access to the CHARMm molecular mechanics and dynamics program provides the most complete, scientifically validated molecular modelling system for use on UNIX workstations, with more scientific papers published referencing this software than any other available.
Protein Modelling and Homology
For advanced protein modelling, techniques such as sequence homology mapping, geometric fragment searching and replacement, and local geometry regularisation are invaluable.
These together with secondary structure prediction/analysis, multiple sequence alignment and Protein data Bank searching algorithms form the heart of QUANTA's Protein Modelling and Homology package.
A new development is the QUANT/NMR option providing an integrated solution for spectral processing, analysis and molecular modelling for the NMR spectroscopist using the unique X-PLOR package as the compute engine for handling distance geometry, relaxation matrix refinement and simulated annealing in addition to its more traditional role as a unique refinement tool for protein engineers.
Materials Research
To design and characterize materials, CERIUS provides a range of problem-solving computational instruments used in the prediction of materials' properties.
Specialist capabilities for polymer, zeolite, catalyst, ceramic, semiconductor, metal/alloy and molecular materials are provided with simulation of X-ray, neutron and electron diffraction and High-Resolution Transmission Electron Microscope images possible for these materials.
Recent developments include the introduction of Rietveld refinement for exact comparison of simulated and experimental X-ray diffraction data, together with LEED Simulation and new facilities for Catalysis and Separations Modelling, Surface and Interface modelling and the first fully open materials simulation environment, CERIUS Open Force Field.
Synthetic Polymer Modelling
A range of products are available for examining atomistic models of crystalline and amorphous polymers with the calculation of non-equilibrium stress strain properties and X-ray/neutron scattering of these models.
Molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations can also be used to study polymers in solution.
This atomistic data can provide new predictive correlations between experimental properties by using QSPR techniques.
Quantum Chemistry
The AVS™ CHEMISTRY VIEWER is a high quality, low cost visualisation environment for quantum chemical calculations which runs on nearly all UNIX workstations.
It allows accurate predictions of molecular structures and their properties, including electron densities, electron affinities, molecular orbitals, ionisation potentials, electrostatic potentials and chemical reactivity predictions.
BIOSYM technologies
Powerful solutions
BIOSYM Technologies Inc. is an acknowledged leader in the provision of computer aided molecular design (CAMD) software.
Its molecular modelling programs allow researchers to apply the most recent scientific theory and advances in computational chemistry to the search for new pharmaceuticals and advanced materials.
By using computer simulations, researchers can rapidly acquire a body of knowledge not previously available to them through traditional laboratory methods, and explore chemical events that would otherwise be too dangerous, speculative or costly to pursue.
BIOSYM is unique in offering total integration of its software programs.
The core program architecture has been designed to provide a commonality across all the products, no matter which application they are designed for.
All programs use one graphical interface,INSIGHT II , a windowed, pull-down menu environment that is both easy to learn and use.
At the core of every BIOSYM program is a commitment to excellence in science.
Senior scientists comprise more than one-third of the company and are dedicated to creating powerful advanced solutions in computer-aided molecular design.
Their successful research is the basis for the strategies incorporated into BIOSYM software.
In addition to its extensive product range, BIOSYM has formed consortia, dedicated to advancing the software research tools in a specific area of scientific study:
The Potential Energy Functions Consortium is committed to the derivation and validation of accurate ‘second generation’ potential energy functions and parameters for a broad range of chemical compounds.
The Polymer Project Consortium has the aim of improving existing and developing new methods of polymer property prediction.
A number of new Polymer modelling tools are now commercially available as a result of this project.
The Catalysis and Sorption Consortium focuses on the development of software for material science applications.
The programs are designed to simulate and characterise the behaviour of catalysts and sorbants, such as zeolites and other metal oxide systems.
Members of such consortia each fund a dedicated group of scientists and software engineers at BIOSYM, and participate in strategic decisions to guarantee that the resulting programs are fully relevant to research problems in the commercial arena.
More than 2,500 of BIOSYM's programs are currently in use worldwide in major industrial companies, research facilities, academic institutions, and government laboratories.
BIOSYM's strong relationship with these customers ensures that its programs contain the necessary function and rigour for today's research, bringing tomorrow's products closer.
CHERWELL SCIENTIFIC
Outstanding quality
The research scientist now expects to find outstanding quality and ease of use in technical software.
Cherwell Scientific Publishing Limited was founded in 1990 to distribute and publish carefully selected software which reaches this standard.
The company is based in Oxford and has moved to new premises in the Oxford Science Park.
The list consists of fourteen packages and is evenly split between the IBM PC-compatible and the Macintosh platforms.
Cherwell Scientific has three software packages of direct interest to chemists who work with molecular structures:
ChemWindow is a program for drawing chemical structures.
With a palette containing more than thirty specialist drawing tools, multiple Windows, context-sensitive help, templates and a structure album with hundreds of images,ChemWindow is the most powerful structure drawing program on the market and is now used by thousands of chemists.
ChemWindow Classic is a simpler version of the program recommended to users who have less powerful systems.
Both versions of ChemWindow require Microsoft Windows.
ChemIntosh is a sister program for use on Apple Macs.
Its functionality is very comparable to ChemWindow and graphics created by either program can be read by the other.
Ball & Stick is a Mac program for representing and displaying molecular structures.
It is the ideal tool for the research scientist who need to produce slides, animations or printed images for desktop publishing or lectures.
We know of no program that can generate printed output of comparable quality.
The The 1992 Directory of Chemistry Software , edited by Wendy Warr, Peter Willett, and Geoff Downs describes over 170 of the most widely used chemistry programs.
It was published in January 1992 in association with the American Chemical Society.
No chemistry department can afford to purchase software without reference to this authoritative guide.
Cherwell Scientific's technical staff supplies prompt and local expertise free to our customers.
We offer education discounts and our packages are now in use in every university and polytechnic in the UK.
Major chemical and pharmaceutical firms standardising on the Windows environment have decided to adopt ChemWindow as a company standard and Cherwell Scientific offers exceptional and flexible licencing arrangements to companies who wish to network our packages.
Cherwell Scientific's list of chemistry software shows a strong commitment to scientific productivity and innovation.
We welcome your inquiries, proposals, and ideas.
FRASER WILLIAMS
ChemMod
ChemMod from Fraser Williams (Scientific Systems) Ltd is a powerful but Low cost 3D Molecular Modelling system with versions available for the PC and the Apple Macintosh.
Both versions enable the chemist to build and manipulate 3 dimensional organic structures and to perform comprehensive charge, torsion angle and energy minimisation calculations upon them.
It is this combination of powerful calculation facilities with optimised graphics performance that differentiates ChemMod from other products available for the PC and Macintosh.
New enhanced versions of the software are now available.
PC ChemMod has several new features — such as enhanced rapid ‘build routines’, the provision of ‘Ball and Stick models’(in addition to‘stick’, spacefill and Van der Waals displays), a new minimiser interface, colour coding of residues, and a comprehensive set of template libraries, as well as extended printer support.
PC ChemMod is designed for use with 286/386/486 PCs with VGA graphics and a maths coprocessor, for optional performance a minimum of 4 Mb RAM is suggested.
ChemMod II for the Apple Macintosh is also available in a new release — this being fully ‘System 7 compatible’ and designed for use with all Macintosh IIs and for the new Macintosh Quadras.
The Macintosh version utilises the versatility of the Apple operating system, enabling the comprehensive transfer of ChemMod structures to Macintosh publishing packages.
The enhanced graphics performance of the latest Macintoshes has been fully exploited in the system design — to offer the best possible real time manipulation of solid structures (e.g. shaded Van der Waals, ‘Ball and Stick’ and ‘Space Filled’displays).
The functionality is largely identical to the PC system with common calculation facilities.
(An Apple Unix version of ChemMod II ), identical to that for the Apple operating system is available on request).
Demonstration discs are available now for both PC ChemMod and ChemMod II .
Fraser Williams (Scientific Systems) Ltd is a member of the Fraser Williams Group, one of the major independent UK Computing Services organisations.
In addition to these and other specific product offerings — Fraser Williams (Scientific Systems) Ltd provide a wide portfolio of services to the chemist.
These include bespoke software, systems integration, 2d database building, project management and consultancy.
In addition to 3D visualisation, specific services are offered to the publishers of chemical structure information and in Health and Safety datasheet compilation.
Microorganisms get to work
Gary F. Bennett and Kevin P. Olmstead
Industrialisation in the US has generated increasing amounts of hazardous waste.
Over the years indiscriminate dumping has resulted in a large number of environmentally dangerous sites that are leaking toxic and hazardous chemicals.
An Act passed by the US Congress now provides Federal resources to clean up these hazardous sites — the number of which could increase 10-fold in the next few years.
Using microorganisms in the disposal of hazardous waste is now being developed and this could provide the way forward in cleaning up this toxic legacy.
The standard site clean-up procedure normally involves removing the waste from the site, followed either by reburial in a secure landfill or incineration off-site.
For contaminated groundwater, the standard process has generally been to pump-and-treat the water on-site, with subsequent recharging to the aquifer or disposal to a sewer.
Recently, however, the US Environmental Protection Agency (US-EPA) published regulations favouring on-site solutions.
Although the pump-and-treat system satisfies those regulations, there is an increasing realisation that pump-and-treat systems alone cannot meet the clean-up criteria.
Bioremediation appears to be a very attractive, and in many cases a cost-effective way of cleaning up many contaminated sites.
The bioremediation market is just being developed, and its potential appears quite large.
One estimate is that the US market could be as large as $500 million by the year 2000, compared with 4100 million in 1990.
Another estimate puts the figure at $10 billion in 10 years.
Today, an estimated 200 US firms offer bioremediation as an exclusive or adjunctive remedial service.
Remediation solutions
Bioremediation is currently attracting a lot of attention as a remedial technique.
This is because other techniques, by themselves, are either inadequate (eg pump-and-treat), do not permanently solve the problem (eg immobilisation or containment), or have the potential to be very expensive (eg incineration).
Bioremediation is being evaluated by both industry and the US-EPA as one technology for cleaning up hazardous waste sites.
The process usually involves the stimulation of indigenous subsurface microorganisms to degrade chemicals on-site, although there have been cases in which microorganisms with some specialised metabolic capabilities have been added.
One advantage of this process is that soil excavation is not required.
Microorganisms may attack hazardous organic waste in one of three ways:
mineralise the compound directly, which means that the compound is converted to harmless organic molecules such as carbon dioxide and salts;
by mineralising the compound only as a cometabolite, which means that the microorganisms require some other organic compounds for growth or to induce formation of the enzymes required for degradation of the target compound; or
by converting the compound to some other compound, which may also be toxic and may be recalcitrant to further degradation.
Of these three scenarios, the first is clearly the most desirable, and this is the goal in the design of most bioremediation schemes; with the second being used if necessary.
The avoidance of the third scenario may require the use of a consortium of microorganisms to get complete mineralisation of the toxic waste.
Process considerations
All bioremediation techniques involve using microorganisms to degrade the pollutants, and the use of microorganisms has emerged as one of the most promising technologies for treating contaminated groundwater.
Because microorganisms are very versatile and can be quite efficient at degrading toxic compounds, using biotechnology can be cost-effective.
Despite this, bioremediation is the least developed treatment technology, although a number of promising site studies and other research activities have been done.
Bioremediation is formally defined as the controlled use of biodegradation to remove toxic chemicals from soil and groundwater.
The goal of the engineer is to find a microorganism, generally a bacterium, that will metabolise (or at least oxidise) the target contaminant under the conditions in the contaminated site or in an above-ground reactor.
Indigenous microorganisms are now used in above-ground batch reactors, but commercial blends are being used to degrade petroleum hydrocarbons.
These microorganisms may use either aerobic or anaerobic pathways to degrade compounds, with the final products being CO2, small organic compounds such as methane or organic acids, or water soluble microbial products.
Environmental factors that can affect the success of a bioremediation scheme include:
soil permeability;
oxygen supply;
toxicity and concentration of contaminants;
concentration and types of nutrients;
pH;
other organics;
microorganisms;
temperature; and
bulking agents (when using aboveground reactors).
Of these factors, some —eg permeability — cannot be affected by the engineer.
Other factors, such as pH and temperature, cannot be changed easily in groundwater, but may be adjustable in any above-ground reactors.
In general, the optimum pH is 6.5–7.5, while the optimum temperature is between 10°C and 35°C.
Other factors, such as oxygen supply and the concentration of other nutrients, can and should be adjusted both in the aboveground reactors and the subsurface to enhance the overall process.
Addition of oxygen is often required to ensure that its concentration is not limiting; typically, 3 lb of oxygen is required to degrade 1 lb of organics.
Oxygen can be supplied (for aerobic processes) by aeration (resulting in a dissolved oxygen (DO) concentration of 8mgl-1), injection of pure oxygen (40 mgl-1 DO).
If anaerobic conditions are required, as is often the case with chlorinated organics, nitrate may be added as a terminal electron acceptor.
Other nutrients which may be required include sulphur, phosphate, ammonia, vitamins, minerals and cometabolite carbon sources.
Hydrogen peroxide cannot be added to extremely high levels of DO, because of its toxicity.
Also, regulation may prohibit the addition of some nutrients to groundwater —eg nitrate.
The rate of biodegradation may be monitored in several ways, including observing the rate at which CO2 is evolved; the rate at which chloride is produced (if the compound contains chlorine; the changes in TOC (total organic carbon) and COD (chemical oxygen demand); and changes in the concentration of the contaminant.
The preferred method is measuring of the contaminant concentration, combined with some other measurement to ensure that the contaminant is being mineralised rather than being transformed to some other intermediate compound.
A number of hazardous substances are resistant to biodegradation.
Such compounds can occur naturally, but are generally xenobiotic (man-made).
However, not all xenobiotics are difficult to treat.
To determine the feasibility of using microorganisms, degradability tests must be done.
These tests will also determine whether or not the microorganisms will completely mineralise the waste, as opposed to producing metabolic intermediates which may be more toxic that the original compound.
(In such cases, the biological process may be enhanced by using some physicochemical techniques such as air stripping or activated carbon adsorption.)
Chemical structure is an important controlling factor for biodegradation.
Certain chemical structures are inherently more biodegradable than others; moreover, the aqueous phase solubility, adsorptivity, molecular size and the nature of the chemical bonds within the molecule all affect the ability of a microorganism to metabolise the molecule.
With chlorinated hydrocarbons, the ease of biodegradation decreases as the number of chlorine atoms per molecule increases.
As a result, highly chlorinated organics such as PCBs, chloroform (CHCI3), carbon tetrachloride (CCI4), tetrachloroethylene (CI2C=CCI2), trichloroethylene (HCIC=CCI2) and dichloroethylene (HCIC=CHCI) are not readily biodegradable aerobically and are toxic in concentrations of mgI-1.
In general, relatively simple compounds, such as short chain hydrocarbons, alcohols, phenols and other small molecules, are relatively easy to degrade, while larger and more highly substituted compounds are more difficult.
Chemical structure also influences the degree of adsorption of the compound on soil particles.
Such adsorption may be a problem when using above-ground reactors.
Typically, stubborn compounds are also quite hydrophobic, and adsorb readily on inert solids.
Because of this, they are difficult to flush out of the aquifer under standard conditions, and in situ biodegradation may be the only technically and economically feasible way to achieve remediation.
Sometimes enzymes used for degradation of a target contaminant are not induced by the presence of the pollutant, either because the concentration is too low or because of the xenobiotic nature of the compound.
In such cases it may be possible to induce cometabolism of the target compound, with a different, related compound simultaneously being metabolised.
All in situ bioremediation schemes in which microorganisms are added require that the injected microorganisms are able to move easily within the subsurface with low degrees of attenuation, or ‘thinning out’ of the population due to adsorption on soil particles or natural decay.
Whether such conditions exist depends largely on the nature of the soil.
It has been found that injected microorganisms are able to migrate in the subsurface, but these display relatively high levels of attenuation.
These attenuation levels can be improved by using multiple injection points at the site, so that injected microorganisms or their progeny are not required to travel great distances in the subsurface.
Overall, the advantages of bioremediation for groundwater clean-up are:
it can be used when other processes cannot,eg when excavation is impossible, such as leaking storage tanks located under major buildings or highways;
both soil and groundwater may be treated in one step;
if done correctly, hazardous waste products are not generated;
it is generally cost effective; and
treatment can follow the contamination plume in the subsurface.
However, there are some potential disadvantages in using bioremediation:
it only applies to biodegradable contaminants;
It may not be effective for low permeability soils;
it can be inhibited by toxic compounds;
both the soil and any injection well may be clogged by overabundant microbial growth;
some residual contamination may remain in the soil owing to concentrations which do not induce microbial degradation;
treatment may take a long time; and
long term effects of addition of microorganisms and/or nutrients to the subsurface are not well understood.
Despite these disadvantages, some of which only apply in situ , using biological processes in aiding groundwater remediation is worthy of further study.
Bioremediation
Bioremediation falls into several categories.
1.
Doing nothing and letting nature ‘take its course’.
2.
Ploughing in microorganisms, nutrients, and possibly additional wastes in the form of a compost — this is commonly called ‘landfarming’.
3.
Treating contaminated groundwater in  an above-ground biological reactor — this is an example of pump-and-treat.
4.
The treatment of the contaminated soil itself in reactors, generally with detergents — this is commonly called ‘soil washing’.
5.
Irrigation of the site with microorganisms and/or nutrients.
This is to encourage in situ bioremediation.
6.
The combination of biological treatment with physicochemical techniques.
Of these bioremediation techniques, doing nothing is (of course) the least expensive, but may not be environmentally, politically, or socially acceptable.
(The environmental problems associated with doing nothing include migration of the contaminant plume before any subsurface microorganisms have the opportunity to act.)
Landfarming .
This is also known as soil banking and involves the addition of microorganisms, nutrients, bulking agents, and/or contaminants to soil, with subsequent biodegradation occurring in the surface soil.
Bulking agents are sometimes added to maintain easy pathways for nutrients (especially oxygen) to get to microorganisms, rather than everything collapsing into a mass that is not conducive to diffusion.
Landfarming is similar to composting systems for destroying organic or biological sludges from municipal and industrial waste water treatment systems.
The basic process is shown in Fig. 1.
The actual system is generally placed in an enclosure, which provides a means both for keeping moisture in and for preventing volatile organic compounds from leaving without treatment.
In addition, the leachate from the system is collected and either treated or recycled.
The nutrients may be added to the system through spray nozzles, as shown in Fig. 1 , or they may be ploughed into the solid phase by using rotating discs.
Overall, there are several advantages to landfarming.
It provides a standard method for treating contaminated soils, sands, and solids; it provides treatment for surface contamination, while other methods are more suited to subsurface treatment; and it also requires a relatively low level of technology, meaning less can go wrong with the process.
However, there are also several disadvantages to landfarming.
It requires large tracts of land, which may be a problem in urban regions; it is relatively slow; and problems may occur if volatile organic compounds are present in the waste.
This last disadvantage can have serious cost and technology implications if the number and toxicity of the volatile compounds are high.
In general, landfarming lends itself to volatilisation of organic compounds; in fact, that is often the primary means of removal.
If the compounds are toxic, though, the off-gases may have to be collected and treated, probably by passing them through a granular activated carbon absorber.
In situ bioremediation .
This process involves the addition of microorganisms, nutrients and an electron acceptor into the saturation zone of a contaminated aquifer.
Typically, the nutrients added are limited to sources of ammonia, nitrogen and orthophosphate, while the electron acceptor is often molecular oxygen delivered as hydrogen peroxide.
In certain cases, anaerobic conditions may be used to achieve specific clean-up goals, such as removing chlorinated compounds.
In such instances, nitrate may be added as a terminal electron acceptor, with the caveat that regulatory authorities may frown upon introducing nitrate into potentially potable water.
In general, microorganisms present at the site have had sufficient opportunity to adapt to the contaminants and have degraded the waste to some extent.
If laboratory scale experiments indicate, however, that the indigenous microfauna are unable to degrade the contaminants, enrichment cultures of microorganisms may be added to speed up the process.
Commercial blends of enriched isolates of aerobic bacteria are being used to clean-up petroleum hydrocarbons in soil and groundwater, with the predominant organisms being Pseudomonas species.
In these cases, as in most others, the  microbial mixture is grown using the contaminated groundwater in above-ground bioreactors, with subsequent introduction to the subsurface and further,in situ , biodegradation.
The processing of contaminated groundwater in above-ground reactors has the advantage of providing plume management, because pumping water from the centre of a contaminant plume induces groundwater flow toward the well, thus preventing migration.
When microorganisms and additional nutrients are introduced, they are generally added at the edges of the plume, or at least up-gradient from the contaminant source.
In this way, the microorganisms and the groundwater will flow toward the centre of the plume, presumably degrading the contaminants along the way (see Fig. 2 ).
In summary, there are several advantages to in situ bioremediation:
clean-up can be done in areas where excavation is difficult or impossible;
it is inexpensive compared with other treatment techniques;
if no microorganisms are introduced, the regulatory permits may be easy to obtain; and
it has the potential to clean the subsurface more thoroughly than other schemes, because the microorganisms may be in intimate contact with all parts of the aquifer, both solid and liquid.
The main disadvantages of in situ bioremediation are:
it may not be applicable to all contaminated aquifers, in that low permeability or highly sorptive soils may prevent full dispersion of the microorganisms through the aquifer;
the process is slow compared with other processes;
the technology generally is not proven; and
the process is not easily controlled.
Above-ground reactors .
Sometimes conventional biological reactors are used to clean-up groundwater and/or contaminated soils.
These reactors are generally completely stirred tank reactors (CSTRs) or sequencing —ie aerobic/anaerobic cycling — batch reactors.
In the case of contaminated soil, the material is slurried before introducing it to the reactor, enabling mostly liquid-phase reactions to occur.
There are several advantages to using conventional biological reactors:
better control of the system may be obtained than with in situ systems;
better mixing may also be obtained, with resulting higher levels of microbial growth and concomitant faster degradation rates; and
the technology has been proved over the course of more than 100 years.
The better control of the reactors includes the ability to deal with volatile organic compounds more easily, in that collection of off-gases is not a problem.
The main disadvantage, compared with conventional biological reactors, is that the process is not operated in situ , and this can result in higher treatment costs.
Combined physicochemical/biological treatment .
There are occasions when biological treatment cannot effect satisfactory clean-up alone, because the target compounds are incredibly resistant to biodegradation; the proper conditions —eg strict anaerobic conditions — cannot be obtained; or the concentrations of the target compounds are either at toxic levels or are below the minimum concentration required for substrates.
In such cases, it is possible that the inclusion of some physicochemical unit operation in the process may allow the overall treatment scheme to remove the target contaminants more effectively.
Three examples of pretreatment unit operations are air stripping, activated carbon adsorption, and metals removals.
Air stripping .
This is a process whereby volatile organic compounds are transferred from the aqueous phase to the gas phase, thus removing the pollutants from the water stream.
It is generally  done in a vertical packed bed reactor, in which water is passed down the column, with air passing up the column.
the air, laden with volatile compounds, can then either be treated (activated carbon adsorption or incineration) or, if allowable, released directly into the atmosphere.
Activated carbon adsorption .
Activated carbon has the ability to remove a wide variety of organic compounds from water and wastewater, even in trace quantities.
The design of activated carbon adsorbers depends on the degree of equilibrium partitioning of pollutants between the aqueous phase and the sorbed state, and on the mass transfer rates of the contaminants to the activated carbon particles.
Such operations have the advantage of removing the pollutants entirely from the waste stream ie the compounds do not merely undergo a change of state within the environment — and can exhibit beneficial interactions with microorganisms (eg the so-called powdered activated carbon (PACT) process, in which powdered carbon is added to activated sludge and ‘biological activated carbon’, in which microorganisms extend the life of carbon filters before regeneration is required).
Activated carbon has been used in groundwater remediation to aid the overall process.
Removing metals .
This can be a key step in determining the overall effectiveness of a bioremediation scheme.
For example, groundwater containing high quantities of iron can produce large amounts of iron precipitates when biological nutrients, such as peroxide or phosphate, are added.
In such cases the precipitates can block the interstices between the soil particles, making transfer of microorganisms, nutrients, or water through the contaminated site difficult or impossible.
Metals can be removed by ion exchange or coagulation/flocculation.
These physicochemical unit operations may be combined with conventional or in situ biological unit operations to create an overall effective system.
One example of such a combination is shown in Fig. 3 .
In this case, air stripping precedes a conventional biological process, while carbon adsorption is used as a final polishing step.
Some potential uses of conventional biological reactors,in situ bioremediation, and activated carbon adsorption are summarised in Table 1.
There are several possible treatments for chlorinated compounds, with both biological treatment and carbon adsorption often being possibilities.
Petroleum wastes may be amenable to activated carbon adsorption if they are relatively small; bulkier molecules, such as polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), are difficult to treat by adsorption due to size exclusion from the adsorbent's micropores.
Conclusion
As the clean-up of contaminated hazardous waste sites in the US enters its second decade, technologies are being developed to provide in situ , effective, and economic remediation.
In many cases, though not all, bioremediation/bioreclamation meets these three criteria.
Bioremediation is a promising and rapidly developing treatment technology with a bright future.
The size of the market and the number of companies seeking to use bioremediation is increasing rapidly, and as more experience is gained and the operation parameters are better defined, new applications will undoubtedly be found.
Gary F. Bennett is professor of biochemical engineering in the department of chemical engineering, University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio 43606, US and Kevin P. Olmstead is a research fellow in the department of civil and environmental engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, US.
Case histories
There are several cases in the literature where biological processes have been used for in situ or conventional biological treatment of petroleum or chlorinated organic wastes.
These cases are summarised in Table 2.
There have been very few cases where microorganisms have been used for in situ removal of chlorinated, or even petroleum compounds, and conventional biological processes are more commonly used.
This situation should change in the future as more engineers and scientists in the field and in regulatory agencies become aware of in situ processes and become convinced of the efficacy of such schemes.
Costs
Bioremediation can be very cost effective.
Solid phase biological treatment $50–80 per yd3 (£40–65 per m3)
Composting $100 per yd3 (£80 per m3)
Slurry phase treatment $100–150 per yd3 (£80–120 per m3)
Comparing costs with other, alternative treatment processes is difficult, but landfill disposal costs alone in the US exceed $166 per yd3 (sic $133 per m3), not including removal costs and site restoration which can potentially double the unit cost of treatment.
John Pople and the search for chemical truth
Dermot Martin
Some scientists make a deep impression on their discipline and John Pople, a quantum chemist, comes into this category.
Educated at Cambridge and an early ‘brain drain’ graduate, having emigrated to the US in 1964, he now holds a long list of academic honours in the US.
Pople is widely known for his contributions to bonding theory and the development of computer programs in quantum mechanics.
John Anthony Pople was born in Burnham on Sea in 1925, the elder son of Herbert and Mary Pople.
He was educated at Bristol Grammar School and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he became a research student under Sir John Lennard-Jones from 1948 to 1951, receiving his PhD for a thesis on Lone pair electrons .
During the Cambridge period, in 1950, Pople's name first appeared on a paper on the theory of molecular bonding.
This paper, entitled The molecular theory of chemical valency: the significance of equivalent orbitals , was part IV of a series of dissertations published in the Proceedings of the Royal Society , and was written in collaboration with Lennard-Jones.
It was to launch Pople on a brilliant international career.
Today, more than 40 years later, few papers on molecular orbital theory and chemical computational analysis fair to cite the work of Pople, who has acquired cult-like status among the practitioners of quantum chemistry.
This important first publication emerged from part II of the series, in which Lennard-Jones has demonstrated how in molecules with symmetry the molecular orbitals could be transformed into equivalent orbitals, which differed only in their orientation in the molecule.
In part IV, Pople demonstrated how equivalent orbitals could be used to describe molecules whose atoms possessed inner shells and lone pairs of electrons and illustrated his theory by reference to H2O and NH3.
For the first time the significance of lone pairs of electrons, in determining the overall shape of molecules was recognised.
This work was not merely a move towards understanding molecular bonding but also the material for an entire branch of chemistry.
Pople followed up this publication with two papers on the statistical mechanics of assemblies of axially symmetric molecules; interpretations of electron interactions in unsaturated hydrocarbons; collaboration (with Christopher Longuet Higgins) on the spectra of aromatic molecules on solvent spectral shifts; the theory of the Renner effect (Strong coupling between electronic and vibrational modes in a molecule leading to a breakdown of a Born-Oppenheimer approximation — it became a standard work); and his recognition of the value of NMR as a tool for chemistry is revealed in the early issues of Molecular Physics .
In 1964, when Pople left the UK for the Carnegie Institute of Technology in Pittsburgh, as it was then called, his departure inspired one popular British newspaper to the headline Another brain down the drain , but given the lamentable levels of financial support by successive UK governments for the theoretical research in which Pople was to excel, it is unlikely he could have achieved so much without moving.
The years in the US saw the development of Pople's Gaussian series of computer programs, which underpin so much of the theoretical work on chemical bonding.
John Pople has set new standards for quantum mechanics, theoretical chemists, and for the general chemistry community.
Riding on the wave
With the formulation by Schrödinger in 1925 of the wave equation for an electron, it was clear that a solution to it could pave the way to a direct quantitative predictive method for most, if not all, chemical phenomena by using the values of a small number of physical constants.
It was recognised, however, that such a solution was nigh on impossible for any but the simplest systems — and this is still true today, despite massive increases in computing power.
In fact some of Pople's early work spotlighted the limitations of one praiseworthy attempt by James and Coolidge in 1933, to use elaborate wave functions to obtain the energy of the two electrons in the hydrogen molecule.
Nonetheless, the quantum chemists have remained patient and undaunted.
The idea that meaningful research could be done successfully without experiment still leaves some chemists feeling insecure, although many chemists now realise how slow they were to embrace quantum mechanics as a tool.
There is no doubt that these perceptions have altered radically in the past 20 years, with the improvements in computer power needed for solving real problems (see Box 1).
With these riches of computer power at their fingertips, it still rankles with the quantum fraternity that the molecules which they can accurately subject to quantum description remain at only 2–20 electron systems.
Nonetheless, simple systems are widely used to do ab initio calculations accurate enough to answer important questions for reasonably complex molecules.
The plethora of published research is testimony to this.
In the early 1960s, papers on purely mathematical descriptions of molecules were virtually non-existent.
Today, entire journals are given over to this work.
Theoretical procedures permit the systematic study of intramolecular interactions, particularly between directly bonded groups and those connected to a common centre.
The track record of research is continually being extended.
Calculations have been applied to the study of:
reactive intermediates;
carbocations;
renegade molecules that violate conventional structural rules;
square planar as opposed to tetrahedral four-coordinate carbon;
structures and stabilities to perpendicular alkenes and bridged acetylenes, and their relationship to normal planar and linear systems;
the structures of the transition metal  carbenes and transition metal alkyl complexes.
This is to name only a few.
The computational problem
The application of quantum mechanical methods to the understanding of molecular properties requires a detailed algorithm or program to translate the maths into an instruction suitable for a digital computer.
Among ab initio programs that do this are Polyatom 1, Ibmol Hondo, Gaussian 70, Gaussian 76, Gaussian 80 and Gaussian 82.
The Gaussian programs have all been developed by Pople.
In these programs, the graphics representing molecular orbitals —ie the contributions given to each molecular orbital from the various atomic functions — are first independently sketched onto a picture of the skeleton of the molecule and are then ‘smeared’ together to indicate the delocalisation of the orbital away from the atomic centres.
The resulting ‘smears’ may be portrayed as ellipses, or a graphic artist may draw them as smooth half-tone ellipsoids, giving a sense of three dimensionality.
However, this method is too qualitative to deal with differences in orbital structure in closely related molecules.
The aim has been to produce pictorial representations of a complete set of valence molecular orbitals for as many molecules as possible and to relate them to what is observed in the experimental world.
As the system is developed, numerical information about all aspects of molecular structure energies, dipole moments, vibrational frequencies will be stored in a universal databank for easy reference (see Box 2).
The quantum debate
There has been a healthy friction between the theoretical chemist and the experimentalist since chemistry emerged as a scientific discipline.
The chemist Compte (1798–1857) expressed it in quite brutal terms: ‘If mathematical analysis should ever hold prominent place in chemistry — an aberration which is happily almost impossible — it would occasion a rapid and widespread degeneration of that science’.
But Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac (1778–1850) clearly stood on the side of the theorists.
‘We are not perhaps far removed from the time when we shall be able to submit the bulk of chemical phenomena to calculation’, he said.
The work of the modern quantum chemist has helped to fan the flames of this debate.
The ability of good theories to make successful predictions is useful, because often we want to know the properties of systems that are not easily accessible by experiment.
So theories may become a tool in the same way as laboratory equipment.
It is usually the experimental scientist who seizes on a theory as a tool to help interpret the properties of systems inaccessible by experiment.
But there are conservatives, who, while acknowledging the successes of quantum mechanical methods, caution against complacency.
Walter Kauzmann, in a perceptive preface to his book on quantum mechanics, argues that chemical quantum mechanics should be regarded as a language rather than as a tool.
He claimed that the early promise that chemical quantum mechanics would prove to be a powerful tool has yet to be realised.
A new age in chemistry, where the problem of measuring some molecular property could be resolved by pushing a few keys on a computer, has not materialised — the reason is that ab initio calculation for any but the simplest of systems remain beyond the reach of the most advanced computers.
Every day the chemist makes use of such concepts as resonance electronegativity, hybridisation, zero point energies and classification of the states of molecules according to symmetry and angular momentum.
Kauzmann wrote: ‘None of these concepts can be adequately understood without a good grasp of the principles of quantum mechanics.
But the chemists must also be aware of the limitations of the precision with which certain concepts can be defined and he must understand how they arise’.
Martin Karplus of Harvard University touched on the issue at a conference in honour of Pople in 1990.
Calculations make it possible to compare and contrast molecular configuration or perturbations with experimental results and ‘at times’ can expose them as possibly accurate or inaccurate.
But Karplus claimed that nothing gives theoreticians grater satisfaction than to find close harmony between their results and the laboratory results.
However, the demands of the experimentalists make it difficult to provide a simple description of the meaning of the calculations.
The mathematicians argue that the correct interpretation of the results is complex and that complete interpretation in chemical terms is not yet possible.
Karplus believes some of the blame must lie with the mathematicians for failing to interpret what they are doing.
However, Karplus illustrated the immense scale of the problem facing those embarked on theoretical study.
Even if computing power increases by a factor of 10–10 every 40 years, adequate calculation for systems of 10 5 electrons that require a 10 50 increase in computing power would become feasible only in 200 years.
John Pople, like the rest of the quantum community, is conscious of the shortcomings of quantum mechanics and he thinks that exact solutions to the Schrödinger equation for many-electron systems are unlikely to appear for many decades.
An alternative approach is to apply the highest level of theory currently feasible for a system of its size.
In the years since quantum mechanics was first applied to chemistry, many fundamental problems have been ‘solved’— covalent bonds, periodicity, the aromatic nature of benzene, the stereochemistry of carbon, the mechanism of bimolecular reactions, the existence of free radicals, van der Waals' forces, the magnetic properties of matter, and others.
Leland Allen, a quantum chemist at Princeton University, believes that Pople has brought elements of standardisation, reliability, a large body of reference calculations, ready availability, and reproducibility; and most importantly has opened up a second pathway — in addition to experimentation — to chemical truth.
Pople's methods have been recognised as possibly the single greatest methodological change in chemistry in 200 years.
Pople himself captured the mood of self-assurance and optimism that is the mark of these theoreticians at the end of the book he coauthored on the subject.
‘The science of chemistry as we know it today is in the throes of revolution.
Its extension from an experimental to a mathematical science is already well underway’.
The sentiment is perfectly true, but it would surely have chemists from the school of Compte spinning in their graves.
Some quantum successes
Quantum chemistry has the potential to open up a limitless horizon of opportunity for chemists and mathematicians wanting to develop their understanding of the nature and scope of chemical bonding.
The Pople conference of 1990 produced some fascinating insights into current work.
Strain theory .
Since Baeyer put forward his strain theory of bonding in 1885, chemists have probed the limits of convention by conceiving and investigating structures under strain.
For example, the Van't Hoff-Le Bel hypothesis (1874) predicted the tetrahedral shape of methane and revealed the essential rigidity that characterises classical organic molecules.
Square planar and square pyramidal methane geometries are much less stable than tetrahedral and are in energy terms incapable of existence, and can only be ‘examined’ by calculation.
Fundamental violations of accepted bonding rules might be achieved by using substituents capable of stabilising a planar carbon centre.
They delocalise electron density from the non-bonding lone pair on carbon (the highest occupied molecular orbital).
Calculations suggests that a planar lithiomethane molecule would only be 34 kcal mol-1 less stable than its tetrahedral form.
For two lithiums substituted in cis configuration the difference would be a mere 5 calmol-1 (the trans isomer is much less favourable).
Computer simulated graphics of these species show electron density delocalised across three centres.
Studies on a range of alternative singlet forms of basic hydrocarbons have been done.
Experiment and theory.
Ab initio calculations and computer analysis have been extensively used to demonstrate acceptable correlations between theoretical and experimental results.
The methods have been used to re-examine and describe the now classical 1960s work of Hendrickson on the symmetry inversions of cyclo-hexane and the relative stability of the chair conformation versus the twist boat.
Calculations and molecular graphics led to the conclusion that the chair structure and twist boat are minima on the conformational energy hypersurface, with the twist boat 6.9 kcal mol-1 above the chair isomer.
The degree of agreement with experimental analysis has been used to argue the reliability of the Pople programs used.
Reaction mechanisms .
The area that offers most promise for chemical theory is in the understanding of reaction mechanisms.
The latter relies on an understanding of transition structures and intermediate species.
In the laboratory only reactants and products can generally be obtained, yielding little information about the nature of a reaction pathway.
Activation energies may often be obtained from rate measurements by using transition state theory.
Isotope effects and activation entropies can offer qualitative structural data, but geometries can still only be worked out through theory.
Calculations enable reaction surface potentials to be explored to any degree of detail required.
Here the quantum chemical theory of bonding has had some remarkable successes.
In one case it predicted the existence in interstellar space of a new molecule, HOC, before its physical detection.
What about the data?
The growing interest in and use of ab initio quantum mechanics requires the manipulation of masses of numerical data.
Results of general interest to the experimental chemist are ‘total energies’, equilibrium and transition structures, and values of physical properties.
The information is already so widely dispersed throughout the chemical literature that Pople and coworkers, realising the immense problems and complexities involved in organising a bibliography, decided to set up a database.
The Carnegie-Mellon Quantum Chemistry Archive operates in association with the Gaussian 82 program.
Every time a program is run, it leaves behind an archive entry giving key results from calculations.
The chemical information is distributed in the form if direct output from the program, avoiding transcription errors, and is in a form that can be used as a direct input into another computer for additional processing.
Access to it via computer searches has been made relatively straightforward.
Antiulcer drugs from plants
David A. Lewis
As early as the 17th century apothecaries were using liquorice extracts to treat ‘inflamed stomachs’ just as the ancient Chinese had done centuries before.
Interest in plant derived antiulcer drugs declined following the success of synthetic antihistamine drugs in the 1970s.
Now interest has been revived with the identification if new compounds in plants, previously little known to Western scientists.
With these new molecules from nature scientists hope to combat one of the most uncomfortable and vexing problems in medicine more effectively.
Before the 1960s the treatment of peptic ulcers was empirical, based on bedrest and dietary factors, including increases in the intake of  digestible foods like milk products, and general advice such as cutting back on smoking and drinking alcohol.
Drugs were available such as Pulvis Cretae Aromaticus cum Opio BP (2.5 per cent of powdered opium — containing the narcotic analgesic morphine — in aromatic powder of chalk, which is chalk mixed with sucrose, cinnamon, nutmeg, cloves and powdered cardamon seed) or Mistura Kaolini et Morphinae , a suspension of light kaolin as a coating agent in sodium bicarbonate solution with added tincture of chloroform and morphine.
These drugs had an antacid and analgesic effect on ulcers but the neutralising effect of simple antacids like chalk, sodium carbonate or bicarbonate, magnesium carbonate, and bismuth carbonate rarely lasted for more than 2h and these preparations did not cure ulcers.
Preparations based on kaolin and chalk are still marketed, for the treatment of diarrhoea.
Drugs based on bismuth may be making a comeback.
Bismuth has long been used in the treatment of digestive problems and a typical bismuth drug in the British pharmaceutical codes (BPC) for 1949 was Pulvis Bismuth Compositus , BP, a mixture of bismuth carbonate, magnesium carbonate and sodium carbonate.
Recent interest in bismuth is based on evidence that some peptic ulcers may be caused by the bacillus Campylobacter pylori (Helicobacter pylori).
This organism responds to treatment with bismuth salts —eg potassium dicitrato bismuthate; DeNol.
However, the role of Campylobacter pylori in ulcer formation is  controversial with some clinicians claiming that its property of promoting excess gastrin and gastric acid secretion is a primary ulcer inducing factor, while others argue that it is a secondary factor.
This distinction is important because if the organism is a primary factor then cures may be possible using antibiotics.
Carbenoxolone
The modern treatment of peptic ulcers started with the use of the triterpenoid drug carbenoxolone on the 1960s, following the pioneering work of the late Siegfried Gottfried.
Carbenoxolone was developed as a result of a phytochemical investigation of the roots and rhizomes of liquorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra ), resulting in the discovery of the active factor glycyrrhizic acid (glycyrrhizen).
Glycyrrhizic acid on boiling forms glycyrrhetinic acid, and carbenoxolone sodium (1)(Biogastrone, Bioral, Duogastrone, Neogel, Sanodin), which is the sodium salt of the semi-synthetic hemisuccinate of glycyrrhetinic acid.
Various Abrus species such as A. melanospermus, A. precatorius and A. pulchellus , all of which form part of the  traditional medicine of the Malay peninsula and Indonesia, also contain glycyrrhizic acid.
Carbenoxolone was the market leader for about 10 years but its structural similarities to the steroid hormone aldosterone was probably responsible for side-effects such as weight gain, oedema (accumulation of fluid in tissues), hypokalaemia (potassium loss) and hypertension found in some patients.
Carbenoxolone has now largely been replaced by the histamine blockers cimetidine ranitidine.
Other triterpenoids such as oleanolic acid (2) 4 (Calendula ), ursolic acid (3) 5 (Psychotria adenophylla ), taxaxerol (4) 5 (Taraxacum officinale ), lupeol acetate (5) 5 (Spilanthes ocymifolia ) and sericic acid and it glycoside sericoside (6) 6 (Terminalia sericea ) have antiulcer properties but these compounds have not been developed commercially in the West.
Aggressive and defensive factors
Before considering, in detail, the treatment of peptic ulcers by using drugs, it is necessary to consider the factors that lead to ulcer formation.
Peptic ulcer is a convenient term which covers both gastric and duodenal ulcers.
Duodenal ulcers are more common than gastric ulcers in the UK where about 10 per cent of the population have ulcers or ulcer scars.
Peptic ulcers appear to be more prevalent in industrialised nations.
Peptic ulcers are produced by the self-destruction of the gut wall by pepsin and hydrochloric acid in gastric juice.
Normally the wall is protected by a waterproof viscoelastic layer of mucus which forms a continuous layer over the surface of the underlying mucosa (Fig. 1 ).
In fact Claude Bernard, in 1856, described mucus as ‘enclosing the gastric juice as in a vase so impermeable as if it was made of porcelain’.
The main chemical constituent of mucus is a waterproof high molecular weight glycoprotein.
The integrity of the gastric epithelium depends on a balance between aggressive and defensive factors include the mucus layer and the secretion of bicarbonate to neutralise gastric hydrochloric acid.
Dead surface epithelial cells are normally rapidly replaced and the health of the tissue is maintained by a good blood supply.
Aggressive factors include gastric juice and bile salts which can reflux back into the stomach.
External aggressive factors include excessive drinking, certain drugs such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), smoking and stress.
Ulcers start as small erosions (Fig. 3 ) but if these fail to heal they enlarge and penetrate to the underlying muscle, forming ulcers.
Perforation of the wall is a life-threatening complication.
Ulcers tend to run in families, and genetic factors may make some people more susceptible to aggressive factors than others.
The strategy for developing drugs to combat ulceration is based on either inhibiting aggressive factors based on the well-known dictum ‘no acid, no ulcer’, or strengthening defensive factors such as mucus synthesis.
Prostaglandins as defensive factors .
Prostaglandins (PGs) are local hormones and PGs such as prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and prostacyclin (PGI2) inhibit acid secretion and stimulate the secretion of mucus, and of bicarbonate.
Unfortunately, synthetic, stable, orally-active PG analogues are not very effective as antiulcer drugs.
It appears that the administration of exogenous PGs is less effective than endogenous PGs in raising the level of defensive factors.
Exogenous PGs also cause diarrhoea.
Carbenoxolone works by maintaining PG levels in mucosa by inhibiting the PG metabolising enzyme 15-hydroxy-PG-dehydrogenase (Fig. 4 ).
Gefarnate .
Another drug obtained from plants is gefarnate (Gefanil, 7).
This drug was discovered in the 1940s when it was found that the omission of certain fresh foods, including greens from the diet of chicks results in the development of ulcers.
This suggested that certain foods, especially greens, contained a ‘gizzard antierosion factor’.
Later work showed that a factor in cabbage and other greens inhibited the development of histamine induced ulcers in guinea-pigs.
The factor was called ‘Vitamin U’ but was finally identified as geranyl farnesyl acetate.
It is less effective in treating ulcers than carbenoxolone but it is also less toxic.
Gefarnate works by promoting defensive factors such as mucus and acid mucopolysaccharide synthesis in gastric epithelial tissue.
Flavonoids .
Because of the side-effects associated with carbenoxolone, interest was revived in liquorice extracts particularly when it was found that despite the removal of glycyrrhizic acid, liquorice retained antiulcer activity.
Consequently  a preparation containing no glycyrrhizic acid (deglycyrrhizinised liquorice, CavedS, Rabro) was marketed and subsequent research showed that its antiulcer effect was die to flavonoids such as licoflavonol (8 ), licoricone (9 ) and kumatakenin (10 ).
The flavonoids have attracted interest because some of their chemical and biological properties are relevant in antiulcer actions.
Some raise PG levels in gastric mucosa by stimulating cyclooxygenase (an enzyme of the prostaglandin synthetase complex)(Fig. 4 ), or raise PG levels by inhibiting 15-hydroxy-PG-dehydrogenase.
Hypolaetin-8-glucose (11 ), an antiulcer flavonoid isolated from the medicinal herb Sideritis mugronensis found in Spain and other parts of Southern Europe, stimulates prostaglandin synthetase.
Polar flavonoids are antioxidants and they probably stimulate PG synthesis by protecting cyclooxygenase from inactivation by oxidation.
The most successfully exploited antiulcer flavonoid to date is solon (12 )(Sofalcone, SU88, 2-carboxymethoxy-4, 4-bis(3-methyl-2-butenyloxy)chalcone) which has been used clinically in Japan since March 1984.
The story of solon started with a phytochemical investigation of the oriental medicinal plant Sophora subprostrata from which the ancient Chinese drug guangdougen, used in traditional medicine for the treatment of digestive disorders, is prepared.
The active antiulcer substance present was found to be the isoprenyl substituted chalcone, sophoradin (13 ).
Japanese chemists have synthesised a large number of isoprenyl and isoprenoxyl derivatives and tested them against animal models.
Solon, the most active derivative, went forward for clinical trials.
Solon increases PG levels in gastric mucosa by inhibiting 15-hydroxy-PG-dehydrogenase.
Many polar flavonoids are excellent enzyme inhibitors because of their ability to bind to proteins —eg the ability of narigenin (14 ) and catechin (15 ) to inhibit histidine decarboxylase, which catalyses the formation of the gastric acid stimulator histamine, is believed to be the basis of their antiulcer action.
The ability of narigenin and catechin to inhibit histamine synthesis and therefore acid secretion is the closest that plant drugs get to the well known dictum ‘no acid, no ulcer’.
Polymeric forms of catechin (condensed tannins) are also antiulcerogenic and tannins probably inhibit pepsin by direct tannin-pepsin interactions.
Important structural features for antiulcer activity in flavonoids include the isoprenyl group, the presence of ortho -hydroxyl groups and/or a free hydroxyl in the uncondensed benzene ring.
Most naturally occurring flavonoids are present in plants as glycosides, which stimulate PG formation even if the aglycone is inactive.
Flavonoid metabolites such as the hydroxyarylcarboxylic acids also stimulate PG formation.
Even flavonoids which inhibit PG formation in vitro are not pro-ulcerogenic in vivo .
For example quercetin, which inhibits PG formation in vitro , has antiulcer properties.
The reason for such anomalies may be because flavonoids are also potent lipoxygenase products such as the leukotrienes are powerful inflammatory agents.
No acid, no ulcer
The expression ‘no acid, no ulcer’ dominated the approach in the 1980s to the development of antiulcer drugs.
Improved knowledge of the basic mechanisms of gastric secretion led to the development of synthetic drugs such as cimetidine and ranitidine which block the action of histamine, by occupying the histamine receptors in the parietal cell (H2receptors).
Cimetidine was the first H2 blocker to reach the clinic, which was a triumph for synthetic organic chemistry.
It had been known for a long time that histamine was responsible for producing many allergies and the first antihistamine drug was produced in France in 1937.
It was soon realised that antihistamines did not block all the effects of histamine, and in particular its action in promoting the secretion of gastric acid.
In 1972 it was realised that this property depended on a separate histamine receptor (H2) which was different from histamine (H1) receptors in the lung and elsewhere, which were responsible for the allergic action of histamine.
Consequently a search was made for histamine antagonists which blocked the H2 receptor.
These compounds were histamine analogues and cimetidine, developed by Nobel laureate Sir James Black, was the first clinically successful one.
Cimetidine, and later ranitidine, replaced carbenoxolone as the market leader in the UK.
However, although these drugs heal 70–80 per cent of ulcers within four weeks of treatment they do not cure the underlying disease.
Consequently ulcers tend to reoccur after treatment has stopped.
Interest in antiulcer drugs that raise the level of defensive factors has been revived.
Certainly the number of patents and papers concerning natural antiulcer products and derivatives has increased in recent years.
Crude drugs have been re-examined.
For example, the dry aqueous alcohol extract of Vaccinium myrtillus berries (bilberry) has been marketed in Italy since 1964 for the treatment of eye problems and microcirculation disorders.
Recent work has shown that the extract also has antiulcer activity due to anthocyanosides and one aglycone, cyanidin chloridel (16 )(IdB 1027), is  particularly active.
Its mode of action is thought to be its ability to potentiate the defensive barriers of gastrointestinal mucosa.
The Thai medicinal plant Croton sublyratus , which is used in traditional medicine, has recently been found to contain the antiulcer acyclic terpenoid plaunotol (17 ) which is similar in structure to gefarnate.
Plaunotol probably raises defensive factors since it enhances PG levels in gastric mucosa.
Solidago species (Compositae )— a family of coarse hardy perennial plants — have been used in European traditional medicine for centuries to treat various conditions, including ulcers.
Eight acyclic terpenes have been found in the plant which may have antiulcer activity.
Alkaloids
Other drugs of plant origin used in ulcer therapy are the alkaloids.
Probably the best known of these is the drug atropine (hyoscyamine) which is one of the alkaloids found in Atropia  belladonna  (deadly nightshade).
The name of the plant describes its historical use by the ladies of Venice who used the plant in the belief that its property of dilating the pupil of the eye converted them into lustrous wide-eyed beauties.
In more recent times it was prescribed as Belladonnae herba (BPC 1968) which was the dried leaves or aerial parts of the plant which contained 0.4–1 per cent of the drug.
The crude drug was used to inhibit secretions by gastric glands and as an antispasmodic agent for treating intestinal colic.
In modern medicine, atropine is classified as an anticholinergic drug which means it is an inhibitor of basal and meal-stimulated gastric acid production.
This is the basis of its antiulcer action.
Its toxicity has severely limited its use as an antiulcer drug but either it or its analogues are occasionally used clinically.
Conclusions
Peptic ulcers are still a major medical problem and require new drugs, particularly non-toxic drugs with a prophylactic effect, to prevent ulcer reoccurrence.
Even with an ample supply of new molecules from nature there is still a lot of work to be done.
Dr David A. Lewis is a reader in pharmaceutical sciences in the department of pharmaceutical sciences, Aston University, Aston Triangle, Birmingham B4 7ET.
Efficiency for the future
R. S. Barratt
As we start a new year and approach a new century, one of the greatest challenges we face is that of environmental protection.
Even as early as 1919 scientists warned of the dangers of an increase in atmospheric CO2 concentrations.
Individuals must now see their personal role as increasingly important in dealing with global issues.
Energy efficiency can help in reducing CO2 levels in the atmosphere, and scientists can contribute significantly to this by taking a closer look at energy needs in their own working environment — the laboratory.
Recent announcements have warned that the mean increase in global temperature in the first half of the next century could be the greatest ever experienced in human history.
However, while the extent and impact of global warming are uncertain and difficult to predict, there is general acceptance that global temperatures have increased by up to 0.5°C during this century, and that warming of 1.5–4.5°C is likely by around the year 2030.
The cocktail of greenhouse gases includes chlorofluorocarbons, methane, nitrous oxide and carbon dioxide.
The first three also damage stratospheric ozone, while ozone produced in the troposphere does not compensate for this loss, but in fact behaves as another greenhouse gas.
The relative warming potential of these gases is shown in Table 1, which demonstrates the principal role of CO2 as a greenhouse gas.
National and international initiatives are recognising the problem, with both scientists and politicians calling for stabilisation and reduction of CO2 emissions.
However, the uncertainties concerning the extent of climate change and the implications at local level allow political procrastination.
The evolution of European policies shows a need for fundamental changes if environmental and energy policies are to become integrated.
The environmental policy has progressed from its initial remedial approach to one of prevention and anticipation.
This implies reduction of pollution at source and sound management of resources.
Integration now seems more likely following an EC report in late 1985.
A major factor influencing this change is the projected trend in CO2 emissions.
Following a decline in the first half of the 1980s, an upward trend to the year 2010 is now predicted, when total CO2 emissions will be 14 per cent higher than now.
The Department of Energy predicts that for the UK, under various scenarios, the increase in CO2 emissions over 1985 baseline figures will be 13–42 per cent by the year 2005 and 19–100 per cent by the year 2020.
Energy efficiency
EC countries now accept that energy efficiency improvements seem to offer the most promising single policy tool for CO2 reductions.
Department of Energy analyses also imply that the scope for energy savings could be as high as 60 per cent, although a more realistic figure is around 20 per cent .
For the domestic sector alone, this could reduce present annual CO2 emissions by almost 50 per cent by the year 2020.
Steps to improve energy efficiency can affect the whole range of energy systems in industry, transport, the home, commerce and the public sector.
These improvements can be implemented immediately, and could have multiple benefits in improving economic competitiveness and in environmental protection.
Risks to health and the environment can be minimised and it is also important to produce the energy cleanly.
Clearly, some energy efficiency developments require major policy decisions, but most of the work needed to improve energy efficiency relies on the efforts of individual organisations and on the individuals within those organisations.
In considering planning for our common future in the face of global change, Holdgate acknowledges that governments are evidently aware of the problems, but awareness needs to be cultivated in individual firms and local communities.
Personal awareness is essential because global impact is an integral part of human actions that alone appear trivial.
So what can we do?
Energy management
Science offers a key to solving environmental problems by providing more data to construct better predictive models.
Scientists can also play a role in improving energy efficiency in their laboratories.
Energy efficiency is a form of waste minimisation, the modern concept of pollution control, in which innovative technologies, management practices and employees are all involved.
This total approach to resource management results in less pollution and lower production or service costs.
Either benefit may serve as a motivator to individuals who must be made aware of these benefits and their own role.
Attitude surveys I have done, have revealed that some individuals regard energy saving as ‘nothing to do with me’.
Leadership from the top of an organisation is an essential start to cutting energy consumption.
It is generally accepted that energy reductions of 10 per cent may be possible through simple steps which are often  termed ‘good housekeeping’.
This involves nothing more than putting right the small faults such as leaks, poor control settings and using excessive temperatures or times for various energy consuming activities.
Good energy management may be approached by considering the three components: time, level and efficiency (Box 1).
Many savings apply to electricity consumption, whether for lighting, instruments and other equipment, for ventilation, and even heating.
In fact, savings of electricity are particularly important in terms of reducing CO2 emissions.
As Table 2 shows, each unit of electricity consumed releases several times as much CO2 as an equivalent energy output from fossil fuels.
Lighting .
This is often regarded as a minor energy consumer, but it may in fact represent a significant proportion of the total electrical load in a laboratory.
Clearly certain areas —eg animal houses — may have statutory lighting levels.
Other areas where energy is being wasted include using artificial lighting when daylight is adequate, using lighting in unoccupied areas and using excessive lighting.
Waste in the first category may be minimised by installing automatic light controls; turning lighting on or off according to the measured light levels.
This involves some expenditure, but this can be avoided if staff awareness is raised and a ‘switch off’ attitude is developed.
There is a common belief that switching off lights increases energy consumption and also reduces the life of fittings.
Table 3 compares the effect of various switching cycles on the life of a typical fluorescent tube.
It is clear that excessive switching does reduce the life of a tube considerably.
The cost of a tube is small compared with the cost of energy consumption over the lifetime of the tube.
Thus, assuming that a single 65W tube costs £2, the expected hourly depreciation cost over its expected lifetime is 0.027ph-1; this compares with the energy consumption of 0.21ph-1 if electricity is charged at 3.2pkWh-1.
Even with a 5 min switch cycle, giving a tube life expectancy of only 1500h, the tube depreciation, at 0.13ph-1, is still only just over half the energy consumption cost of 0.21ph-1.
The electricity cost is therefore the more significant feature.
Manual control is also an option for lighting in unoccupied areas, provided that awareness and motivation of staff are maintained.
personnel sensors are available but once again this involves expenditure which may be unnecessary with full staff involvement.
The third lighting problem —ie excessive lighting — is less easily resolved by individuals particularly if switches serve too many light fittings.
Where lighting consistently exceeds the recommended level for a particular area certain tubes could be removed, but in the case of switch start light circuits, the starter must also be removed otherwise this will continue to use power.
Laboratory equipment .
Individual items of laboratory equipment may seem minor power users, but as with lighting the total consumption may be large.
Users should be aware of the potential energy consumption of individual items, and be encouraged to switch off when possible, and increasing staff awareness should enable saving to be made.
However some equipment may have to be left on, perhaps to maintain stability.
In the longer term, purchasing policies can help to improve energy efficiency in electrical equipment.
Drawing a parallel with domestic appliances, such as refrigerators and freezers, which may be used in laboratories, it has been suggested that the average electricity consumption of newly purchased appliances in the UK is considerably higher than the best available in Europe.
The consumption of similar appliances in the UK can vary by a factor of two or three.
By 1992 in the US the National Appliance Energy Conservation Act 1987 will outlaw 70–90 per cent of the appliances sold in 1986.
This will reduce the annual emissions of CO2 in the US by 70 million tonnes by 2010.
There are pressures for the EC to adopt similar legislation.
At least some UK suppliers are responding to the energy efficiency challenge and are offering more efficient appliances, such as chamber furnaces etc .
Fume cupboards .
These represent a major area of energy consumption and potential waste in many laboratories.
Correct operation and control is essential.
There are two aspects of waste: unnecessary operation of fan motors; and the extraction of heated laboratory air during the winter.
Fume cupboards may be manually operated or on a time clock control.
The latter, as will all time clocks, are notorious for ‘generous’ settings — perhaps several hours longer than necessary.
It is important to identify which fume cupboards need to operate overnight, and closing the fume cupboard door to the threshold level will allow low speed operation of two speed systems.
The extraction of expensively heated warm air from the laboratory through fume cupboards is another area of concern.
If the laboratory is air conditioned this is also a problem during the summer.
Once again keeping fume cupboards doors closed to the threshold level will minimise this energy loss, as will switching off those that are not needed.
The problem of fume cupboards is a sensitive area and it may be argued that health and safety considerations are in conflict with energy efficiency.
Sensible operation need not make this so.
Space heating .
Another major energy consumer in many laboratories is space  heating.
Boiler settings, combustion performance and time control may not be controlled by laboratory staff, but there are areas under individual control.
Unoccupied offices and meeting rooms left unused for long periods need not be heated to the normal level.
However, in occupied areas, overheating is a common problem.
Not only does it increase building fabric losses, but it also increases losses through fume cupboards and open windows.
How often have you seen windows opened because people find it too warm, yet they do not turn off radiators?
Typically overheating by 1°C increases energy consumption by 7 per cent, and so heating a building to 22°C rather than the statutory maximum of 19°C increases the amount of energy used by over 20 per cent .
It is vital that the thermostatic controls are correctly set and maintained at those values.
Thermostatic radiator valves provide local control, but with these it is important that staff are aware of settings so that the valves are not used merely as manual controls.
There is also the misconception that the speed with which a room is heated to a set temperature increases by turning up a room or radiator thermostat.
These and other responsibilities of laboratory workers must be covered when staff are made aware of their role in the laboratory.
Other options
There is obviously much more to energy efficiency than the few ideas suggested here.
Many can be found in Department of Energy publications, and much of the work falls into the domain of site engineers in terms of replacing tungsten filament lamps with fluorescent fittings, boiler plant optimisation, insulation and so on.
These will all reduce emissions from fossil fuels and so help combat global warming and acid deposition.
The development of alternative, environmentally safer energy technologies or the expansion of the nuclear power industry are two further contrasting options to help combat global pollution.
There is, however, one other option where individuals can contribute, and that is recycling.
This process saves energy because making new products from virgin materials is less efficient than using secondary materials.
Stauffer has discussed this energy saving option in some detail, and Table 4 estimates the potential of recycling.
It is also worth noting the value of minimising water use and recycling water whenever possible.
Apart from representing a valuable resource in its own right it is important to note that water is paid for twice — in terms of metered supply and the effluent charge.
Moreover, water is often heated and pumped, and so minimising water use is another way of minimising energy consumption.
Conclusion
Global issues seem far removed from individuals, yet we all have an important role to play in energy efficiency programmes, which offer one approach to dealing with increasing CO2 emissions.
Energy efficiency drives became popular following the oil price rises in the 1970s, and more recently in 1990, but energy efficiency is a rather dull topic and it is difficult to sustain interest.
Global warming provides a more imperative justification for energy efficiency, but as Helm and Schneider have pointed out, what would be wasted by an energy efficiency strategy if serious global warming never materialised?
Scientists can deal with these problems, by making a start in their own working environment.
Compared with options such as more nuclear energy more use of renewable energy, conversions from coal and so on, energy efficiency is relatively simple, need have no harmful environmental consequences, and also offers financial benefits of reduced production costs and enhanced competitiveness.
What more could one ask?
Dr Rod Barratt is an environmental engineering lecturer in the faculty of technology.
The Open University, Walton Hall, Milton Keynes MK7 6AA .
Dithiadiazoles: a new family of free radicals
A. J. Banister and J. M. Rawson
Free radicals — species with one or more unpaired electrons — are very important in many areas of chemistry; from initiating the formation of polythene and playing a major role in the chemistry of the Earth's atmosphere to causing the deterioration of food.
Free radicals may also play a part in producing organic compounds with metallic properties.
As a result, new classes of free radical are particularly interesting to chemists.
In 1880 the first cyclic sulphur-nitrogen free radical —— was prepared as a deep green powder with a metallic lustre.
Although its electron spin resonance (ESR) activity indicated the presence of some monomeric radical, its low solubility in a variety of solvents (except when accompanied by decomposition) coupled with the absence of a chlorine NQR signal indicated an oligomeric and ionic structure.
Several other salts of this radical have since been prepared, all of which have a similar appearance.
When the structures of these salts were determined by X-ray crystallography, an oligomeric ionic structure was found — but one of a most unexpected type.
Rather than the expected planar monocyclic cation (cf , an alternative structure as observed with two  rings joined to form an  cation (Fig. 1 ) in which each of the component  rings provides one electron for a unique type of  interaction through four sulphur atoms.
In all  salts there are S…
S bonds between the two  rings, producing a paddle-shaped cation.
There is also a web of secondary interactions involving the anions and (at least) the pair of bridging sulphur atoms of the  rings, and these interactions prevent ready solubility.
These sulphur-anion interactions are not unexpected; they are a common feature of 1,2-disulphur  cations because these functional units tend to be moderate electron acceptors.
The singly occupied orbital (SOMO) overlap (Fig. 1 ) explains the geometry of .
There is one unusual property of  which is particularly striking.
The interaction between the two rings is so weak  that there is incomplete association in both the solid state and in solution; the  free radicals present are easily detected by ESR spectroscopy.
The observations suggested that  might be the archetype of a new family of isoelectronic free radicals.
By replacing one of the sulphur atoms in an  ring by RC, it was hoped to retain the same electronic properties of  and, by changing the substituent R, a systematic study of the physical and chemical properties of this type of heterocycle could be done.
The replacement of one S+ centre by isoelectronic carbon leads to two possible  rings, which are known as dithiadiazoles.
Similarly, by replacing one sulphur and one nitrogen by RC groups, heterocycles can be formed.
The chemistry of these ring systems is particularly striking.
For example, many dithiazolium compounds,, can be obtained in almost quantitative yield and some low molecular weight dithiazoles —eg — are virtually unassociated paramagnetic liquids.
Synthesis of  salts
Chlorides of the 1,2 disulphur cations,(especially where R is aromatic or chlorinated aliphatic) are easily prepared from  or  and amidinium salts, amidines or silylated amidines.
The yield (typically ca 30 per cent) in this type of reaction (a ) can be improved by adding a tertiary base —eg 1,8-  — which scavenges the HCI formed.
They can also be made from nitriles as shown in equation (b ).
The SNS + synthon
1,3,2,4-Dithiadiazolium salts are synthesised by the reaction of nitriles with dithianitronium salts —eg equation (c ).
A variety of anions can be used —eg and  but the hexafluoroarsenate gives the cleanest reactions.
Although preparing  involves using  and  (both potentially hazardous) it is a straightforward procedure in expert hands and the yield is around 95 per cent.
The hexachloroantimonate,, is easier to obtain — from , and sulphur — but its reactions tend to be slow due to its poor solubility in most solvents.
The cycloaddition reactions of SNS+ with alkynes and nitriles have been thoroughly investigated and these ‘reverse electron demand’ cycloaddition reactions would fit well into elementary organic chemistry courses.
As well as reacting with simple RCN systems, SNS+ reacts with multicyano compounds —eg dicyanobenzenes, dicyanogen (NCCN), tricyanobenzene and  tricyanomethanide  — yielding the corresponding bis and tris(dithiadiazolium) cations.
All of these reactions give high yields and are often quantitative.
The dithianitronium cation is a remarkably versatile reagent and it reacts again via  symmetry allowed cycloaddition process, with a wide variety of other unsaturated groups such as and .
The dithianitronium cation also reacts with halogens, see Scheme 1.
Charge transfer salts
The ionic nature of the 1,3 and 1,2-dithiadiazolium salts is clearly shown in their addition and metathesis reactions.
For example, reacts with  and  to give the hexachlorometallate salts and it undergoes metathesis reaction with LiBr, Nal, and .
As with many other sulphur-nitrogen compounds these salts are brightly coloured and their reactions can often be monitored by inspection.
It is interesting that the donor capacity of the anion can be estimated from the colour of the  salts.
Weak donor (‘hard’) anions, such as tend to give red salts of 1,2-dithiadiazoliums and pale yellow-green salts of 1,3-dithiadiazoliums.
However, these salts tend to become darker in colour as the anions get softer.
For , the chloride is yellow, the bromide is burgundy and the iodide is black.
Such charge transfer reactions also affect the cation geometry.
For example, the S-S bond distance in  is  and this is appreciably longer than in the weakly interacting .
The overall electron transfer from the  anion is particularly high and has been calculated at approximately 0.8e.
It is interesting that the anion-cation charge transfer is so marked in  and  and that they are stable in only a few inorganic solvents —eg liquid .
In organic solvents, or on warming, complete electron transfer from the anion (ie cation reduction) usually occurs forming  and  or  
The neural  species is known as a dithiadiazole and is isoelectronic with the  moiety.
Dithiadiazoles
Some dithiadiazolium salts are capable of disproportionating (equation d ), and dithiadiazoles can also be prepared by chemical reduction of the cation.
Indeed reduction of either 1,2- or 1,3-dithiadiazolium salts with a variety of reagents (Ag, Zn/Cu couple or ) gives the analogous dithiadiazoles, typically as a purple-brown solution.
Numerous 1,2 dithiadiazoles  have been isolated and several solid state structures have been determined.
For example, when  etc .
In the solid state, 1,2-dithiadiazoles generally show quite a complex array of secondary interactions, both S…
N and S…
S, which are also observed in  salts.
These dithiadiazoles are held together in dimeric pairs through S — S interactions, as in , though they are not held together in the  trans -type configuration, but in a variety of other orientations.
Most of these  structures are cis , with the ring pairs lying above one another.
However, and  dimers are twisted out of a purely cis arrangement due to steric hindrance (Fig. 2 ).
The two side groups are no longer eclipsed but become slightly staggered.
Consequently, by changing the R group attached to the  ring it is possible to change the solid state properties of these radical dimers.
For large bulky groups or low molecular weight species these materials are often low melting point solids or even paramagnetic liquids, at room temperature.
In comparison, oligomerisation of the analogous dithiazoles is weakened by electron withdrawing substituents.
This is illustrated by the properties of the  derivative,, which is an unassociated black-green paramagnetic liquid, which vaporises to a blue gas.
In the solid state however, most dithiazoles have a dimeric structure analogous to , with the rings in a trans configuration.
1,3-Dithiadiazoles  are unstable with respect to isomerisation to the 1,2-isomer and consequently isolation of these 1,3-radicals has, on the whole, been unsuccessful.
Nevertheless their presence has been established by ESR spectroscopy.
Despite the instability of these 1,3-Dithiadiazoles, compounds with more than one such ring have been prepared.
It has been possible to isolate neutral bis and tris (1,3,2,4-dithiadiazoles) by reducing their corresponding salts; the neutral products precipitating before they have time to rearrange.
Perhaps the most striking dithiadiazole structure is the stacked bis (1,3,2,4-dithiadiazole)(Fig. 3 ).
The interatomic distances show that both quinoid and zwitterionic canonical forms contribute to the overall structure.
In the solid state, this bis(dithiadiazole) is packed in a similar way to a one dimensional metal —ie short contacts (eg S…
S at 3.21A) link the molecules together in polymeric chains and the molecules are slipped sideways over one another such that the ‘right-hand end’ of one molecule overlaps the ‘left-hand end’of the next one.
This leads to a trans configuration, as in .
However, because of the two dithiadiazole functionalities at either end of the molecule, the solid state structure is polymeric rather than dimeric.
Thus by changing the environment around the dithiadiazole ring substituents, it is possible to produce, in the solid state, a variety of cis, trans and staggered dimers, and also polymeric arrays.
Reactions
The simplest reactions of dithiadiazoles are their association and isomerisation reactions in solution.
Isomerisation of the 1,3-rings to their 1,2-isomers is a photochemically symmetry allowed process which is thermally symmetry forbidden.
Since ESR spectroscopy clearly shows the presence of free radicals in solids or in solution, it is a very convenient probe for dithiadiazole isomerisations and reactions.
The 1,3,2,4-dithiadiazoles show a 1:1:1 triplet due to the spare electron being largely localised at the nitrogen atom remote from the ring substituent.
After rearrangement — which takes between 5 min and several days in solution, depending on the substituent R — the 1,2,3,5-dithiadiazole products give a five-line 1:2:3:2:1 quintet due to interaction of the free electron with two equivalent nitrogen nuclei (see Fig.4 ).
The redox behaviour of 1,2- and 1,3-dithiadiazoles (D), with a wide variety of R substituents has been studied by using cyclic voltammetry (CV)
Most of the compounds (D) behave as reversible redox systems.
Typical half-wave reduction potentials  for 1,2 compounds are  versus the standard calomel electrode (SCE) while those for the 1,3-isomers are 0.2V.
The 1,3-compounds with alkyl substituents —eg — tend to rearrange slowly and spontaneously to the corresponding 1,2-rings.
The CV method is particularly useful not only in detecting the presence and ratios of both isometric forms (due to the 0.4V separation) but also for monitoring the conversion rate of one radical form into the other.
It has also helped in studying the kinetics of SNS+ cycloaddition reactions with nitriles, by monitoring, as a function of time, the diminishing reduction peak of SNS+ and the increasing peak of the 1,3 compound.
The general chemistry of dithiadiazoles is full of surprises.
Because dithiadiazoles are usually obtained by dehalogenation of the chloride —eg equation (e )— it is logical that dithiadiazoles sometimes act as dehalogenating agents (equations g and h ).
However, the products obtained from reactions with halides can be rather surprising —ie the dithiadiazole can trap free radical intermediates.
For example, whereas chemical reduction of  normally gives  (the best known sulphur nitride), the reaction of  with  results in reduction (removal of CI) and then  ring contraction, with the loss of two SN units.
The  produced is intercepted by  radicals to give the stacked charge transfer complex .
In the solid state its ring pairs (AB) are packed ABBA etc .
This complex is unusual in another way.
The single crystal ESR spectrum (Fig.4 ) shows the presence of  radicals, but no .
It appears that the surfeit  rings in the crystal are compensated for by holes at the  lattice sites.
Ring contraction also occurs in the reaction of  with  with the loss, in this case, of just one SN unit.
The radicals  and  combine to give a 1:1 product with a layer type structure held together by an array of S…
S and S…
CI secondary interactions (see Fig. 3 ).
This material is particularly interesting because it combines the  radical with the  species to which it is structurally related.
More extreme examples of combined cationic and neutral  rings are the black compounds  and , as well as the golden compound .
Some 1,2-dithiadiazoles will not only trap radical species in solution but they will, in the solid state, also trap atomic nitrogen radicals generated in a simple DC discharge tube.
The atomic nitrogen inserts (in approximately 80 per cent yield) into the disulphide link of the dithiadiazole.
The reaction shown in Scheme 2 was first observed when a sample of , in an ampoule under nitrogen, was being tested for a pinhole using a Tesla discharge; the surface of the sample turned from black to brown.
A crucial requirement for this type of reaction to occur is the presence of solid state channels for the transport of the atomic nitrogen atoms.
This is one of the rare uses of plasma species for molecular synthesis.
(Plasmas are more often used for polymer synthesis and for surface treatments such as metal nitriding).
This novel method of synthesising the compound could perhaps be used more widely if the compound were dispersed —eg within a zeolite — where there are channels for the rapid movement of the reactive plasma species.
Rather more conventional than the radical trap reactions of dithiadiazoles are their metal complexation reactions.
The reluctance of the odd electron to engage in bonding appears to be retained in these complexes and the few X-ray structures obtained so far indicate unusual bonding.
Only the phenyl derivative  has so far been studied as a ligand.
It reacts with zero valent metal complexes by ligand replacement, particularly substitution of carbonyls and phosphine complexes.
The products from the reactions with carbonyl complexes are often insoluble involatile black powders, but preparing them by using slow diffusion sometimes gives sufficient crystal growth for X-ray structure determination.
The structure of three dithiazole metal complexes are known; a di-iron compound with only one  ligand shows clear signs of intermolecular (N…
N) interactions whereas a di-nickel compound, again with one such  ring, does not.
The structures of these complexes and of a trinuclear palladium complex with two  ligands are shown in Fig. 5 .
Because the single electron in a dithiadiazole radical,, causes S-S bond weakening (it is in a π*; molecular orbital that is antibonding with respect to the S-S bond), changes in this bond distance are useful in indicating the extent of ligand to metal electron flow.
In the complexes studied so far, the S-S distance is approximately , which indicates a bond order between zero and one (a S-S single bond length is approximately  and the van der Waals' contact is between  in the direction of the S-S bond and  perpendicular to the S-S bond).
Thus as the radical reacts, the received electron charge opens the ring between the sulphur atoms, and these atoms bond to the metal.
Since dinuclear complexes and a trinuclear dithiadiazole complex have been prepared, it seems likely that higher oligomeric chain and cluster compounds will soon be prepared, giving a variety of unusual compounds.
Conclusion
In this brief review we have shown that the monomer unit,, is the archetype of a whole new family of free radicals with highly unusual properties — low or negligible intermolecular attractions, photochemical isomerisation and novel ring trapping, and complexation reactions.
The formation of charge transfer salts containing the planar  unit has produced a variety of novel low dimensional materials.
This is only the start of a new area of free radical chemistry and we anticipate properties more characteristic of metals as the area develops.
(The selenium analogue of  has recently been shown to be a semiconductor.)
Dr A. J. Banister is a reader and Dr J. M. Rawson is a postdoctoral research assistant in the department of chemistry, University of Durham, South Road, Durham DH1 3LE    
Fine chemicals
Roget's Thesaurus offers many approximations to the word ‘fine’, as well as a few phrases in the connexion.
In a chemical context, one notices ‘of the first water’ and ‘worth its weight in gold’.
The first has to do with purity (originally in the diamond trade) and the second with value consequent upon that purity.
Looking into Roget again, one finds the following: excellence, integrity, precious, unalloyed, sterling, standard, true, unimpaired, unadulterated, first class, second to none.
If the cumulative burden of all this is descriptive of the fine chemicals industry, it is clear that manufacturers of such products are aiming very high indeed.
Well, so are their customers.
Whereas the requirements of a ‘speciality’ chemical are often concerned with effect (though nowadays terms overlap), the buyer of a fine chemical specifies a particular substance , and the supplier must deliver precisely what is specified in terms of chemical structure and purity level.
‘Three nines’ is not uncommon: purity warranted to within 0.999 of absolute purity, with some certainty that the umpteenth consignment will be as pure as the first.
To describe oneself as a fine chemicals supplier, therefore, requires self-confidence, not to say courage.
Courage to take on enormous challenges in management and scientific matters.
Only the best will do, in everything from personnel through equipment and working practices.
And the supplier must be able to prove his worth up front.
In the following pages, some companies brave enough to make these claims tell you how they back them up.
If you contact them by means other than our Reader Service Card, please let them know that you read about them in CHEMISTRY IN BRITAIN.
Thank you.
JANSSEN CHIMICA
Semi-bulk specialities
Since 1953 Janssen Pharmaceutica has been a pioneer in the pharmaceutical field.
Over 70 original Janssen products have found important applications in medicine.
This expertise and experience in the field of organic chemistry have moulded Janssen Chimica — a logical extension of Janssen Pharmaceutica.
Since 1970, Janssen Chimica has been manufacturing fine chemicals.
The company has evolved into a major chemical manufacturer, and a supplier with a supplier with a world-wide reputation for flexibility, innovation and excellence.
Janssen's Fine Chemicals Catalogue, which contains more than 12,000 different products, fully illustrates this evolution.
This vast product-line combined with an ability to deliver quickly from stock has led to the supplying of thousands of satisfied professionals in research institutes, laboratories and chemical process industries worldwide.
Contained within Janssen's warehouse are products ranging from highly specialised organic compounds to analytical reagents, in sizes to suit research and development all the way through full-scale industrial production.
Janssen promise their customers fast delivery, and since they have inventory on more than 12,000 different products, they pride themselves on keeping this promise.
Janssen Pharmaceutica has manufacturing plants in Belgium, Ireland, Mexico, Puerto Rico and Spain.
Each facility is equipped with multi-purpose reactor vessels and operates under strict GMP and FDA regulations.
Every batch produced is closely monitored by quality and process control departments.
As a pharmaceutical company Janssen know how important dependability and consistence are.
Before production is begun, of multi-kilogram or even multi-tonne lots, each reaction step is carefully studied in the pilot plant.
More than 25 glass lined and stainless steel reactors, which hold from 50–1200 litres, are used for development and testing.
Customer adapted packaging
Because Janssen sell products in quantities for research and industry as well as for laboratory use, they offer packages in many different sizes…often as suggested by their customers.
Handling chemical products of high quality is not easy.
Corrosion, flammability, toxicity, governmental restrictions, temperature considerations, air sensitivity etc., are of major importance in the selection of appropriate packaging.
The company will, however, package to customers' specific requirements as regulations permit, in order to reduce delivery time.
This in turn enables Janssen's customers to start production or synthesis sooner than they might have thought possible.
Quality a  principal concern
Each product manufactured by Janssen Chimica is quality tested at least three times, depending upon the requirements.
Products are always tested to conform to standard specifications (as printed in the catalogue), but if there are specific analytical needs, they will gladly perform custom analyses, ensuring that the product will work for a particular application.
The complete results of the final testing of each product are stored in computer files, from which a certificate of analysis is generated.
This certificate, lot-depending, will accompany each shipment.
Employee Protection — MSDS
Janssen Chimica offers more than 12,000 fine chemicals, from common reagents to custom designed molecules.
With the multitudinous package sizes available, there is a great deal of physical contact with the chemicals by Janssen personnel.
The company has created and maintained a database, which contains all the relevant information for each product, including physical properties and toxicological values, as well as packaging instructions.
On the Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) the physical and safety related data (such as flash, melting and boiling points, decomposition temperatures, explosion limits etc,), labelling, storage and handling, disposal and emergency measures for eg. spills, fire extinguishing media and first aid.
Janssen care a great deal about their customers' people, too.
Environment vs. packaging
Janssen's contribution to preserving the environment is substantial.
Everyone who deals in chemical purchasing knows that in many cases, one is forced by prepackaging and stringent sales requirements to purchase substantially more of a given compound than is required.
The excess will remain in the buyer's warehouse for quite some time, tying up his capital and his storage space.
After time, he will still be facing the same problem: what to do with the remainder of the material?
As an environment-conscious consumer, he will have the product disposed of at a premium charge — high prices to be paid by both the customer and the environment.
With this scenario in mind, Janssen Chimica will provide exactly the quantity required and at no extra charge for special packaging.
Their concern for protecting the environment goes that far.
PRL
Specialist facilities
Palmer Research Laboratories (PRL) was established in 1965 as an independent contract research organisation specialising in the field of organic chemistry.
The success of PRL in its early years led to the expansion of its activities, with the construction of pilot plant and production facilities enabling the company to offer a complete service from laboratory research, through pilot plant development and the production of intermediate quantities of material to large-scale commercial manufacture.
Based on this comprehensive service, which is designed to cover every aspect of customers' requirements.
PRL has built its current high reputation in the pharmaceutical and fine chemicals fields.
Commercial considerations
Whatever the nature of the enquiry, the following commercial considerations apply:
(i)
Confidentiality obligations are first established.
(ii)
The project objectives are defined clearly at the outset, e.g. product specification, time scale, GMP requirements.
(iii)
The costs for the project are specified.
(iv)
Essential information on the progress of the project is conveyed throughout its duration and any enforced changes are notified promptly.
Facilities
PRL's 15 acre site in North Wales has three research laboratories and two large pilot plants containing over 40 reaction vessels ranging in capacity from 50 litres to 1500 litres.
In addition, specialist facilities are available for chlorination, bromination, photochemistry, high temperature reactions (to 260 °C) and cryogenic reactions (to -100°C).
PRL's expertise in optical resolution and chiral synthesis is also well established.
Further expansion of the production facilities has recently taken place.
With the support of PRL's owners, Associated Octel, a multi-purpose production building is now fully operational and contains stainless steel and glass-lined reactors up to 500 gallons capacity.
KODAK
Eastman Fine Chemicals
New dimensions
Eastman Fine Chemicals brings a new dimension to the worldwide manufacture and marketing of fine chemicals.
Whether your requirement is for grams, kilos, tons or thousands of tons, they have a large range of facilities and technologies to meet your needs.
Eastman Fine Chemicals gives you access to the capabilities of 3 respected worldwide suppliers of fine chemicals — Sterling Organics, the Kodak Laboratory and Research products Division and the Eastman Chemical Company of Eastman Kodak Company.
Because of this range of facilities, Eastman Fine Chemicals can now offer a wide range of services from initial research samples through scale up, test market, to full national or international manufacture.
Eastman Fine Chemicals is a major business organisation in the Eastman Chemical Company, and is organised to serve your needs for laboratory and bulk fine chemicals, custom synthesis, and toll manufacture.
Eastman's primary markets are the pharmaceutical and agrochemical industries, the photographic chemical and electronic materials markets, flavour and fragrances, organic and biological laboratory products, and custom synthesis/toll manufacture.
For the pharmaceutical market, Eastman Fine Chemicals offers bulk pharmaceuticals, key intermediates, a substantial range of formulation excipients, together with custom synthesis in USA and Europe in FDA registered plants.
In the photographic chemicals market the company offers a range of intermediates and also chemicals for photo finishing.
In the electronic materials market, they offer custom synthesis of photosensitizers, photo polymers, speciality organic chemicals and dyes used in the manufacture of integrated circuit devices and printed circuit boards.
To agrocultural chemical producers, Eastman Fine Chemicals offers both intermediates and custom manufacture, together with outstanding plant flexibility in meeting increasing demand as your product market develops.
Synthetic products and various intermediates are also available for the flavour and fragrance market.
One of the core strengths offered by EFC is the extensive range and depth of chemistry available within the company.
The company's database of reactions contains information on over 500,000 compounds, and the expertise to operate many of these on a commercial scale had been built up from several decades of process development by Kodak, Eastman and Sterling.
There are many custom and fine chemical manufacturers but few, if any, have EFC's long experience in multi-step, complex, organic synthesis — knowledge gained from years of experience in the manufacture of photochemicals, dyes and pharmaceuticals.
Eastman Fine Chemicals have dedicated plant facilities and special expertise in many key unit processes including:
Alkylation
Acetoacetylation and diketene chemistry
Birch and Benzyne chemistry in liquid ammonia
Special plants for cyanide and HCN reactions
Synthesis of chiral synthons and enzymatic resolution
Organometallic chemistry, together with a major facility for low temperature work
Friedel Crafts chemistry
Halogenation with facilities at several sites to handle bulk bromine, chlorine and iodine
Extensive capabilities for both chemical and catalytic reduction, including high pressure facilities in Europe and USA
Nitration, oxidation and sulphonation
Special polymer synthesis
Eastman Fine Chemicals is a global company with personnel at key international locations and the major fine chemical markets of the world.
The main R & D and pilot facilities in Europe located at Newcastle, England, and in the USA at Rochester and Rensselaer in New York State, and Kingsport Tennessee.
EFC's principal manufacturing sites   are at Batesville, Arkansas; Kingsport, Tennessee; Rochester and Rensselaer, New York; and Dudley, England.
There are additional Kodak manufacturing facilities at Longview, Texas; Barceloneta, Puerto Rico; Kirkby, England; and Chalon, France.
If your project requires the supply of fine chemicals or custom synthesis from laboratory quantities to multi-thousand tonnes, Eastman Fine Chemicals can help.
Their business is designed to start with you at the R & D stage and stay with you through large scale manufacture.
EFC believe their core expertise in complex, multi-step organic chemistry, the global location of manufacturing sites and offices, a strong position in safety, environmental control and quality assurance, all combine to make EFC the preferred partner for reliable supply of quality fine chemicals.
SAF BULK CHEMICALS
From development to manufacturing
SAF Bulk Chemicals combines the manufacturing and sourcing capabilities of Sigma, Aldrich and Fluka Chemical Companies to offer the most comprehensive range of fine chemicals and speciality chemicals and biochemicals in commercial development, and manufacturing quantities.
Comprehensive range
SAF Bulk Chemicals provides over 70,000 products from stock at its manufacturing and distribution sites worldwide.
SAF Bulk Chemicals offers manufacturing expertise in a broad range of key chemicals including reagents for organic synthesis; intermediates for pharmaceuticals, fine and speciality chemical production; fine chemicals for the electronics and specialist paper industries; intermediates for liquid crystal manufacture; and specialist biochemicals, reagents, enzymes, media and immunochemicals for biotechnology, tissue culture, fermentation, immunodiagnostics, biosensors and clinical chemistry.
The company's manufacturing expertise is particularly strong in the production of a range of key chemical and biochemical reagents and intermediates including: albumins and other extracted proteins; boranes; biological buffers; carbohydrates and sugar derivatives; chemical and biological detergents; chiral compounds, enzymes and resolving agents; enzymes for immunodiagnostics and clinical chemistry; fluoroorganics; immunochemicals, peptide synthesis, protected amino acids and peptide/protein modification reagents; protecting groups; reducing agents; silylating agents and organo-silica compounds and tissue culture reagents.
Process capabilities
SAF's bulk manufacturing facilities are designed for batch processing from multi-kilo to multi-tonne quantities.
Process equipment includes glassteel reactors (50–12,000 litres), pilot-plant scale 316 stainless steel reactors (140–10001).
solids filtration (3 to 25 cubic ft), vacuum shelf dryers (20 to 300 sq.
ft); vacuum tumble dryers (3 to 70 cubic ft).
lyophilisation (to 50kg), hydrogenation (to 500psi), vacuum distillation (100lt
100mm Hg), process temperature range -20°C to 180°C.
Their production staff is experienced in a wide variety of techniques including but not limited to; acylation, alkylation, amination, bioconversion chlorosulfonation, condensation, conjugation, dehydration, diazotisation, esterification, Grignard methods, halogenation, hydroboration, hydrogenation, oxidation, peptide synthesis, phosgenation, quaternisation, reduction, saponification and sulfonation.
Backed by the capacity and reputation for quality and service of Sigma, Aldrich and Fluka, SAF's commitment to its customers doesn't stop at supplying the product.
SAF Bulk Chemicals works with customers from development to manufacturing.
With flexibility in mind, SAF also offers a range of services including custom and toll manufacturing, custom product design, dispensing and packaging; charge size quantities; full documentation; GMP manufacturing facilities in Europe and the USA; just-in-time delivery and full technical back-up.
SAF Bulk Chemicals is committed to be a quality, reliable and versatile supplier to the chemical industry.
Fluka
World-wide network
Fluka Chemicals Ltd, based at Glossop in Derbyshire, is the British subsidiary of Fluka Chemie AG, Switzerland, and is part of a world-wide network of subsidiary and distribution companies, providing a high speed, high quality sales, distribution and technical back up service for the full range of over 14,000 chemicals and bio-chemicals offered in the present Fluka Catalogue.
Fluka is known world-wide as a supplier of high quality chemicals and bio-chemicals for research and development and intermediates for industrial manufacture, but this is only part of the picture.
The Buchs site offers large scale production facilities, now approved to GMP standard, manufacturing over 4,000 products in quantities from a few grammes to small tonnage.
All plant has been specifically designed for multi-purpose usage so it can be easily adapted to many different chemical processes, enabling Fluka to adopt a versatile and flexible approach not only to production but also to specific customer developments in which they are actively seeking to become involved.
Fluka's product line is continually increasing as its own research and development bring new products on stream.
The quality of the full product range is assured because Fluka assay every chemical and bio-chemical, and subject all products to exacting tests in their well equipped quality control laboratories.
Each product is carefully packed and labelled so that chemists, bio-chemists, life scientists and laboratory technicians world-wide can rely on ‘made in Switzerland’ quality.
Fluka's philosophy of continual development of both product range and customer service has led over the last 12 months to the company becoming an integral part of the SAF Bulk Chemical Service.
This sets out to offer the full range of Fluka products alongside those of Sigma and Aldrich, but at a scale and price more appropriate to the needs of pilot or development plant, clinical trial or production level, while maintaining the very high levels of quality and service for which all three companies are renowned.
The company was worked consistently over the years to develop special knowledge and expertise in particular areas e.g. chiral compounds and building blocks; quaternary ammonium compounds for phase transfer catalysis and electrochemistry; silylating agents; a range of products for ion-selective electrode work and a comprehensive range of highly purified reagents for bio-chemistry marked under trade name Micro-Select .
Fluka is continuing to work to stay at the forefront of knowledge in these areas.
The UK sales and distribution base aims to achieve the same high standard in sales delivery and technical service that are so well established by Fluka throughout Europe.
Next day delivery of the large majority of products is offered in all their various pack sizes, from a computerised warehouse in Glossop.
The three sales office personnel will be able to let a customer know at the touch of a key exactly what is the pack size, price and availability of the product required.
Customer code and order number are enough…leave the rest to them.
The product should arrive the next day.
Deliveries arrive from Switzerland on Monday and Friday each week so any materials that may be required in bulk or larger than normal stock quantities will be delivered within 7–10 days.
Fluka Glossop is in continual contact with Fluka Buchs by computer, phone and fax so that immediate information is available on stock levels, plus a rapid-access service to the full technical expertise of one of Europe's major chemical manufacturing organisation.
Keeping customers happy is Fluka's prime objective and their personnel are determined to provide the best possible service.
They are always available to discuss any product or service, so please do not hesitate to contact them.
HICKSON
Fine chemicals division
On 1 August 1991, Hickson & Welch Limited and Hickson Danchem, Hickson International's US-based organic chemical operation, combined to form the Hickson Fine Chemicals Division.
Hickson & Welch Ltd is a world leader in nitration technology, with expertise in sulphonation, chlorination, phosgenation, catalytic hydrogenation, heterocyclic chemistry plus other techniques.
Their new phosgenation unit and phosgene generator is now on-stream, capable of high temperature reactions to 200°C.
Both this plant and their 2nd Buss catalytic hydrogenation loop are accredited with BS 5750/ISO 9002.
This standard is to be extended site-wide.
Some contract manufacturing areas are already covered.
With a business base complementary to Hickson & Welch, manufacturing a wide range of polymerisation products and high value compounds, Hickson Danchem also places particular emphasis on custom/toll manufacturing and production flexibility.
Contract manufacturing
Hickson Fine Chemicals offer their client two types of service:
Toll manufacturing, where developed products are produced under a secrecy agreement.
Custom manufacturing, where the product is at an earlier stage of development and they work with the client in scale-up and production.
Hickson's background in contract manufacturing
A long term relationship with major US multinational companies , involving tens of products over more than 30 years.
Relationships with many other multinational companies in recent years.
This has been mostly in agricultural chemicals where tonnages have proved a good fit with Hickson's type of batch equipment.
Some pharmaceutical work has also been carried out.
Confidentiality is maintained throughout.
Involvement in a very wide range of chemistry, extending well outside the company's standard commercial product range .
They have manufactured many heterocyclics (currently synthesising pyridines, pyrimidines and triazines) and some aliphatics.
Work to the highest safety standards in a range of difficult and toxic chemistry .
Hickson can handle phosgene, thionyl chloride, chloroformates, ethane thiol, dimethyl sulphate, bromine, chlorine, hydrogen cyanide, anhydrous HCI, sodium metal, nitric acid and oleum.
They also have experience using a wide range of solvents: methylene chloride, dimethyl formamide, dimethyl sulphoxide and dimethyl acetamide as well as the common alcohols and aromatics.
What do Hickson offer to customers?
Confidentially plus a relationship with a well equipped company within an independent international group which is unlikely to have interests or conflicts in the end product markets.
Early new product supplies with a minimum capital outlay .
At any time Hickson will probably have around 20 reactors available, ranging in size from 500 to 1500 gallons, supported by a range of filtration, scrubbing and ancillary equipment.
Modifying current equipment enables them to minimise new capital outlay while the product is being launched and its success evaluated.
A high level of skilled technical input from the 60-strong R & D Department and experienced production units.
Hickson take pride in their ability to solve technical problems quickly while maintaining the highest safety standards.
The company's pilot plant has 15 stainless steel and glass lined reactors ranging from 10 to 200 gallons with a range of filters, scrubbers and condenser systems.
There is also a semi-commercial production unit with five 500 gallon reactors.
This operates 7 days a week with graduate chemist cover.
Early tonnages of product are made under very tight supervision for data-gathering so that optimal requirements are quickly developed.
Close technical and commercial contacts are encouraged with customers.
Good communication means that the customer fully understands Hickson's plan, how it is progressing and how any new information learned will affect short and long term outlooks.
Hickson take pride in meeting commitments on delivery, and costs, and keeping customers fully in the picture.
The support and resources of a modern well-equipped site.
Hickson is large enough to provide excellent support in terms of safety systems, effluent treatment, safety testing (all aspects), corrosion testing, engineering expertise and in depth experience over a wide range of equipment and chemistry.
A partnership attitude.
Hickson believe in an on-going technical commitment in all their contract manufacturing.
By sharing the benefits and improvements openly with customers they hope to build the mutually beneficial long-term relationship which is their objective.
BOOKS
Protein purification applications: a practical approach
E.L.V. Harris and S. Angal (eds)
Protein purification applications is the companion volume to Protein purification methods , in the Practical approach series.
The book contains seven chapters written by a collection of authors who are obviously highly experienced.
Each author attempts to relate the ‘tricks of the trade’ in a highly readable, often anecdotal fashion; most notable is Wood's mention of growing protein crystals in a sandwich box.
It is an interesting thought that Aldrich's sales of laboratory equipment could grind to a halt as the UK's cash-starved scientists descend on their nearest Woolworth's looking for their highly desirable Tupperware apparatus!
Most chapters contain one or more ‘general methods’, a step-by-step procedure for performing a particular purification —eg of membrane proteins — or for separation of proteins to a grade necessary for sequencing, or therapeutic use.
While these methods are not guaranteed to work, they should provide suitable guidelines for other workers.
The final chapter —Example purifications — illustrates aspects of the purification of various classes of protein — cytochromes, growth factors etc .
Again, although not guaranteed to be foolproof, the basic philosophy of the techniques described should provide a good starting point for the work of others.
The book is reasonably priced and generally well written, with few errors.
A comprehensive index is preceded by a useful list of equipment/chemical outlets (Tupperware suppliers are surprisingly absent from the list).
Along with its companion volume this book can be recommended to newcomers, and to more experienced workers.
A. SHEPPARD
Additives for water-based coatings
D.R. Karsa (ed)
Water-based coatings are most important in the context of environmentally desirable efforts to reduce solvent emissions and from the standpoint of operational health and safety.
Thus, a book explaining what goes into water-based coatings, and why, ought to be of interest both to the specialist coating technologist and to the industrial chemist.
Unfortunately, this book, assembling 16 papers as the proceedings of an RSC symposium held at the University of Liverpool, in September 1988, largely fails in meeting such needs.
Most of the papers unashamedly promote commercial products and intermediates to the market and while that, in itself, is not without interest, there is an over-abundance of claims of performance advantages which the reader will judge against weakness in supportive fact or convincing argument.
In the latter connection, the level of the underlying science base comes over as generally low, and if the book fairly reflects the current understanding of those employed in contemporary development there is an clear need for the involvement of better research scientists.
Only the papers by R. Derby and H.J. Kleintjes on acetylenic glycols serving as surfactants in emulsion and dispersion paints which minimise the water-sensitivity of the final coatings; the paper by P.J. Moles on zirconium derivatives as cross-linking agents; and the papers on urethane-polymeric thickeners and ionomer dispersions by J.H. Bieleman and by W.D.
Davies respectively, clearly convey technical advances in any memorable sense.
Indifferent editing has allowed numerous errors including structural formulae inconsistent with rather informal polymer nomenclature, paragraphs being repeated and a statement advising the reader that ‘recently, ammonium zirconium carbonate was granted FDA approval for use as a component of paper and paperboard in contact in good’— whatever that is supposed to mean.
This is not really good enough for a supposedly authoritative special publication under the RSC's banner and I feel that, overall, a more convincing book might have emerged had all the papers been independently refereed.
B. SAVILLE
Studies in polymer science no 9: Polymer solutions
H. Fujita
The study of polymer solutions is where physics and chemistry merge.
True, in real systems, there are interactions between polymer and solvent at the molecular level that are really ‘chemistry’.
However, to understand these interactions, a considerable general understanding of the properties of molecular chains in the solution state is necessary.
The aim of this book is to describe the physical laws governing the behaviour of molecular chains in solution which may be obeyed in common by actual polymer solutions.
It is therefore essentially a book about the physics of these systems.
The book is divided into 10 chapters in two parts.
Part 1 deals with the fundamentals, and begins by explaining how polymer molecules may be treated as spring-bead chains in which the molecules are treated as a sequence of spring-like beads.
The subsequent chapters, which are all highly mathematical, cover topics such as two-parameter theory, renormalisation group theory and stiff chains.
part 2 deals with concentrated solutions, covering topics such as polymer self-diffusion and phase equilibria.
All chapters include numerous references to the recent literature, but this is not merely a compilation of the work of others.
The author gives useful critical comment on many of the ideas discussed.
Overall this book is a well produced scholarly account of the physics of polymer solutions.
Its usefulness will depend on the extent to which your research focuses on general properties rather than on specific properties of the chemicals that make up real polymer solutions.
J.W. NICHOLSON
Environmental Management in the USSR , issue 8.
All-union Institute of Scientific and Technical Information Center, Geneva
This informative book is presented in five chapters each discussing an important environmental, or ecological issue in the former USSR as a whole and in the Union Republics and selected regions in the country.
Chapter 1:An abridged report on the state of the environment in the USSR, 1988 stresses that industrial nations face an increasingly deteriorating environment and the depletion of natural resources.
In 1986–88 steps were taken to rationalise the use of water resources.
There were also reductions in the atmospheric discharge — six million tonnes in 1986–88.
Much greater attention is now being paid to the protection and management of wildlife —eg the seal population at Lake Baikal is increasing and beavers and musk oxen are re-producing normally.
The USSR is now receiving international cooperation, especially in environmental protection, largely via the United Nations and the UK, the US, the EC, Sweden, Finland, Norway, and other countries.
Chapter 2:The state of the natural environment in the Union Republics and selected regions of the country covers the scientific principles of new techniques and technologies to ensure the ecological safety of national economic complexes and includes the concept of a regional system of ecological safety as applied in the Urals; trends of change in the natural environment of Siberia and associated ecological studies; ecological challenges in Byelorussia and scientific solutions, and some pressing ecological problems in the Ukraine.
Ecological safety and strategies of environmental protection are also discussed in relation to Latvia and Lithuania.
A section on north east Estonia —The environment i pain — highlights cases where the concentration of some harmful substances in the air exceeds permissible levels by up to 1000-fold.
Ecological and social problems are also outlined in Moldavia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, the Uzbeck republic, Turkmenia and Tujikistan.
Chapter 3:Nature conservation: economic aspects considers the economic aspects of nature protection, and stresses that scientific and technological progress can be achieved and can and must reduce the cost of the recovery and that  these costs are borne in mind at the planning stage.
Chapter 4:The seismic catastrophe in Armenia: natural disaster and us is an incredible account covering forecasting, prevention and protection of the realities at Spitak and Leninakan.
The final chapter:Ecological information: information support of environmental research and practice notes that with perestroika and the acceleration of scientific and technological progress, there is great importance in the timely use of advanced national and international experiences in research and practical work.
There is an increased use of Infoterra and Informoos, in collaboration with the Program Activity Centre in Nairobi, and the publications of Viniti , and the English abstract journal Environmental Management Abstracts .
This interesting review contains information vital to chemical and environmental information specialists, toxicologists, ecotoxicologists, ecologists, professional water chemists, and many others.
This book is now in the RSC library at Burlington House and should be read by everyone interested in environmental matters in the USSR and Eastern Europe.
M.L. RICHARDSON
Safety and loss prevention in the chemical and oil processing industries
This book consists of 54 papers presented at a conference in Singapore in October 1989 and is a timely, authoritative, unusually useful and wide ranging work.
The title may give the totally misleading impression that only chemical engineers will find it interesting and that it is simply concerned with refineries and chemical plants.
The contents in fact range from burning tests and estimation of flashpoints to occupational health aspects of hazardous waste landfills and Thai Open University occupational health and safety distance learning curricula.
The contributors, from some 16 countries, represent academic, industrial, governmental and international organisations.
The overall standard of authors and papers is high and contributors such as L. Bretherick V.C. Marshall and T. Kletz will be well known to readers.
To achieve commendably rapid publication the author's original typescripts appear to have been reproduced with a mix of typography and some English which would have benefited from editorial attention.
The text and diagrams are clear and readable and the value of the text is greatly enhanced by about 80 per cent of the papers having an average of over eight references.
The book contains a number of excellent reviews on a wide range of important topics.
This book is well worth consulting by all involved in laboratory safety, health and safety education and training, plant design and management, the transport, handling, storage and disposal of hazardous chemicals, emergency planning, insurance and loss prevention, hazard identification and assessment and with toxicology and industrial hygiene.
Undergraduate and postgraduate students will also find papers worth reading.
F. DEWHURST
ACS monographs no 186: Oxidations in organic chemistry
M. Hudlický
This book has been written as an aid to the bench chemist and its scope is experimental rather than theoretical.
Following general introductory chapters on oxidation reagents and dehydrogenations, a very long chapter then describes the oxidation of the various functional groups.
The final chapter describes 57 actual procedures for preparing and using various oxidation reagents, and the emphasis is very much on the synthetic usefulness of the reactions rather than on their mechanisms.
To cover such a broad topic in a single monograph, examples have been restricted to fairly simple compounds.
The author has condensed a great deal of material into just over 400 pages and presents it in a reasonably readable style.
Perhaps inevitably, the text is rather bitty, and it is therefore a book to be dipped into rather than read from cover to cover.
I found the correlation tables, which list (and cross-reference) suitable oxidants for various functional group interconversions, very helpful.
A useful bibliography of review articles and other monographs, plus over 1200 references to the primary literature are also included — although most of the latter are pre-1980.
This is a broad but concise one-volume review of the subject and is therefore a useful addition to the literature.
It is a book that should be available in all synthetic organic chemistry laboratories.
A. HEATON
An introduction to peptide chemistry
P.D.
Bailey
This book is intended as a concise account of the principles of peptide chemistry for upper-level undergraduates studying chemistry and biochemistry and the author has obviously given a great deal of thought to the needs of his readers.
To aid the student, particularly important concepts or definitions are enclosed in boxes, questions (without answers) are given at the end of each chapter, and there are lists of sources of further reading.
After an introductory chapter the properties of amino acids are described.
Next the isolation and purification of peptides are dealt with, followed by the elucidation of the structure of peptides by using amino acid analysis and sequencing.
The next chapter covers the synthesis of peptides, with roughly equal weight being given to the subjects of protecting groups and coupling procedures.
To illustrate the principles of peptide chemistry described in these chapters the determination of the structure and synthesis of an imaginary peptide is described.
The final chapter is a real case study considering luteinising hormone releasing hormone.
I found the book to be very readable, with each subject being given just the right amount of coverage, considering the intended readership.
I could find only one minor error, which reflects the quality of this book.
I would recommend it to students who want to know more about peptide chemistry.
G.P. RANDALL
Enzyme technology
M.F. Chaplin and C. Bucke
This is a book by biotechnologists and written mainly for students of the subject and those in related areas.
Within a single volume a range of topics is covered that will also be of interest to a wider readership.
It gives a useful introduction to the subject and via the bibliography the reader will be able to gain entry into the specialist literature.
I found that it was easy to read and well organised in eight chapters.
The topics covered are fundamental enzyme kinetics, enzymes in solution and immobilised enzymes (preparation and use), industrial usage, biosensors, and recent advances in the technology, leaving a forward look for the final chapter.
In each section the text is well arranged, treatment is lucid and diagrams are plentiful and clear.
The book was remarkably free of minor errors.
It is possible to argue that certain sections could, with advantage, have been expanded to stress the more chemical aspects of topics —eg the section of enzymes ‘in reverse’(why not refer to this as synthesis?) touches on an area of great value and which is increasingly used industrially.
Similarly, the reference to reactions in organic solvents merited further discussion.
Such treatment may reflect the readership the authors had in mind.
At £12.50 the book is good value, and I hope that chemists will find it useful as an introduction to an area of growing interest and application.
B.V. SMITH
Watt Committee report no 22: Renewable energy sources
M.A. Laughton (ed)
The oil price and supply uncertainties of the 1970s and more recently in 1991 triggered awareness of the problems of depending on imported energy supplies.
These concerns have been further stimulated by the change in public attitudes to safety and environmental issues, many of which are closely linked to energy.
These problems and concerns are addressed in this report which summarises the results of the deliberation of the working group on renewable energy sources.
The working group was formed in 1986 and during its working period several reports appeared on the same topic.
Nevertheless an independent review emerged with a comparative analysis of a complex field.
The report begins with a background review of the status of renewable energy technologies in the late 1980s.
This section is written by Schneider of the International Energy Agency, who concludes that renewables have many chances to contribute to energy futures, and should be advanced by government action.
Subsequently the report devotes between six and 16 pages to each of tidal, wave, wind, small scale hydro, geothermal, ocean thermal, solar and biofuel energy sources.
Only one reference cited in the report is dated after 1988, and so some recent developments and arguments are absent.
For example, the impact of electricity privatisation is speculative.
Likewise the debate over the relative merits of landfill gas and incineration as options for recovering the energy in waste is brief.
Nevertheless, the report acknowledges some uncertainties and continues the tradition of the series in presenting a reasonably comprehensive and balanced overview.
As such it will be useful to those seeking a broad review of renewable energy sources from the viewpoints of technology, economics and system integration, especially with an environmental impact prospective.
R.S. BARRATT
NMR, NQR, EPR, and Mossbauer spectroscopy in inorganic chemistry
R.V. Parish
Not too many recent books have specifically attempted to provide an introduction to the interpretation of the spectra produced by the title techniques when applied to inorganic compounds.
Thus the present volume has a well defined, and relatively vacant, niche at which to aim.
The material is presented at the undergraduate level thus the simplified approach adopted is commendable.
Regrettably this leads to over-simplification resulting in a lack of clarity and thus to the possibility of misunderstanding by the reader.
In addition there is an unfortunate number of errors and inconsistencies, many of them trivial, some less so.
For example, it appears that frequencies of 9–36 GHz belong to the radio-frequency region of the spectrum whereas radar is invoked but microwaves are not mentioned in this context.
It should be stated that it is an electric, rather then magnetic, dipole that is depicted and that the quadrupole belongs to a nucleus rather than a molecule.
Perhaps one is being a little punctilious, but some clarification of these, and other, matters would have been helpful to the novice.
The reader is also informed that it is not normally possible to obtain high resolution on NMR spectra from solid samples.
This and comparable statements do not belong in a modern student textbook, even when modulated by the appearance of a cross-polarisation/magic angle spinning (CP/MAS) spectrum and a mention of the procedure involved in producing the spectrum.
From the learner's point of view the most valuable part of this book consists of the 49 problems and answers.
Fluorine in bioorganic chemistry
J.T. Welch and S. Eswarakrishnan
In recent years there has been a great increase in the use of active compounds.
This timely book will be particularly help to those researchers who, while lacking detailed knowledge of organofluorine chemistry, may be contemplating preparing fluoro analogues of some of their compounds.
They will be assisted by the book's division into chapters each dealing with a particular class of compound —eg amino acids, sugars, steroids etc .
Typically, each chapter gives a brief introduction followed by preparative methods, arranged according to reagent used or building block employed, and concludes with a short section on biological activity.
The text rests mainly on specific cited examples, drawn from the literature up to 1987, but the authors comment on both the scope and the likely mechanism of the various transformations.
Where there is a choice of reagents, the merits of each, including ease of handling, are explained.
The book would be a useful addition to the organofluorine section of any library serving synthetic chemists.
D.J.
MILLER
Cage hydrocarbons
G.A.
Olah (ed)
In 1957 a very short paper appeared in J. Am.
Chem.
Soc. outlining a one step  medicated conversion of tetrahydrodicyclopentadiene into adamantane.
The author was Paul V. Schleyer, and his paper was to exert an astonishing influence on the pattern of subsequent work on the chemistry of cage hydrocarbons.
This book is dedicated to his 30 years' research in the area, and he has contributed an interesting first chapter on his reminiscences.
The remaining nine chapters cover a variety of topics.
Adamantane chemistry features largely in five of these chapters, and coverage includes catalytic synthetic methods, the superacid route to the 1-adamantyl cation, electrophilic reactions of cage hydrocarbons, fragmentation and cyclisation routes, and bridgehead reactivity.
The remaining chapters are concerned with the use of tert -butyl groups as a means for minimising kinetic reactivity of systems such as tetrahedrane, developments with homologues of barrelene and bullvalene, and two on the current status of polyhedrane chemistry, especially the ‘Mount Everest of alicyclic chemistry’, dodecahedrane.
References — mainly to the end of 1988 — author and subject indexes are also provided.
The various chapters are authoritatively written with clarity and directness by the leaders in the field.
Although the coverage is not comprehensive, and many reviews on various aspects of cage hydrocarbon chemistry are available, to my mind the real value of this book lies in the ideas that it generates, the insights into the chemical developments it provides, and the historical connections that it reveals.
It is certainly worth a good read, and I can recommend it to anyone interested in this subject.
G.B. GILL
Energy and the environment
J. Dunderdale (ed)
This book contains the proceedings of a RSC symposium which took place in April 1990.
The major theme is a consideration of the interrelationships between various patterns of energy use and possible global warming.
The main advantage of Energy and the environment is that its rapid publication means that the information presented is as up to date as is possible in a book.
The disadvantages are that the chapters are of varying quality and with a degree of repetition that more editing time could have removed.
Fossil fuel, used for stationary and mobile energy sources, and nuclear energy are discussed in some detail, making up the bulk of the book.
Extraction, energy generation and waste management processes are all considered in a reasonably comprehensive manner.
However, I found the short section on conservation and alternative energy sources disappointing.
This may have been because my hopes were raised when mention was made of the need to consider ‘the environmental effect of each stage leading to an alternative energy system’.
Unfortunately, the methodology was said to be in an early state of development and no references to this approach are given.
Surely complete environmental audits from ‘cradle to grave’ are essential if we are to make rational choices of energy systems.
I was also surprised to find geothermal energy described as creating no direct chemical emissions — even the ‘hot dry rock’ schemes have water pollution problems.
Despite its drawbacks the book is worth reading as a useful guide to recent developments.
It can also be recommended as a good source of material for student seminars and tutorials at both sixth form and undergraduate level.
P. O'NEILL
SOFTWARE
Ball & Stick 3.0: software for presenting 3D molecular models on Apple Macintosh
Ball & Stick is a three dimensional molecular graphics program for Macintosh computers (Mac Plus or later) aiming to provide publication-quality images of models constructed from library fragments or using coordinates from databases, calculations or experiment.
The operator has wide control over model-type — wireframe, ball and stick or space-filling — addition or deletion of atoms, atomic radii, bond lengths and angles, the portion of the structure viewed, viewing angle etc .
It is also possible to generate animated rotation sequences and, using the mouse, to translate and rotate wireframe models interactively and modify their bond parameters.
This program performs to the high standards expected of Macintosh software but of course the final reward depends on investment in time, patience and hardware.
Anyone with experience of computers may wonder if it really is possible to ‘…produce a stunning presentation product within minutes…’— just a little optimistic, perhaps?
Also, the most impressive output will require colour, 32-bit QuickDraw and a laser printer, while memory and processing speed may place some restrictions on molecular size.
On an SE/30 — a 68030 machine with a maths coprocessor — myoglobin (2658 atoms) approached the upper limit for interactive manipulation and a monochrome drawing on the screen required about 20 sec (wireframe), 1–3/4 min (ball and stick) and three min (shaded space-filling); the times tripled on a smaller SE system.
Such limitations, however, lie in the realities of personal computers and not in any shortcomings of the program.
Ball & Stick is am impressive program and can be recommended to all interested in chemical structures.
C.S. McKEE 
Recent IUPAC recommendations
Nomenclature for chromatography
The Commission on Analytical Nomenclature of IUPAC has been active for a long time in establishing nomenclature for chromatography.
Having proposed suitable nomenclature for gas chromatography and ion exchange, the commission then developed a unified nomenclature for chromatography.
Parallel to these activities, other standardisation bodies (eg ASTM and BSI) and scientists have also dealt with nomenclature for gas chromatography, liquid chromatography, exclusion chromatography, and planar chromatography.
The original activity of the commission, aimed at creating a unified nomenclature applicable to all forms of chromatography, took place over 10 years ago.
Since that time, chromatographic techniques have advanced significantly.
On the basis of these developments it was decided to prepare a new, up-to-date universal chromatography nomenclature, which also takes into account the recommendations incorporated in the various other nomenclature systems developed since the original work of IUPAC.
This document, prepared for the commission by Dr L.S. Ettre, considers all the previous nomenclature systems mentioned above as well as three publications by Ettre dealing with chromatography nomenclature.
It deals with all chromatographic terms and definitions used in the major chromatographic techniques such as gas, liquid and supercritical fluid chromatography, column and planar chromatography, partition, adsorption, ion exchange and exclusion chromatography.
However, it does not include terms related to the results calculated from chromatographic date, such as the various molecular weight terms computed from the primary data obtained by exclusion chromatography.
IUPAC welcomes comments on these recommendation, prior to the production of a definitive version for publication in Pure Appl.
Chem .
Copies of the text may be obtained on request from Dr A.D. McNaught, the Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, Science Park, Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 4WF.
Comments should be received by 30 June 1992 .
Julius Grant 1901–1991
The death of Dr Julius Grant brings to an end a life of determination and distinction, which progressed from a deserved reputation in paper chemistry to an international career in forensic science.
Grant obtained his first degree by attending evening classes at Queen Mary College, London, and he subsequently took a doctorate at King's College.
In joining John Dickinson at Croxley Mills in 1931, Grant became one of the first qualified scientists to be employed by the paper industry and his contributions and experience proved invaluable to him throughout his subsequent career.
Grant's responsibilities at John Dickinson provided him with a wide knowledge of the paper manufacturing processes used throughout the world and the way in which they were being improved.
During World War II his expertise was used in developing edible papers for secret agents, secret inks and forgery-proof paper for ration books.
During his period in the industry Grant's expertise was used in forensic cases and he progressed from document examination to handwriting comparison and ultimately to wider aspects of forensic science.
Grant was very much a ‘practising chemist’ and moved to the analytical practice of Hehner and Cox in 1948.
Thereafter he became better known as a forensic scientist achieving such professional distinctions as presidency of the Medico-Legal Society and of the Forensic Science Society (of which Grant was a founder member and secretary).
Although Grant gave evidence in thousands of cases in which his wide experience was invaluable, he will be particularly remembered for the prominent part he played in the exposure of the forged Mussolini and Hitler diaries.
When Grant was asked in 1967 to date the former, he was able to prove conclusively that the paper used for the purported 1925 diary was not yet being made in Italy in 1937, because he had spent part of that year studying the Italian paper industry in detail for his employers.
When asked in 1983 to conduct a similar investigation of the purported Hitler diaries of 1932 and 1935, Grant found that high grade waste paper containing an optical brightening agent had been used in the pulp and these were not in use at the alleged time.
However, Grant will be remembered by many members of the legal profession for his availability as an expert for the defence, particularly when the consultancy profession in that field was less developed.
Before me is a reprint from the Analyst of 1941 in which Grant discussed recent work and a new method for deciphering charred documents.
In introducing the subject Grant commented that while it was important in crime investigation, it has taken on a new significance in the past year because of the large number of valuable documents that had been damaged as a result of fires caused by enemy action.
Fifty years later, all chemists are taking pleasure in the recent restoration of John Dalton's papers, which had been badly charred when the premises of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society were destroyed during the Blitz.
My last memory of Grant is of a frail but determined figure walking the broad streets of Adelaide last October.
We were both attending the triennial meeting of the International Association of Forensic Sciences, which provides an opportunity for the international community to exchange ideas in this dynamic area of science.
Grant clearly believed that education was a lifelong process and his commitment to maintaining his awareness, even during his advancing years, is a example to all professionals.
Peter G.W. Cobb 
radicals
THE AMMONIUM NITRATE STORY
David Jones
Ammonium nitrate has three memorable properties.
It is an explosive; it is fertiliser; and it is hygroscopic.
These properties come together in a memorable story, with a powerful moral for chemists.
To the compounders of explosives, ammonium nitrate has always been a useful cheap ‘extender’ for expensive nitro-organic explosives.
Amatol, a TNT-ammonium nitrate mixture, was widely used in bombs and shells in both World Wars.
By contrast, the manufacturers of ammonium nitrate fertiliser have always manfully ignored its explosive properties, despite frequent forceful reminders.
Perhaps the most dramatic of these was delivered to the BASF fertiliser works at Oppau in 1921.
The company had 4500 tons of ammonium nitrate-ammonium sulphate fertiliser stored in an open warehouse.
The hygroscopic mixture got damp; when the humidity went down again it caked into an intractable solid mass.
It seems that the warehouse workers decided to blast it loose with dynamite.
The operation was completely successful.
It blew a crater 80m across, wrecked the Oppau works and killed 561 people.
No lesson seems to have been learnt from the tragedy.
Expensive commercial explosives continued to sell; consignments of cheap ammonium nitrate fertiliser continued to explode.
In 1947, three particularly spectacular shipboard explosions occurred, two in Texas City and one in Brest, with massive damage and loss of life.
This fertiliser was an improved formulation devised by the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA).
Each pellet of ammonium nitrate was coated with a hydrocarbon wax to reduce the effects of hygroscopicity.
The result was a classic fuel-oxidant explosive.
Subsequent studies showed that the TVA chemists had hit upon just about the most sensitive explosive you can make from ammonium nitrate and wax.
Still nobody in the chemical industry put two and two together.
Manufacturers of dynamite and the other nitro-organics plied their trade as placidly as ever; manufacturers of ammonium nitrate fertiliser merely desensitised it and countered its hygroscopicity with kaolin or kieselguhr instead of wax.
But around 1955 various smart operators in the American and Canadian blasting industry began to see the light.
They weren't chemists; but they started mixing ammonium nitrate fertiliser with diesel fuel, and detonating the mixture with dynamite.
Despite the desensitising effects of the kaolin, it worked wonderfully.
It was extremely cheap, saving an awful lot of dynamite; and extremely safe, both inherently and because the fuel and oxidant were only mixed on site just before use.
All of a sudden the dynamite business was in terrible trouble.
I won't go into the commercial bloodletting that followed.
Suffice it to say that ammonium nitrate-fuel oil is now the standard explosive for blasting and quarrying; the nitro-organics industry has shrunk and readjusted to a restricted role as a supplier of initiators and specialist explosives; and ammonium nitrate is now available in a kaolin-free ‘explosives grade’.
An invention that might have been made by the chemical industry 50 years previously, was ultimately forced on it from outside.
RSC news
Irvine review lectures
Around 250–300 honours and research students from all over Scotland attended the 14th annual Irvine review lectures held in the Chemistry Department at St Andrews University in November.
This year's topic was Modern aspects of transition metal chemistry and Professor Peter Sadler (Birkbeck College, London) opened the symposium by talking of exciting developments in the use of inorganic compounds in drug therapy.
This was followed by a lecture from Professor David Fenton (Sheffield) on the progress inorganic chemists have made in modelling biological transition metal sites with diverse roles, from the transport of oxygen in the blood (iron in haemoglobin) to the removal of blood alcohol in the liver (zinc enzyme).
The afternoon session began with a lecture by Professor Brian Heaton (Liverpool), on how the mechanisms of certain important metal-catalysed industrial processes are now being understood using modern spectroscopic techniques.
The meeting was brought to a fitting climax by Professor Brian Johnson (Edinburgh), who gave a highly entertaining lecture on how studies of metal clusters are providing an intriguing insight into the interfacial region between solution and solid state reactivity.
The lectures were organised jointly by the Tayside Section of the RSC and the St Andrews chemistry department, with financial support from BP Research International and the RSC.
The annual series of lectures was instituted in 1977 to mark the centenary of the birth of Sir James Irvine, professor of chemistry and later principal of St Andrews University.
Pictured above with some of the students are (left to right): Prof David J. Cole-Hamilton (Irvine professor of chemistry, University of St Andrews); Prof David E. Fenton (Sheffield); Prof Brian T. Heaton (Liverpool); Prof Brian F.G.
John son (Edinburgh); Prof Peter J. Sadler (Birkbeck, London); Dr David T. Richens (St Andrews and Tayside RSC) and Dr R. Alan Aitken (St Andrews, chairman, Tayside RSC).
Women chemists
A vacancy has arisen on the Women Chemists Committee, the role of which is to raise the profile of women in chemistry by:
developing and implementing services, facilities and programmes, particularly relevant to the professional needs of women engaged in or qualified in chemistry, and women chemistry students;
promoting entry and re-entry of women to the profession of chemistry; and
collecting and disseminating information about women in chemistry.
An election, for which all Professional Members of the Society will be eligible, will be conducted through issue no 5 of Women Chemists Newsletter in April 1992.
Nominations must be submitted on an official nomination form, available from Mandy Mackenzie, secretary to the Women Chemists Committee, RSC, Thomas Graham House, Science Park, Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 4WF; tel: 0223-420066.
The closing date for receipt of nominations is Friday 28 February 1992 .
Chirality
A Faraday Division symposium on Chirality and the origin of life will be held at the Royal Institution, London, at 2.00 pm on Thursday 26 March 1992.
Prof V. I. Goldanskii (Institute of Chemical Physics of the Academy of Sciences, Russia) will give a centenary lecture entitled Chirality, the origin of life and evolution .
Supporting lecturers will be Prof L.D. Barron (Glasgow), Dr A.G. Cairns Smith (Glasgow) and Prof S.F. Mason (King's College, London).
For details contact S.S. Langer, RSC, Burlington House, Piccadilly, London W1V 0BN.
Main Group
A one-day Dalton Division symposium on Recent developments in Main Group chemistry will be held at the Scientific Societies' Lecture Theatre, London, at 10.30 am on Thursday 2 April 1992.
The meeting will include a Tilden lecture by Professor J.F. Nixon (Sussex) entitled Phospha-alkynes, New building blocks in inorganic and organometallic chemistry and the 1990 Meldola lecture by Professor A.R. Barron (Harvard University, US) entitled The reaction of group 13 alkyls with dioxygen: From carelessness to chemistry.
For details contact S.S. Langer, RSC, Burlington House, Piccadilly, London W1V 0BN.
Library mailbox
The RSC library now has its own Janet mailbox.
The number, to be entered in one string, is:
Biotech seminar
Patenting life,a one-day industrial seminar for the biotechnology industry sponsored by the RSC, will take place at the Scientific Societies' Lecture Theatre, New Burlington Place, Savile Row, London, on 20 March 1992.
It will be of interest to all those who need to protect their products and processes.
For details contact C.E. Roberts, administrative director, GB Biotechnology, 4 Beaconsfield Court, Sketty, Swansea SA2 9JU; tel: 0792–2081 90 .
Report on Council, boards and committees
Council expressed its appreciation to all those members who had helped to make the 150th anniversary celebrations a success.
Council also thanked those members of staff who had put considerable effort into running the events.
Council
5 December 1991, the president, Sir Rex Richards, in the chair
Council noted with approval the 1991 year-end membership total of 43 034, the highest ever, and an increase of 882 since December 1990.
The professional membership figure is 33 182. 1626 members were removed for nonpayment of subscriptions.
The secretary general reported satisfactory progress with the construction of the extension to Thomas Graham House and that disruption to staff is minimal.
Approval was given to an amended format for ballot papers, to permit each candidate for elected membership of Council/boards to include a short biographical note, in addition to the usual list of appointments.
Approval was given to the appointment of P.G.W. Cobb as chairman of Professional Affairs Board, from the 1992 AGM.
Miss A.R.
Haygarth Jackson was reappointed for a second term as chairman of Publications and Information Board.
On the recommendation of Finance Committee, approval was given to the 1992 revenue budget for a surplus of £77.2K and to capital budget expenditure of £362.8K.
In order to ensure that the Society is operating as efficiently as possible, Council asked the secretary general to arrange for a management review of the efficient working of all areas of the Society.
In order to investigate the possibility of making savings on committee expenses, SCC was asked to undertake a review of the frequency of Council, board and committee meetings and put forward proposals for the future.
Arising from DAB, Council noted the Society's involvement in the 1992 research assessment exercise of the Universities Funding Council.
Arising from PAB, Council accepted amendments to the disciplinary regulations for a procedure for dealing with certain complaints against members, where a full investigation by a Disciplinary Committee is not published.
Council also approved in principle the text for a booklet Guidance on professional conduct incorporating a code of professional practice .
Arising from QEB, Council agreed that the school teacher fellowship scheme, as provided for under the 1991–93 strategic plan, should be continued.
Arising from the Benevolent Fund Committee, Council agreed that the fund should purchase two sheltered housing nomination rights in Scotland and two in Wales during 1992.
Professional Affairs Board
5 November 1991, S.G. Luxon
A submission to the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice on aspects of forensic evidence, prepared by the Ethical Practices Committee, was approved on behalf of the Society.
Approval was given to further professional publications: a professional brief on Food colours , a new edition of Directory of consulting practices in chemistry and related subjects , and a report on the 1990 Pension survey.
Reports and recommendations were received and considered from the Chemical Consultancy Forum, the Pharmaceutical Forum, the Water Chemistry Forum, RSC/APA Joint Standing Committee, Ethical Practices Committee, Law and Parliamentary Committee, Registration Development Committee, Employment Committee and the Working Party for Professional Symposia.
Divisional Affairs Board
23 October 1991, Prof E.W. Abel DAB received a presentation from the chairman of the Membership Development Committee and considered ways in which divisions could help with promoting recruitment.
The interim report of the Degree Courses Review Group was discussed and DAB's concerns were passed back to the group.
After discussing the findings of the working party on the future of autumn meetings, DAB concluded that the meetings, had a role in providing a focus on younger people, and should be continued.
A decision was taken, therefore, to hold an autumn meeting in 1993 at Warwick University.
DAB had been concerned that insufficient time was available at its meetings to give detailed consideration to the many conferences for which it was responsible.
A sub-committee for conferences is, therefore, to be set up with responsibility for all the conferences organised under DAB's auspices; this subcommittee will subsume the Annual Congress Committee.
Reports were received from the Awards Committee and from Division Councils and the future conference programme was reviewed.
DAB was pleased to record that five successful, well attended DAB conferences had been held during the summer and autumn: international symposium on Supporting reagent chemistry (York), 10th international meeting on NMR spectroscopy (St Andrews), 11th international conference on Chemical education (York), 16th international symposium on Macrocyclic chemistry (Sheffield) and the 1991 Autumn meeting (York).
Local Affairs Board
11 October 1991, Prof J.M. Holloway
An analysis of the half-year accounts and projections for the end of 1991 indicated that LAB's expenditure for the year would be somewhat over budget, due entirely to costs hitherto outside it control.
LAB noted the revised arrangements concerning the Top of the Bench competition and was especially pleased to note that each local section would be entitled to send a team to the finals in London.
Oral reports were received from LAB's representatives on other committees and, in particular, LAB noted continuing discussion concerning how best to assist those members in developing countries.
There was considerable debate on communication between sections and their members, and LAB was very pleased to learn that the distribution of notices, programme cards etc could once again be effects through insertion into Chemistry in Britain .
This had been achieved following lengthy negotiations with the Post Office and would cause minimal disruption and considerable savings over the current system.
LAB noted the success of recent social gatherings in Bern and The Hague for members in Switzerland and the Netherlands respectively.
These had followed a similarly successful event held in Brussels a few years ago for members in Belgium.
The Belgian group was now flourishing and it was anticipated that future activity for the Swiss and Dutch members would be coordinated by enthusiastic individuals.
It was agreed that similar events should be planned in France and Italy.
Publications and Information Board
24 October 1991, A.R.
Haygarth Jackson
Much of the meeting was devoted to a discussion of new journals business plan, covering the period 1991–96.
The journals were seen to be in better health, both scientifically and economically, than for many years, and plans to take advantage of this situation, in promoting the journals to both authors and subscribers, were approved.
With this in mind, it was agreed that the staff of Sales and Promotion Department should be increased by one.
PIB also approved plans for further development of the Society's library as a major London-based source of chemical information.
It was hoped to increase awareness of the library and its services and to increase the number of users.
The function of the library as a repository of archival documents had not been clearly recognised hitherto.
A report arising out of a recent short-term library schoolteacher fellowship appointment recommended the enhancement of the value of the library to educationalists and the improvement of its accessibility to chemistry teachers.
Half-year information services accounts were considered.
The resulting end-of-year forecast was close to budget: a favourable variance on primary journals was counterbalanced by the effects of the recession in other areas.
Qualifications and Education Board
22 October 1991, Prof M.I. Page
QEB noted that societies in a number of other EC member states had agreed to the establishment  of the designation ‘European Chemist’.
QEB welcomed and agreed to a suggestion that the RSC should provide the secretariat to the European Chemist Registration Board.
The RSC had been consulted by the National Curriculum Council over proposed revisions to the science component of the national curriculum and QEB was pleased to note that the main thrust of the RSC's response had been accepted by the NCC.
At the time of the meeting publication of draft orders to be laid before parliament were awaited.
QEB considered a report on the school teacher fellowship scheme, noted the successful outcome of the work of the two fellows who have so far held the post and welcomed the external sponsorship that had been attracted.
A report of a working party on chemistry courses for 16–19 year olds was considered and accepted.
Activities to support chemistry at this level will be strengthened and the Society will seek active involvement in the development of general national vocational qualifications at this level.
Membership Development Committee
4 October 1991 Dr J.W. Coomber
MDC noted that the Retirement planning seminar held on 31 May 1991 had proved to be very successful and agreed to hold a similar event in Manchester on 21 February 1992.
The cost of the Manchester seminar will be met by the Manchester Professional Panel and Commercial Union Financial Services.
It was noted that, to date, 120 members had expressed interest in the ‘recruit-a-friend’ scheme.
MDC also noted that the student recruit-a-friend campaign was part of a prize winning competition.
MDC noted that a careers roadshow, which had attracted £1200 of sponsorship, would be held on 26 October 1991 at the Jesse Boot Centre, University of Nottingham.
It was also noted that a series of young analysts' talk shops had been arranged to take place during the ‘Laboratory’ exhibition in November 1991.
MDC noted that a Younger Chemists' reception would be held during the 1992 annual congress and that Ciba-Geigy had agreed to provide sponsorship.
Women Chemists Committee
10 October 1991, Dr M.E. Farago
Members welcomed Dr Maureen Cooper, University of Stirling, who updated the WCC on progress with the recently-launched Women Scientists & Engineers in Scotland network, for which she is coordinator.
The success of the one-day symposium Chemistry: attracting girls; retaining women , which attracted 94 conferees, was noted.
Interest is being shown in the initiation of small local networks for members on career breaks and unemployed or retired members: 19 contacts who would help run such a network have been identified.
Progress reports on plans for two meetings were noted:question of food — an early evening scientific programme and debate, at the annual congress, UMIST, on 13 or 14 April 1992; and Raising profiles — a one-day symposium on professional development organised jointly with Women in Physics with sponsorship from ICI, Millbank, London, on Saturday 16 May 1992.
Arrangements are under way for the hosting of a lunch at the 1992 Autumn meeting in Dublin.
The lunch, at which numbers will be limited, will be open to all members and will feature an after-lunch speaker.
Career break and beyond is now available free to all members, and at a cost of £3.50 to non-members.
It was noted that a resources register questionnaire would be circulated with the Women Chemists Newsletter No 4 in order to update current information and to introduce new women to the register which already contains details of the particular expertise of over 800 women.
Finally, WCC received a list of new publications deposited in the women chemists' reference section in the library at Burlington House.
International Committee
7 October 1991, Prof J.H. Purnell
All contributions towards the proceedings arising from the pre-congress conference on Chemistry and developing countries had been received and it was anticipated that these would be published through the Commonwealth Science Council in the near future.
The various papers had been submitted to ICSU as input to its forthcoming conference on an Agenda of Science for Environment and Development into the 21st Century (Ascend-21 ) and subsequently to the UNCED conference in Brazil in 1992.
IC received a report of its cosponsored conference held in Sri Lanka in May, and noted developments towards other meetings to be held in Egypt, India and Botswana over the next 12 months.
Various matters relating to FECS and ECCC activities were noted, particularly the proposals for the establishment of the concept of ‘European Chemist’.
0 Reports on stop-over visits funded by the RSC were received.
These included visits to Canada, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, the UK and Vietnam.
Batches of journals had been despatched to Nepal, Pakistan and Romania under the IC's scheme for the provision of back issues to needy institutions overseas.
The committee received detailed reports from the Society's sponsored VSO volunteers in Ghana and Zimbabwe.
Dr Christine Henderson, the first such volunteer, had recently returned from Zimbabwe and described her experiences to the IC, providing graphic examples of the sort of problems that could encountered.
There followed a lengthy discussion on how best to assist future volunteers.
External Relations Committee
8 October 1991, Prof J.J. Monaghan
The chairman welcomed two new members to the committee: Dr S.R. Challand, representing Local Affairs Board, and Dr J.M.F. Gagan, representing Qualifications and Education Board.
(Dr Gagan had sent apologies.)
ERC noted that it was on target with its 1991 budget.
ERC discussed the plans for the external relations/Women Chemists joint symposium,A question of food , to be held during the annual congress in Manchester.
ERC endorsed the recommendation of a Working Group on Distinguished Chemists that no video-taped interviews should be produced.
Other matters discussed included: interaction with COPUS; the media fellowship scheme; and the future of the Information Team.
ERC also noted the success of Sir Geoffrey Allen's lecture given during the BA meeting, and plans to present the lecture at the Royal Institution; a new poster; and plans for Chemistry week on 11–18 November 1992.
1992 Autumn meeting
The 1992 Autumn meeting will take place at Trinity College, Dublin, on the occasion of the quatercentenary of its foundation.
The meeting will start at lunchtime on Wednesday 16 September and finish at teatime on Friday 18 September.
It will be preceded by a one-day pre-doctoral symposium on Tuesday 15 September.
Scientific programme
The scientific programme for the Autumn meeting will consist of symposia and group sessions within the framework of the meeting as follows:
Analytical Division:Sensors and signals 
Dalton Division:Compounds and materials with metal-metal interactions .
Education: Two one-day symposia The graduate and industry and Communication of chemistry .
Faraday/Industrial Division:Light on polymers — photochemistry and advanced materials .
Perkin Division:Working molecules — the design and synthesis of molecular machinery 
Toxicology:Toxicology — from molecules to morals .
Plenary lectures
There will be a congress plenary lecture by J.D. Watson (Cold Spring Harbor, US) with the title The finding of the genetic code .
During the pre-doctoral chemistry symposia, H.C.
Brown (Purdue, US) will deliver his quatercentenary lecture entitled Discovery and exploration of a new continent of chemistry .
Papers and posters
The Society is particularly anxious to encourage younger persons to offer contributions for the symposia.
All those whose contributions are accepted for oral or poster presentation will not therefore be asked to pay a registration fee to attend the meeting.
Oral contributions are invited for the Dalton, Faraday/Industrial and Perkin symposia and poster contributions for the Analytical, Dalton, Faraday/Industrial, Perkin and Toxicology symposia.
Anyone wishing to present a paper should submit a title and brief synopsis (100 words) together with an indication of the symposium it should be considered for, to Dr John F. Gibson, secretary (scientific), RSC, not later than Monday 27 April 1992.
Further information
A first circular of the meeting giving further information about speakers, costs and social events, can be obtained from Ms Paula Elliott, RSC, Burlington House, London W1V 0BN.
Enzymes and receptors
A one-day meeting on Modulation of enzyme and receptor function , sponsored by the Bio-organic Group, will be held at Wellcome Research Laboratories, Beckenham, on Monday 30 March 1992 at 10 00 am.
Attendance will be limited to 70 participants.
Plenary lectures will be given by Prof R. Baker (Merck, Sharp and Dohme), Prof G.M. Blackburn (Sheffield), Dr D. Buckle (Smith-Kline Beecham), Prof M Houslay (Glasgow), Dr S. Moncada (Wellcome), Prof R. Ramage,(Edinburgh) and Dr R. Storer (Glaxo Group Research).
For further details contact Dr H.F. Hodson, Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Wellcome Research Laboratories, Langley Court, South Eden Park Road, Beckenham, Kent BR3 3BS; fax: 081-663 3340.
Applications for registration should be received before 14 February 1992 .
Atmospheric chemical change
A well-attended symposium on Global atmospheric chemical change , organised jointly by the Environment Group and the Industrial Division, was held at the Scientific Societies' Lecture Theatre, London, last November.
In the first presentation, R. Wayne (Oxford) outlined the importance of kinetics, spectroscopy and photochemistry in the study of Fundamental chemistry applied to atmospheric problems .
T. Marsh (National Power) followed with a lecture entitled Sulphur and nitrogen chemistry and regional scale air pollution , paying particular attention to how spatial and temporal aspects influence the transformation processes and the ultimate fate of atmospheric pollutants.
The scale of atmospheric pollutant impact was widened by R. Jones (Cambridge) in his talk on the Implications of atmospheric chemical change for the global climate .
He assessed the climatic impacts of changes in stratospheric ozone levels and concluded that the net warming effect due to chlorofluorocarbon release into the atmosphere would be zero.
A. Apling (Department of the Environment) immediately picked up the relevance of this statement to government attitudes in his discussion of Policy implications of atmospheric chemical change .
He outlined the historical development of the response of governments to atmospheric pollution with the message that both very complex and basic science were becoming integral parts of policy making in international politics.
The meeting concluded with Prof P.J. Crutzen (Max-Planck-Institute, Germany) presenting the 1991 John Jeyes lecture on Global atmospheric chemistry and its relationship to biosphere, anthroposphere and climate .
He began by commenting on the dramatic progress that has been made in the understanding of both tropospheric and stratospheric chemical processes during the past 20 years.
Professor Crutzen illustrated these developments by referring to the individual and competing chemical roles of nitrogen oxides and CFCs with regard to stratospheric ozone depletion, particularly over the Antarctic.
In the troposphere he emphasised the important reactions of the hydroxyl radical, which he described as the ‘detergent’ of the atmosphere because of its pollutant removal capacity, particularly in the tropics.
D.M. Revitt 
SAC silver medal
Nominations are invited for the award of the SAC silver medal, which is for the encouragement of young scientists (not over 35 years old) working in any field covering the practice and teaching of analytical chemistry.
The award of the medal is accompanied by a cash prize and is normally made annually to the candidate who, in the opinion of Analytical Division Council, has made the greatest contribution, and whose work has made the most significant impact on any branch of analytical chemistry.
In addition, the future promise of the candidate is taken into consideration.
It is hoped that an opportunity will be provided for the successful candidate to deliver a lecture to the Analytical Division on a suitable occasion subsequent to the presentation of the medal.
The rules are available from the secretary of AD.
Recommendations for the next award should be made to the president of the Analytical Division at the RSC, Burlington House, London W1V 0BN by 13 March 1992 .
Organic synthesis
A one-day Perkin Division symposium on Stereocontrol in organic synthesis will be held at the Scientific Societies' Lecture Theatre, London, at 11.00 am on Thursday 9 April 1992.
The meeting will include the Robert Robinson lecture by Prof G. Stork (Columbia University, US) entitled Problems and progress in stereo-controlled synthesis .
Supporting lectures will be given by Dr V.K. Aggarwal (Sheffield), Dr J. Leonard (Salford), Dr I. Paterson (Cambridge) and Prof E.J. Thomas (Manchester).
For details contact S.S. Langer, RSC, Burlington House, Piccadilly, London W1V 0BN
A-level prize
Keith Brennan of Warwick School was awarded the RSC prize for outstanding performance in chemistry at A-level, in respect of the Oxford and Cambridge Schools Examination Board.
Brennan received £50, a certificate, book and sweatshirt.
Top of the bench
ICI Paints' site in Slough was the venue for a knock-out competition for the school team seeking to represent the Chilterns and Middlesex Section in the 1992 Top of the Bench Competition.
With weather conditions on the appointed day predicted to be very severe — including gales likely to cause structural damage to buildings — only three of the six teams managed to participate.
Even so, the competition proved to be extremely tight.
The questions were asked to the accompanying sound of thunder and lightning, gale force winds and extremely heavy rain outside the building in which the competition was taking place.
The winning team came from Parmiter's School of Garston in Hertfordshire.
Each school team was given a toy Dulux dog as a memento of the occasion.
In addition Parmiter's School received a cheque for winning the Section's competition.
I. Turner 
Belgium Group
The RSC's Belgium Group held its first demonstration lecture at the British School of Brussels, Tervuren, in November.
Under the title Experiments and considerations touching colours , A.J.S. Williams, honorary fellow of the University of Wales, Aberystwyth, and Shaw medallist, demonstrated a wide range of colour experiments, while Dr J.C.
Young from the University of Montpellier, France, presented the lecture.
The event attracted 250 pupils during the afternoon session, and a further 180 people (pupils, parents and RSC members) were entertained in the evening.
Partly sponsored by industry, this was the second activity that focused on the promotion of chemistry to young people to be organised by the recently-formed group.
The first was a chemistry day, entitled Chemistry and the quality of life , involving seven lectures from industry, a careers clinic and an exhibition to coincide with Chemistry week in the UK.
K. Price 
Piper Alpha discussion
The Hazards Forum is to hold a discussion on Piper Alpha: the disaster, the inquiry, and the lessons at the Institution of Civil Engineers, 1–7 Great George Street, Westminster, London SW1P 3AA, on Wednesday 11 March 1992 from 5.30–7.30pm.
The discussion will be led by Professor Frank Lees, of Loughborough University, who was appointed in 1988 as one of the three technical assessors to sit with the judge in the public enquiry into the Piper Alpha disaster.
Instant fire
The annual Christmas lecture for sixth formers, organised by the Chilterns and Middlesex Section, took place at Brunel University on 4 December.
Everybody was assembled in the lecture theatre at the appointed time, but no lecturer had arrived.
Dr John Nicholson, a committee member of the Section, stepped into the gap and started to give an impromptu lecture.
Twenty minutes later the guest speaker, Alex Campbell (Newcastle upon Tyne) arrived (his train had been delayed by over two hours) and the audience was entertained with a lecture/demonstration on Instant fire .
Campbell began with a historical résumé of the various methods of making fire.
He explained some basic principles of physical chemistry using simple illustrations.
In particular, the concepts of free energy and entropy were illustrated with experiments accompanied by coloured lights, flashes and sound effects to the delight of the audience.