

Everything you'd expect from a Summer holiday — yet so much more
Like many people, maybe you're feeling that there should be more to a summer holiday than sun ,sea and of course, crowds.
Well there is — it's called the Enterprise Lakes and Mountains brochure.
We're offering the cream of towns and villages on or near to the picturesque and sunny lakes and mountains of Austria, Italy and Switzerland.
Our resorts have been carefully selected for the range of walking, rambling, swimming and boating they offer.
Should you wish, there are expeditions to wonderful old castles, museums and monuments, as well as shopping centres.
But the main attractions are the sights themselves: here are some of the most impressive mountain ranges in Europe.
There is sightseeing on a spectacular level, whether you use the chairlifts, cable cars, mountain railways or the ever trusty Shank's pony!
Bored you won't be.
The other winning feature of our Lakes and Mountains holidays, are the locals themselves.
Many of the guesthouses and hotels we feature in this brochure, have been in the same family for years.
You'll enjoy standards of service and food which are amongst the best in Europe.
In fact, we have clients who book from our brochure year after year: the result of a promise of a holiday with no nasty surprises — just personal service and high standards.
More holiday for your money!
Our Representatives
Care and service are the bywords of an Enterprise representative.
One will see you off at your departure airport, whilst another will be on hand to meet you on your arrival abroad.
During the transfer to your resort, they will answer your questions and later, at a welcome meeting, will tell you all you need to know about your location; including what there is to see and do.
After that if you want to be organised, you can be — or alternatively you can go your own way.
Remember your representative will always be happy to arrange your excursions, explain currency and local customs and, of course, sort out any problems you may have.
Enterprise representatives are friendly, reliable, and highly skilled, and are in resort to ensure that you have the best possible holiday.
Booking is so easy
We don't just aim to offer you the lowest possible prices; we also take great pride in the high standard of service you are given from when you make your booking right through until you arrive home again.
Your ABTA travel agent is the local expert, and our specialist reservations help line staff are friendly, efficient and very knowledgeable.
Child reductions
Lakes and Mountain holidays are great holidays for families; and with fantastic child reductions, great value too!
We know that families are tied to school holiday dates, and for that reason we offer our highest discounts during these periods; this is the best time to go combined with the best value.
In addition, this year we have highlighted hotels that offer extra special discounts; see the panel below.
The reductions details in the panel are applicable to a child who shares a room with two full-fare paying passengers.
Some hotel rooms can take a fourth bed, and in this case the second child will receive a discount of 25%.
To qualify for these reductions, children must be aged between 2 and 11 years inclusive on the date of departure.
A charge of £15 is made for infants under the age of 2 years on departure date, provided they sit on an adult's lap during the journey.
Cots are available on request, and should be paid for locally.
If you take Enterprise insurance cover, infants are included at no extra cost.
Child discounts apply to the basic holiday price and any applicable flight supplements.
Any room and meal supplements that may be applicable are payable in full.
Group reductions
A Lakes and Mountains holiday is great fun when you travel with a group of friends or family.
There is so much to see and do; everyone will find something that suits them.
To help you choose a hotel that can accommodate larger numbers, just look for the G against the hotel name in the price panel.
To qualify for a group reduction, all you need to do is get together 8 or more people.
The amount of the reduction will depend upon the date of departure and the number in your party.
The panel below gives our basic reductions, but for larger groups or low season dates please ring our groups department on 0293 588305 for details of the discounts.
We know they will be the best around.
Over 60's reductions
Holidays can make a big hole in your savings so we offer a 5% discount for clients over the age of 60 on the date of departure.
This special discount has now been extended and is available throughout the season.
It is applicable to the basic holiday price with flight supplements; any appropriate room and meal supplements are payable in full.
Price guarantee
Except for Governmental action, there will be no increase in the cost of your holiday.
Please see page 81 for details.
The pick of Europe's Lakes and Mountains.
AIR MILES…
SAVING ON YOUR HOLIDAY HAS NEVER BEEN EASIER!
Air Miles and Enterprise have joined forces to bring you the best quality holiday at reduced prices…all you have to do is go shopping!
The idea is simple: masses of shops and services throughout mainland Britain are giving away Air Miles vouchers to customers spending money.
It's just a matter of hoarding the tokens as you go along and exchanging them for a discount on your Enterprise 89/90 holiday.
Every time you spend your cash on particular products or services in any one of the participating outlets, you will receive a number of Air Miles vouchers depending on just how much you spend.
Your shopping receipts will suddenly take on a new significance!
Save Air Miles tokens and make your Enterprise holiday something to really write home about — 1,000 Air Miles vouchers entitle you to a whopping £60 off any holiday in this brochure.
Travel & Accommodation — the choice is yours.
Air Travel
All of our flights will be on leading British and foreign airlines (details on page 80).
We offer a wide choice of departure airports, and all of our flights are scheduled to operate by day — there are no night flights.
For full details please refer to the flight information on page 80.
Fly-drive
Get the most out of your Lakes and Mountains holiday — give yourself the independence to visit other resorts, see famous landmarks or just find the best views.
All this is possible if you book a car through Enterprise to be collected at your arrival airport, for the duration of your holiday.
We've included unlimited mileage, local taxes, and in Italy, Collision Damage Waiver: for a small additional charge payable locally when you collect your car, you may also take out Personal Accident Insurance.
We offer a choice of car, from economy to roomy.
An allowance has been made for the transfers you will not be taking, against the cost of the care hire.
The car must be returned to the airport at the end of the holiday.
You can select your accommodation from any of the hotels featured in this brochure (with just one or two exceptions, where parking is either very limited or impossible.
These are clearly shown in the hotel descriptions).
For prices and further details please see page 80.
Self-drive
An Enterprise self-drive holiday gives you the freedom and flexibility of your own car.
We have negotiated specially reduced rates with Sealink, and can take bookings for the following routes:
Dover–Calais
crossing time 1hr 20
Folkestone–Boulogne
crossing time 1hr 50
Newhaven–Dieppe
crossing time 4hrs 45
Harwich-Hook of Holland
crossing time 6hrs 30
If you wish to take a different route from those which we offer, simply book your chosen hotel and make your own way.
Hotels and how we grade them
Enterprise has a huge range of hotels with something to suit all tastes and budgets.
All of our hotels have been chosen for their good standard of comfort and value.
To help you choose, each property has been given an Enterprise quality grading.
There are from 1 star, a budget-style simple property, to 5 star for the most luxurious in this brochure.
A + sign after the number indicates that the property is a particularly good one in  its class.
On each resort page, you will find a photograph and a full description of each of our properties.
We indicate not only the location and amenities, but also the number of bedrooms in the hotel, and whether it has a lift.
This will give you a better indication of the size and type of property, which we know is often an important factor in choosing a particular holiday.
PREMIER Enterprise
Enterprise Premier hotels, are special hotels chosen for their high standards of service, comfort and an individuality which gives distinction.
They range from 3 Star to deluxe.
You will find them identified by a special frame and the Enterprise Premier symbol above the hotel description.
See more and pay less with pre-bookable excursions
This year we're offering an even wider choice of pre-bookable excursions.
All these excursions are very popular in resort; but here's your chance to book well in advance of the rush.
And as you'd expect from Enterprise, all these prices are well below what you would pay in resort anyway.
Detailed below are the packages available.
For a full description of the individual excursions, please see the relevant resort pages.
Simply more holiday with Enterprise Lakes and Mountains…
Spring & Autumn SPECIAL OFFERS
At the beginning and end of the season when the resorts are quieter and more relaxed, we can offer special holidays at really rock-bottom prices.
In the spring the flowers are at their most glorious, and the weather is much better than in the UK.
We offer special spring holidays to St Johann, Soll, Ellmau, Going, Westendorf and Scheffau.
Departures are from London on 11 May and travel is by coach overnight to Austria.
You will arrive in your resort mid-morning on 12th May.
Our coaches are luxurious, offering plenty of space, reclining seats, toilet and many other features.
There will be refreshment stops and you will drive through some stunning scenery.
After a full week in your resort, you will return by air on 19th May.
You can choose to fly back to either Gatwick, Birmingham, Bristol or Manchester.
In autumn, just as the leaves change colour, Austria has long periods of fine settled weather, with long sunny days and mild temperatures.
It's an excellent time for walking and rambling.
We are offering holidays departing by air from Gatwick, Birmingham, Bristol or Manchester to St Johann, Soll, Ellmau, Going, Scheffau, Westendorf and Mayrhofen.
You will have a full week in the resort of your choice, and return by luxury coach as detailed above, departing on 29th September and arriving back in London on 30 September.
As a special bonus, all of our special autumn holidays will include a free day trip to the internationally famous Munich Beer Festival.
If beer is not your tipple, it is still worth the trip because there is so much going on.
There's a huge fun fair, wonderful decorations, oompah bands playing, whole oxen spit roasting, and generally a tremendous friendly atmosphere.
If you wish to go more than once, our representative can arrange this for you.
For prices of the Spring and Autumn breaks, see the appropriate resort pages.
Twin centre holidays
Make the most of a holiday to Australia, Switzerland or the Italian lakes by taking a twin centre holiday — see twice as much and enjoy the contrast between totally different resorts.
In Austria, why not try one week in a mountain resort?
Mix Austria and Switzerland; one week in the Jungfrau region of Switzerland, and one week in Brand or St Anton in Austria.
In Italy, why not a mix of one week on Lake Como and one on Lake Maggiore; or perhaps even two of the very different resorts on Lake Garda?
The only stipulation is that you arrive and depart from each of your resorts on Friday for Lake Garda, or Saturday for Austria and Lakes Como and Maggiore.
Transfers between the two resorts are included in the price, and are via the arrival airport.
Alternatively you can make your own way between resorts — our representative will advise you.
Costing the holiday is very easy.
Just add together both the two week holiday prices, based on the arrival date in the first resort, divide by two and add £20 per person.
The £20 covers both administration and transfer costs (this is not refundable if you travel between resorts under your own steam).
If you are travelling by car, calculate as above then make the necessary accommodation only reduction as detailed on page 80.
If you wish to book a ferry through us, add on the appropriate price for the route you require.
Our recommendations for two resorts which offer interesting contrast are:
Austria: Seefeld and St Wolfgang; Soll, Ellmau or Scheffau and Fuschl or St Gilgen; Mayrhofen or Kitzbuhel and Zell am See.
Italy: Resorts in the Lake Como and Lake Maggiore region: Bellagio and Stresa; Menaggio and Pallanza; Lenno or  Cadenabbia and Baveno.
Resorts in the Lake Garda region: Garda and Riva; Bardolino and Limone.
BICYCLE TOUR
Arguably, cycling is one of the best ways of really appreciating the beauty of Austria.
You don't even have to be super-fit, as apart from one optional part of the route, the area is very flat!
We also follow specially prepared bike routes, with little or no traffic.
All the bikes we hire are in excellent condition, and we can offer smaller cycles for children.
The tour is based in Kaprun, and you can choose from any of the hotels in the village in the normal way, where you can leave your heavy luggage on the nights that you will not stay in Kaprun.
If you wish, we can arrange for your luggage to be sent on ahead to each of the overnight stops.
A cheaper alternative is to take your own small rucksack.
The pace is leisurely, and we guarantee you'll come back a lot fitter than when you left!
DAY 1:
Saturday.
Fly to Munich.
Transfer to Kaprun and check in at the hotel.
DAY 2:
Sunday.
Round trip of Lake Zell —(Kaprun, Thumersbach, Zell am See, Schuttdorf, Kaprun).
Today we hold a short welcome meeting to fully explain the routes, and to familiarise you with your steed!
The rest of the day is spent on a round trip of Lake Zell, before returning to Kaprun and the hotel.
(Today's ride: approx 20kms)
DAY 3:
Monday.
Two Day Tour.
Kaprun, Neukirchen and Krimml (Waterfalls)
This follows the Salzach Valley, with a leisurely ride along the bike routes through fields, small villages and stop-off at two bathing lakes.
We finally dismount in Mittersill or Hollersbach and an overnight stop in a Gasthaus.
(Today's ride: approx. 30kms).
DAY 4:
Tuesday.
Tour continues.
Today we stay on the bike route along the Hohenaurern to Neukirchen am Groussvenegiger (the second highest mountain in Austria).
Officially, the bike route ends here; more experienced cyclists may care to carry on the ascent to the Krimml waterfalls.
For the return trip to the hotel in Kaprun, we take the narrow gauge Pinzgau railway.
(Today's ride: approx 18kms)
DAY 5:
Wednesday.
Two Day Tour.
Kaprun — Maria Alm.
Our route takes us along the shores of Lake Zell, via Thumersbach, Schloss Kammer, Gerling Zum Ritzensee, and then on to Maria Alm.
We overnight at Maria Alm in a comfortable gasthof.
(Today's ride: approx 27kms)
DAY 6:
Thursday.
Tour continues.
Return from Maria Alm via Saalfelden, with a visit to the summer toboggan run on the way.
We also ride through Harham, Maishofen, Zell am See to Kaprun.
Overnight in Kaprun.
(Today's ride: approx 27kms)
DAY 7:
Friday.
Day at leisure, or hire a bike for an extra day.
DAY 8:
Saturday.
Fly home, or transfer to your chosen Lakes and Mountains resort.
Price for cycle tour: £39 (to book the cycle tour, book a holiday to Kaprun and then add the cycling tour on extras pack Q.)
What's included
Good quality bicycle
Local maps/route descriptions
Narrow gauge railway tickets
All overnight stops on the cycle tours (based on twin rooms with facilities on an HB basis)
What's extra (pay locally)
Luggage transport (all cases may be left in Kaprun) approx £19.00
Hire of rucksack approx £3.50
WALKING TOUR
To many people, walking is what Lakes and Mountains holiday is all about.
‘Breathtaking’ is an overworked brochure cliche, but you'll find it very apt when you've experienced the kind of scenery we're talking about.
Our Walking Tour isn't just for professional hikers; the pace is leisurely and anybody who is reasonably fit will love it!
The tour takes you to parts of this lovely area of Austria that most clients don't find.
This is due to the very experienced local guides who will lead every tour.
The guides are fully qualified to take groups anywhere on these mountains; safety is always paramount.
Included in the cost is all overnight accommodation.
Overnights will always be in comfortable hotels (all bedrooms with private bathrooms) staying on a half board basis.
We also include the transportation of your main luggage from hotel to hotel.
Finally, to make the most of this tour, groups will never be larger than twenty people, or smaller than twelve people.
SATURDAY.
Arrive and overnight in Soll area.
SUNDAY.
Meeting with your guide who will explain routes, hand out maps and explain the week's agenda etc.
There will then be a day's walk in the local area before returning to Soll and your hotel.
MONDAY.
— Soll to Scheffau.
Full day's walk with lunch stop at a mountain Gasthof.
Today's walk takes in the Hintersteinersee area.
We will endeavour to arrive in Scheffau before the shops close!
Overnight in Scheffau.
TUESDAY.
— Wilder Kaiser Mountains.
A walk above Scheffau through the spectacular Wilder Kaiser Mountains.
Break for lunch.
Return to Scheffau and overnight in the hotel.
WEDNESDAY.
— Going.
Full day's walk ending in Going.
Overnight in Going.
THURSDAY.
— Grossraum area.
Full day's walk above Going in the Grossraum area, this time on the opposite side of the valley to the Wilder Kaiser mountains.
Overnight in Going.
FRIDAY.
— Mountain Walk.
A last very scenic walk to remember further up into the Wilder Kaiser mountains!
After returning to Going, we arrange a meeting point for the group for a farewell dinner, and even a small gift!
SATURDAY.
— Return to UK, or transfer to Lakes and Mountains resort.
What you will need on our Walking Tour
A small rucksack
Walking boots or very stout shoes
Shorts
Long trousers (Denims will do)
Good socks (bear in mind, there won't be many clothes washing opportunities…)
Weatherproof clothing
Sun glasses
Sun hat
High factor suntan lotion, plus a good lip salve
Walking Tour/Stay put
Make the most of Austria by taking the walking tour followed by a week in any of our Austrian resorts.
To calculate the price, use the add-on price below, plus the 7 night price of the hotel of your choice, as shown on the appropriate resort page.
Walking tour add-on £149.
Enterprise Special Tours.
Lakes and Mountain holidays are very different to run of the mill summer holidays.
For a start there is so much to see!
Bearing this in mind and the fact that you only have a limited time to see it all, we've put together these special tours.
Travel is by luxury coach with an experienced driver, and you will be accompanied by an Enterprise Representative.
Remember, you could combine trips; or how about a tour followed by a relaxing week in whichever resort takes your fancy in this brochure?
The choice is yours.
GRAND AUSTRIAN CITIES TOUR
DAY 1: Munich — Salzburg
Fly to Munich, to be met by the Enterprise Representative.
You are escorted to your hotel in Salzburg.
The rest of the day is spent at leisure.
DAY 2: Salzburg
— Salzburg is most famous for being the birthplace of Mozart.
Our tour also includes Getreidegasse, Salzburg's oldest street with its lovely cathedral and shops.
In the afternoon, there is an optional trip into Germany to see Hitler's ‘Eagle's Nest’ and the magnificent scenery around Berchtesgaden.
DAY 3: Salzburg — Vienna
We travel via the Danube Valley, where there is an optional boat ride from Spitz to Krems via Durnstein.
During the afternoon, our tour includes the Belvedere Palace, the Spanish Riding School within the grounds of the Hofburg Palace, the magnificent Opera House and St. Stephen's Cathedral.
As evening falls, there is an optional ‘Vienna by Night’ excursion.
This includes a traditional waltz dance show at the Cafe Hubner, followed by dinner in the famous wine village of Grinzing.
DAY 4: Vienna
Our morning tour of the city includes the Schonbrunn Palace.
Here, Marie Antoinette spent her childhood.
The afternoon is free for you to explore the delights of classical Vienna.
Alternatively, join us for an optional excursion to Vienna Woods, including a trip to the hunting lodge at Mayerling.
Our ‘Romantic Vienna’ evening excursion includes dinner in a typical restaurant, followed by a visit to the Prater Funfair with its big wheel.
DAY 5: Vienna — Klagenfurt
The drives between towns are a delight, and the journey to Graz, with its famous clocktower is no exception.
After lunch, we continue to the village of Piber where the famous Lipizzaner stallions are bred for the Spanish Riding School.
Finally, it's on to Klagenfurt, capital of Carinthia, near the shores of the beautiful Worthersee.
DAY 6: Klagenfurt — Innsbruck
Again, a very scenic drive up the Alpine Road to Austria's highest peak, the Grossglockner.
During the afternoon we continue to Innsbruck, capital of the Tyrol, making a brief stop at the glassworks at Rattenburg.
We arrive in Innsbruck for dinner and an overnight stay.
DAY 7: Innsbruck
Sports fans will know that Innsbruck played host to the Olympic Games, and our tour includes a visit to the Bergisel ski jump.
Continue with an optional trip to the small town of Vipiteno across the border into Italy where the low cost of wine and leather goods will be more than tempting!
The afternoon is then yours to explore this fascinating city.
During the evening, there is traditional folk dancing.
DAY 8: Innsbruck — Munich — UK
After breakfast, leave for Munich airport for your flight home; or transfer to your chosen Lakes & Mountains resort.
NOTES:
All accommodation is in 3 or 4 star hotels.
All rooms have private facilities.
Half board in Salzburg, Klagenfurt and Innsbruck.
Bed and breakfast in Vienna.
City sightseeing tours are included in Salzburg, Vienna, Graz and Innsbruck.
Entrance to the Schonbrunn Palace is also included.
ALPINE HIGHLIGHTS TOUR
Day 1: UK — Munich — Innsbruck/Patsch
After arrival in Munich, you will be met by our representative.
Travel by coach to your hotel in Innsbruck-Patch.
Day 2: Innsbruck/Patsch — Lake Garda
After exploring the famous City of Innsbruck we cross the Europa Bridge on our way over the Brenner pass into Italy.
After a sightseeing and shopping stop at Vipiteno we arrive at Riva on Lake Garda.
Here there is the option of an evening excursion to Verona.
Day 3: Lake Garda — Lake Como
After breakfast we head for Milan.
We will visit the Sforza-Castle, the magnificent gothic Cathedral and the well known La Scala opera house.
We then travel the short distance to Lake Como where we will stay for two nights.
Day 4: Lake Como
A day at leisure to enjoy the breathtaking beauty of this most scenic of the Italian lakes.
In the afternoon there is an optional excursion along the shores of Lake Como returning by boat.
Day 5: Lake Como — Lake Lucerne
Leaving Lake Como via the Porlezza Pass we soon reach Lugano, often referred to as the Rio de Janeiro of the Alps.
After travelling through the scenic St. Otthard Pass we pass through William Tell country before arriving at our hotel on Lake Lucerne.
Day 6: Lake Lucerne
In the morning you will be taken on a guided tour of the medieval city of Lucerne.
The remainder of the day is at leisure although there is an optional excursion to Interlaken and  Grindelwald , visiting the woodcarving centre of Brienz.
Day 7: Lake Lucerne — Kufstein
Travelling past some of the most beautiful lakes in Switzerland, we arrive at the principality of Liechtenstein.
We continue via the breathtaking Arlberg pass and arrive at the border town of Kufstein.
Say goodbye by joining in an optional evening's excursion and enjoying traditional folk dancing and singing.
Day 8: Kufstein — Munich
Return to Munich for your flight home.
Those staying for a further week will be transferred directly from Kufstein to their resort.
WHAT'S INCLUDED
Half board accommodation in good class hotels with private facilities.
Guided sightseeing tours in Lucerne, Milan and Innsbruck.
Coach tours from £299
Single supplement per person per night 7.50
* This departure includes an outward journey by air and a return journey to the UK by coach along the ‘Romantic Road’.
This is not only the most famous route in Germany, but also one of the most beautiful.
You will pass a wealth of museums, castles and well preserved medieval towns.
This journey also includes an overnight stop near Wurzburg.
THE LAKE GARDA DISCOVERY TOUR
Day 1: UK — Brussels
Our tour starts in London where we board our luxury coach travelling to Dover.
We cross to Calais and continue to Brussels for our first overnight stop.
Day 2: Brussels — Rhineland
A morning sightseeing tour enables you to explore the interesting old town of Brussels before continuing after lunch to the Rhineland where the included boat trip along the Rhine is a must.
Day 3: Rhineland — Austrian Tyrol
Depart after breakfast for the stunning scenery of the Tyrol.
Arrive in a typical, pretty Tyrolean village for dinner and overnight accommodation.
Days 4–11 Lake Garda
The highlight of the tour — a seven night stay on the shores of Lake Garda staying in one of our excellent hotels.
Lake Garda offers a wealth of things to see and do including visits to nearby towns such as Riva del Garda with its narrow streets, elegant shops, cafes and restaurants.
We have also arranged optional excursions to help you enjoy the best this region can offer.
The trips to Venice and Verona, are always popular.
Day 11: Lake Garda — Lucerne
The Swiss Alps are now our destination where we head for Lucerne for a one night stop.
Day 12: Lucerne — Strasbourg
After breakfast we turn our attention to the cradle of Europe, Strasbourg, but on the way we will pass through one of Germany's most scenic regions, the Black Forest.
Day 13: Strasbourg — Paris
The tour's nearly over but there's still enough time to take in the fabulous sight of Paris illuminated by night, where we will stay for one night.
Day 14: Paris — UK
An early morning departure for London planning to arrive early evening.
Tour and Stay
If you would like to extend your holiday by a further week, then just use the add-on price below plus the 7 night price of your chosen hotel, as shown on the appropriate resort page.
Grand Austrian Cities add-on £199.
Alpine highlights add-on £207.
Grindelwald
½ PRICE SWISS TRAVEL CARD included
A lively, bustling village, Grindelwald is full of Alpine atmosphere.
Set in the most spectacular surroundings, it is also known as the ‘Village of the Glaciers’, a tribute to the two glaciers which stretch from the mountain gorges to the valley floor.
Sheltering the village with is impressive yet formidable presence is the north face of the Eiger.
Keen walkers will be spoilt for choice by the range of tracks and routes available to them, from leisurely strolls through Alpine meadows to more taxing and strenuous mountain hikes.
For those who find walking just a little to much like hard work, take the longest chairlift in Europe to the ‘First’ peak at 7,150 ft and enjoy the glorious views and the grandeur of the mountains without being out of breath!
There are plenty of places to visit and lots to see and do.
Europe's highest mountain railway which beings in Grindelwald and climbs through magnificent scenery to the Jungfrau is a must; and there are excursions to Berne and Lucerne, if you can tear yourself away from the mountains for long enough!
The spectacular Trummelbach Falls, near Wengen, plunge inside the mountain and are quite breathtakingly beautiful.
From Grindelwald, you can also walk the glacier gorge and actually walk inside the upper glacier.
If your idea of a holiday doesn't include lots of walking, Grindelwald has plenty of shops to browse around, as well as numerous cafes, restaurants and bars for that relaxing afternoon coffees and cake.
The village has good and inexpensive road and rail connections, making it easy to explore the surrounding region.
What to see and do
Excursions: There are lots of places to see from Grindelwald, and public transport is inexpensive and reliable.
Europe's highest railway to Kleine, Scheidegg and then through tunnels and past glaciers to the summit of the Jungfraujoch at 11,333 ft, is a world famous journey and one that affords fantastic views of snow capped mountain peaks and Alpine scenery.
The Trummelbach Falls are nearby, spectacular waterfalls which plunge into the depths of the mountain.
Lucerne and Berne, Switzerland's capital city, can easily be reached for a day's sightseeing.
Walking: Grindelwald has a wealth of varied walks to choose from, using the mountain railways, chairlifts and cable cars if you wish.
At the end of Grindelwald village is the glacier gorge (Gletscherschlucht) which is a fairly easy walk along a very narrow road to the upper glacier which you can go inside.
Sports Centre: The village boasts an excellent sports centre with an ice skating rink, a heated indoor swimming pool, 4 tennis courts and a fitness centre.
Swimming: Heated outdoor swimming pool.
Fishing: Can be arranged, permit required.
Climbing: Mountain climbing tuition is available in Grindelwald.
Cinema: The cinema in Grindelwald shows English films.
Other activities: Include minigolf and bowling.
HOTEL WEISSES KREUZ AND POST (4)
This is a large and spacious modern hotel offering high standards of accommodation and service.
It is situated right in the centre of the resort and has all the facilities of the shops, restaurants and sports centre close at hand.
Bedrooms are beautifully furnished featuring a bath, shower and loo, minibar, fridge, telephone, TV and radio.
The public rooms each have a distinctive style of their own, from the cosy, rustic ‘Challi-Bar’ to the elegantly furnished reception area and television room.
Breakfast is served buffet style, and standards of cuisine served in the sumptuous restaurants are high.
Other hotel facilities include a snack bar and small shop, indoor swimming pool and roof top sun terrace, hairdressing salon, TV and reading rooms, fitness room and solarium.
2 lifts; 45 bedrooms; singles on request.
CHALET HOTEL ALTE POST (3)
Built in the charming traditional chalet style, the Alte Post is quietly located yet close to all the village facilities.
Accommodation is in twin rooms in the new chalet annexe directly behind the main building.
All the room are furnished in a comfortable, rustic style and have a private bathroom, telephone and radio.
The extensive buffet breakfast is taken in the chalet, whilst nearby evening meals can be purchased in the wood panelled restaurant ‘Alte Post’.
The cuisine is traditional and excellent.
The reception area of this relaxing hotel is extremely welcoming with an open fire and comfortable chairs.
There is also a small bar and card room.
Lift; 14 bedrooms.
HOTEL SANS-SOUCI (3)
Centrally situated, yet in a very quiet area, the Hotel Sans Souci is only 3 minutes from the railway station and close at hand for the sport centre, bank and all the other resort amenities.
Bedrooms are modern but full of rustic style and charm with their pine panelling and wonderful mountain views.
They are all twins with bath or shower and loo.
All have their own telephone, radio and mini bar.
Public rooms, including a comfortable lounge with TV, card room and bar, are attractively furnished in the traditional alpine style.
Chairs and sun parasols are provided in the beautifully kept garden which is ideal for a spot of sunbathing.
Breakfast is served buffet style.
Evening meals consist of excellent traditional dishes, and always include an extensive salad buffet.
All are waiter service, with a daily change of menu.
The availability of babysitting, early meals for children and a kiddies playroom make this hotel an excellent choice for families.
Guests have free entry to the Sports Centre 200m from the hotel.
Lift; 27 bedrooms.
Murren & Lauterbrunnen
½ PRICE SWISS TRAVEL CARD included
Switzerland is famous for its snow capped mountains, alpine meadows, beautiful lakes and flower bedecked chalets.
Lauterbrunnen and Murren typify all that is Switzerland, areas of great natural beauty which have an almost magical quality about them.
The valleys are absolute tranquillity and it is no wonder that writers and poets have found inspiration here for many years.
Lauterbrunnen has a spectacular setting in the sheer sided Lauterbrunnen Valley.
The valley is famous for the awe inspiring Trummelbach Falls, a total of seven waterfalls tumbling and plunging into the mountain.
There are 72 waterfalls in the Lauterbrunnen valley, cascading down into the Lutschine river which surges along the valley floor in a rush of white foaming water.
In the village, the main street is lined with picturesque alpine chalets, their balconies and window boxes overflowing with colourful flowers.
All around are the spectacular mountain peaks of the Jungfrau region.
This is an ideal base for exploring with the villages of Interlaken, Grindelwald, Wengen and Murren easily accessible by a variety of different transports including cable car, funicular railway and post buses.
Murren perches high on a sunny shelf in the Lauterbrunnen Valley, surrounded by all the glorious beauty of peaks and glaciers.
Peace and quiet are to be found in abundance here with the lovely narrow streets being totally traffic free, apart from the odd herd of cows being led down the street by their mountain cowherd.
It is reached by way of a beautiful mountain railway journey from Lauterbrunnen or by cable car from Stechelberg.
Murren has a huge variety of signposted walks to take you over the hills and into the mountains.
At the end of June, Murren is host to International Ballooning Week, and the skies fill up with myriads of colourful hot air balloons.
Directly above the village rises the peak of the Schilthorn mountain which was featured in the James Bond film ‘On Her Majesty's Secret Service’.
The top station has a large revolving restaurant and a sun terrace with wonderful views over Switzerland, including the Eiger, Monch and Jungfrau mountains.
The cable car journey to the top is the longest in the Alps and the whole journey is filled with breathtaking scenery.
What to see and do
Excursions: Take the longest cable car in the Alps to the top of the Schilthorn at 9,600 ft and see the revolving restaurant.
Visit the Trummelbach Falls, a spectacular sight of seven illuminated waterfalls plummeting into the mountain.
There is an excellent network of cable cars, mountain railways and chair lifts making the highest mountains accessible to everybody with the minimum of effort.
Interlaken and the lakes of Thun and Brienz are reached within an hour, as are the mountain resorts of Wengen and Grindelwald.
Walking: Both Lauterbrunnen and Murren have a wide selection of varied walks to choose from, all well signposted and ranging from gentle rambles to more strenuous hikes.
Cable cars, chairlifts and mountain railways take the strain out of steep climbs and allow relaxing walks on the mountain summits.
Sports Centre: Murren has a superb new sports centre with a heated indoor swimming pool, whirlpool, gymnasium, squash courts, sauna, solarium, indoor tennis courts, ice rink and a library and snack bar.
All of our clients staying in Murren have free entry to the swimming pool and whirlpool, squash, tennis and ice skating in the centre.
Swimming: Lauterbrunnen has a lovely outdoor swimming pool set in alpine meadows.
Other activities: Fishing, tennis, crazy golf are all available.
HOTEL ALPENRUHE (3+)— MURREN
Situated in an enviable position enjoying wonderful views over the Bernese Alps, the Hotel Alpenruhe is conveniently close to the Schilthorn Cable Car.
The amenities of the resort centre are only a short walk away.
Although the hotel is fairly new, it is built in the traditional chalet style and the use of wood panelling throughout gives it a mellow and warm atmosphere.
All the bedrooms are most attractive and have a private bathroom with a shower or bath and hairdryer.
Each room has a mini bar, telephone and radio.
Breakfast can be taken at the top of the Schilthorn; take the cable car to the ‘Piz Gloria’ revolving restaurant for a breakfast served in the most glorious of surroundings.
Meals at the hotel are served in the charming dining room, and the Alpenruhe boasts a very high standards of Swiss and continental cuisine.
Enjoy a refreshing drink and the spectacular views of the Jungfrau mountain from the sun terrace in the afternoon, or in the evening relax with a drink in the rustic ‘stuberl’ bar.
Guests have free entrance to the swimming pool at the sports centre which is a 10 minute walk from the hotel.
Lift; 26 bedrooms.
HOTEL OBERLAND (2+)— LAUTERBRUNNEN
In a central location and only 3 minutes walk from the mountain railway departure point, this hotel is in an ideal position to explore the surrounding countryside.
Trains run from the station to Wengen, Jungfrau and Murren.
The Oberland's owners are exceptionally friendly and will do everything to make your stay in this traditionally built hotel an enjoyable one.
Although the exterior of the Oberland is very traditional with shuttered windows festooned with flowers and the interior decor is quite modern.
The twin bedrooms are airy, spacious and comfortably furnished.
All have their own bath, shower and loo.
Single rooms are available on request.
the hotel has two lounges, a TV room, a snack bar and a rustic bar with a very relaxing atmosphere for evening drinks.
They reception area is comfortable and welcoming.
Meals are served in the terrace restaurant, with breakfast served buffet style and evening meals of good, hearty Swiss cooking.
The Hotel Oberland is ideal for children: there is a playground, early meals and special menus can be arranged and baby-sitting is available.
No life; 25 bedrooms; single on request.
HOTEL MURREN (4)— MURREN
A member of the Residence hotel group, the Hotel Murren offers first class accommodation, comfort and excellent facilities.
It is convenient to the railway station and only a 10 minute walk from the Schilthorn cable car.
Right next door is the sport centre to which guests have free entry to enjoy such facilities as a swimming pool, sauna, solarium and squash.
The restaurant serves outstanding Swiss cuisine and the ‘Kandalar Grill’ with its warm rustic decor offers all day dining, anything from simple lunches to haute cuisine dinners.
The menu is changed daily.
Snacks and afternoon tea can be enjoyed on the sun terrace facing the Jungfrau mountain.
The bedrooms are tastefully decorated with their own bath and shower, telephone, radio, fridge and mini bar.
The ‘Palace Bar’ is warm and welcoming with an atmosphere all of its own, ideal for a drink before dinner.
Other facilities on offer in this excellent hotel include: hairdressing salon, coffee shop/snack bar, children's play room, T.V., video, reading and games room.
Breakfast is a mixture of buffet and waiter service, dinner is waiter service.
Guests at the hotel can also enjoy dancing evenings, plus free entry to sports centre next door.
Lift; 46 bedrooms.
HOTEL EDELWEISS (3)— MURREN
In an ideal position on the Boulevard of Murren, the romantically named Edelweiss is surrounded by the dramatic scenery of the Bernese Alps.
This stone built hotel has the reputation of being well run and offers light, spacious rooms.
All bedrooms have private facilities with bath or shower, they are pleasantly furnished and all have a mini bar, telephone and radio.
The quiet, rustic public rooms are perfect for relaxing in and the cosy bar is wonderful for a peaceful drink in the evening.
Meals are served in the restaurant, looking over the mountains.
Dinner is waiter service and the menu is changed daily, offering a wide choice of dishes.
The Edelweiss is set in its own lush and shady garden with a large terrace where you can enjoy views of the Lauterbrunnen Valley (famous for it waterfalls), the awesome Jungfrau and the wildlife reserve on the Breithorn.
Guests have free entrance to the swimming pool at Murren sport centre.
No lift; 26 bedrooms.
Lake Maggiore
Stresa is the largest of our three resorts on Maggiore and it is undoubtedly the most cosmopolitan and sophisticated.
Designer shops rub shoulders with gourmet restaurants and the promenade is as much for dressing up and meeting people as it is for enjoying the glorious views.
Yet in spite of this, away from the front it still retains a small Italian town atmosphere with cobbled streets and attractive red roofed buildings.
For the young and young at heart, nightlife can be very lively with a selection of restaurants and bars to choose from.
Getting around Stresa isn't a problem with its extensive network of public transport.
Boats can take you to the Borromean Islands and to tall the other resorts around the lake and regular bus services along the lake road.
Taking the electric railway up to Monte Baldo is a very worthwhile day out.
Stresa has its very own zoo, worth visiting for an afternoon trip that's slightly different!
This resort is a good choice for the elderly and infirm as the area is very flat and there is plenty to see and do in the vicinity of the lake.
BAVENO
Quite a different resort from Stresa, Baveno is much quieter and has more of a village atmosphere about it.
Instead of smart hotels and shops, Baveno is a maze of narrow streets, small squares and traditional buildings.
It also has a very attractive promenade and a small harbour from where boats set off to go up and down the lake.
Baveno is a pretty village, although it doesn't take long to explore it all.
The focal point of the town centre is the church, with old buildings threaded by narrow alleyways hemming in from all sides.
There is also a weekly local market where the most marvellous local cheeses and wines can be bought.
This is the ideal resort for those in search of a quiet holiday in a traditional, pleasant and uncrowded town with the option of plenty of excursions to choose from.
PALLANZA
Situated on a large south facing lakeside promontory, Pallanza is another traditional holiday base.
It has a wonderfully mild climate all year round, and as a result, there is a profusion of shrubs and flowers.
Nearby is Villa Taranto, famous for having over 20,000 plants and trees on display, many of them on the endangered list.
This is a visit that nobody with an interest in plants and gardens should miss!
Pallanza is bigger than Baveno, a jumble of red roofs overlooking a lively harbour full of ferries, fishing boats and pleasure craft.
There is a long promenade to stroll down, but the focal point of the resort is the village square.
It's very pleasant to linger in a pavement cafe here and just watch the world go by.
Nightlife is fairly low key, and centres mainly around restaurants and bars, although there is one disco.
What to see and do
Excursions: Full day coach trip around the whole lake with a stop at a large market, and at Ascona in Switzerland.
Full day by coach and train to Zermatt via the Simplon Pass, and up the rack railway to the Matterhorn.
A whole day by air-conditioned coach to Venice, with dinner (optional) in a canal side restaurant.
Again by coach across the spectacular St Gothard pass to Lake  Lucerne in Switzerland.
Three lakes tour visiting Lakes Como, Lugano and Maggiore.
Half day tour to Lake Orta.
Half day trip to the mountain village of Macugnaga.
Activities: Swimming in the lake, tennis, boating rambling and windsurfing are all available.
Walking: There are some lovely mountain walks to be had that are not overly strenuous.
The less energetic could take the easy walk to the cable car and ride to the summit of Mount Mottarone.
Local Transport: Ferry services to the Borromean Islands and other lakeside resorts.
The Borromean Islands boast beautifully landscaped gardens and often stage regular concerts.
Steamers available to Switzerland, and from the local railway station trains go to Milan.
HOTEL REGINA PALACE (4) STRESA PREMIER
The Regina Palace is ideally situated in the centre of Stresa, just across the road from the lake and main promenade.
If you want old-world tradition in an idyllic setting, this is the hotel for you.
It's not just the fine cuisine, but also the long-renowned courteous service from friendly and efficient staff.
All rooms are twin bedded with a private bathroom.
Facilities include a swimming pool set in attractive gardens at the rear of the hotel, children's paddling pool, sun terraces, tennis court, squash court, sauna and Gym (local charge), and a shop.
There's also a spacious lounge, a cocktail bar, snack bar, a table d'hote restaurant, and the Charleston restaurant (a la carte menu).
Apart from the pleasures of the bar, the hotel features dancing several times a week.
Lifts; 176 bedrooms.
GRAND HOTEL MAJESTIC (4) PALLANZA Premier
Situated right beside the lake, this grand and spacious hotel is just 10 minutes from the town centre, and is idyllically set in well established gardens.
The sweeping lawns and garden lead right down to the lake, where there is a small private beach, and fabulous views of the Borromean Islands.
The public rooms are elegant in a traditional style, and there are 3 comfortable lounges, a modern bar, and a fitness room.
All rooms are twin bedded with a private loo and bath or shower, and all are nicely furnished.
The hotel features an indoor swimming pool, tennis (payable locally), and there's boating and windsurfing available from the private jetty.
The two restaurants within the Majestic are of excellent quality, offering both table d'hote and a la carte.
After dinner the hotel bar features live music nightly.
Lifts; 119 bedrooms.
Single available.
HOTEL LA PALMA, STRESA (4)
This well appointed hotel is situated in its own gardens, just across the road from the promenade and Lake Maggiore.
There are spacious loungers, a bar providing waiter service to the garden terrace, a restaurant that opens onto the lovely gardens offering buffet style breakfast, and a mixed buffet and waiter service dinner.
The large swimming pool with extensive sun terraces are across the road next to the lake.
All the attractively furnished twin rooms have private bathroom, a balcony, and some have a lake view.
Lifts; 60 bedrooms; single available.
HOTEL BEAU RIVAGE (2), BAVENO
The Beau Rivage is a comfortable hotel set on the front in Baveno, opposite the promenade and close to the centre of the village.
The atmosphere is friendly and homely, and the hotel features a large comfortable furnished lounge, bar, a separate TV lounge, and a restaurant that also serves a la carte meals.
The staff speak good English, and British guests are specially welcomed.
At the back of the hotel is a secluded garden.
All rooms are individually furnished in a modern style, and are twin bedded with a private bathroom.
All are also big enough to take a third bed.
No lift; 50 bedrooms.
Single available.
Bellagio
This is a centuries old, charming village situated on the promontory that separates Lake Como from Lake Lecco, so you're getting two lakes for the price of one!
Bellagio is all cobbled alleyways, stretching upwards and away from the lakeside.
Small shops, pavement cafes and steps are around every corner.
Bellagio has a wonderfully friendly atmosphere.
There is a lovely tree lined promenade for gentle afternoon strolls, and it is backed by lots of cafes and restaurants, perfect for stopping off and enjoying a drink while watching everyone pass by.
Adding to the overall charm, there is often live music played on the promenade.
Five minutes from the centre along the promenade is Villa Melzi, a most attractive lakeside villa with wonderful gardens that are open to the public.
A little further away, about 10 or 15 minutes walk, is Villa Serbehoni which also has fabulous gardens open to the public.
All around the lake are similarly charming villages, easily reached by the regular ferry service that operates out of the bustling little harbour.
In fact, because the roads into Bellagio are very difficult, most people use the ferry services to get around.
When you visit you'll wonder why such a gem of a village always seems so uncrowded and peaceful.
Well, the answer is that there is no room for Bellagio to expand any further because of its position and there isn't the accommodation to cram in those extra people!
All of which is good news for those who travel back here year after year, but disappointing for those who find out about Bellagio too late and can't book it for love nor money…
What to see and do
Excursions: There are plenty of excursions available.
Go to St Moritz, the famous Swiss ski resort, enjoy fantastic scenery and take a ride in a cable car.
Visit Venice, see the Bridge of Sighs, St Marks Square and finish the day with a Gondola ride (optional).
Milan, with La Scala and its famous fashion shops is another popular excursion.
Lake Maggiore, with its islands, is picturesque and the visit includes a trip to the Borromean Palace of Isola Bella.
Sports: Swimming at the small lido, tennis and riding are also available.
Walking: The tourist office provides maps to show the many marked walks which include lakeside paths in both directions from Bellagio.
There are also some steeper climbs behind the village.
Planned circular walks are also available, which always include many points of interest and an approximate time.
Eating out: Excellent restaurants and many cafes line the front, either open air or under the porticos of old buildings.
Local transport: Car ferries from Bellagio to Cadenabbia and to Varenna; passenger ferries to all villages along the lake and a regular hydrofoil runs the length of the lake to Como Town.
Gardens: Visit the gardens of the Villa Carlotta, those on the Isola Comancina, Villa Balbianello, Monastero as well as those in Bellagio itself.
HOTEL DU LAC (3)
Situated in an ideal position on the front a Bellagio, the Du Lac has been a favourite with our clients for over a decade.
The owners, Signor and Signora Leoni and their son pride themselves on their high standards of personal service.
The hotel's restaurant enjoys a good reputation, with a lovely first-floor terrace where on fine days you dine overlooking the lake.
All bedrooms are comfortably furnished and have a private bathroom, and telephone.
There is a lively bar which extends outside under a portico, and where there is music 3 times a week, whilst the rooftop sun terrace is an ideal place to relax.
Horse-riding, windsurfing and water-skiing can all be arranged locally.
Lift; 50 bedrooms; single available.
METROPOLE (3)
The Metropole is the only hotel in Bellagio situated right on the lakeside, as well as being in the village centre, it is in fact one of the finest locations in Bellagio.
The hotel has a lakeside restaurant and terrace, where you can enjoy the splendid view across the lake to Tremezzo.
All rooms are twin bedded with a private loo and bath or shower, and a side or full view of the lake.
Although the Metropole does not have a pool, all guests can use the pool at Hotel Splendide, which is opposite.
The Metropole features a large sun terrace, lounge, lively bar and restaurant.
Food is to a high standard with a buffet breakfast, and a choice of menu with a buffet salad in the evening.
Lift.
50 bedrooms; single available.
GRAND HOTEL SERBELLONI (4+) Premier
This is quite simply the best hotel featured in this brochure, and if you're a gardener yourself, you'll find the gardens around this gem of an hotel worthy of the accolade's ‘spectacular’.
Stroll through the grounds to the lake, and you'll come to the hotel's own private each and landing stage.
Set peacefully overlooking the lake on a headland, the Serbelloni is nevertheless convenient for the centre, steamer and hydrofoil departure points.
All rooms are twin bedded with a private bath and loo, are luxuriously furnished, and all have a view either of parkland or the lake.
They are also equipped with hairdryers and a telephone; radio, TV and minibar are available on request.
Breakfast is continental style, dinner is 5 courses, and gentlemen are requested to wear a jacket.
The hotel features elegant lounges, chandeliers, antiques, an American bar, sun terrace, and a large swimming pool.
Live music from the resident orchestra is played nightly.
Lift; 82 bedrooms.
HOTEL BELVEDERE (4)
Situated about 10 minutes walk from the centre of Bellagio, and set in its own lovely grounds overlooking the lake, this is an impressive hotel.
Fine cut lawns and terraced gardens lead from the main building down to the lake, and a pretty little pebble beach with safe swimming.
The hotel also has a swimming pool, an pool bar, hotel bar, lounge, and dining room with a fine view out over the lake.
Breakfast is buffet style, and there is a choice of menu for evening meals.
All rooms are twin bedded with a shower and loo; some are available with a lake view.
Lift; 50 bedrooms; single available.
Lake Como
MENAGGIO
Menaggio is a super lakeside resort that feels so untouristy that you could be forgiven for thinking it was just a typical Italian village.
The central point is the village square and harbour, and there is also a very pleasant lakeside promenade.
Windsurfing, waterskiing and swimming are all available on the lake.
Swimming is also available at the Lido, where there is a large sand beach, and at the swimming pool.
If golf is your game, there's an 18 hole golf course above the village with wonderful views.
In the evenings, nightlife centres around the large number of bars, pavement cafes and restaurants.
LENNO
This is one of the lesser known resorts on Lake Como and it's a good base from which to explore this charming corner of Italy.
Lenno has a weekly market which shouldn't be missed to sneak a glimpse at a traditional Italian life.
The resort is formed on a large bay, with a lakeside promenade which has a good selection of pavement cafes and bars.
At the far end of the bay is a pleasant Lido with a good sand beach, while in the resort there's a quieter pebble beach.
Windsurfing and waterskiing are available, and there is tennis on the public court.
Goods walks are to be had in and around Lenno.
Nightlife is very quiet, with a choice of four friendly bars and absolutely no discos!
CADENABBIA
Cadenabbia is a smallish resort, running along the west shore of Lake Como.
Lovers of Italy will know that the resort is linked with the famous Villa Carlotta and the lovely old town of Tremezzo by a huge avenue of plane trees known as the ‘Via del Paradiso’.
Along the lake front runs a promenade with lots of welcoming cafes, all with superb views over the lake.
By the small harbour is a good sand beach, and there's another sand beach at the Lido along with the swimming pool and facilities for windsurfing.
At night, in true Italian fashion, the Lido transforms itself into a disco!
What to see and do
Excursions: A good selection of excursions are available from all of our Lake Como resorts.
Amongst the most popular are The Three Lakes a circular tour of three of Europe's most beautiful lakes.
You will travel into Switzerland, stopping at Lucarno on the northern shores of Lake Maggiore.
Then on through beautiful Swiss scenery to Lake Lugano for lunch, before travelling back to Lake Como, and driving along Europe's most spectacular lakeside road.
Omegna Market, at spectacular lakeside road.
Omegna Market, at the northern end of Lake Orta, is a must if you want to haggle over souvenirs.
Full day excursions are also available to Venice, St Moritz in Switzerland, Stresa and the Isola Bella on Lake Maggiore.
Milan is another firm favourite, a city steeped in history and home of the famous opera house and museum at La Scala.
There's also time also to visit some of the world's most fashionable shops…and they all take credit cards!
Watersports: Windsurfing, waterskiing and swimming in the lake are all available.
There are a number of swimming pools at resorts around the lake.
Sports facilities: these vary from resort to resort, but include a selection of tennis, mini-golf, walking, mountain-bike and pedalo hire.
Walking: Many miles of marked paths maps are available from the local Tourist Offices.
Eating out: This corner of Italy is famed for its superb regional cooking.
Fresh fish, and of course pasta, accompanied by excellent wines, will make your evening one to remember.
Local transport: Lake steamers, car ferries and hydro foils ply across the lake, while buses drive round it on a regular basis.
Gardens: Visit the gardens of the Isola Comancina (only island on Lake Como), Villa Balbianello, Monastero, Villa Melzi and, of course, Villa Carlotta.
GRAND HOTEL MENAGGIO, MENAGGIO (4) Premier
The aptly named Grand Hotel has been completely refurbished, in modern elegant style, and the interior provides spacious, well decorated public rooms.
There is a comfortable lounge area, attractive bar, and a sophisticated dining room offering excellent cuisine (an a la carte menu is available).
The dining room also has large panoramic windows giving majestic views over the garden, lake and mountains.
The hotel has a sun terrace and swimming pool set in the peaceful and tranquil gardens on the lakeside.
The village centre is a few minutes stroll, and with the ferry jetty nearby, the Monastero at Varenna, and adjacent villas with their semi-tropical gardens are all within easy reach.
All the comfortable, fully carpeted bedrooms have a private bathroom, mini bar and we recommend those with a lake views.
Lift; 60 bedrooms; single available.
HOTEL BELLAVISTA (3) MENAGGIO
Situated right on the lakeside and next to the picturesque harbour in the centre of Menaggio, is the Hotel Bellavista.
The Bellavista is a friendly hotel with a welcoming atmosphere and a good reputation for food and service.
This is an ideal hotel as a base for sightseeing as the ferry/hydrofoil jetty is right next to the hotel.
All rooms are twin bedded with a private loo and bath or shower.
Lakeside views from most rooms are available, whilst others overlook the bustling resort.
The hotel features a lovely dining room overlooking the lake, where the view can truly be described as spectacular.
There's also a lounge and TV area and spacious sun terrace, built out over the lake.
Lift; 35 bedrooms.
HOTEL BELLEVUE (2+) CADENABBIA
The Hotel Bellevue dates back to 1790, exalted guests have included Queen Victoria and Longfellow.
The Cadenabbia Lido is just 300 yards away and nearby is the centre of Tremezzo, with the boarding point for the ferry which crosses the lake to Bellagio.
There is a bus service which runs into Menaggio and Como.
The older atmosphere of this attractive hotel is enhanced by the antique style furnishings and traditional decor.
The spacious interior includes 2 lounges, a card room, and 2 restaurants which serve a choice of menu at dinner; an a la carte menu is available.
The hotel also features dancing once a week.
The hotel's extensive grounds include colourful gardens, a small swimming pool, and a short tennis court.
The bedrooms are furnished in older style and have a private bathroom, though they do vary in size.
Some twins also have a balcony and lake view, but as they overlook the lake road, those seeking tranquil accommodation should book the quieter, though simpler and smaller garden rooms.
Lift; 130 bedrooms; single available.
HOTEL ROMA, LENNO (2)
Situated on the lakeside opposite the small harbour of Lenno is the friendly, family run Hotel Roma.
This has been a popular hotel with our clients, many of whom regularly return.
Once an imposing villa, the Roma has been converted into a charming little hotel.
The gardens look out over the Bay of Tremezzina, and all of the bedrooms have lovely lake views.
There is a smaller bar and cosy dining room serving excellent home prepared Italian cooking.
The colourful weekly market takes place outside the hotel on the promenade, and opposite is the jetty for ferries around the lake, making this pretty hotel an ideal base to explore the area.
Lift; 27 bedrooms; single available.
Riva
Riva is the major resort on this, the largest lake in Italy, and is located at the base of magnificent cliffs just at the point where the River Sarca flows into the lake.
Best known as the Gateway to the Dolomites, Riva has grown into a cosmopolitan, upmarket resort with a superb climate — just look at the spectacular gardens along the lakeside!
There's much to see and do in Riva.
The town is primarily medieval, with some fine buildings and two castles.
Riva's narrow streets and sophisticated shops are a delight.
Sporting types will find tennis, mini golf, horse riding and windsurfing all available, and there are a number of small shale beaches where you can bake in the sun and dream about being energetic tomorrow.
Because of its size and position, Riva would be a good choice for those wishing to explore the whole lakeside area, either by way of local excursion coaches, or by hired car or boat.
Just 4kms from the resort is the first of many places you just ‘have’ to see the Varone waterfalls.
As you'd expect from such an upmarket resort, nightlife is excellent.
There are over 30 restaurants and very many bars, some with piano and live jazz.
Particularly pleasant are the harbour front bars.
There are also a couple of discos for the younger element.
What to see and do
Excursions: These range from trips to Verona and the beautiful city of Venice, to a trip through the breathtaking scenery of the Dolomites.
See the local Enterprise Representative for details.
Swimming: From both the lakeside beaches and hotel pools.
Watersports: Most are available.
Lake Garda is particularly suitable for windsurfing.
Riva is the home of the Mistral Windsurfing School.
Fishing: Locally obtained permit necessary; there are 20 varieties of fish in the lake!
Walking: There are many cleared paths with superb views over the lake.
We particularly recommend the walk to the Verone Waterfalls.
Riding: Available at the Centre Ipico.
Public transport: Buses and boats run regularly round the lake and connect all its resorts.
GRAND HOTEL RIVA (4) PREMIER
This is an elegant hotel set in the centre of Riva and overlooking the lake.
Refurbished to the highest standards, its air-conditioned public rooms are spacious and attractive and include a roof garden and two spacious restaurants; The Magnolia, where buffet breakfast is served and the Bel Air restaurant with floor-to-ceiling windows offer panoramic views over Riva and the lake, and a reputation for excellent cuisine.
The comfortable bedrooms have all been decorated to the highest standards, and all have a telephone and radio; most also have a television and minibar, and some are air-conditioned.
Lift; 77 bedrooms.
HOTEL LIDO PALACE (4+) Premier
The Lido Palace, one of the finest hotels in the Italian lakes, is in a superb position.
It's set in its own park with beautiful rolling gardens leading down to the road which separates the hotel from its own private beach, yet is only a few minutes from the centre.
The Lido Palace has had many famous visitors, including Sir Winston Churchill who spent his honeymoon here.
The hotel has been recently renovated, with its subtle cool modern interiors enhanced with chandeliers and elegant arches, to create an atmosphere of refinement.
All bedrooms are twin with private bathroom; some with a balcony.
There is a lovely dining room overlooking the lake, where splendid meals are served, and there is a weekly candlelit dinner with live music.
The lounges, card room and sun terraces all have a lakeside view.
Sports facilities include a swimming pool and 4 tennis courts.
Lift; 60 bedrooms.
HOTEL EUROPE (3)
In an ideal situation, the Hotel Europa faces the old harbour.
It has been recently renovated, beautifully redecorated and is close to all the local amenities.
All rooms are twin bedded with a private loo, bath and shower; some have a lake view.
The hotel features an elegant restaurant, locally renowned for its food, with a terrace facing the harbour, a pleasant roof garden with bar, sun terrace and panoramic views, a small garden and the public rooms which are all cool marble and pastel shades are air conditioned, with yet more fabulous views across the lake.
Guests at the Europa have free use of the pool and gardens at Hotel Astoria.
Lift; 63 bedrooms.
TRENTINO ITALY We grateful acknowledge the co-operation of APT Trentino in the preparation of this programme.
HOTEL ASTORIA (3)
Situated just a short walk from the centre of the resort, the Astoria is adjacent to Riva's tennis and sports complex.
All rooms are twin bedded with private facilities, some are available with balcony and all are nicely decorated.
The hotel is set in well tended gardens, has a swimming pool and sun terrace, a restaurant, bar, television and reading rooms.
Once a week there is an open air buffet (weather permitting) with live music, and the hotel also features a regular candlelit dinner with music.
Lifts; 96 bedrooms.
Singles available.
Garda
Garda is a charming old village that is very easy on the eye.
Situated on the eastern shore of the lake with a backdrop of terraced vineyards, olive groves and cypress trees.
Along the side of the lake, a long promenade runs in front of the town; no wonder amateur photographers come back raving!
Garda still operates a fishing fleet, and there is a lovely blend of the old and new, with many smart restaurants and chic boutiques, rubbing shoulders with old cafes and on market day a sea of stalls.
In some ways, there is much more of a Mediterranean feel about this end of the lake than the everyday Lakes and Mountains resort.
There are beaches, for instance, which are a mix of pebble and shingle, and a couple of lakeside lidos.
The swimming is safe and very tempting in the lake's crystal clear waters.
If Garda reminds you of some of the better Mediterranean resorts you've visited, its nightlife will nicely reinforce that view!
The bars and restaurants which line the promenade are sophisticated, and the choice is varied.
It's also very pretty, as the promenade's lights twinkle into the night.
Further ‘inland’ you can choose from a myriad of even more music bars and pizzerias which are tucked away in small cobbled squares.
It's all very civilised!
We'd recommend Garda for those who want plenty to do on holiday, or to groups with different interests — families with teenage children perhaps.
What to see and do
Excursions: Whatever you do, don't miss a visit to romantic Venice.
Florence is also within easy reach.
Here there are many of the world's great art treasures and museums, as well as many elegant shops.
The spectacular Dolomite mountains is another memorable day out, and a trip to the great wine growing area of Valpolicella is a favourite.
Swimming: The lake is clear and pristine perfect for swimming.
Garda has small beaches just outside town.
Watersports: Pedaloes are available.
Windsurfing and waterskiing are also on offer.
Tennis: Hard Courts are available.
Bring your own equipment.
Fishing: Fish are abundant; locally obtained fishing permit required.
Walking: A map showing all the paths is available locally.
Local transport: Local buses link the various resorts on the lake; though it's much nicer to travel by ferry or hydrofoil.
HOTEL MARCO POLO (3)
Situated on a steep incline and build into the hillside overlooking the Lake, is the unusually designed Marco Polo.
The main building is semi-circular, and the reception area and public rooms are situated on the top floor, with the bedrooms beneath them.
All bedrooms are twin bedded with a private loo, shower and balcony.
Two separate villas are located in the extensive gardens.
The hotel features a pleasant swimming pool with sun terrace, lounge chairs and large lawns for sunbathing.
On the top floor is a dining room with views out over the lake, offering self-service breakfast, waiter service evening meals and an a la carte menu.
There's also a snack bar, lounge area, children's pool, mini bus from hotel to lakeside (small local charge), and occasional dances with live music.
Lift; 90 bedrooms; singles available.
SWIMMING POOL — MARCO POLO
HOTEL DORIA (2)
The friendly and unpretentious Hotel Doria is set just 400 yards from the lake, and close to all the resort's amenities.
The hotel has a good reputation for service, and all our clients have been made to feel very welcome.
The Doria is comfortably furnished, with a lively bar on the ground floor which serves drinks to the lounge and the small front terrace.
Meals are served in the attractive dining room.
Hotel guests can use the swimming pool and pleasant garden of the nearby Hotel Imperial, under the same management.
The twin bedded rooms have private shower-rooms, and some have a balcony.
Lift: 45 rooms.
HOTEL REGINA ADELAIDE (3+) Premier
This is a lovely, elegant hotel on the lakeside promenade, just a short stroll from the centre of Garda.
The bedrooms, though on the small side, have recently been completed refurbished in sophisticated style.
The public rooms are spacious and create a discreet atmosphere of good living.
There are several comfortable lounges, a bar and a stylish restaurant overlooking the garden, considered to have one of the best chefs in Garda.
Dinner is a three course affair, followed by a calorie heavy sweet trolley!
Outside is a patio; ideal for drinks, a sun terrace, and a small garden.
Lift; 54 bedrooms.
HOTEL AL MULINO (2+)
Once part of a watermill, this hotel is just 500 metres from the lakeside beach and close to the centre of Garda village.
There is a swimming pool with a sun terrace, pool bar, free deckchairs and deckchairs all set in lovely gardens.
Guests have a choice of two comfortable lounges, as well as a cheerful taverna bar where regular barbecues are held.
There is also an open air dance floor (open during high season).
Breakfast is continental style, while dinner is a choice of main courses.
Guests may choose to take lunch rather than dinner.
Bedrooms vary in size, though all are comfortable, and have a shower and loo.
Lift; 44 bedrooms; singles available.
Bardolino & Torri del Benaco
TORRI DEL BENACO
These two delightful little resorts are spread round a picturesque old fishing harbour at the southern end of Lake Garda.
Bardolino is just five minutes by local bus from Garda and the shingle beaches are a ten minute walk from the village.
The water shoals reasonably gently, and the swimming is safe.
As well as windsurfers and pedaloes, there are sailing boats for hire, and on two of the beaches where there is a small charge to enter, sunbeds are available.
The resort also features a mini golf course, and there is a tennis club available to all.
Bardolino is a very pretty traditional resort, and has a relaxed Mediterranean feel about it.
There is also an attractive promenade and park for a stroll in the sunshine.
Nightlife is informal, with a dozen or so quiet bars and about 15 restaurants offering delicious home made pasta dishes.
Bardolino is our nearest resort to the great cities of Venice, Milan and Florence and will appeal mainly to those people seeking things to do and see, rather than an inactive holiday in the sun.
Torri del Benaco meanwhile, is another charming village, dominated by the 13th century castle of the Scaligiers.
Lovers of history will also appreciate the pretty Church of Trinity, with its 15th century frescos.
All the narrow streets eventually seem to lead to the harbour.
From here regular hydrofoils and ferries connect to Garda, Malcesine and Riva, so getting about is never a problem.
Ten minutes walk from the harbour are shingle beaches with safe swimming, pedalo hire and a windsurfing school for the energetic.
Naturally there are many walks to be enjoyed in the surrounding countryside, and through the lemon groves that surround the village.
The local tourist office organises a number of guided walks.
Nightlife is relaxed and friendly, with a handful of bars and restaurants.
Small and sophisticated, Torri's beautiful harbour is dominated in the evenings by a floodlit castle.
If your idea of an ideal evening out is a leisurely meal, followed by long drinks and good conversion, then Torri is your kind of resort.
What to see and do
Excursions: There is an excellent selection of value for money excursions, bookable locally including trips to the world famous cities of Verona, Venice and Florence.
Don't miss the chance to visit the breathtaking Dolomites.
The trip to the wine growing area of Valpolicella is always popular.
Swimming: Both resorts have small shingle beaches from which one can swim in crystal clear waters.
Watersports: Windsurfing, waterskiing and pedaloes are available for hire.
Walking: There are several lovely walks along the lakeside, with the two mile stroll between Bardolino and Garda being a firm favourite.
Public transport: Buses run from both resorts, north to Riva and south down to Verona.
Much more fun are the hydrofoils which ply up and down the lake.
HOTEL FIORDALISO, BARDOLINO (2)
The Fiordaliso is an excellent value for money base in Bardolino, and is run by the same family as the popular Catullo, so you can be sure of a warm welcome.
Situated in a 10 minute stroll from the lake, this clean and well run hotel has a small lounge, a bar, a pretty terrace where drinks are served, two further terraces with chairs to relax in, and a restaurant which serves good Italian cooking.
All the twin rooms are comfortable, and all overlook the attractive courtyard.
No lift; 35 bedrooms; single available.
HOTEL GARDESANA, TORRI DEL BENACO (3+) Premier
Recently restored and renovated, this beautiful 16th century palace is now a splendid hotel.
Situated right on the pretty little harbour front, the Gardesana enjoys superb views of the lake from its elegant public rooms and first floor restaurant, where an extensive buffet breakfast and excellent 3 course dinner with salad bar are served.
It is the ideal place to spend a leisurely holiday.
Under the porticoed frontage, where music is played most evenings, you can sip a drink and watch the world go y.
A small beach, perfect for a cooling dip, is some 160 yards away.
Lift; 34 bedrooms.
HOTEL CATULLO, BARDOLINO (2+)
Ideally situated directly on the lakeside promenade yet close to the centre of the resort, the Catullo is a delightful hotel in an attractive setting, and is run with great care by the Fabbricatori family.
This is a popular hotel with our clients, many of whom return year after year.
It is a traditional building, and amongst its facilities are a TV room, a friendly bar, a pretty garden and both outdoor and indoor restaurants; both have an excellent reputation for food; breakfast is an extended buffet, and at dinner local specialties are on the menu.
Vegetarian meals can be arranged on request, as can children's meals.
The bedrooms are comfortable, and twins have private bathrooms.
Garden view rooms are quiet and secluded.
No lift; 36 bedrooms; singles available.
 Malcesine & Limone
Malcesine is a bit special.
It is based around a busy little harbour with many waterside cafes offering magnificent views across the lake to Limone.
The village can only be described as picturesque, the core built in the 13th century has narrow and sometimes steep and winding cobblestone alleys.
There's a castle, and a cable car that soars up the mountains to an area that has been dubbed ‘the botanical gardens of Italy’.
For lovers of wild flowers and all things natural, Malcesine is a must.
Beaches are shingle with safe swimming, and most forms of watersports are available.
Nightlife is laid back, though there are a score or more of bars (some with a pianist), and even two discos.
Restaurants range from the good to the fast food variety; if you're more concerned with ambience, then choose one in the old port area.
Limone is a very old village nestling at the foot of the cliffs on the lake's western shore.
It's another lakeside village in a spectacular setting.
The lemon groves, which gave the village its name, cover the surrounding countryside, and there are flowers everywhere.
The town ha its own castle and church.
Because of the terrain, we'd hesitate to recommend this resort to the very old or infirm.
The village has many bars and restaurants.
Limone would be a good choice for those who seek no more from a holiday than a chance to completely relax in the sun with a long cool drink.
Alternatively, how about a leisurely lunch next to the lake while watching the fishermen mending their nets.
The fact that Limone is so relaxing may have something to do with the proven fact that statistically, the residents of Limone live longer, with lower incidents of stress or heart disease!
What to see and do
Excursions: A must is a trip to Verona, an elegant Italian city and the home of Romeo and Juliet.
The opera festival, which takes place in July and August is highly recommended; see your local Enterprise Representative for information.
Other popular excursions on offer are Venice and the Dolomites.
For less cultural souls, we offer a half day trip to sample the local wines in the Valpolicella region.
Swimming: Many of the hotels have their own swimming pools, and of course there are the clean crystal waters of the lake itself.
Please note, however, that the bottom shelves quickly into deep water.
Walking: In Malcesine there are miles of marked paths on the Monte Baldo, reached via cablecar or on foot.
In Limone there are guided walks organised by the local tourist office.
Watersports: Both resorts feature windsurfing schools.
Motorboats are also available for hire, as are the pedaloes and sailing dinghies.
Tennis: Courts are available.
Public transport: Buses and boats run regularly round the lake.
Verona, Garda, Riva, and Torbole are all within easy striking distance.
HOTEL CRISTINA (3)
Situated in a complex of separate building son a hillside over Lake Garda, the lakeside promenade and the beach are all within easy walking distance, even though it's an uphill return.
The village is a 20 minute stroll away (though the hotel operates a bus service into the village for a small charge).
There are also two swimming pools with sun terraces and extensive gardens.
Inside, there is a lounge, dining room and a barbecue.
Breakfast is buffet style with a choice of menu at dinner.
There is a full entertainments programme during the high season and the hotel has a taverna with frequent live music.
All rooms are comfortably furnished and have their own shower and loo.
Overall, a friendly and lively hotel with a cosmopolitan atmosphere.
Lifts; 143 bedrooms; singles available.
HOTEL CENTRALE, MALCESINE (2+)
Situated right in the centre of the town and directly facing Malcesine's picturesque harbour, the Centrale is perfectly placed to enjoy this attractive lakeside resort.
The cafe/terrace is an ideal place to relax and watch the world go by, and its a la carte restaurant has excellent food and is well known amongst the local residents.
There is a lively bar where you will be served a welcome drink, and the hospitable staff will be sure to give you a warm welcome.
All of the simply furnished rooms have private bathrooms, a nd some have a lake view.
Lift; 38 bedrooms.
HOTEL MALCESINE, MALCESINE (3)
This hotel enjoys an unrivalled position right on the lakeside in the centre of Malcesine, and offers well furnished rooms, some with double beds and all with a private bathroom.
The many shops and bars at this exceptionally pretty little resort are close to the hotel, which features a large sun terrace where drinks can be enjoyed against the backdrop of the incomparable beauty of Lake Garda.
Amenities include a sun terrace built out above the lake, garden, lounge, bar and table tennis.
Dinner, with a choice of menu, is served in the hotel's attractive dining room.
NB: Unsuitable for disabled people.
Lift; 55 bedrooms; singles available.
HOTEL CARAVEL (4)
Standing in an elevated position looking out over Lake Garda, the Caravel is one of Limone's best hotels.
It's a ten minute walk up hill from the beach and an easier stroll into the village.
All bedrooms are twin bedded with a private loo and bath or shower, are spacious and therefore suitable for families and have a balcony and lake view.
The hotel features a large swimming pool, a roomy poolside terrace with fantastic lakeside views, a dining room with waiter service; English style breakfast is available.
The hotel also has two lounge areas, a bar, a children's area in the main swimming pool, and nearby public tennis courts.
The Caravel also features an entertainments programme.
Lift; 95 bedrooms.
HOTEL PANORAMA (3)
This friendly hotel is in a superb position, built on a cliffside on the shores on Lake Garda.
Limone is a pleasant 25 minute stroll along the banks of the lake, and the hotel runs a minibus during the day for a nominal charge.
The entrance from the road is in the top floor, with all the rooms and public areas on lower levels leading down to the lakeside.
This means all the spacious, well furnished bedrooms have spectacular lake views which can be enjoyed from the sunny balconies, and all have a third bed in the form of a convertible sofa.
There are more stunning views from the pretty dining room in which you will be served typical Italian food, and you can relax with a large drink in the small lounge bar.
By the lakeside is a large swimming pool and attractive garden plus bar, perfect for languid days in the Italian sun.
Lift; 40 bedrooms; singles available.
Fuschl
Fuschl is the smallest of our Austrian lakeside resorts and attracts those desiring a totally unspoilt atmosphere.
The whole area is a listed nature reserve, and the emphasis is very much on peace on quiet.
Even on the lake for instance, motorboats are not allowed and the hired boats run on electricity.
It takes about an hour to travel the length of the lake in complete silence.
Other watersports on offer are rowing, sailing, windsurfing and pedaloes.
Swimming is a pleasure in the lake's warm waters, and as its floor shelves very gradually, it is safe for children to bathe.
Tennis, bowling and minigolf add to the daytime activities, and Schloss Fuschl houses a hunting and pipe museum.
Walking in the surrounding area is really enjoyable.
The marked paths lead to spectacular view points and picturesque mountain villages.
The walk round the lake is a good place to start off with, while the path over the ‘Mozartblick’ to St Gilgen gives a fantastic view over the Wolfgangsee.
Fuschl is the closest of all our resorts to Salzburg, which is easily reached by a regular bus service.
There's a wealth of things to do here, from visiting the fortress or the water gardens at Hellbrunn, to wandering around the museums or the very elegant shops in the old town.
Nightlife is varied, with traditional music at folklore evenings, open-air concerts, cafes, bars and a really good disco for the lively.
Evening excursions to Salzburg also operate, giving you the opportunity to visit a concert, or the Marionette theatre, or simply explore the city.
What to see and do
Excursions: There are numerous excursions available from your resort.
The Salzkammergut resorts are the nearest we offer to Vienna, Austria's capital city.
It is just 3 hours by coach and a tour will include the Schonbrunn palace, the Hofburg, the Opera and St. Stephen's Cathedral.
You will also catch a glimpse of the Big Wheel in the famous Peter fairground.
Golf: Schloss Fuschl has a 9-hole golf course; it is advisable to take your own clubs if you wish to play as hiring is quite expensive.
Green fees are approx AS 175 per day.
Walking: There are something like 150 miles of marked paths for you to follow, and maps can be obtained from the local Tourist Office.
Cycling: Hire a cycle to explore the surrounding countryside; the terrain around the lakes is fairly gentle!
Watersports: On the Fuschlsee you can hire electrically-powered boats, rowing boats, pedaloes, and also sail or windsurf.
It is also ideal for swimming, and the gentle gradient of its shores makes it safe for children.
Tennis: Outdoor types can enjoy a game of tennis, and tuition is available.
Free activities: The brass band gives regular concerts, there are guided walks and even occasional windsurfing regattas!
NB The commentaries for the guided walks are generally in German.
HOTEL SEEWINKEL (3+)
It's easy to see why guests return to the Seewinkel year after year.
Situated a 5 minute walk from the centre of Fuschl, the hotel is surrounded by its own gardens and stands directly facing the lake.
The hotel has a terrace overlooking the lake where you can enjoy delicious cakes and ice cream.
Other public rooms include a reception area, lounge, dining room, TV lounge and a bar where you will be offered a welcome cocktail.
The hotel has a sauna and a Turkish steam bath (both free to house guests) and a coin-operated solarium.
Dinner is 4 courses and there is a choice of menu.
Specialities of the Seewinkel are the excellent buffet breakfast, pancake buffets, and the barbecue or ice cream buffet which takes place on alternative weeks.
All the bedrooms are very comfortable and have a private bathroom, telephone, radio and balcony.
Some rooms take a third bed.
The single has free use of a shower.
A rowing boat and canoes are available to guests (charge for canoes in high season).
During September Herr Ferstl, the owner offers a weekly guided ramble around Fuschl.
Lift; 39 bedrooms; single available.
PENSION TANNHOF (2+)
This is a pretty flower decked pension located in the middle of the village, yet only 2 minutes from the lake shore.
It has a large garden with stream, ideal for sunbathing, and a log-built summer house.
The Tannhof has recently been completely modernised, and the bedrooms, all with private bathroom, are beautifully furnished in traditional Austrian style.
Some rooms have balconies.
For guests on half board, dinner is served at the Leitner which is next door.
No lift; 13 bedrooms.
PENSION ALPENROSE (2)
The Pension Alpenrose is only one minute from the lakeside, beautifully furnished and decorated with Hans' own carvings.
The Stollinger family, who speak excellent English take great pride in their friendly and spotlessly clean pension.
The Alpenrose has recently been refurbished and now ha a comfortable TV lounge, and a cosy breakfast room with views to the fields and mountains at the back of the house.
Limited parking is available.
All the bedrooms are simply but pleasantly furnished.
Basic rooms have free use of showers.
Guests who have booked half board take their evening meal at the Leitner.
No lift; 16 bedrooms.
St Gilgen
St Gilgen is set on the north west shore of the Wolfgangsee.
It is an extremely pretty village that remains delightfully uncrowded all year round, but still has much to keep the visitor occupied.
To the side of the village square, is a small but fascinating folk museum, which surprisingly has enough exhibits to keep anyone occupied for an hour or two.
The main feature of the square is the village hall, in front of which is the Mozart fountain.
On the short walk down to the lakeside promenade you pass Mozart's mother's house; this is also a small museum.
The view from the promenade across the lake is quite breathtaking, and there is always plenty happening.
Take a look at the unusual fountain at the edge of the lake, and see if you can count the number of different patterns it makes.
The Zwolferhorn gondola takes you directly from St Gilgen up to the top of the Zwolferhorn mountain.
The journey takes about 15 minutes, but once at the top you can enjoy one of the best views in the Salzkammergut.
On a clear day you can see no less than 7 lakes.
Walkers have plenty to keep them busy.
If you are very energetic you may even make your way to the Postalm, the largest alpine plateau in the Eastern alps.
Less energetic souls may prefer the views afforded from the lake steamers.
A very lazy way to spend a day in the sun, is to buy a ‘day’ ticket, and hop on and off the boats and in and out of the many cafes and restaurants dotted around the lake.
Watersports abound, and instruction in sailing, windsurfing and waterskiing is available.
Pedaloes, rowing and electric boats are also available for hire.
There are several tennis courts, mini-golf and 9 pin bowling.
Evening entertainment is relaxed.
There is often live music in the bars and the discos are quite lively.
In high season the village brass band plays regular concerts and there are waterski displays most weeks.
What to see and do
Excursions: Don't leave without taking the trip to Vienna.
Our tour of the capital takes in the Opera House, the Schonbrunn and Belvedere Palaces, St Stephens Cathedral, and the famous big wheel.
The journey back to the resort takes you through the Wachau wine region on the Danube.
Another must is the excursion to Hallstatt and Gosau, two of the most beautiful spots in the Salzkammergut.
An interesting trip takes you to Berchtesgaden, location of Hitler's ‘Eagle's Nest’.
The drive there is quite an experience too, have your camera ready!
Walks: Far too many to manage in one holiday, even if you did nothing else.
Either up the mountains or around the lakes, the views are superb.
Walking maps are available from the local tourist office.
Mountain Lifts: Gondola lift up to the Zwolferhorn mountain.
Swimming: Indoor pool and the lake.
Fishing: Keen fishermen should bring their own tackle, the fishing in the lake is good and varied.
Permits are required, ask our local representative for details.
Sports: Watersports are excellent, the village offers sailing, windsurfing, waterskiing and rowing.
Instruction is available.
Tennis, minigolf and bowling are also on offer.
PARKHOTEL BILLROTH (4)(Premier)
Originally a private villa, the Billroth stands in its own park, some ten minutes walk from the centre of St Gilgen.
Time seems to have stood still in this lovely hotel, and the gracious style of the rooms, terrace and extensive gardens is truly relaxing.
All rooms are twin bedded with a private bathroom.
Amenities include a bar, lounge, television room, and restaurant which leads onto a large terrace with wonderful views across the lake.
There is also a tennis court (own equipment needed), solarium (payable locally) free use of sauna and steam bath twice a week, private access to the lake for bathing, and free use of rowing and pedal boats.
Breakfast is continental, supplemented with ham and cheeses, and dinner is 4 courses.
No lift; 47 bedrooms; single available.
HOTEL RADETZKY (3+)
This elegant hotel is in the middle of St Gilgen, a two minute walk from the lake.
The public rooms are attractive and include a traditional stube, dining room and small bar.
On the second floor there is a sun terrace commanding superb views.
The decor in the bedrooms has been tastefully designed in cool pastel shades, whilst the beautiful furniture varies from light ash and mahogany to dark oak.
Dining is a special occasion here; this is the only hotel we know where china is Rosenthal and silver cutlery is used!
Needless to say the cuisine is also a bit special.
Breakfast is buffet style and dinner is a three course set menu.
The single room has free use of a shower.
No lift; 24 bedrooms; single available.
HOTEL AND GASTEHAUS KENDLER (3)
These two buildings, owned and managed by the Kendler family, are right in the middle of St Gilgen, and only two minutes walk from the lake and promenade.
Built around 1905, the hotel has plenty of character.
Our guests will stay either in the original hotel or the modern gastehaus which is about 100 yards away.
The hotel features a large lounge, a sauna and coin-operated solarium, and the gastehaus has an exceptionally pleasant private garden.
All meals, including buffet breakfast, are taken in the hotel.
The Kendler has a well deserved reputation locally for its food.
Main building 38 bedrooms; gastehaus 26 bedrooms; single available.
SALZBURGERHOF (2)
Situated just one minute from the village centre and five minutes from the lake.
The Salzburgerhof is convenient for everything including local buses and the cable car.
This hotel has just been taken over by Herr and Frau Sulzur, and already there is a friendly atmosphere.
Rooms are simply furnished and all have a bath, shower and w.c.
Some have a balcony, and a few will take a third bed.
There is a small stuberl for a la carte meals and a small garden type terrace where snacks and drinks are served.
Breakfast is buffet style, and the evening meal is a three course set menu.
In short, friendly and good value for money.
No lift; 20 bedrooms.
St Wolfgang
St Wolfgang is the most famous of the resorts set on the shores of Lake Wolfgang.
Lovers of opera know it as the setting to Benatsky's ‘White Horse’ operetta: you can still enjoy eating apple strudel and cream on the balcony of the 350 year old White Horse Inn.
The village itself is well over 1000 years old; in the middle ages it was a very important centre for pilgrims; the white church still forms the focal point of the village.
Wander through the village and along the lakeside promenade, and you come to the small Schafbergbahn railway, which winds its way to the top of the Schafberg mountain behind the village.
A journey on one of the steam trains is certainly not to be missed!
Ferry boats ply regularly between all the resorts on the lake, and it's great fun to catch a ride on the old paddle steamer, the Franz-Josef.
For the more active, there is sailing, windsurfing, waterskiing and motor boat hire.
land based sports include golf, tennis and 9-pin bowling.
Walking in this area is very extensive, and it ranges from gentle strolls around the lake, to strenuous hikes up and down the mountains: walking maps can be obtained at the local tourist office.
Nightlife is good, and there is plenty to do in the evenings, whether you're looking for a quiet drink or a bop in a disco.
There are plenty of bars and cafes, many of them featuring live music, or at the opposite end of the scale operetta!
The White Horse Inn organises operetta evenings every week.
Our local representative has a full programme on offer; the boat party is everybody's favourite.
What to see and do
Excursions: St Wolfgang is the closest of all of our resorts to Vienna, so the trip to the old Imperial capital and the Wachau wine region on the Danube is a must.
Salzburg is a fascinating city too, and the guided tour is by far the best way to get your initial bearings.
One of the excursions which is slightly out of the ordinary is to the Ice Caves at Dachstein, where you are guided through a twilight world of amazing ice formations.
These are just a few of the many excursions on offer.
Walking: There are far too many paths for anyone to explore them in one holiday.
The walk over the Falkenstein to St Gilgen offers super views of the lake, and the adventurous may even make their way to the top of the Schafberg.
Mountain Lifts: Schafbergbahn mountain railway.
Swimming: Some of the hotels have their own pools; the lake is excellent for bathing.
Fishing: Keen fishermen should bring their own tackle as the Wolfgangsee is renowned for its fishing (permits required).
Sports: All forms of watersports including sailing, windsurfing, waterskiing and rowing (instruction available).
On land there is 9-pin bowling, minigolf, golf and tennis.
To explore further afield, bicycle hire is available.
Lake Steamers: A regular service runs to all the villages around the lake.
HOTEL SCHLOSS EIBENSTEIN (3)
This is a unique opportunity to stay in a wonderful Austrian castle, complete with towers and turrets, situated directly above the lake.
The Eibenstein stands on a small hill in its own lovely park and garden, yet it is right in the middle of this bustling resort.
Public rooms are, as one might expect, elegantly furnished with high ceilings (and antlers on the walls!).
The hotel also has a private beach for lake bathing, a free indoor pool and a sauna (payable locally).
Most of the bedrooms have private facilities, but guests staying in the basic rooms will have free use of a shower.
Many rooms have balconies and most enjoy beautiful lake views.
Some rooms are also large enough to take a fourth bed.
Breakfast is a buffet, and although half board is not available at the hotel, there are plenty of cafes and restaurants in the resort.
2 lifts; 50 bedrooms; single available.
STRANDHOTEL MARGARETHA (3+)
The Margaretha occupies an excellent yet quiet position, about a 10 minute walk from the village centre, and a mere stones thrown from the beautiful lake.
The hotel's private lakeside garden is just across the road, ideal for sunbathing and swimming.
A major attraction is the hotel's relaxation centre which has a steam sauna, Finnish sauna, jacuzzi, solarium, massage and rest room all payable locally.
The lounge, bar, sun terrace, restaurant and cafe are open all day.
The hotel's owners are keen golfers and have arranged a 15% reduction on green fees and training at the local course (SS71 grade) for house guests.
Breakfast is buffet-style.
All rooms are twin bedded with a private bathroom.
Balcony rooms have a view of the lake, and some have a television and telephone.
Most rooms take a third bed, one takes a fourth.
The hotel has its own carpark, free to guests.
Lift; 36 bedrooms; no singles available.
GASTHOF KATRIN (3)
You will be made very welcome in his pretty ‘Hansel and Gretel’ Gasthof, and very well looked after by the friendly owner, Frau Henn.
On the main street of St Wolfgang, the Katrin has a large terrace where drinks and a la carte meals are served, and a stube where house guests dine; the meals are excellent.
Upstairs there is a pleasant breakfast/dining room.
All the comfortable bedrooms have a private bathroom.
The Katrin also has a small garden nearby which is available to house guests; there are no parking facilities at this Gasthof.
No lift; 16 bedrooms; no singles available.
PENSION ALPENBLICK (1+)
A really charming pension, and the owner, Frau Senjak is very friendly and welcoming.
This pension is situated above the main road, in its own gardens and can be reached via a flight of steps from the road.
The front looks over the lake and the views are beautiful.
It is eight minutes walk from the resort centre, and a ten minute stroll from the nearest bathing area.
Most bedrooms have private facilities, and those that don't have free use of a separate bathroom.
Breakfast is taken on a pleasant terrace, or in a large room which doubles as a comfortable lounge during the evenings.
Guests on half board take dinner at the Hotel Rudolphshohe, just five minutes walk away.
No lift; 8 rooms; single available.
Zell am See
The attractive small town of Zell am See is located on the shores of a lake in the heart of what is known as the Europa Sport Region.
It's a lively and cosmopolitan resort, which as well as being scenic, offers enormous potential to the sports enthusiast.
The Lake is centre of much summer activity and entertainment.
Swimming in the lake is a joy in summer, and with water temperatures often reaching 20C (68F), windsurfers shouldn't need a wet suit!
Zell am See also has an excellent Sports Centre, with an indoor swimming pool and sauna.
For the less energetic, ferries ply regularly across the lake.
The town itself has a pedestrian centre with quaint narrow streets leading down to the lake front.
There are numerous shops, cafes, an old church which is well worth a visit, plus a thirteenth-century tower in the bustling town square which is a focal point of the resort.
Zell am See's distinctive Schmittenhohe mountain (6,447ft) is easily accessible by cable car and there are several restaurants at the top where you can lunch and enjoy the incomparable views.
If you enjoy walking, we recommend Zell am See.
Walks vary from a gentle stroll to the neighbouring resort of Thumersbach, from where you can return by boat, through to more challenging rambles using the cable car further up the mountains.
Ski enthusiasts will want to visit the nearby village of Kaprun, just a few miles down the road; where you can try summer skiing on the Kitzsteinhorn glacier.
Zell am See is also very centrally situated for a marvellous range of coach excursions, and the lakeside railway offers the more independent traveller the opportunity to explore further afield on his own.
Zell has a tiny airport, and a trip in an air taxi or a glider, offering unforgettable mountain panoramas, should prove an experience you'll never forget.
Nightlife is varied and active — open-air concerts, discos, numerous bars plus, of course, a full programme of entertainment offered by your resort representative.
What to see and do
Excursions: Zell am See is a marvellous base for many lovely coach tours of the Baroque city of Salzburg with its ancient fortress; the Grossglockner, a climb up one of the first major Alpine highways (opened in 1935) to see Austria's highest mountain, set amidst the everlasting snows of the Pasterze glacier; the Krimml waterfalls; Vienna: Kaprun: St. Wolfgang and Hallstatt in the Salzkammergut, and even Venice.
For details of our pre-bookable excursion packages, please turn to page 8.
Summer skiing: Kaprun's glacier is just a half hour bus ride away.
In summer, it's definitely for the early risers — lifts close around midday as the hot summer sun softens the snow!
Windsurfing: Boards are available for hire, and the warm lake makes Zell am See an ideal spot for this sport.
Sailing: This is one of the best areas for sailing in Austria.
Tuition is available if required, at an approx cost of AS 210 per hour.
Swimming: Apart from swimming in the lake itself, Zell am See has an excellent public pool close to the town centre.
Tennis: There are many courts available for hire.
Horseriding: Available in Schuttdorf, a suburb of Zell am See.
The Kristall would be the ideal hotel to choose if this is your favourite pastime.
Approx cost AS 170 per hour.
Rambling: Zell am See offers wonderful vistas to the energetic walker — from the Schmittenhohe you can see the distant peaks of the Grossglockner; northwards is the lovely Glemmtal.
Golf: There is an 18-hole championship course nearby and equipment can be hired.
Railway: The train to Salzburg takes an hour and a half and costs approx AS 270; alternatively Innsbruck takes two hours and costs approx AS 370.
Free activities: A weekly walk is organised by the tourist office.
HOTEL GRUNER BAUM (2+)
The Gruner Baum comprises two buildings linked by an underground walkway, and accommodation is of a high standard.
Standard rooms are double bedded (not twins).
Facilities include a resident's sitting room, and a beautiful dining room where the breakfast buffet and three course dinners are served.
There is also a cellar bar with music and dancing nightly in high season, an a la carte restaurant, bar and an outdoor terrace restaurant.
Lift; 47 bedrooms; singles available.
HOTEL TIROLERHOF (4) Premier
The Tirolerhof's facilities include an a la carte restaurant, two resident's dining rooms, a terrace restaurant, a TV/video lounge, a playroom, solarium, and a free Turkish bath and sauna which open according to demand.
Breakfast is a buffet and dinner is four courses with a choice of main course.
Accommodation is of the highest standard, all twin rooms having a private balcony and bathroom.
The junior suits have separate sleeping and living areas and a south facing balcony.
The hotel offers its guests a 20% reduction on green fees at a nearby golf course and free transport.
Lift; 85 bedrooms; single on request.
HOTEL KRISTALL (3+)
The Kristall is about a 30 minute walk from the lake, and a 45 minute stroll or a 5 minutes bus journey will bring you to Zell am See town centre.
The hotel has a new indoor pool leading directly onto the well-kept gardens with table tennis and sun-bathing lawns.
A sauna is available free twice a week and there is also a fitness room.
Once a week in fine weather a barbecue replaces an evening meal.
There is a spacious reception/lounge and a comfortable hotel bar.
All bedrooms have a private bathroom and balcony.
Lift: 35 bedrooms; singles available.
CLIMA SEEHOTEL (4) Premier
The hotel has been built in a lovely mansion style.
All rooms are large and well furnished with private bath.
The hotel features an excellent restaurant and cafe with terrace and panoramic views of the lake, TV room, a traditional wood panelled drawing room, a bar and a disco, and a sauna, solarium and whirlpool.
There is also a roof terrace, and guests are offered a 20% green fee reduction at a nearby 18 hole course.
Lift: 85 bedrooms; no singles available.
PARKHOTEL EDER-VICTORIA (3)
These are two buildings set in their own grounds, one behind the other.
Ideally situated, about three minutes walk from the town centre (pedestrian zone) and the lake.
All Enterprise rooms are in the Victoria part of the complex, and all have shower, loo and balcony.
All rooms are comfortable and traditionally furnished.
The hotel offers a children's playground and a spacious covered terrace where drinks are served.
There is a TV, lounge and a pub famous in Zell am See, called the Crazy Daisy, which has a fabulous atmosphere.
There is a buffet breakfast and a wide choice of main courses at dinner, plus a salad buffet.
All meals are taken in the Eder.
Lifts: 82 bedrooms; no singles available.
Brand
Tucked away high up in the Ratikon Alps, Brand is a beautiful little village in the traditional Austrian style.
All the houses are wooden shingle, window boxes overflowing with wooden flowers on every balcony and window ledge.
There are over a 100km of marked walks throughout the area.
One of the great things about mountain walking in Austria is that no matter where you go, you never seem to be far from a mountain hut serving food and drinks to refresh you.
Many of these huts provide overnight accommodation if you feel like being a bit adventurous.
The Niggenkopf chairlift starts directly in the village and gives access to the Lorenzital and the Amatschon Joch.
A short walk from Brand, or a local bus ride, will take you to the cable car which in turn takes you to the Lunarsee, a beautiful crystal clear mountain lake.
here you can take a gentle stroll around the lake, or start off on a more strenuous hike.
A cafe with a sun terrace lies by the lake, so you can relax in the sun and enjoy your surroundings to their full.
All around the village are wonderful mountain meadows, filled with alpine flowers.
Total tranquility is what it's about up here; not a sound but the lazy buzzing of insects, the whirring of grasshoppers and the distant tinkle of a cow bell, just ideal for a relaxing break.
There is also an ideal resort for children as there are several activities arranged to cater specially for them.
There is a kindergarten, pony riding, guided walks, a playground and adventure playground.
There is also a special programme organised during July and August, outlined below, for children and parents.
All in all, this is a great little village, with something for everyone and very friendly locals.
What to see and do
Excursions: Liechtenstein, the tiny principality which lies on the Austrian/Swiss border is not too far away and makes for a fascinating destination.
Excursions all around the Vorarlberg are worthwhile to see all the fantastic scenery, and the many ancient villages, castles and churches scattered over the countryside.
A half day excursion to the pretty island of Lindau on Lake Constance is most worthwhile.
A trip to King  Ludwig's fairytale castle at Neuschwanstein is also arranged.
Walking: Brand and the surrounding area boasts over 100 km of marked paths, weaving through the breathtaking alpine scenery.
Swimming: Open air swimming pool with a small pool for children.
There are also a few indoor pools.
Horse riding: Riding is available for children as well as for adults.
Horse drawn buggy rides: Great fun for everyone and a good way to see the village!
Fishing: A permit is required for fishing in the Lunarsee and Alvierbach.
Bowling: bowling and mini golf are available.
There is also a fitness course you can take to test how fit you really are!
Local transport: Regular buses run to Bludenz, 11 kms away down the valley.
Nightlife: Brand has 2 discos to choose from.
There is modern and traditional live music played most nights and Brass Band concerts weekly.
Children's programme
A typical weekly programme organised by the Tourist Office and run during July and August is outlined below.
This is free of charge to clients staying in Brand.
A nominal charge is made for table tennis and tennis tournaments.
Monday: Aerobics.
Make up morning — children and parents made up like Red Indians, clowns etc.
Followed by an afternoon family ramble.
If it's raining in the afternoon there will be a table tennis tournament.
Tuesday: Aerobics followed by pony riding and children's tennis in the afternoon.
If it rains, the programme will be aerobics, papier mâché mask making, craft work and painting etc.
Wednesday: Aerobics, followed by football and tennis.
If it's raining, aerobics will be followed by table tennis and craft work.
Thursday: Aerobics, Mountain Bike training, pedal car ‘Grand Prix’ and a torchlight walk.
If the weather doesn't allow, there is indoor football and  papier mâché mask making instead.
Friday: Running/jogging followed by frisbee, badminton and tennis.
In the afternoon, swimming games water polo, diving etc.
Then, story telling by the fire.
If it rains, there will be aerobics and make up morning, followed by indoor cycling proficiency.
HOTEL VALSCHENA (3+)
The Valschena is in a quiet position on the outskirts of the village, though the centre is a mere five minute walk away.
Enterprise clients have free use of the indoor pool, and there is a sauna (payable locally).
The hotel also has a large garden with deckchairs, table tennis, a children's playground and sun terraces.
The four course dinner is taken in the restaurant opposite the hotel under the same management.
The large bedrooms all have a private bathroom and several will take a third or fourth bed.
No lift; 17 bedrooms; single available.
HOTEL LAGANT (3+)
Set back from the main road, the Lagant enjoys a centrally situated location, with all the village amenities within easy reach.
There are indoor and outdoor tennis courts, as well as a large and very well equipped fitness centre with every kind of apparatus imaginable.
Other activities include table tennis, 2 swimming pools and a sauna.
A farmer's buffet and fondue evening replace two evening meals during the week.
All bedrooms are large and well furnished and all have private facilities.
Most take up to four beds and have balconies.
2 lifts; 75 bedrooms.
PENSION GARNI ALPENSTEIN (2)
Centrally situated, this pension is owned and managed by the Gassner family.
There is a large garden with deckchairs and table tennis and the public swimming bath is just two minutes walk away.
Guests on half board take their evening meal at the Hotel Zalim which is two minutes walk away.
Bedrooms are simply furnished, but are very comfortable.
All have private facilities and balconies are available at a supplement.
No lift; 11 bedrooms; single available.
PENSION GULMA (2)
The Gulma is set in its own garden with lawns and a sun terrace at the rear.
There is a lounge with a TV for relaxing during the evenings.
Alternatively, guests can enjoy a whirlpool bath at the hotel next door (small local charge).
Breakfast is continental with cheese, ham and fruit juice.
Guests on half board take their evening meals at th Hotel Zalim, 50 metres away.
The basic rooms have a wash basin and free use of a shower.
Rooms with private facilities are available at a supplement.
No lift; 14 bedrooms.
HOTEL ZALIM (3)
The Zalim is centrally situated for all village amenities.
The hotel has a large garden with sun loungers, children's play area, table tennis, lounge and bar.
A continental breakfast, with cheeses and meats, is served and dinner is four courses and consists of good home cooking.
Bedrooms are spacious and are traditionally furnished.
All have a telephone, TV and a kitchenette.
A balcony is available for a small supplement.
1 lift; 26 bedrooms.
St Anton
Almost on the border of the Tirol and the Vorarlberg, St Anton is set amongst the most breathtaking scenery.
Towering mountains surround the village and the area around St Anton is fantastic for walking.
For those who are not so energetic, the high peaks can be reached by cable cars and chair lifts from mid June onwards.
The village of St Anton could have fallen off a picture post card: it's that pretty!
The houses are traditional Austrian with lovely wooden shutters and balconies; all the windows and balconies have boxes overflowing with bright flowers.
Narrow streets wind their way through the houses and shops, and there are many restaurants and coffee houses with the tempting aroma of fresh coffee and baking air to entice you in.
A pedestrian zone also gives you the opportunity to wander at your leisure through the wide selection of shops.
If you enjoy walking, this could be heaven there are over 80 kms of marked paths to keep you occupied and walks are arranged weekly with an English speaking guide, both easy and strenuous.
There are a wide variety of activities on offer, including cycling.
This is something of a well organized pastime here, and there are many scenic routes to take.
Nightlife centres around the bars and restaurants, with a couple of discos at the Sporthotel and Post Hotel.
Still, after all the outdoor activity in the fresh air, many people don't last much beyond dinner and a few drinks!
What to see and do
Excursions: There are numerous excursions available from St Anton.
One of these is to Liechtenstein, the tiny principality which lies on the border of Switzerland and Austria.
Innsbruck, the famous Olympic ski resort is another excursion where you have a fascinating guided coach tour of the city followed by a few hours to explore for yourselves.
If you're dying to see these fairy tale castles for which Austria is famed, then take the trip to Neuschwanstein where King Ludwig's fairy tale castle is waiting to capture your imagination.
The castles in Chitty Chitty Bang Bang and Fantasia were based on this magical structure.
You will be given a guided tour and then return via the Lech valley.
Walking: With over 80 km of marked paths, there is plenty here to keep even the most ardent of walkers entertained.
Walks with an English speaking guide are arranged every week.
Wherever you go, the views are marvellous and the grandeur of the mountains breathtaking.
Mountain lifts: The Valluga Peak cable car takes you to 9,220 ft and a magnificent view.
Mountaineering: There are courses for beginners with accompanied trips and excursions.
Swimming: 15 minutes walk from the village centre, there is an excellent open air heated pool in a beautiful woodland setting.
Several of the hotels also have indoor pools.
Horse riding: Riding can be arranged at Pettnau with lessons for all levels and day treks available.
Fishing: Can be arranged, bring your own tackle, permits required.
Tennis: There are indoor and outdoor courts and coaching can be arranged.
Other sporting activities available include: mini golf and bowling.
Nightlife: Discos are in the Sporthotel and the Post Hotel.
There are plenty of bars and restaurants to choose from to enjoy a cool beer in.
Evening film shows are sometimes arranged.
Free activities: Open air brass band concerts are very popular and are held on a regular basis.
SPORTHOTEL (4+)
The Sporthotel is quietly located in St Anton's pedestrian zone, and is well placed for all the resort's facilities.
The hotel combines Tyrolean hospitality with all modern comforts in a luxurious setting with a high standard of service.
Facilities include two restaurants, a coffee shop and a steak house.
There is also a basement disco called the Stanton Bar.
You may also care to relax in the hotel's cocktail bar/lounge.
Sporting opportunities include an indoor swimming pool with a wave machine, a sauna and a solarium (payable locally).
All twin bedrooms have a private bath, loo telephone, radio, TV and many have a balcony.
All are very comfortable with a sitting area.
Most take a third bed.
Breakfast is an extensive buffet with cheeses, hams and fruit juices.
Dinner is a set menu of three courses.
Lift; 54 bedrooms.
HOTEL TYROL (4)
This hotel is set against a pleasant backdrop of tree-covered slopes.
It's a traditional chalet style hotel with friendly and very helpful staff.
Facilities include a cosy rustic bar, a livelier pub, plus a traditional stuberl restaurant offering a la carte meals.
Other diversions include a sauna and steam bath which is free once a week, but otherwise is payable locally.
Breakfast is continental, whilst dinner is three courses from a set menu.
The light and pleasant bedrooms have a private bathroom and are traditionally furnished.
All takes a third bed.
In short, a pleasant, informal atmosphere.
Lift; 56 bedrooms; singles available.
HOTEL ROSANNA STUBERL (4)
The Rosanna Stuberl is a long established favourite with Enterprise winter and summer clients.
Centrally located opposite the tennis courts, all the resort's facilities are on your doorstep.
The bar here is also popular with the locals, as is the small cafe for light snacks.
Breakfast is buffet style, and dinner is taken from a four course set menu.
Overall, standards of cuisine are excellent.
All the twin bedrooms are modern and comfortable with a private bath and loo.
Each features a balcony with lovely views.
The rooms are all large enough to take a third or fourth bed.
Lift; 37 bedrooms; single available.
STANTON PENSIONS (1+)
We offer a variety of pensions all within five minutes walk of the Sporthotel.
All pensions are carefully chosen and are usually family run.
Although basic, they are all friendly, spotlessly clean and represent the best value for money way of staying in this delightful resort.
All offer a continental breakfast.
Bedrooms all have a private bathroom and loo.
A half board arrangement is available at the Sporthotel, which offers excellent cuisine.
Singles available.
Lermoos
Set in a wide, sunny valley close to the borders of Austria and Germany, Lermoos is a pretty, and unspoilt resort offering glorious views towards the Zugspitze, which is Germany's highest mountain.
The chalet-style hotels blend in easily with the older buildings; some parts of the village in fact, date back to the thirteenth-century.
Those looking for action will find tennis courts, and there is an excellent swimming complex with pool, waterfall, fountain, wave machine and showers; also saunas, Roman-style steam baths, hot whirl pool, fitness room and massage facilities.
Riding and windsurfing are both available nearby, and in the nearby village of Biberwier is the Tyrol's longest summer toboggan run.
You can also go rafting on the River Inn.
Where Lermoos really comes into its own, however, is as walking country.
There are some really lovely places to explore, including some guided walks organised by the Tourist Office.
You should not miss a trip to the summit of the Zugspitze during your stay.
A cable car takes you from nearby Ehrwald to the Zugspitzkamm station at 9,203 feet which has been partly blasted out of the rock.
From here you can either continue by cable car to the summit at 9,679 feet and enjoy the panoramic views from the restaurant, or you can walk up through a half-mile tunnel (with viewing windows at intervals) to the Schneefernehaus.
Another glorious day can be spent walking through the Fern ‘distant’ Pass, where you cannot help but admire the jewel-like splendour of the turquoise coloured lakes.
Return is by way of the old Roman road to Biberwier.
At night, Lermoos offers relaxed entertainment in the best Tyrolean manner; the village band plays weekly concerts and there are Tyrolean Evenings, fondues and other activities; see our Enterprise Representative on arrival.
What to see and do
Excursions: Visit Neuschwanstein Castle where the ‘Chitty Chitty Bang Bang’ film was made.
Other popular trips include a day to Salzburg; a full day trip to King Ludwig's exquisite folly, Schloss Linderhof, Neuschwanstein and Oberammergau where the famous Passion Play takes place every ten years; Venice and Lake Garda: Obergurgl; and the Italian Dolomites.
Ehrenberger Fortress, one of the largest forts in the Tyrol is just 15 kms away.
Finally, we recommend the excursion to Garmisch-Partenkirchen, to view the Olympic ski jump, and the capital of the Tyrol-Innsbruck.
For details and prices of the pre-bookable excursions from Lermoos, see pages 8/9.
Tennis: Two hard courts and three sand ones.
Coaching is also available.
Tobogganing: Visit the Tyrol's longest summer toboggan run.
1,300 metres long with a drop of 135 metres, and 40 bends!
Swimming: Large pool with waterfall, fountain, showers, sauna, whirlpool and fitness room.
Riding: Available in Biberwier; cost approx 110AS (Summer ‘89 price).
Windsurfing: On the Metterwang Lake.
Mountain lifts: Numerous chairlifts open up entrancing panoramas for you; and a trip on the Tiroler  Zugspitzbahn should not be missed!
Free activities: Guided walks of the area's loveliest spots take place weekly; the village band gives regular open-air concerts, and there are classical music concerts in the village church.
HOTEL RUSTIKA (4)
The Rustika is a modern hotel which enjoys a quiet, slightly elevated position on the sunny side of Lermoos, close to the centre.
The Rustika's excellent facilities include two spacious dining rooms, a restaurant, hotel bar, TV lounge, cafe, massage/fitness room complete with sauna (free to house guests), and solarium.
The hotel has a popular cellar dance bar called the Rustik Stuberl, which plays a mixture of live and disco music every evening from mid-June to the end of the season.
Breakfast is a buffet, and at dinner you are offered a choice of main course.
The spacious bedrooms are decorated in rustic style and all have a private bathroom, balcony, radio and telephone.
The hotel also offers a free guided ramble every week.
Most take a third bed.
Lift; 35 bedrooms.
HOTEL LERMOOSERHOF (3)
This is a family run hotel offering excellent value for money, comfortable accommodation and tasty food cooked by Frau Hollrigl herself.
The hotel is in a quiet sunny position, approximately an eight minute walk from the centre of the village.
From the bedrooms there are glorious views of the Wetterstein mountains and the Zugspitze.
Facilities include a bright sunny dining room, a cosy stuberl where you can relax at night, and a terrace where home-made cakes and coffee are served.
The continental breakfast is supplemented by cheese and ham, and dinner is three courses.
All rooms are twin bedded with a private shower and balcony; a single room is available with hot and cold water, but no shower is available.
No lift; 14 bedrooms; single available.
PENSION BERGFRIEDEN (2)
This is a cosy bed and breakfast pension which is run by the Parth family.
Set in a quiet position, just a five minute walk from the centre of the village, it's a very friendly little pension.
Breakfast is served in the snug breakfast room in which an old-fashioned corner stove is an attractive feature; there is also a sitting area with a television.
Guests wishing to book half board are served evening meals at the nearby Hotel Rustika.
All rooms have private facilities and can take a third bed.
No lift; 15 bedrooms.
HAUS BERGKRANZ (2)
This clean and simple bed and breakfast pension commands superb views of Erhwald and the Zugspitze.
Set in a quiet location, it is close to the village centre.
The modern bedrooms are bright and sunny and all the twins have balconies and private bathrooms.
Breakfast is continental; if half board is booked, dinner is served at the nearby Hotel Loisach.
No lift; 5 bedrooms; single available.
SPORTHOTEL LOISACH (4)
This is a friendly and comfortable hotel which is owned by Josl Rieder, a former world champion slalom skier.
Situated in the centre of the village, it has excellent facilities including both an a la carte restaurant on the ground floor and a residents dining room.
There is a wood panelled stube, a small lounge, a separate television lounge with a large screen TV, and a cellar bar.
A free sauna is available, and the solarium is payable locally.
Both zither and dance music are played once a week.
Breakfast is a buffet, and guests are offered a choice of main course at dinner.
Free cycle hire is offered to Loisach guests.
All the bedrooms have private facilities and a balcony.
Lift; 44 bedrooms; single available.
Igls
Beautifully situated on a sunny mountain plateau high above the Inn Valley, and surrounded by flower filled meadows, Igls is a charming and peaceful village with the bonus of being only four miles from Innsbruck, the lovely capital of the Tyrol.
Igls has long been a popular summer haunt of the Austrians, and therefore has much to offer the visitor.
There are several delightful marked walks through the fields and woods around the village (free guided walks are organised by the Tourist Office) while a cable car ride will take you to the summit of the dramatic Patscherkofel, where there is some splendid hiking terrain, and a viewing platform giving stunning views over Innsbruck and the Inn Valley.
Tennis and golf are both available, and the Olympic bob-sleigh run is also open to the public.
Meanwhile, the less energetic can sunbathe on the shores of the pretty Lansersee.
Thee are excellent facilities for children, with a kindergarten and a kid's playground in the Kurpark.
For a complete change of scenery, a 15–20 minute bus ride (buses run every half hour) will take you to Innsbruck, where you can visit the picturesque old town and the famous Golden Roof, the Alpine zoo, the Folk Museum, or just explore the shops and enjoy coffee and cream cakes in the elegant Maria Theresia Strasse.
Nightlife is Igls is relaxed and friendly, with several restaurants and cosy bars: there is even a discotheque for the young at heart while the bright lights of Innsbruck are only a taxi ride away.
What to see and do
Excursions: One of the most popular excursions is an unforgettable visit to Venice, while a spectacular trip over the Europa bridge and through the Brenner pass will take you to the Italian town of Vipiteno, for bargain hunting.
The historic city of Salzburg is another popular choice, as is the visit to Obergurgl, Austria's highest parish, with its summer skiing on the eternal snows of the glacier.
Bavaria is close at hand, and excursions to Oberammergau, site of the famous Passion Play, and the fairly tale castles of Neuschwanstein and Linderhof are possible.
For details and prices of our pre-bookable excursions from Igls, please see page 8/9.
Walking: There are several pleasant walks around the resort, while the Patscherkofel cable car opens up some spectacular hiking trails.
Mountain Lifts: The Patscherkofel cable car operates throughout the summer.
Swimming: Many of the hotel shave pools as well as the attractive Lansersee.
Riding: Available at the Hotel Astoria. 140AS an hour.
Tennis: Indoor and outdoor courts available.
Golf: Igls has 9 and an 18 hole championship golf course.
There is also minigolf and a driving range.
Bicycle Hire: Available from the tourist office.
Local Transport: A small train runs hourly from 7am–8pm (approx cost 19AS single) and buses are available throughout the day to Innsbruck, approx AS41 return.
Free Activities: Guided walks are organised by the tourist office.
The Guestcard offers reductions on the cablecar, mini-golf, tennis and Innsbruck museums.
PARK HOTEL (4) Premier
Just five minutes on foot from the town centre, this super hotel, as its name would suggest, is set in its own magnificent park.
The Beck family, who own and run the hotel, are friendly and helpful, and will do everything to ensure your holiday runs smoothly.
All rooms are twin bedded with private bathrooms, balconies and lovely mountain views.
Superior rooms are also available; these rooms are larger with a higher standard of furnishing.
On the top floor there is an impressive indoor pool with sauna and panoramic views.
The hotel also features a massage-room and solarium (small local charge), spacious lounges, TV and reading rooms, a tennis court and a putting green.
The cafe, with its own sun terrace, is a pleasant spot for a coffee, and live entertainment is provided six days a week.
The standard of cuisine in this hotel is second to none, with a la carte and vegetarian meals readily available.
You will be greeted with a welcome drink, and once a week you can enjoy a romantic candle-lit dinner.
Lift; 65 bedrooms.
GASTHOF STERN(3)
Situated right in the centre of the village this hotel has always been popular with British holidaymakers.
The Stern is a typical Austrian Inn, and offers good value for money and a lively, informal atmosphere.
All Enterprise rooms are located in the new wing and are twin bedded with a private bathroom, and a balcony, a fridge, cooking rings and a sitting area.
On the premises is a Cafe and Stube, and a restaurant where Continental breakfast and an excellent three course dinner with a choice of main course is served.
A la carte and vegetarian meals are also available.
The Stern boasts a lively bar and disco in the cellar, plus a free car park for the convenience of its guests.
Lift; 38 bedrooms.
AGIDIHOF (4)
This friendly and comfortable hotel to which many clients regularly return, is built in traditional Tyrolean style, and is ideally situated in the centre of this charming resort.
The Patscherkofel cable car is a stone's throw away, and the bus to Innsbruck stops nearby.
There is a lounge, a rustic style bar, a sauna (local charge) and a welcoming dining room where you will be served with a buffet breakfast and a three course dinner with a choice of main course.
The bedrooms are comfortable and all have private bathroom, radio and telephone.
There are some family suites available with two separate but interconnecting bedrooms, one bathroom and two entrances.
Lift; 30 bedrooms; single available.
HOTEL BON ALPINA (4)
This lovely medium sized hotel is especially suitable for families.
It is centrally situated, and a ten minute walk from the cable car which leads to some magnificent mountain walks.
There is a comfortable lounge/bar, a children's playroom, a terrace cafe and a restaurant.
Breakfast is buffet style and dinner three courses with a choice of main course.
The indoor heated pool is free to guests, as is the sauna three times a week.
A local charge is payable for the solarium and gym.
The pleasantly decorated bedrooms all have a private bathroom and balcony.
Lift; 98 bedrooms; single available.
PENSION WOPFNER (3)
The Wopfner is conveniently situated in a quiet position right in the centre of the village.
The friendly owners both speak English and this comfortable little pension is a good centre for the many walks available in the surrounding countryside.
The pension features a lounge bar and breakfast room, where the standard breakfast includes cheese, ham, eggs and juice.
Half board is also available with meals taken at the nearby Gasthof Stern.
All rooms are twin bedded with a private bathroom and balcony.
All are pleasantly furnished.
Seefeld
Seefeld has grown into one of the Tyrol's largest and most popular resorts, and it's not hard to see why.
Firstly, Seefeld is just 14 miles from fashionable Innsbruck and is set high on a sunny plateau.
The town has been carefully designed to offer its visitors every amenity.
The centre of the town is pedestrian only, and before even considering the walks in the hills, one can while away many hours just exploring Seefeld's many shops and cafes.
An amazing variety of sport and entertainment awaits you.
Pride of place is given to the magnificent swimming complex with its outdoor and indoor pools; but this is only one of several pools for the keen swimmer there is an extensive open-air heated lido (July–September, earlier in particularly fine summers!), the Seefeld lake and many hotels have their own indoor or outdoor pools too.
Golf enthusiasts flock to enjoy the 18-hole course at the nearby Wildmoos, three miles away, and from mid June to mid September the tourist Office provides transport from the resort to the golf course (AS20 each way: Summer ‘89 price).
Seefeld also boasts the 6 hole Golf Academy and driving range: some of our hotels will offer you a discount on both courses, ask for details.
For the active walker and rambler the choices are too numerous to mention.
Up to forty-nine different walks and paths have been marked through the refreshing green fields and hills.
From mid June onwards, there are also daily guided rambles.
Combine these, too, with trips on the chair lift to the Gschwandtkopf or with longer trips on the funicular railway and its connecting cablecars to the Seefelderjoch and the Harmelekopf.
If lively nightlife is an important part of your holiday, then Seefeld would be a good choice.
Apart from discos and several nightclubs, local bands regularly play in the friendly keller bars and there are occasional folklore shows.
Those with money burning a hole in their pocket might also car to visit the casino.
What to see and do
Excursions: Amongst the most popular excursions are ones into Bavaria; to Oberammergau, site of the Passion Play since 1634, and the fairy-tale castles of Neuschwanstein and Linderhof; up the Otz Valley to Obergurgl and into the world of eternal ice and snows, a chance to see the summer skiers in action.
Venice is within easy reach, and Salzburg is a popular choice.
There are also short city sightseeing trips to Innsbruck, and shopping trips to Vipiteno in Italy.
Should you fancy it, Mittenwald in Bavaria is a 20 minute trip by train.
Walking: Gentle rambles along marked paths or more strenuous hikes accompanied by a guide.
You will need to be prepared for these with stout walking shoes.
Mountain lifts: Climb mountains the easy way by chair lift or by rack railway and cable car.
Swimming: Indoor and outdoor pools, the superb Olympic complex and the open-air Lido.
Fishing: If you have your own tackle, trout fishing is available at nearby Leutasch (reached by bus).
A daily permit costs approx AS275.
Casino: Try a spot of gentle gambling at the Casino ideal for those who like a little more sophisticated entertainment.
Sports: Seefeld has these in abundance!
There is an 18-hole Golf Academy and a driving range offering intensive instruction at Geigenbuhel.
There is a bowling alley near the station, and two minigolf courses.
Mountain bike tours are organised weekly, and ordinary cycles can be hired.
Seefeld has riding stables (children's ponies available) and there are numerous tennis courts offering tuition if required.
Indoor course are available for approx AS100 per hour.
Need a partner to share your sporting activities?
The Sport and Congress Centre's ‘Sport Partner Agency’ will even try to sort that out for you!
Bring your squash racket, as there are excellent courts for hire.
The more adventurous should try paragliding and rafting.
Railway: Regular trains to Innsbruck take 45 minutes and cost approx AS68 return.
Garmisch Partenkirchen by train takes 50 minutes and costs approx AS140 return.
Free activities: During your stay you may enjoy open-air brass band concerts (weather permitting) and organ and chamber music concerts in the local church.
You may also catch the village music festival with dancing happening on the third week of July.
Finally, there is a flower festival on the first Sunday in August.
PARKHOTEL (4) Premier
Beautifully set in its own grounds, this centrally located hotel provides a high standard of comfort and friendly service in elegant surroundings.
The indoor heated pool and sauna are free to house guests, and there is a solarium (payable locally).
Table tennis is on offer, and one can also hire bicycles.
A splendid buffet breakfast, and a four course dinner plus salad buffet are served in the rustic style dining room.
All bedrooms have private bathroom and are very comfortable.
Lift; 40 bedrooms; singles available.
HOTEL HAYMON (3)
Situated on the edge of the pedestrian zone, is the friendly Hotel Haymon, consisting of two Tyrolean chalet style buildings set a few yards apart.
The hotel has a small pleasant lounge and bar, two terraces one on the roof, a solarium (payable locally) and a sauna (free).
Breakfast is buffet style and dinner is three courses, both serve din the very attractive wood-panelled dining room.
All rooms have a private bathroom, balcony and telephone and will either be in the main building or the newer Gasthaus, reached by a covered walkway.
Guests have free use of the hotel's bicycles (mountain bikes also available) and a 50% reduction on green fees at the new 6 hole golf academy which is 2000 metres away.
Lift (Gasthaus only); 44 bedrooms.
HOTEL SEEFELDERHOF (4+)
This is an attractive hotel built in traditional chalet style, which has proved to be very popular with our previous clients, and is just an 8 minute walk from the main pedestrian precinct.
Facilities include an indoor pool which opens onto a large garden, a solarium, sauna (which is free twice a week) and sun terrace.
Public rooms include a traditionally furnished lounge, cafe, restaurant, fitness room, games room, children's playground, table tennis, and a TV/video room where English films are often shown.
The hotel also has bikes for hire and a 25% reduction is offered to Enterprise guests.
Breakfast is a substantial buffet, and dinner is four courses with a salad buffet, and a choice of main course and dessert Guests are offered a weekly gala dinner with dance music, and weekly buffet dinner featuring typical Austrian and Tyrolean specialities.
Every week you'll also be invited to a welcome cocktail at the new hotel bar.
Guests at the Seefelderhof are eligible for a 15% discount on green fees at Seefeld's golf course, and may use the resort's bus service at a reduced rate.
There is also a 50% discount at the Golf Academy.
Top floor rooms may have a sloping ceiling.
All rooms have private bathroom, radio and telephone.
Lift; 50 bedrooms; single available.
HOTEL ALPINA (4+) Premier
This delightful hotel is close to the pedestrian precinct, yet as it's on the edge of the town amidst woods and meadows, it's an ideal start point for walks.
The hotel is quiet and has an old style elegant atmosphere.
There is a lounge, a restaurant, a bar and a card/writing room.
A special attraction is the swimming pool, with sliding windows opening onto a large lawn.
The hotel offers a free sauna, coin operated solarium, table tennis, and a tennis court (two hours free per week).
Hotel guests are eligible for a 15% reduction on green fees and Wildmoos golf course, plus free transport.
The Alpina has a resident sports organiser.
Breakfast is a buffet, and dinner is four courses.
Once a week guests are offered a candlelit dinner, also a barbecue if the weather is fine, or a farmers' buffet at which Austrian specialities are served.
Music is played in the lounge 2 or 3 times a week.
Bedrooms are well furnished and all have private bathroom and telephone.
Some have a balcony.
No lift; 50 bedrooms; singles available.
HOTEL LOIPE (3)
The Loipe is a small, family run hotel in a quiet position about seven minutes walk from the centre of Seefeld.
Bedrooms are well-furnished and spacious, and all have a private bathroom; some rooms will take a third and fourth bed.
Facilities include a small reception area with a pretty Tyrolean stove, lounge area with bar, and a sauna and solarium (for both of which there is a local charge).
A buffet-style breakfast is served and snacks are available at lunchtime if required.
Hotel guests are entitled to a 50% reduction on green fees at the 9-hole ‘golf academy’ in the village.
20 bedrooms; no singles available.
HOTEL KLOSTERBRAU (5) Premier
This luxurious hotel is rated amongst the top hotels in Austria, 450 years ago the building was a monastery, and the original parts of the structure with vaulted ceilings give added atmosphere to the Brau Keller (where a Tyrolean band plays nightly).
The origins of the hotel are also apparent in the impressive entrance hall, cocktail bar and lounge.
The Klosterbrau boasts an impressive dining room where breakfast buffet and four course dinners are served; a la carte restaurant if you wish, and a nightclub.
There are three pools; indoor, outdoor and jacuzzi; a beauty area with a hairdresser, massage facilities and beautician.
Should you feel adventurous, try a Finnish sauna, a Turkish steam bath, hot and cold plunge pools and a turbo solarium which guarantees a fast tan.
The hotel is located in the middle of the pedestrian area yet all the rooms are quiet and have lovely views.
All rooms have a television showing English programmes on Sky Channel, most have a sitting area, and all have a telephone and radio.
Some Enterprise rooms are in the annexe directly opposite the main building.
Guests are offered free transport to Seefeld's golf course daily; this hotel is simply the best you'll find.
Lift 115 bedrooms; singles available.
Mayrhofen
Mayrhofen is one of the most popular of the Tyrolean resorts and has been welcoming British guests for many years.
It is a large village in open meadowland at the head of the Ziller Valley, and is surrounded by steep mountains.
There are two cable cars running from the village, on the west up the Penken and, on the opposite side of the valley, up the Ahorn: from these points there are walks to suit all grades of hiker or climber and restaurants with broad, sunny terraces to suit the more sedentary holidaymaker!
In the village there are numerous activities on offer; horseriding, swimming either indoors or in the resort's attractive open-air pool, crazy-golf, bowling, tennis and squash, and even summer skiing on the nearby glacier above Hintertux.
For something a little different try a ride on the narrow gauge steam railway which runs from Mayrhofen to Jenbach at the mouth of the Ziller Valley.
Alternatively, try wild-water rafting or surfing; and for stunning views, hot air ballooning.
Mayrhofen is an ideal resort for children.
The Tourist Office have a weekly programme in high season offering something to do every day, such as Punch and Judy shows, guided walks through ‘Fairy Land’, a fun fair, and special ‘kids only’ rides on the Zillertalbahn Railway.
There are also plenty of shops and open-air cafes, and, for your evening entertainment, bars and discotheques to suit all tastes.
The Zillertal people are renowned for their love of singing, and throughout the season there are festivals of folk singing and dancing, plus, weather permitting, brass band concerts taking place weekly from June to September.
What to see and do
Excursions: Amongst the most popular coach excursions available from Mayrhofen is the one to Hintertux, at the head of the Ziller Valley.
Here you will get a taste of winter as you view the summer skiing area and enjoy the fine views from Austria's highest chairlift, which rises to a level of 3,250m.
Innsbruck, the capital of the Tyrol, and Salzburg, the home of Mozart and the Sound of Music, are also on offer.
There is also trip to Hall, formerly the centre of the Tyrol's salt industry; on to the Swarovski crystal factory show rooms where you will see glass being blown and painted, as well as having the opportunity to buy anything that takes your fancy.
Then on to Austria's best-preserved medieval castle, Schloss Tratzberg, which was once the home of the Austrian Imperial family.
If you fancy a more energetic excursion, why not join in the day-long bicycle tour of the local beauty spots in the Ziller Valley, including a visit to a local woodcarver, and the chance to savour a typical Tyrolean lunch before your return.
If a longer excursion appeals, trips to Venice and Vienna are available and very popular.
Railway: At the weekend you may actually become a train driver for a short distance on the steam railway!
Tennis: Four sand courts to choose from and indoor courts are planned.
Cable cars: Two, up the Ahorn (July and August only) and the Penken (all summer).
The cost is approx AS110 return.
Swimming: A lovely outdoor pool, with children's area and shady lawns for sunbathing.
Also an indoor pool, and a sauna.
Bowling: Four automatic bowling lanes; organised bowling evenings too.
Walking: The local tourist office offers an award scheme and there are clearly marked paths for you to follow some the ideal length for an afternoon stroll.
Others take a whole day, when a good packed lunch and proper walking shoes are advised.
Party night: This is an extremely happy night, hosted by the Mayrhofen Trio who are well known all over the world; in fact, they represented Austria at the Olympic Games.
The band play both Austrian and English music to which you can dance and there will also be organised games for you to join in if you wish.
Summer skiing: This takes place on the Hintertux glacier; suitable for experienced skiers only, our representative can advise if you are interested.
Free activities: If you are interested in power stations, there are guided tours of the Tauern Power Station.
If you enjoy singing, the ‘Sing Mit’ group will teach you some of the traditional Tyrolean songs.
There is a special activity programme geared towards senior citizens, and children will enjoy the weekly Punch and Judy shows.
The Mayrhofen Brass Band gives regular open-air concerts in fine weather.
HOTEL NEUHAUS (4) Premier
Probably the best hotel in Mayrhofen, the Neuhaus has high standards; it offers much in the way of facilities and the cooking has an excellent reputation.
The hotel is approximately a two minute walk from the church and village centre, and has a pleasant private garden with children's playground.
Facilities include lounges, a television room, dining rooms, a cocktail bar where music is played two or three times a week, two beautiful old panelled stuben, a games room and an indoor swimming pool.
A sauna, solarium and massages are available at local charge.
Once a week the hotel organises a Tyrolean Evening (local charge).
The hotel also offers a three-lane bowling alley with a bar.
Breakfast is buffet style and dinner is four courses with a choice of main course.
Once a week instead of dinner there's a farmer's buffet.
Enterprise rooms are located either in the main building, or in the nearby landhaus.
All rooms have private facilities and most take third and fourth beds.
Lifts; 139 bedrooms; singles available.
HOTEL ST GEORG (3+)
This is a small hotel that nevertheless offers standards and facilities usually associated with much larger hotels.
It has a spacious lounge, and a traditional stube where you can enjoy drinks with the locals.
There is an elegant dining room where a breakfast buffet is served, and there is a choice of menu for dinner which is served by candle-light.
The hotel has a large indoor swimming pool, plus a sauna and solarium (for which a charge is made).
Situated in a quiet location, the hotel is about an eight minute walk from the resort's main shopping street.
It has a large garden and a terrace where once a week, instead of dinner, you may enjoy a barbecue.
All bedrooms take a third and fourth bed.
Lift; 32 bedrooms.
SPORTHOTEL STRASS (3+)
Adjoining the Hotel Strass and under the same management, the Sporthotel is very popular with Enterprise clients.
Standing in the main street of Mayrhofen, facilities include a lounge/bar, dining room where breakfast and dinner with a choice of menu are served, heated indoor pool with children's pool (free to house guests; caps must be worn) and the super Freelax Centre.
Facilities in the centre are paid for locally, and include tennis, hot whirlpool, a Finnish sauna, a Turkish steam bath, cold water pool, fitness room, coin-operated solarium and a bar for people to use whilst in their swimwear.
All bedrooms have bath, loo, balcony, radio and telephone.
The hotel has a barbecue once a week instead of dinner, and one meal each week offers a Tyrolean speciality.
There is a weekly programme of live music, dancing, guided walks, and occasionally on Sunday mornings there is music on the terrace.
Some of the rooms take a fourth bed.
Lift; 66 bedrooms; singles available.
PENSION WALDCAFE (2)
Standing in a quiet picturesque position, but only three minutes from the resort centre, this delightful traditionally styled pension, is close to some splendid mountain walks.
There is a large sun terrace and breakfast is served in the Restaurant Waldcafe opposite, where snacks are available all day.
Public tennis courts and swimming pool are close by.
All rooms are twin bedded with a private shower and loo.
No lift; 7 bedrooms; single available.
HOTEL ROSE (3)
The Rose is an attractive, traditional style Tyrolean gasthof where you will be made very welcome by Simon and Anneliese Kroll.
The hotel has a good reputation locally for food and you will soon realise why.
Buffet breakfast with ham and cheese is served, and at dinner there is a choice of three main courses.
The Rose is situated in a quiet yet central position, about a three minute walk from the main street.
It has a large garden, a cafe, a sunbathing terrace with sun chairs, and a plunge pool.
Inside the hotel there is a large restaurant/dining room, a breakfast room with television and bar, and a typical wood panelled stube.
During the main part of the season, music is occasionally played on the hotel's terrace during the evening.
Standard rooms have free use of shower.
Public tennis courts and swimming pool are close by.
No lift; 50 bedrooms; singles available.
HOTEL STRASS & ANNEXES (3+)
The Strass has been popular with British holiday-makers for many years, and is conveniently situated in Mayrhofen's main street, next to the Penken cable car.
As well as free use of the indoor swimming pool, guests can use the facilities offered in the adjoining Freelax Fitness Centre for a local charge: Sauna, Turkish bath, jacuzzi, solarium (coin-operated), squash courts, outdoor tennis and massage facilities.
Dinner is a choice of three different menus, and once a week there is a barbecue.
English films are shown in the television room, and there is a weekly entertainment programme with dancing, music and guided walks.
A special menu is offered for children, a nd some bedrooms take a fourth bed.
The bed and breakfast houses are within a three minute walk; the evening meal is served in the Strass.
A local supplement is payable for use of a shower.
Lift; 70 bedrooms; single available.
ALPENHOF KRISTALL (3)
This very friendly family-owned hotel has been welcoming British guests for over 30 years.
Recently it was completely renovated, and now looks brand new.
The hotel is at the end of the main shopping street in a busy part of the village.
Outside is a garden restaurant, lawns and a private sun terrace.
Inside are four very pretty wood-panelled stuben for a la carte meals, a dining room and an open-plan entrance hall, with a lounge area and bar.
All of the bedrooms have a balcony and telephone, and some take a third and fourth bed.
Breakfast is buffet style and inner is three courses plus a salad buffet, with a choice of main course.
Public tennis courts and a swimming pool are close by.
Lift: 36 bedrooms; single available.
HOTEL MARIA THERESIA (3)
Very picturesque, the Maria Theresia is quietly situated in its own garden about two minutes from the resort's main street.
Facilities include a cosy sitting room where drinks are served, and a sun terrace.
There is an excellent breakfast buffet, and service is of a high standard.
Clients booking half board are served their evening meal at the Hotel Neuhaus.
The comfortable bedrooms all have private bathroom, telephone, radio and a balcony.
All rooms take a third bed, and several take a fourth.
Lift; 31 bedrooms; single available.
PENSION SCHEULINGHOF (3)
This is a smart modern pension which offers excellent value for money, and is conveniently situated not far from the resort's two cable cars and the centre.
Facilities include a breakfast room, a separate lounge, table tennis, coin-operated solarium and a sauna.
At the rear of the hotel is a large garden with loungers for sunbathing.
The comfortable bedrooms have been recently refurnished, and all have balconies, most also take a third bed.
Clients booking half board are served their evening meal at the Hotel St. Georg.
Lift; 21 bedrooms.
Kaprun
Kaprun is a delightful mountain village, full of Austrian charm.
It lies at the mouth of the Kaprun valley, to the south west of Salzburg, and together with Zell am See, it forms part of the ‘Europa Sport Region’.
Kaprun is unique in that it offers summer skiing, along with a multitude of other activities.
Skiing takes place on the Kitzsteinhorn, a spectacular glacier towering over the surrounding countryside.
Even if you are not a skier, it is worth taking the funicular up to the slopes just to experience the journey and to marvel at the views opening out below.
Skiing takes place only in the morning as the snow tends to become too soft in the afternoon, but after a morning skiing in glorious sunshine, you can then sunbathe in the afternoon, or water ski and windsurf at Zell am See.
In 1939, an impressive hydro electric scheme, the Tauernkraftwerk Glockner Kaprun was built.
Trips to the reservoirs and dams can be arranged and are highly recommended for the breathtaking views of the Kitzsteinhorn, Gross Glockner and Steinenes Meer.
The main reservoirs of Wasserfallboden and Mooserboden can be reached by road from the village, while the Limberg dam is reached via the Limbergstollen, a lift in an inclined shaft that is 2 miles long, quite an experience!
Kaprun is an ideal centre for walking in beautiful alpine scenery, with every route you choose offering fantastic views particularly if you take the high alpine road up to the Gross Glockner, the highest mountain in Austria.
Cycling is well catered for with a superb network of cycle tracks available, and for those with an adventurous spirit and strong legs, mountain bikes can be hired as well as ordinary bikes.
In fact, Kaprun and its neighbour Zell am See have everything that you could need to enjoy a perfect holiday in some of the most beautiful alpine scenery there is, including some excellent bars and restaurants for relaxing evenings and charming coffee houses for afternoon coffee and cake; an experience that is not to be missed!
What to see and do
Excursions: Salzburg, the home of the Sound of Music and birthplace of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, is surely top of the list on the agenda of excursions.
It is a beautiful and romantic city, famous for its Baroque style of architecture.
Mozart's birthplace and the house where he composed the Magic Flute are both now museums.
There are numerous other things to see in Salzburg, among them Hohensalzburg Fortress, Cathedral Square, Palace of the Prince Archbishops and Mirabell Palace and gardens.
An excursion to the top of the high alpine road of Gross Glockner will leave you breathless at the fantastic views stretching as far as the eye can see in every direction.
Another trip worth taking time for is to Berchtesgaden, Hitler's Eagle's Nest which was his ‘country retreat’ when the pressures of life were getting too much for him.
Again, it is set in the most spectacular countryside and well worth taking your camera to.
Another scenic excursion is to Leichtensteinklamm, a superb gorge, again you'll be reeling off the film in your camera.
Watersports: Water skiing, sailing and windsurfing are all available in the nearby resort of Zell am See, which is a short journey away on a regular bus service.
Boats can be hired on Lake Zell.
Canoeing is available in Kaprun.
Summer skiing: On the Kitzsteinhorn glacier, reached by cable cars and a funicular, it is possible to enjoy some good quality skiing, but only in the mornings as the snow becomes too soft in the afternoons.
Ski hire, lift passes etc, available in Kaprun.
Walking: There are a wide variety of walks to be had, from very gentle to very strenuous, depending entirely on what you want.
Organised walks and rambles in the company of a guide are available.
Golf: Situated between Kaprun and Zell am See is an 18 hole Par 72 golf course, designed by an Englishman!
Cycling: Whether you want to go mountain biking or just gentle cycling through the forests, both types of bicycle are available for hire and both types of cyclist are well catered for here with a huge network of cycle tracks on offer.
Mountain bike tours can be arranged.
Tennis: Courts available in the village.
Squash: Courts available in the village.
Riding: Can be organised in the village.
Other Activities: Gym/training circuit in the village.
Optimum Sports Centre: Indoor and outdoor pools, sauna, solarium, massage rooms and outside whirlpool.
Nightlife: There are several discos to choose from, as well as bars and restaurants to suit most tastes if you have the energy left at the end of the day!
For a pleasant and relaxing end to the day, why not take an evening cruise on Lake Zell.
There are also bowling evenings and fondue evenings, and in addition there will be a programme organised by our rep in Kaprun.
Free activities: A cultural centre has recently opened at ‘Burg Kaprun’ offering family games, jazz and orchestral evenings.
GOLFHOTEL ZUR BURGRUINE (4)
Named after the nearby ruined castle, the Burgruine has a well deserved reputation for high standards of accommodation and the facilities it offers.
This hotel will especially suit keen golfers: there is a pitching green, free daily transport to the nearby 27 hole golf course, plus a 20% discount on green fees.
The hotel owner will take people golfing himself once a week, and will even organise mini-tournaments if there is enough interest!
However, even non-golfers will enjoy their stay at this hotel.
There is an indoor swimming pool and sauna.
Because of its link with the castle, there is a weekly medieval festival.
The buffet breakfast is served in the hotel's pleasant dining room and there is a four course evening meal.
Every day, there is a starter, dessert or salad buffet.
Once a week there is a  barbecue instead of dinner.
Between 7th July and 17th August, the hotel has a resident nanny for 4–11 year olds; who organises a children's activity programme and early dinners if required.
This service is free to all house guests.
Bedrooms are comfortable, and all have private facilities plus a telephone and minibar.
Lift; 30 bedrooms; single available.
HOTEL HUBERTUSHOF 93+)
This hotel is right in the centre of the village, close to all the shops, cafes and restaurants.
There is a sauna, steambath, whirlpool and a sun terrace with deckchairs.
The hotel also boasts a cosy ‘pub’ traditionally furnished with lots of character.
Breakfast is buffet style, while dinner is four courses, often with local specialities and always with a salad buffet.
All bedrooms are well appointed and have private facilities and a radio, telephone and a balcony.
Many take a third bed.
No lift; 21 bedrooms.
PENSION LINSHALM (2)
This comfortable pension is located on the edge of the village, but only five minutes from all the facilities in the resort centre.
The Linshalm is well placed for exploring Kaprun and the surrounding area.
The pension is simply furnished, but spotlessly clean and very friendly.
There is a cosy lounge which also doubles as a dining room, plus an attractive garden with deckchairs and parasols.
Bedrooms are simply furnished but comfortable and all have private facilities and a balcony.
Breakfast is buffet style and dinner is a 3 course set menu of traditional cuisine.
Vegetarian meals are available.
No lift; 17 bedrooms; single available.
PENSION REIDER (3)
A very traditional Austrian pension offering an excellent standard of accommodation.
The village centre is about seven minutes walk away.
There is a lounge, bar and TV room.
The well tended garden has deckchairs and parasols as well as a children's play area.
All bedrooms are light and airy and have private facilities, plus a telephone and radio.
All twins have their own balcony and some will take a third bed.
Breakfast is continental but supplemented with cheeses and ham.
Dinner is 3 courses.
No lift; 14 bedrooms; single available.
Saalbach & Hinterglemm
These two bustling little villages are idyllically situated in the lush green Glemm valley.
Saalbach is the larger of the two, but both have excellent facilities to offer.
Surprisingly, despite being mountain villages, both have a wonderful array of elegant shops that will keep any browser amused for hours on end.
Plenty of bars, cafes and restaurants line the streets, tempting you with delicious cakes laden with cream, chocolate and fruit, the aroma of freshly brewed coffee and the thought of a refreshing glass of ice cold beer.
For keen walkers, there couldn't be a better holiday area — there are 350 km of well marked paths!
Wherever you go, there will always be a mountain gasthaus somewhere close at hand to keep you fed and watered.
You will be amazed at how much walking you will manage to do in a week: somehow the wonderful scenery seems to inspire you to keep on walking over distances that you would be hard pushed to cover back home.
Salzburg is not far away and is well worth a visit to see the wonderful Baroque architecture of this elegant city.
It is, of course, the birthplace of one Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart and the house where he was born, as well as the house where he composed The Magic Flute, are now fascinating museums.
Vienna, the capital of Austria and another elegant and graceful city is also within easy reach.
Once there, a visit to the Spanish Riding School in Hofburg is essential in order to see the Crown Jewels, as well as marvel at the world famous white stallions.
With all this on offer, you'll be spoilt for choice of things to do, but there's still more!
Swimming, tennis, horse riding, golf and fishing are just a few of the other activities available in these delightful villages and for those who like to be adventurous while on holiday, white water rafting can be arranged in the River Saalach, not far from Saalbach and Hinterglemm.
Europe's largest summer toboggan run is also close by at Saalfelden.
As night falls, there are nightclubs and discos for those with lots of energy left.
For those who would like a more relaxing evening, what better than to sit at an open air cafe, sipping an ice cold beer, listening to the local brass band in the village square and watching the sun slip down behind the mountains — perfect!
What to see and do
Excursions: The most popular are to Salzburg and to Vienna, both beautiful, elegant cities, steeped in history and culture with lots to see.
Another for the amateur photographers is Krimml, the highest waterfalls in Europe and an opportunity to experience yet more breathtaking beauty.
Walking: A paradise for keen walkers with 350 kms of marked paths to ramble along at your leisure.
Swimming: There are indoor and outdoor pools to choose from, depending on the weather.
Tennis: Saalbach has tennis courts and Hinterglemm has a tennis centre.
Fishing: There is fishing available in both Hinterglemm and Saalbach and there are small trout ponds at Angelteich and Brenbachhof nearby.
A permit is required.
Golf: Zell am See, 15 minutes by bus, has a golf course, as does Saalfelden.
Horse riding: Riding can be arranged in Hinterglemm.
Cycling: Mountain bikes and ordinary bikes can be hired in Saalbach.
Watersports: All watersports are available at Zell am See, 15 minutes away by bus.
Nightlife: There are discos and nightclubs for those with loads of energy, also plenty of cafes, bars and restaurants to choose from.
A very popular night out is the evening in a mountain hut, with loads of traditional thigh slapping music to join in with, finishing off with a flare lit mountain descent.
A more peaceful evening can be spent bowling.
PENSION BURGER (30)— SAALBACH
This friendly pension is owned and run by the Burger family, and all guests are promised a warm welcome.
All twin bedrooms have private facilities and most take a third bed.
Balconies are available for a small supplement.
There is also a lounge and a sun terrace.
A family apartment is also available on request.
This has two twin bedrooms, one with bunkbeds, a living room and bathroom.
There is also a kitchenette with two cooking rings, sink and fridge (no oven).
Guests on half board take their evening meal in the Hotel Peter next door.
No lift; 16 bedrooms.
HOTEL KENDLER (4) Premier — SAALBACH
The hotel is several cosy lounges and bars, all furnished in the local style with lots of pine.
The hotel also features a garden with a children's play area and deckchairs.
The Kendler has its own sauna, steam bath massage facilities and table tennis (all payable locally).
The bedrooms are all well furnished, and each has its own bathroom, balcony, radio and telephone.
The hotel serves a buffet breakfast and a four course dinner.
Bicycles can be hired free of charge once a week and tennis is free for 1 hour per week.
Lift; 54 bedrooms; single available.
HOTEL GOLLINGERHOF (4)— HINTERGLEMM
This well run and friendly hotel is set right in the centre of the resort.
The Gollingerhof is build in traditional chalet style with five large lounges and three bars, each decorated in pine with open fires.
The bedrooms are light and airy, with pleasant views from their balconies.
Each has a private bathroom, radio, telephone and TV.
All will take a third bed.
The hotel provides a large buffet breakfast and a three course dinner (set menu).
Lift; 30 bedrooms.
HOTEL REITERHOF (4)— SAALBACH
The Reiterhof is a large hotel with plenty of facilities, and is well suited for walkers as it is located close to the mountain cable car.
There is a heated indoor swimming pool, and the hotel also has a library/TV room, fitness room, sun terrace and a pleasant garden with chairs and parasols.
The traditionally built dining room offers a superb standard of cuisine and an a la carte menu.
Breakfast is buffet style.
All bedrooms are large and beautifully furnished in Austrian style with a private bathroom.
Some have a balcony.
Lift; 56 bedrooms; single available.
PENSION ALPENBLICK (3)— HINTERGLEMM
This pleasant hotel is built on a slight rise, and has excellent views of the mountains behind it and down to the village in front.
The pension is recently built, but is finished off in the traditional style.
Amenities include a sauna, steam bath and a solarium (payable locally).
The Alpenblick offers a weekly slide show and regular guided walks with the owner.
Twin bedrooms all have a private bath or shower.
Each has a telephone and a balcony.
All take a third bed.
There is a large terrace and a garden with deckchairs.
Breakfast is buffet and inner is a 3 course menu.
Lift; 30 bedrooms; single available.
Leogang
Imagine a hidden picture postcard village set between two fantastic mountains ranges, and you have some idea of why Leogang is one of Austria's best kept secrets.
The village stretches along the Pinzgau Valley and many who visit maintain that Leogang offers some of the most interesting and varied walks in Austria, with one of the highlights being the Saalach Valley Ridge Path walk.
For those with plenty of energy when they return from walking, there are tennis courts.
Leogang also has a super leisure and fitness centre, with a heated open-air swimming pool.
There is mini-golf, and if you fancy exploring further afield, there are bicycles for hire.
There is also a golf course five miles away, and if you have your own tackle you can fish for trout.
Children are made especially welcome in Leogang — there are lots of activities arranged for them.
One of the most interesting and useful must be to spend a half-day with the local climbing school.
The four-to-eleven year olds learn through play the safe and correct way to behave in the mountains; whilst eleven to fifteen year olds are taken on short excursions.
There's plenty to do even if the sun stops shining.
 The Hotel Krallerhof has an indoor pool, sauna, solarium and massage facilities.
There's an interesting Folk Museum at Schloss Ritzen in Saalfelden, which has the largest collection of Christmas cribs in Austria.
There are interesting caves at nearby Weissbach; also worth visiting is the lovely pilgrimage church of Maria Kirchental, built above the tiny hamlet of St. Martin.
Leogang's railway station is just a short walk from the village if you like to organise your own excursions.
At night there's a relaxed atmosphere, with cosy evenings in bars, sometimes with zither music; barbecues are arranged, and occasional concerts performed by the local band.
At times there's also music for dancing in several hotels.
What to see and do
Excursions: There are plenty of trips for you to choose from.
Half day excursions include a visit to the Krimml Waterfalls, Europe's highest; you can also visit the beautiful city of Salzburg.
Full day trips include a drive along the magnificent High Alpine Grossglockner Road, where you will see the longest glacier in the eastern Alps the Pasterze, which is over five and a half miles long.
Another trip is to the Ziller Valley and Kitzbuhel.
The highlight of the week must be a trip to the old Imperial City of Vienna.
For further details of our pre-bookable excursions, please turn to page 8–9.
Walking: There are 250 kms of marked paths for you to follow.
Fishing: Permits can be obtained from the Tourist Office for trout fishing; bring your own tackle.
Tennis: There are several courts available.
Coaching is also available.
Chair lifts: The Asitz double chair lift operates on Wednesdays and Sundays during high summer to give a flying start to some of the area's prettiest walks.
Swimming: The resort has an open-air pool and an indoor one, plus sauna, solarium and massage facilities.
Cycling: Bicycles can be hired if you would like to explore further afield.
Railway: Leogang's railway station is on the main Westbahn rail line with daily connections to Bregenz in the Vorarlberg and Vienna to the east good for independent excursions!
HOTEL ST.
LEONHARD (3+)
The Hotel St. Leonhard is a hotel close to the centre of the village.
Some rooms are in the Landhaus which is next door.
This has its own small sitting room, and guests can use the facilities of the hotel, where all meals are served.
These facilities include a spacious open-plan lounge, a bar and a large dining room where breakfast buffet and dinner, with a choice of menu, are served.
The indoor swimming pool is free to hotel guests; a sauna, whirlpool and steam bath are available at a small charge.
Lift; 60 bedrooms.
HOTEL SALZBURGERHOF (4)
This well appointed hotel is conveniently placed for the Asitz chairlift to give you a head start into the mountains.
All rooms are well furnished and are of a good size, all will take a third bed and have a private bath or shower and balcony.
There is a lounge, T.V. room, table tennis, cellar bar, large sauna, solarium and steam bath.
Guests have free use of the swimming pool at the St. Leonard 600 yards away.
Meals consist of a breakfast buffet and a three course dinner with a choice of main course.
40 bedrooms: no singles available.
HOTEL KRALLERHOF (4+) Premier
This super hotel is situated in its own grounds.
There are two heated swimming pools, sauna, solarium, sun terrace, two tennis courts, squash courts (payable locally), fitness room, massage facilities, health baths (payable locally) and billiards.
The hotel also organises guided rambles!
The Krallerhof has several bars: the Kralleralm, two cocktail bars, and the igloo bar.
There's also an a la carte restaurant, a residents' dining room and a TV lounge.
Occasionally there is live music, and a weekly  barbecue weather permitting.
There's even a small shop.
The bedrooms are very comfortable, all have private bathroom.
Superior rooms have a lounge area.
Lift; 75 bedrooms.
GASTHAUS STOCKINGGUT (3)
This hotel has an elevated position above the village.
Facilities include a breakfast/dining room and a lounge area with TV on the first floor.
There is a small cellar bar, a sun terrace, a large garden and small heated outdoor swimming pool.
Meals include breakfast buffet, and dinner is three courses.
The hotel runs its own activity programme, including a barbecue evening, tennis and table tennis tournament, farmers buffet, guided ramble and transport to Zell am See.
The hotel also has its own bikes which are free to house guests.
No lift; 16 bedrooms.
LEOGANGERHOF (3+)
This is a family-run hotel situated in the centre of the village, with excellent food and service.
All rooms have private facilities.
Most have a balcony and some take an extra bed.
Facilities include a lounge, bar, TV lounge, dining room and a la carte restaurant.
There is a swimming pool and sauna (free of charge) and a solarium (local charge).
This hotel is well known for its high standard of cuisine.
A buffet breakfast is served, and dinner is three courses with a choice of main course.
40 bedrooms: no singles available.
PENSION HUTTWIRT (2+)
This is an enchanting old inn, dating from the sixteenth century.
The pensions is about 45 minutes walk from the village centre.
Public rooms include an a la carte dining room and a breakfast/dining room for house guests.
Dinner is a set starter and dessert, and for the main course you may choose from the a la carte menu.
The bedrooms are all furnished Austrian style.
Basic rooms have free use of a shower.
Outside is a lovely garden where you may eat in fine weather, and occasionally the hotel offers zither music during the evening.
No lift; 14 bedrooms.
St Johann
Situated in a lovely green, sunny valley at the foot of the Kitzbuheler Horn and the Wilder Kaiser Mountains, St Johann is a busy and attractive town, with most of the buildings build in traditional style with wooden balconies and brightly coloured walls.
The town has many shops and pavement cafes, which as well as serving delicious cold beer, offer sinfully fattening cakes, pastries and ice-creams.
There are numerous sports on offer.
To start with there's over 60 miles of cleared walks with splendid views, and a number of friendly guesthouses.
For the adventurous there is a double-track summer toboggan run, where you can race new found friends!
In addition, there is swimming, tennis, climbing and even flying.
Apart from the outdoor interest, its also worth visiting St Johann's own folklore museum, or taking the train to the nearby fortress town of Kufstein.
St Johann is a popular resort, and many people return year after year.
Consequently, there is a very pleasant welcoming atmosphere.
It's also one of those places where especially during high season there is always something going on.
There are Tyrolean evenings aplenty; plus concerts as well as guided walks.
Evenings are relaxed, friendly and informal.
There are many bars and restaurants.
In short, a friendly resort with much to keep people of all ages happy.
What to see and do
Excursions: Amongst the two most popular are Salzburg and Vienna.
Also popular is the trip to Krimml and Mayrhofen, and our beautifully scenic tour round the Kitzbuhel Alps.
First stop is Rattenberg, the famous crystal making town.
Next top is the Ziller Valley to Mayrhofen; and finally onto the spectacular Krimml Waterfalls.
The tour from the Dolomites is particularly scenic: soaring mountains give way to enormous glaciers.
There's a stop off in Cortina before heading past Lake Misurina and returning via Lienz.
For details of our pre-bookable excursions, please turn to page 8.
Sports: A definite plus for this resort.
Near the village centre there is a very well equipped sports centre with indoor and outdoor pools, a children's pool, sunbathing areas and a gym.
Walking: Maps available from our Representative will guide you through over 100 kms of meadows, woodlands and hills.
Cycling: Different types of cycle can be hired form the village spots shop.
There are plenty of opportunities for cycling around the village.
Tennis: Indoor and outdoor courts at the Sports Centre.
Golf: There is an eighteen and a nine hole course near Kitzbuhel, and minigolf is available in the resort.
Horseriding: Stables and tuition are available nearby.
(Approx 140AS per head).
Wild water rafting is also available.
Free activities: There are guided walks organised by the local tourist office, and various festivals throughout the season.
HOTEL MOSER (3)
A delightful modern hotel, the Moser is built in typical Tyrolean style and set in a quiet but central part of St. Johann.
There is a lounge area, a warm and friendly bar and a cheerful dining room where a buffet style breakfast is served.
Dinner is three courses, with a choice of main dish.
Guests receive a welcome drink on their first full day.
Bedrooms are spacious and all have private bathroom and balcony; most take a third bed.
Car parking is available.
No lift; 40 bedrooms: single available.
HOTEL PARK (4)
Just 5 minutes from the centre of St Johann, the Park stands in its own gardens by the gondola lift, and close to the summer toboggan run.
This family-run hotel has a cosy lounge area, bar, sauna, and solarium, sun terrace, children's playroom, residents' dining room, a la carte restaurant and cafe.
Breakfast is a buffet and at dinner there is a choice of 2 minutes; the Park is renowned for its high standards of cuisine.
Once a week (if the weather is fine) there is a barbecue in the garden.
And once a week one of the waiters takes guests on a free guided walk.
Bedrooms are spacious and all have private bathroom, balcony and TV (1 English channel).
All rooms take either three or four beds.
Lift: 54 bedrooms; single available.
GASTHOF BAREN (2)
The Baren is a charming traditional Tyrolean Inn, conveniently situated in St Johann's main square.
Built in the 15th Century, it has been modernised over the years, but maintains much of the original style.
There are 2 sun terraces where guests may enjoy snacks or a la carte meals, 2 beautiful restaurants built from solid oak; there is a TV at the back of the dining area.
Breakfast is continental style with choose, ham and rolls.
Dinner is good wholesome, home-cooked food.
Bedrooms are spacious, and furnished in traditional style; some take third or fourth beds.
Guests have free use of the shower.
No lift: 19 bedrooms; singles available.
Westendorf
Set amid lush green pasture land and backed by awe inspiring mountains, Westendorf is an attractive, lively village in the Kitzbuhel Alps.
Kitzbuhel itself is only 20 minutes away by rail or bus.
if you've never been before, Westendorf will fulfill your idea of the Austrian Tyrol at its best.
This is a village of wide gabled houses, every one with window boxes full of colourful flowers; of streets where you are more likely to come across a lumbering hay cart in no hurry at all, rather than an impatient motorist blasting his horn at everything in his way, and of friendly locals.
A pleasant unhurried pace of life in some of the most wonderful countryside known to man in what life in a Tyrolean village is all about.
Westendorf offers the chance to hire a bicycle and enjoy the pleasures of cycling on quiet roads.
Try a bit of horse riding, or even a ride in a horse drawn trap.
Crazy golf and tennis are on offer, as is bowling.
The pride of the village is the swimming pool: set in a lovely area of grass and trees, the pool is large and heated, complete with waterslide.
Ideal for lazing round on a hot summer's afternoon.
A new gondola cable car will take you to dizzy heights, enabling you to appreciate the mountains in their true splendour.
From the top, you will have a glorious view, and you can go for a walk, or relax at one of the mountain top restaurants, sitting on the terrace and drinking in the views.
In the village, there are plenty of cafes and bars in which to while away a pleasant evening.
Dancing in Keller bars is almost a nightly event.
Alternatively, enjoy the real traditional side of the village entertainment and listen to the brass band.
The villagers occasionally dress up in their lederhosen, and give it all they've got with a few thigh slapping, foot stamping numbers.
What this village is really good for, however, is relaxing.
Children too are well catered for, giving you the chance to have some time off as well.
One afternoon they will be taken for an easy mountain ramble and on another they are taken by horse drawn carriage into the woods where they can barbecue sausages (a small charge is made for the barbecue).
What to see and do
Excursions: A number of excursions are available from Westendorf.
Some of the most popular include the one to the Salzkammergut and St Wolfgang a trip round Austria's beautiful Lake District with a stop at St Wolfgang, home of the famous White Horse Inn.
Venice and Lake Garda is a full day trip stopping first at Italy's largest lake and then proceeding to the ancient water city of Venice to enjoy the wonderful atmosphere of St Marks Square, the Grand Canal and the elegant shops.
Tennis: There are outdoor courts at a number of locations throughout the village, also mini-golf right in the centre.
Mountain lifts: There is a new gondola which will open up new areas for walking.
The old Chorlape chair still operates from the middle station.
Swimming: No less than five pools — the main one for swimmers, one for diving, one for children and a paddling pool, plus the waterslide!
Horse riding: Available every day, as well as horse drawn carriage rides for the less energetic!
Bicycling: Hire a cycle from the central sports shop which is open every day except Sunday.
Bowling: Special evenings will be arranged by our representative — with Schnapps for every strike!
HOTEL AUSTRIA (3+)
In an attractive, sunny setting close to the centre of Westendorf, the Hotel Austria consists of two buildings.
The old building is full of traditional charm, whilst the new building offers spotlessly clean and homely accommodation.
(NB we cannot confirm which building clients will be staying in).
There is a pleasant dining room for house guests which can also be used to relax during the evening, plus a cosy lounge and TV room.
Guests have always enjoyed the food here, and you will be served with a continental style breakfast with ham, cheese and eggs, and dinner is three course.
The Austria has a pretty little garden, ideal for some peaceful sunbathing; all of the comfortable rooms have private facilities and a balcony.
No lift; 24 bedrooms.
HOTEL FLEIDINGERHOF (2+)
This is a picturesque little hotel, complete with flower bedecked balconies.
It's conveniently close to the village centre, and not far from the tennis and swimming pool complex.
Family run, the Fleidingerhof offers friendly service and great facilities.
The pretty, rustic style dining room overlooks the garden.
There you will be served with a buffet breakfast and a three course evening meal.
There is also an a la carte restaurant, a popular bar, a sunbathing terrace, a small TV lounge and a cafe terrace which is ideal for lingering over a drink in the sunshine.
All the bedrooms have a private bathroom and balcony.
Lift; 27 bedrooms.
HOTEL HOLZHAMERHOF (3)
Set in a quiet location amid beautiful meadows in this traditional Tyrolean hotel.
The centre of Westendorf is a leisurely ten minute stroll away.
There are two bars, a TV lounge and a guest's dining room which overlooks the garden.
Breakfast is continental supplemented with cheeses and ham, and dinner is three courses.
This hotel has an excellent reputation for its home cooking.
The Holzhamerhof would be a good choice for families: early meals and cots are available, and the garden makes a safe playground for kiddies.
The hotel also boasts a sauna and solarium (both payable locally), sun terrace and table tennis.
All the bedrooms have private facilities and balcony.
No lift; 20 bedrooms.
PENSION SCHOBER (2+)
Situated right in the centre of Westendorf, the Schober is a typical Tyrolean pension with a warm and welcoming atmosphere.
The owners are exceptionally friendly, and you are assured of lashings of Austrian hospitality.
Breakfast is a hearty buffet supplemented with ham and cheeses and dinner is a three course set menu.
During the evening, the dining room doubles as a lounge and bar.
All bedrooms have private facilities.
Some will take a third bed or fourth bed.
No lift; 29 bedrooms; single available.
Kitzbuhel
Without doubt one of the liveliest and most sought after of the Tyrolean resorts, Kitzbuhel offers everything.
There's golfing and tennis, a magnificent indoor aquarena, bright cafes and lighthearted bars, scintillating nightclubs even a casino in which to try your luck (from July).
Kitzbuhel is an ancient fortified town with fine medieval buildings.
One can still enter through a narrow stone gateway, though now a new town spreads far beyond the confines of its walls.
The old centre of the town, partly a pedestrian area, comprises of two streets of attractively gabled houses, known as the Vorderstadt and the Hinterstadt.
If you like walking, you'll love Kitzbuhel.
There are in fact over 180 kms of marked walks, some of which are fairly strenuous.
It takes about 2 hours to reach the top of the Hahnenkamm, but it's worth it for the view.
Gentle walks include those over on Panorama Way, or the longer stroll over to Pengelstein.
All around Kitzbuhel, verdant slopes of dainty meadows decked with mountain daisies meet calm pine forests and towering alpine peaks.
Cable cars and chair lifts carry you effortlessly 7,000 feet up into the mountains, where there are sun-soaked terraces, with entrancing panoramas of the mountains.
Five minutes by bus and you're sunbathing on the banks of the Schwarzsee.
Fed by warm springs, this is a natural haven for swimmers and you can also row in a hire boat, windsurf or fish.
The Austrian Open Tennis Championships are played in Kitzbuhel during the first week in August.
As well as tennis, other recreations include riding, golf and squash.
There are many interesting old buildings to explore, including the local museum and the 14th century Liebfrauenkirche.
The town's ‘Oompah’ band, dressed in traditional costumes, gives regular concerts, and the well known ‘Hauser’group will delight you with their noisy Schuhplatter dances, singing and yodelling.
To sum up, Kitzbuhel is a major year round sporting and leisure centre and as such offers every facility.
What to see and do
Excursions: There are numerous coach excursions available from Kitzbuhel; Innsbruck and Vipiteno; Rattenberg, Mayrhofen and the Krimml Waterfalls; Grossglockner; Salzburg via  Berchtesgaden ; Chiemsee Castle: Venice: Vienna and the jewel-like lakes of the Salzkammergut.
Pre-bookable excursions are available; please see page 8 for further information.
Tennis: Hard clay courts are available throughout the town, and excellent facilities on the edge of the resort.
Swimming: There's an enormous ‘Aquarena’ in Kitzbuhel itself, or you may prefer the warm waters of the Schwarzsee, which is just over a mile from the centre.
You may also fish, or hire windsurfing boards and rowing boats on this lake.
Casino: The casino in the town centre is open in July and August.
Cycling: Cycle hire is available in the town centre and many pretty villages are within easy reach.
Mountain lifts: The famous Hahnenkamm cable car will whisk you to the top of the mountain in minutes, for wonderful panoramic views and rambles.
There are also chair lifts galore.
Golf: The ‘Red Bull’ 9–hole golf course is just four minutes walk from Hotel Reisch and the new 18 hole golf course is on the edge of the resort.
Driving range, chipping and putting green, and professional coaches are all available.
Other sports: For the energetic, both paragliding and hang gliding are available.
Riding is also on offer, and will cost about 140 AS an hour.
Free activities: During your stay you can enjoy guided walking tours (walking boots necessary), guided tour of Kitzbuhel, and evening film show of the resort, weekly mini golf tournament, chess evening, and a brass band concert.
All free of charge!
HOTEL HAHNENHOF (3)
This hotel is actually an old farmhouse that has been beautifully converted and is full of character.
Situated a little off the beaten track, the Hahnenhof is 15 minutes walk from the town centre, and is a good starting point for many pleasant rambles.
All bedrooms have bath or shower and loo.
There is a cosy lounge area with a fireplace, a bar where a welcome drink is offered, a sauna and solarium.
The restaurant is extremely popular locally, due to its high standard of cuisine.
The hotel also features a swimming pool and spacious gardens.
All the tastefully appointed bedrooms have private facilities.
14 bedrooms; singles available.
HOTEL HOFER (3)
This is a small and attractive hotel which is situated in a quiet part of Kitzbuhel but close to the town centre.
All the well appointed bedrooms have a private bathroom and telephone; most can take a third bed.
The Hofer has a friendly stuberl and a small TV lounge.
You can take advantage of the sauna and solarium to unwind at the end of the day (a small charge is made).
The Hofer has a good reputation for food and meals are taken in the attractive dining room.
Superior rooms are newly renovated, and all offer a TV with an English channel and a mini-bar.
No lift; 24 bedrooms: singles available.
HOTEL THERESIA (4)
The Maria Theresia is a well-run popular hotel in an excellent location in the centre of Kitzbuhel, 5 minute walk from the Hahnenkamm cable car.
All bedrooms have a private bathroom and some can take an extra bed.
Facilities include a large, comfortable lounge, a traditional stube and a Viennese cafe.
There is also a free sauna, turkish bath and whirlpool, solarium (local charge), sun terrace, TV room and a games room offering table tennis, billiards and bowling.
A breakfast buffet is served and dinner is four courses with a choice of main course.
108 bedrooms; no singles available.
HOTEL STRASSHOFER (2+)
The Strasshofer is situated in the heart of Kitzbuhel, and has been owned and managed by the same family for over 300 years.
The hotel enjoys a good reputation and has recently undergone extensive refurbishing.
Its amenities include a small sun terrace, lounge, television room, restaurant, a solarium (local charge) and a sauna which is free to hotel guests once a week.
The bedrooms are all individually furnished with hand carved wooden furniture, and all have private bathrooms; some can take a third or fourth bed.
Already renowned for its fine cooking, breakfasts are now supplemented with hams, cheeses and juices.
No lift; 25 bedrooms.
SPORTHOTEL REISCH (4) Premier
This well-known, centrally located hotel is amongst the most comfortable in Kitzbuhel.
The Reisch is well known for its excellent standards of service and friendly welcome.
Family-owned and managed, this hotel offers many amenities including a cafe terrace, garden, reception lounge, TV room, 2 bars, restaurant, snack bar and coffee shop.
The sophisticated restaurant serves gourmet meals; gentlemen are requested to wear a jacket.
Once a week if the weather is fine, the hotel provides a barbecue instead of dinner.
The hotel also offers a Turkish bath and sauna free of charge, with solarium and massage facilities payable locally.
The bedrooms are tastefully furnished and all have private bathrooms; all take a third and fourth bed.
Lift; 61 bedrooms.
HOTEL SCHLOSS LEBENBERG (4+) Premier
Formerly a castle, this elegant hotel is delightfully situated in an elevated position overlooking Kitzbuhel.
A daytime shuttle bus operates 6 days a week to the village.
Set in extensive grounds, and enjoying magnificent views of the Hahnenkamm and Kitzbuhlerhorn, the Schloss Lebenberg's facilities include a large indoor pool a sauna, solarium, fitness gym and sun terrace.
There is a hobby room with table tennis, a bridge room, a beauty centre and two television lounges.
There are tennis courts, and golf is available nearby.
Inside, the hotel offers comfortable and spacious lounges, a restaurant (gentlemen are requested to wear a jacket and tie for dinner), and with a traditional bar.
Meals are excellent, with a large breakfast buffet and a four-course dinner with a choice of main course.
Bedrooms are tastefully furnished and combine all modern comforts and facilities with the gracious style of a Tyrolean hunting lodge.
Babysitting is available.
2 lifts in new part; 109 bedrooms; singles available.
HOTEL HASELSBERGER (3)
This very friendly gasthaus is ideally situated next to the Hahnenkamm cable car, and is just a few minutes from the town centre.
There is a pleasant reception area with easy chairs, which leads into the bar.
A sauna is planned for Summer 90.
The Hotel Haselsberger provides a good breakfast supplemented by cheeses hams and cereals.
During the evening, there is a three course dinner with a choice of main course served in the relaxed atmosphere of the hotel's dining room.
All of the comfortable bedrooms have a private bathroom and a balcony.
No lift; 20 bedrooms; single available.
SPORTHOTEL TIROLERHOF (3)
The Tirolerhof is located in a most attractive position on the quiet outskirts of Kitzbuhel, and is a comfortable and well run establishment.
Although positioned well away from the town centre, the Tirolerhof is not isolated, a regular bus service passes the hotel and the hotel will run clients into Kitzbuhel in the evening and collect them again at approximately 11pm.
To walk into Kitzbuhel takes about 20 minutes.
All rooms have a private bathroom and a balcony; some can take a third or fourth bed.
The hotel has a lounge, TV room, cocktail bar and an a la carte stube.
There is a sunny terrace where you can enjoy a relaxing drink, and a free sauna, Turkish bath and solarium (local charge).
A buffet breakfast is served.
Dinner is three courses.
No lift; 30 bedrooms; no singles available.
HOTEL MONTANA (3+)
The Montana is close to the centre of the resort, but in a quite location about a one minute walk from the Hahnenkamm cable car.
It is well appointed throughout, offering a high standard of comfort service and cuisine.
This hotel is a popular choice with Enterprise clients, many of whom return again and again.
The indoor swimming pool is free of charge, as is the sauna twice a week; the solarium is also available.
Other amenities include a lounge; a bar where prices are subsidised for house guests, and a dining room where a buffet breakfast and excellent four course dinners are served.
For children a special menu is provided, with special mealtimes if required.
All the bedrooms have private facilities and are clean and comfortable.
Some bedrooms can take a third or fourth bed.
Car parking is available.
Lift: 40 bedrooms.
HOTEL KLAUSNER (3+)
The Klausner is a comfortable well-run hotel close to the Kitzbuhlerhorn with the cable car only 8 minutes walk away.
The town centre is a 15 minute walk away, and the hotel is close to the railway station.
All bedrooms have a private bathroom, and some can take an extra bed.
Facilities include a comfortable lounge, cafe, sun terrace, bar and an attractive Tyrolean dining room with stunning views of the Wilder Kaiser Mountains.
The Klausner enjoys a good reputation for its cuisine.
A large buffet breakfast is served and dinner is three courses with a salad buffet.
50 bedrooms; singles available.
HOTEL JAGERWIRT (4) Premier
The Jagerwirt is one of Kitzbuhel's leading hotels, and has been owned and managed by the Bartenstein family for three generations and extends a warm welcome to British guests.
The town centre is a four minute walk away.
The hotel is also close to the 9 hole golf course, and both outdoor and indoor tennis courts.
The hotel boasts high standards of comfort and a full range of facilities, including free sauna and Turkish bath, massage solarium (payable locally), a bar, a reading/sitting room, a TV room where English videos are often shown and a garden.
The first class restaurant offers an excellent buffet breakfast and a choice of three dinner menus.
Standard rooms have free use of shower, and rooms with private bathrooms all have a balcony; some rooms take a fourth bed.
All the bedrooms are tastefully furnished and are very comfortable.
Lift to 4th floor; 81 bedrooms; single available.
Kirchberg
One of the most popular resorts in this brochure, and it's not hard to see why.
Kirchberg is extremely well positioned for exploring the Tyrol, yet it remains unspoilt and reasonable priced.
Fashionable Kitzbuhel is just down the road, and there are many local buses and trains for easy access to many other villages and cities like Zell am See and Innsbruck.
But Kirchberg is by no means lacking in things to keep you occupied.
There are miles of well kept paths for walking or cycling.
Most walks are well signposted.
There is the whole of the Brixen and Sperten valleys to explore, and it is about a ninety minutes walk to Kitzbuhel.
Kirchberg has a small lake which is excellent for both swimming and boating.
Next to the lake is a heated outdoor swimming pool and children's pool.
This area is particularly suitable for families.
The whole resort is very picturesque, surrounded as it is by the Kitzbuhler alps.
For amazing pictures, take your camera up the recently opened Fleckalm gondola; the view is simply stunning.
In Kirchberg, small flower-decked open air cafes, are dotted about, and we defy anyone not to be tempted by the gateaux on offer.
Kirchberg is well known locally for its band and throughout the season they stage many concerts ranging from the serene to good old thigh slapping and yodelling nights out.
Other nightlife in Kirchberg is fairly relaxed and informal.
There are a few discos, but if you fancy something more sophisticated, hop on a train for the short journey to Kitzbuhel.
What to see and do
Excursions: Amongst the two most popular are Krimml and Mayrhofen, a beautifully scenic tour round the Kitzbuhel Alps.
First stop is Rattenberg, the famous crystal making town.
Next stop is Mayrhofen in the Ziller valley, and finally onto the spectacular Krimml Waterfalls.
The tour to Chiemsee Castle in Bavaria starts with a picturesque journey via the romantic village of Reit im Winkl to Lake Chiem.
There is a boat trip round the island and a guided tour of King Ludwig's magnificent castle, a copy of Versailles.
There are also organised trips to Vienna and Salzburg.
Pre-bookable excursions are available; for further details please turn to page 8.
Watersports: A bathing lake (rowing boats can be hired), a heated outdoor pool and a children's pool.
There are also 25 Kms of fishing waters, though bring your own tackle.
Walking: Take advantage of the summer lift pass which covers several Kirchberg/Kitzbuhel lifts.
Mini-golf: There are good courses just a few minutes walk from the village centre.
Cycling: Different types of cycles can be hired from the village sports shop.
There are plenty of opportunities for cycling around the village.
Hang-gliding: This can be arranged for the intrepid, and is definitely worth it though we can't cover this with our standard insurance.
Adventure playground: in the woods near the village.
Tennis: There's plenty of choice.
Kirchberg has 3 indoor and 4 outdoor courts.
Squash: Courts are available in the village.
Nightlife: Plenty is organised by our local representative.
This includes bowling evenings and horse-drawn buggy rides.
For those with bags of energy left after exploring the valley, try the local night club, or a few beers in the local pub — The Londoner!
Free activities: There is a weekly brass band concert, weather permitting.
There are also occasional guided walks, chess club evenings and a weekly rifle shoot (all during high season).
TRAUBLINGERHOF (3+)
Recently built, this is a traditional, friendly hotel with good facilities just five minutes from the village centre.
All rooms have private bathrooms and many can take an extra bed.
There is a friendly stube, where drinks are served, dining room, sauna and steam bath (free), and a solarium.
Clients also have a free use of the swimming pool at Hotel Sonne.
A buffet breakfast is served and dinner is three courses with a choice of main course.
40 bedrooms: no singles available.
HAUS AM BRUCKERL (2)
The Haus Am Bruckerl is an ideal choice for those who like a warm and friendly atmosphere and personal service.
The hotel is peacefully situated in lovely countryside, about a 25 minute walk from the village centre.
The bedrooms are comfortably but simply furnished and have a private bathroom.
Some bedrooms take a third bed.
Continental style breakfast is served in the breakfast room, which also has a TV and can be used by guests as a lounge in the evening; guests on half board are served dinner at the nearby Hotel Zeinlach.
No lift; 10 bedrooms.
GASTHOF BRAU (2+)
Five minutes walk from the village centre, the Brau is one of the oldest guest houses in Kirchberg.
Originally a small brewery, it has been owned and managed by the Koidl family for 200 years.
The downstairs restaurant where breakfast is served, has walls decorated with paintings of people dressed in traditional local costumes.
The upstairs dining room used by house guests in high season or when the hotel is busy, is used as a TV lounge during the day.
There are also two stuberls decorated and furnished in traditional ‘farmers style’, where locals meet to drink, play cards and enjoy good food.
Bedrooms are comfortably furnished, and some of them have excellent views of the surrounding mountains.
No lift: 16 bedrooms; singles available.
HOTEL ZEINLACH (3)
The Zeinlach is a traditional farmhouse style guesthouse, its wooden balconies festooned with flowers.
Situated just a mile from Kirchberg centre, the hotel has recently been completely re-furbished and now offers a sauna, table tennis and bicycle hire free of charge.
There is also a cosy, traditional bar-stube which is popular with the locals, an atmospheric wood panelled dining room serving excellent meals, a TV lounge, a roof garden, and a heated swimming pool and terrace.
Once a week the evening meal is a 4 course Tyrolean speciality.
Bedrooms are comfortably furnished, predominantly in wood, and have private bathrooms and balconies.
No lift; 36 bedrooms; single available.
HOTEL RED EAGLE (4)
Newly renovated, the Red Eagle is a comfortable and well run hotel offering excellent facilities, set conveniently just a few minutes form the centre of the resort.
All bedrooms have a private bathroom, and all are large enough to take a third bed.
There is a small but cosy bar where live music is played daily.
Clients have free use of the sauna and steam-bath.
In addition, clients can use the swimming pool at the Hotel Sonne.
Breakfast is a buffet and dinner is three courses with a choice of main course.
Once a week there is a Tyrolean gala dinner.
50 bedrooms: no singles available.
Ellmau and Going
These traditional villages are set in some of the most beautiful Austrian scenery we know.
Deep in the Leukon Valley, the magnificent Wilder Kaiser mountains soar up one side, with Hartkaiser and Astberg looming on the other.
If walking is one of your priorities when choosing a holiday, then this area definitely merits consideration.
In fact, the walking can be as strenuous as you want it.
There is a funicular in Ellmau and a chairlift in Going to whisk you up the mountain and the views.
For the more adventurous, you can even try your hand at rock climbing in Going.
Although linked, both villages have definite characters of their own.
Ellmau is the larger of the two resorts and there is plenty to appeal to all tastes.
In the resort itself are indoor and outdoor swimming pools.
Other sports on offer include tennis, mini golf and horseriding.
To see more of the village and surrounding area, board a horse drawn buggy, or hire a bicycle (mountain or normal).
Nightlife can be fairly active, but even during the day there is plenty to do and we guarantee you'll be tempted at least once by the luscious cakes on offer in the resort's many cafes.
Renowned for its friendliness, Going is a typically Austrian village nestling in beautiful countryside.
The area offers superb walks ranging from gentle strolls to full day hikes.
Going has its own man-made lake, the Badesee which is popular with swimmers and sun worshippers.
The famous Stanglwirt Hotel offers horse riding the hotel has a Lippizaner stud which sires the famous white horses used at the Spanish riding school in Vienna.
There is also bowling and a ‘hot rock’ indoor swimming pool.
Nightlife in Going is quieter than Ellmau, but the Dorfkeller (which is part of the Dorfwirt) more than compensates.
For a change of scenery, Ellmau is just 20 minutes walk away.
What to see and do
Excursions: Amongst the pre-bookable excursions we offer, trips to Innsbruck and then over the Brenner Pass to Vipiteno in Italy is one of the most popular.
Here you can shop for bargain priced wines, leather goods and other souvenirs before returning to Innsbruck, the capital of the Tirol.
Another must is the trip to Achensee, Austria's largest Alpine lake, before journeying to Rattenberg to view some of its world famous crystal.
Other excursions include Salzburg, the Dolomites and further afield to Vienna and Venice.
Turn to pages 8–9 for prices and further details.
Sports: There is swimming in both villages.
Ellmau has indoor and outdoor pools; whilst in Going there is a lake (Badesee).
Both resorts offer tennis, riding, squash and cycling.
Walking: A pleasant way to explore the region is to improvise on the charming mini-network of mountain lifts.
A ten day ticket cost AS 180 during 1989.
This ticket is valid in Ellmau, Going, Scheffau, Soll, Hopfgarten, Brixen and Westendorf.
Both resorts feature organised rambles.
Other activities: In Ellmau, if there is enough support, they organise football tournaments for guests!
Visit towards the end of July, and you'll also catch their village festival.
Both resorts feature Tirolean Evenings and Brass band concerts.
In Going, the keen rambler can enjoy guided walks.
SPORTPENSION TENNENHOF (3)
Situated in a quiet position, this modern style pension is just a few minutes walk from the centre of Going.
It is an attractive hotel offering friendly service, and is in a good location.
All bedrooms are twin bedded with a private bathroom and balcony offering magnificent views.
Some take a third bed.
Facilities include a small lounge area with open fireplace and comfortable chairs, an attractive wood-panelled restaurant with a small bar, a separate a la carte dining room, and downstairs there is a television room with small bar.
The hotel has its own sauna and solarium available to guests at a local charge.
No lift; 30 bedrooms.
HOTEL ALTE POST (4) & GARNI (3)
Situated in the very centre of Ellmau, the Alte Post is one of Ellmau's original hotels, and was recently completely rebuilt.
Directly opposite is the Garni with its popular coffee house downstairs.
Facilities at the Post which are also available to guests at the Garni include a lounge/cocktail bar, a spacious dining room, two large a la carte restaurants, and a fitness area (local charge) with sauna, Turkish bath, solarium and sitting area with a phone to order drinks!
There is a large garden restaurant where you can sit with drinks, snacks and meals.
The Alte Post has an excellent reputation for fine cuisine.
Breakfast is a buffet, and there is a choice of menu at dinner.
Bedrooms are comfortably furnished, those in the Alte Post a telephone, radio and easy chairs.
All the twin rooms have a balcony.
Lift; 40 bedrooms (hotel) 35 bedrooms (Garni); singles available.
HOTEL BLATTLHOF (3+)
This large, impressive hotel is set back from the main road in its own grounds, and clients can walk into Going or Ellmau in around 10–15 minutes.
Local buses stop right outside, and for keen walkers the magnificent ‘Wild Emperor’ mountains are just outside the back door.
The Blattlhof is owned and managed by the Oberleitner family and is impeccably run by them and their staff — many of whom have worked in the hotel for years.
All the comfortable bedrooms have private bathrooms and several will take three or four beds.
Facilities include an outdoor swimming pool, a cafe terrace and garden, reception/lounge with a huge open fireplace, a la carte restaurant, tube, bar, sun terrace, residents dining room and a television room.
Breakfast is an enormous buffet and there is a choice of dinner menu.
NB This hotel only accepts Saturday arrivals.
2 lifts: 85 bedrooms; singles available.
GASTHOF DORFWIRT (3)
Just a couple of minutes from the centre of Going, this picturesque gasthof is accessed from a quiet road running alongside a stream.
You are assured of a warm welcome from Frau Hinterholzer, the owner.
All bedrooms are twin bedded, although third and fourth beds are available, with a private bathroom, and some have a balcony.
The Dorfwirt is a distinctive hotel with carved wooden balconies, and the peaceful atmosphere is totally in keeping with this relaxing resort.
The hotel has a good reputation for its cuisine, served in an attractive dining room.
Other facilities include a couple of stuberls where local people linger over beers and deep conversations, and next door is the popular Dorfkeller bar.
The hotel also boasts a tennis court available to all guests at greatly reduced rates.
No lift; 10 bedrooms.
GASTHOF SCHNABLWIRT (3)
This Gasthof is located right in the centre of the delightful village of Going, but noise is never a problem.
Essentially it is a traditional wood-faced village inn, offering comfortable accommodation, excellent cuisine and good value.
All bedrooms are basic but comfortable with private facilities.
All the twins have balconies.
Public rooms include a cosy bar with a television, a spacious breakfast/dining room, and an a la carte restaurant.
Breakfast is continental, supplemented by cheeses and ham, and dinner is a set three course menu.
No lift; 15 bedrooms; single available.
PENSION LANZENHOF (3)
This is a centrally located bed and breakfast pension in Going, set in a large garden, so it's also very quiet.
All the attractive bedrooms have private facilities, and all have been recently refurbished.
The family apartment comprises 2 bedrooms, bathroom and sitting area with kitchenette.
Public rooms include a television lounge, and another with a bar and open fireplace.
Breakfast is a hearty buffet; clients booking half board take their evening meal in the nearby Schnablwirt hotel.
For that extra special souvenir or present for the family, the owners also run a traditional handicrafts shop selling exquisite handmade gifts a perfect memento of your holiday.
No lift: 16 bedrooms.
Scheffau
Scheffau is set against the backdrop of the stunning Ellmauer Halt, the highest peak in the Wilder Kaiser mountain range.
This is a walker's paradise with everything from a gentle amble round the foothills, to fairly tough all day hikes.
The Tourist Office organises a free guided walk every week.
The whole Wilder Kaiser area is a conservation area, so nothing will spoil the view.
In fact the only buildings up in the mountains are the restaurants which many of the marked walks include en route!
For the less energetic there is easy access by gondola to mountains on the opposite side of the valley from the Wilder Kaiser.
Pleasant walks here are plentiful, or you can simply sunbathe and admire the views, before making your way back down to the village for a piece of scrumptious gateau in one of the numerous cafes.
Those who come for the lakes will not be disappointed either.
Three miles out from Scheffau is the beautiful Hintersteinersee lake, where you can swim, picnic or just enjoy the scenery.
Other activities include tennis and bowling, or you may care to hire bikes and follow the marked tracks.
If you prefer doing it on horseback, there are stables in nearby Going where tuition is available.
Nightlife is generally quiet in Scheffau, though as you'd expect from such a friendly Tyrolean resort, fondues or  barbecue parties and dancing to local music in the hotels and disco are all on offer.
Once a week there is also a brass band concert.
A good night out is the Austrian Skittles Evening; nine pin bowling with prizes and schnapps for every strike.
Your Enterprise Representative has a full programme of excursions and evening activities.
What to see and do
Excursions: Scheffau is a good base from which to explore.
There are trips to the ancient cities of Vienna and Innsbruck.
A visit to Salzburg is a must, as is the tour of the salt mines at Berchtesgaden.
Another worthwhile trip is to Rattenberg, where you can still see the traditional skills involved in crystal glass making.
Additional excursions are to the spectacular Krimml waterfalls and Chiemsee Castle.
Vipiteno is the place for Italian bargains, and we also visit Lake Achensee and the Salzkammergut.
Details and prices of our pre-bookable excursions from Scheffau are shown on page 8–9.
Watersports: Swimming at Hintersteinersee, plus an indoor pool at the Hotel Alpin Tyrol.
Local Festivals: Brass band Festival (first weekend in July) and the intriguing Fire Brigade Festival (mid August).
Shooting: A very popular sport in the Austrian Tyrol.
You can try your luck in Scheffau, and even compete for a bronze, silver or gold medal.
Tennis: Clay courts are available at the Gasthof Waldhof.
Approx cost for non-residents 100 AS per hour (residents 50 AS per hour).
Riding: Available at the Stanglwirt complex in Going both indoor and outdoor.
Cost in 1988 was 100 AS per hour.
Free activities: The local tourist offices provide a free guided walk once a week.
GASTHOF WALDHOF (3)
A spacious typically Tyrolean gasthof, the Waldhof stand in a meadow at the foot of the Scheffau chair and gondola lifts.
The hotel is approximately a 15 minute walk from the centre of the village.
There are extensive grounds surrounding the Gasthof.
Facilities include 3 tennis courts (payable locally), sunbathing lawns and a large terrace where light meals or snacks can be taken at lunchtime.
Downstairs is a Tyrolean-style bowling alley and cellar bar.
The attractive bedrooms all have a telephone and a balcony.
Breakfast is continental and there is a choice of menu at dinner.
Some rooms take a third or fourth bed.
No lift; 32 bedrooms; single available.
GASTHOF WILDER KAISER (3)
The Wilder Kaiser is very comfortable gasthof, which takes its name from the magnificent mountain range that rises behind Scheffau.
It has a pleasant dining room, stube and lounge area, sauna (local charge), solarium and a garden for sunbathing.
Zither music is played once a week.
The Wilder Kaiser is located just across the road room the lifts that access the Brandstadl mountain, and a 10 to 15 minute walk from the centre of the village.
Breakfast is a buffet, and dinner is three courses with the choice of main course.
Enterprise rooms are either in the gasthof itself, or in the very attractive ‘Landhaus’ directly opposite, which has a pleasant traditionally furnished reception-cum-lounge area.
All rooms take a third bed, and some take a fourth.
No lift; 26 bedrooms; single available.
GASTHOF BLAIKEN (3)
Recently built, this attractive gasthof stands back across the road from the gondola lift which gives access to the Brandstadl mountain.
A footpath leads from the back of the hotel to Scheffau village, the walk takes about 15 minutes.
The Blaiken has a welcoming bar and a separate dining room for house guests and it is the only place Scheffau where you'll be able to get real English tea!
Breakfast is a buffet and there is a choice of main course at the 3 course evening meal.
All our rooms are nicely furnished, with private bathrooms, and all have a balcony.
Some take a third bed.
No lift; 20 bedrooms.
GASTHOF WEBERBAUER (3)
Owned and run by the Wieser family, this truly traditional Tyrolean gasthof stands right in the centre of the village, against the impressive backdrop of the Wilder Kaiser mountains.
The Weberbauer has a sun lawn, a small terrace where drinks, snacks and meals are served, a lounge-cum-television room, an a la carte restaurant, a separate residents dining room, two very old stubes which are popular with the local villagers, and during high season (mid July-August) there is dance music once a week.
Breakfast is buffet style, and at dinner our guests will have a choice of three different menus, and are offered a choice of a salad and a ‘starters’ buffet.
We are pleased to be able to offer this well-run house, which enjoys a good reputation locally.
No lift; 23 bedrooms; single available.
HOTEL ALPIN TYROL & ANNEXE (4)
One of the Scheffau's leading hotels, the Alpin Tyrol offers high standards of cuisine and service, together with a friendly and informal atmosphere.
It's set in a quiet location just one minute walk from the centre of the village.
The hotel has a bright sunny dining room, a lounge and bar, a cosy stube, a large indoor swimming pool, a sauna, a solarium, fitness room and a TV room.
Breakfast is a buffet, and there is a salad buffet and choice of dinner menu in the evening.
Once a week when the weather is fine, there is a barbecue.
The hotel's newly re-furbished annexe is located in the next building, and reached by a covered walk-way.
Lift; 25 bedrooms.
PENSION ALOISIA (2+)
The Aloisia is a small and friendly family-run pension where British guests are made very welcome.
It is located just across the road from the gondola lift which climbs the Brandstadl mountain, and a 10 to 15 minute walk from the village centre.
The Aloisia has a sun-lawn, a children's play area, a heated outdoor swimming pool and a breakfast/dining room with a small bar where guests can relax in the evening.
Breakfast is continental style and dinners are tasty home cooking with a choice of menu.
Vegetarian meals are also available.
The comfortable bedrooms all have private bathrooms and balconies.
Once a week, if the weather is fine, there's a barbecue instead of dinner.
No life; 18 bedrooms.
Soll
This is another attractive resort with the dramatic Wilder Kaiser mountain range behind it.
Soll is a charming cluster of broad roofed houses and inns sprawling lazily around an onion domed church.
The new gondola lift whisks you high into the mountains, to views which are reputed to be the finest in the Tyrol.
We recommend that you visit the tourist office and pick up one of the ‘walking maps’ to make the most of the area.
The Tourist Office also organises free guided walks.
Soll is justifiably proud of its enormous sporting and leisure complex.
There are indoor and outdoor pools, sauna, solarium, massage facilities and sunbathing lawns.
For the energetic, cycles may be hired, though take care as the terrain is often deceptively steep…
The Moorsee Lake, on the edge of town, is ideal for swimming.
rowing boats are also available for hire.
Don't leave without hearing the village brass band which plays three times a week.
Zither music is also played three times a week.
During the evening, you can unwind in one of the many bars and restaurants; there is even a disco!
The Enterprise Representative organises Tyrolean evenings, fondue nights and the ever popular bowling excursions.
What to see and do
Excursions: Enterprise have arranged much for you to see and do at reasonable prices.
For example, we organise coach trips to Vienna, Innsbruck and Salzburg.
There are day trips to explore the Wilder Kaiser area; trips to the Krimml Waterfalls and the Berchtesgaden salt mines.
Often we cross the border into Italy.
Lake Garda is definitely worth a visit.
You may even throw caution to the wind and try one of our Mystery Trips.
For details and prices of our pre-bookable excursions, please turn to page 8–9.
Walking: There are many cleared paths.
These vary from the very pleasant amble to the Moorsee, to more testing hikes into the Wilder Kaiser mountain range.
Swimming and Fitness: There is a large and well organised fitness complex at Soll.
Facilities include a swimming pool, gym and sunbathing lawns.
Sports: Squash, tennis and mini-golf are all available.
Bicycle hire: If you want to explore further on your own, it's well worth hiring a bike.
Free activities: A selection of walks are organised by the local tourist office.
There are also open air brass band concerts.
HOTEL POSTWIRT (4) Premier
For years the Post has enjoyed a high reputation locally for its excellent food and service, and the addition of a luxurious wing, means that a matching standard of accommodation is now offered.
The hotel stands right in the middle of the village, where the old part of the building has been the centre of village life for hundreds of years.
This building houses an a la carte restaurant, a traditional beer stube with a vaulted ceiling, and a large hall where Tyrolean shows are staged once a week (payable locally).
In the new wing there is a cocktail bar/residents lounge where guests are offered a welcome cocktail, a traditional panelled stube, and a very attractive dining room where both dinner and the extensive breakfast buffet, including bacon and eggs are served.
Once a week there is a gala buffet with zither music.
On sunny mornings guests can have the added pleasure of breakfasting on the verandah.
The hotel is also happy to cater for vegetarians.
Other facilities include a fitness room, sauna and coin-operated solarium.
In front of the hotel is a garden restaurant; this is the location for the Sunday morning ‘Fruhschoppen’ where lively Austrian music is played.
All rooms have private facilities and balconies.
Lift; 56 bedrooms.
PENSION MIRABELL (2)
This is a friendly bed and breakfast pension situated right in the centre of the resort, and also houses the village patisserie and cake shop.
The bedrooms are comfortable, well furnished and all have private bathrooms; many have a balcony.
Clients choosing half board receive vouchers for their evening meal, which can be exchanged at several cafes and restaurants throughout the village and the pension is ideally placed for you to choose.
Breakfast is served in the first floor breakfast room.
No lift; 14 bedrooms; single available.
HOTEL AUSTRIA (3)
A well-established hotel, the Austria is conveniently situated right in the centre of Soll, ideally placed for all the shops, cafes and nightlife.
There is an a la carte restaurant, a residents dining room, lounge with TV and cocktail bar and an English-style pub with pool room, where you can buy snacks such as pizzas and toasted sandwiches.
On the terrace there is table-tennis.
Breakfast is a buffet, dinner is three courses with a choice of main course and a salad buffet.
The large bedrooms all have private bathroom, telephone, and are nicely decorated.
Lift; 44 bedrooms; single available.
HOTEL GANSLEIT (3+)
The Gansleit was built recently in a very attractive Tyrolean style; it is still owned and managed by the Krall family and has a welcoming atmosphere.
Just a five minute walk from the centre of the village, the hotel is only 150 yards from the resort's swimming complex.
The hotel has a sauna for which a local charge is made.
There is a dining room cum bar which also serves a la carte meals; breakfast is supplemented with cheeses, ham and juice and dinner is three courses with a choice of menu.
All our spacious bedrooms have private bathroom, balcony and some can take a third or fourth bed.
No lift; 41 bedrooms.
PENSION TIROL (3+)
This is quiet and conveniently placed pension, with beautifully furnished rooms.
Recently built in attractive Tyrolean style and very expensively fitted, it has a super breakfast room with a traditional tiled stove in the corner.
Here guests are offered a breakfast buffet whilst the three-course dinner, with a choice of main course, is served in the Hotel Tyrol which is under the same management and stands immediately opposite.
Guests are also offered a welcome drink in the Tyrol's cellar bar, and may use all the facilities of the main hotel which include an open-air heated pool and garden.
Bedrooms are spacious; some even have a sitting area.
All have a balcony.
Lift; 19 bedrooms; single available.
PENSION KAISERBLICK (2)
This family run Tyrolean pension has a cosy atmosphere and has proved very popular with our previous clients.
It is set in a quiet and sunny spot just 12 minutes walk from the village.
There is an attractive terrace and garden where deckchairs and table tennis are available.
All rooms have a private bathroom; some take a third and fourth bed.
There's an open plan dining room, and Herr Wagner the friendly owner does the cooking himself.
Dinner is three courses with a salad buffet.
Once a week guest can enjoy a traditional Tyrolean buffet.
The pension also houses a sauna and solarium for which a local charge is made.
14 bedrooms; single available.
PENSION MARIA (2)
Set in a quiet location amid flower filled meadows, the Pension Maria is just a ten minute stroll from the centre of Soll and all its amenities.
We are pleased to offer this pension which has been a firm favourite with British guests for many years.
Beautifully decorated inside and out, the Maria offers a good standard of accommodation and traditional family hospitality at a reasonable price.
The pension has a cosy TV lounge and rustic bar.
The lawn and sun terraces are perfect for sunbathing and table tennis.
the Maria is renowned for its cuisine: guests will be served an extensive breakfast buffet and an excellent three course evening meal plus salad buffet and bread and butter.
Vegetarians are also catered for.
All bedrooms have a private bath or shower and wc and all are comfortably furnished in Tyrolean style.
No lifts; 18 bedrooms.
PENSION TANNENHOF (2)
The Tannenhof is impeccably managed by the owner, Frau Spiess, who always extends a very warm welcome to our guests.
The pension is situated about 10 minutes walk from the village, set back from the road.
All the twin rooms have a private bathroom with shower.
(Single rooms have hot and cold water, and free use of a shower).
Breakfast is supplemented with cereals, cheeses and cold meats.
In addition to the breakfast room, there is a cosy lounge/bar where guests can enjoy afternoon tea (payable locally).
Those on half board will receive vouchers in the resort which can be used at the various cafes and restaurants.
The pension has a large garden with a children's play area.
Boule and table tennis are also available to guests.
No lift; 14 bedrooms; singles available.
PENSION KAUFMANN (2)
This is a comfortable modern pension in an ideal location.
The gondola lift to the top of the Hohe Salve mountain is approximately five minutes walk way.
The swimming pool complex is three minutes away, and the village centre an easy five minute walk.
All bedrooms have private bathrooms; some take a third bed.
As the hotel does not offer half board, we have arranged a voucher system; meal vouchers will be issued on arrival, and these can be used in many nearby hotels and restaurants.
No lift; 12 bedrooms.
HAUS FEICHTER (1+)
This is a small and friendly bed and breakfast pension where you will be well looked after by Frau Feichter; the house is situated about a 10 minute walk from the centre of town.
The twin bedded rooms have hot and cold water, and most can take a third bed.
A small charge is made locally for the use of the showers.
Guests may use the small breakfast room at any time for playing cards or as a lounge.
Clients booking half board will receive vouchers from our Rep, which can be exchanged at a number of cafes and restaurants in the village.
10 bedrooms; single available.
Insurance.
50% REDUCTION FOR CHILDREN under 12 on the date of their return flight
ENTERPRISE HOLIDAY INSURANCE MEANS PEACE OF MIND
Holiday insurance is very important.
That's why we recommend that you are covered by our own insurance arranged with Commercial Union.
The excellent benefits and the close co-operation between our representative in resort, Traveller's Insurance Association and our GESA emergency assistance service all combine to make a winning team.
Just look at what our insurance offers you!
Immediate local settlement of major medical expenses.
Assistance of our resort representative or local agent.
Round-the-clock emergency GESA back-up.
Emergency funds for misplaced luggage.
No age exclusions (but reduced Personal Accident benefits for under 16's and over 76's).
Free insurance for under 2's.
Cancellation cover applies as soon as you have confirmed your booking with us.
The premium will be added to your invoice.
A synopsis of the cover provided and the principal excursions are set out below.
Full details of the Terms, Conditions and Exclusions will be sent with your invoice or you may ask for a copy of the Master Policy beforehand should you wish to inspect it.
SUMMARY OF COVER
(per person insured)
CLAIMS
Any claim should be made direct to Traveller's Insurance Association Limited, bridge House, 102 George Street, Croydon CR9 6HP (Tel: 01 283 8611).
If it becomes necessary for you to cancel and claim you must notify us (or your travel agent) immediately to obtain a cancellation invoice before claiming.
In the event of loss of money and/or travellers cheques and also in the event of loss of jewellery or personal effects through burglary or theft you must notify the police within 24 hours of discovery.
A copy of the Police Report must be obtained.
All claims must be notified as soon as reasonably possible and accompanied by a copy of your invoice.
PLEASE NOTE
1.
This insurance has no exclusions in respect of:
(a).
Illness related to pregnancy which had not
(i)
been confirmed at the time of booking or
(ii)
progressed more than six months at the date of travel.
(b).
Age
(c).
Pre-existing medical conditions, recurring illness or physical defects, except as detailed under principal exclusions.
2.
Children under 2 years of age are fully covered by the insurance when travelling with an insured person.
PERIOD OF COVER
Cancellation cover applies a soon as you have paid your deposit (the appropriate premium will be added to your invoice) or, in the case of late booking, the full amount including the insurance premium.
The remaining covers apply for the duration of the booked holiday plus the period of travel from home to departure point and back home afterwards not exceeding 24 hours in each case.
PRINCIPAL EXCLUSIONS
(1)
The person insured travelling contrary to medical advice or specifically to obtain treatment.
(2)
The person insured requiring to replenish medication in use at the commencement of the journey.
(3)
Contact lenses, bonds, coupons, stamps (other than current postage stamps), securities, negotiable instruments or documents of any kind.
(4)
Any property more specifically insured.
(5)
Childbirth.
(6)
Pregnancy (known before the date of booking).
(7)
Default of any transport or accommodation provider or any person acting as agent of the person insured or operation of law.
(8)
Financial circumstances other than as a result of redundancy under the terms of the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978 (notice of which is received after the issue of the Booking Confirmation), disinclination to travel or weather conditions.
(9)
Suicide or self-injury, wilful self-exposure to peril (except in an attempt to save human life), the influence of drugs (except as prescribed by a registered medical practitioner other than for treatment of drug addiction) or alcohol, or the person insured engaging in, during the period of holiday or journey, wintersports, mountaineering, racing (other than on foot) or other hazardous adventure.
THIS INSURANCE INCLUDES THE SERVICES OF GESA ASSISTANCE 24 HOUR EMERGENCY SERVICE.
PREMIUMS:
PREMIUMS PER PERSON
AA FIVE STAR SERVICE
A summary of benefits: Vehicle and travel security cover applies from home to home.
AA 5 Star service is the most popular form of cover chosen by the motorist taking his car abroad.
Below is a summary of benefits of AA 5 Star service, given by way of general information.
It is not intended to form part of an offer relative to the contract of insurance.
The full terms and conditions will be shown in the 5 Star service documents which will be sent to you on acceptance of your application cover.
AA's Road Services (including Relay, where available on the UK mainland) and road side assistance from AIT Patrols whilst on the continent.
Access to the overseas emergency network which includes the AA's own continental emergency centre in Boulogne.
This centre is manned by English speaking staff and offers a Freephone service within France 24 hours a day, 365 days a year.
Up to £125 for emergency repairs (including labour costs and towage but excluding the cost of parts) to enable you to continue your journey.
All necessary costs for the AA to arrange to send spare parts out to your vehicle following accident, breakdown or fire overseas.
All necessary costs for the AA to arrange to send spare parts out to your vehicle following accident, breakdown or fire overseas.
All necessary costs for the AA to arrange recovery of your vehicle to your home or appointed repairer, if you cannot use the vehicle for eight hours or more because of illness and the one and only qualified competent driver, or following accident, breakdown, fire or theft of the vehicle.
Up to £500 for additional travel and hotel expenses for one person to collect your vehicle if the repairs are not completed in time for your return home.
All necessary costs for the AA to provide a chauffeur if the one and only qualified and competent driver is medically unfit.
£25 compensation on receipt of the relevant police report if your car is broken into.
Unlimited costs for lawyers fees (not fines) provided at the AA's discretion, if a member of the party is prosecuted for an alleged motoring offence overseas.
Emergency repatriation voucher (£300) for the purchase of passenger tickets.
Credit vouchers up to £260 for the payment of repair costs and other emergencies.
*Free bail bond (up to £1500).
Up to £600 for alternative travel expenses (including car hire) and up to £400 for emergency hotel and food expenses if your vehicle is off the road for eight hours or more following a breakdown, accident, fire or theft.
AA/Avis, Rent-a-Car Credit Vouchers are supplied.
New AA 5 Star travel pack which includes essential information and GB Plate.
Booking Conditions.
Our Commitment to you
Enterprise Holidays are operated by Redwing Holidays Limited.
We are committed to a policy of fair trading and make every effort to ensure that you will have an enjoyable holiday with us.
Our Booking Conditions have been formulated as a result of our responsibilities under law and in no way affect your statutory rights as a consumer.
1.
Your Reservation
All bookings are made and accepted subject to the terms set out in these conditions.
When you or your travel agent instructs us to confirm your booking, we will do so immediately, and you must pay your deposit at that time.
An invoice will automatically be raised and sent to you, and will include any appropriate holiday insurance premium.
2.
Our Policy on Surcharges
We guarantee that the price of your holiday will not be subject to any surcharges except for those resulting from Governmental action.
Even in this case, we will absorb an amount equivalent to 2% of the holiday price which excludes insurance premiums and any amendment charges.
Only amounts in excess of this 2% will be surcharged, together with an amount to cover agents' commission.
If this means paying more than 10% on the holiday price, you will be entitled to cancel your holiday with a full refund of all money paid except for the premium paid to us for holiday insurance and amendment charges.
Should you decide to cancel because of this, you must exercise your right to do so within 14 days from the issue date printed on the invoice.
No surcharges will be applied within 30 days of your departure.
In view of the financial risk we accept in making the guarantee we will not make any refund as a result of currency movements or reduction in costs.
All prices quoted in this brochure are based on exchange rates published in the Financial Times of 25/07/89 and are as follows (in foreign currency value per £1):
3.
If we change your holiday
We plan your holiday arrangements many months in advance, and thought it is unlikely that we will have to make any changes to confirmed arrangements, it does occasionally happen.
Most changes are of a minor nature and we will advise you (or your travel agent) at the earliest possible date, if there is time before your departure.
Flight timings and Carriers in the brochure are subject to change as a result of airline procedures please check final details on your tickets.
When any major change occurs, provided it does not arise from events beyond our control, you will have the choice of (a) accepting the changed arrangements,(b) purchasing another available holiday from us at is advertised price, or (c) cancelling your holiday.
If you choose (a) or (b), we shall pay compensation on the scale shown below.
If you choose (c) we will refund all monies you have paid us.
However, please see IMPORTANT NOTE below.
We consider a major change to be any of the following changes made before the day of departure: change of departure airport, resort area, outward or return time of departure by more than 12 hours, or substitution of the accommodation you have booked with one of a lower price or official classification.
It does not include a flight delay, since flight delay cover is automatically included in our insurance.
Based on period before scheduled departure within which a major change is notified
Compensation per full fare paying passenger (excluding infants) * 
*NB For children invoiced at reduced rates, compensation will be paid on a pro-rata basis.
IMPORTANT NOTE
Compensation will not be payable if we are forced to cancel or in any way change your holiday due to war, or threat of war, riots, civil commotion, industrial disputes, disaster, terrorist activities, technical or other problems with transportation, closure of airports or seaports, alteration or cancellation of scheduled services or other events outside our control.
4.
If we cancel your holiday
We reserve the right, in any circumstance, to cancel your holiday.
However, in no case will we cancel your holiday less than 8 weeks before the scheduled departure date, except for the reasons detailed in Conditions (3) and (7).
If, due to events beyond our control, we are no longer able to provide the holiday booked, we will return to you all monies paid, or offer you an alternative holiday of comparable standard.
5.
Our liability to you
We accept responsibility for the acts and/or omissions of our employees or agents and suppliers while acting within the scope of or in the course of their employment, agency or contract of supply and we also accept responsibility for any deficiencies in the services we are contractually obliged to provide or for any failure of such services to reach a reasonable standard save, in each case that:
(i)
we shall not be responsible nor do we accept liability for death, bodily injury or illness caused to the signatory to the contract and/or to any other named person on the booking form in the course of or as a result of the provision of such services and
(ii)
where the services in question consist of carriage by air or by sea our obligations and liabilities are limited in the manner provided by international conventions in respect of air and sea carriers.
6.
Customer service
We do try to ensure that your holiday with us is as enjoyable as possible, but occasionally plans do go wrong.
If you have a problem during your holiday it is important that you advise your resort representative who will endeavour to put things right quickly.
If your complaint cannot be resolved locally, your representative will ask you to complete a report form, the original of which is for you and a copy will be forwarded to our Head Office.
Following this up within 28 days of your return home by writing to our Customer Services Department at Groundstar House, London Road, Crawley, West Sussex RH10 2TB, giving your original booking reference number and all other relevant information.
It is most unlikely that you will have a complain that cannot be settled amicably between us.
However, disputes arising out of, or in connection with , this contract which cannot be amicably settled, may (if you so wish) be referred to arbitration under a special Scheme, which, though devised by arrangement with the Association of British Travel Agents, is administered quite independently by the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators.
The Scheme, details of which can be supplied on request, provides for a simple and inexpensive method of arbitration on documents alone with restricted liability on the customer in respect of costs.
The Scheme does not apply to claims for an amount larger that £1,500 per person.
There is also a limit of £7,500 per booking form.
Neither does it apply to claims which are solely or mainly in respect of physical injury or illness or the consequences of such injury or illness.
If you elect to seek redress under this Scheme, written notice requesting arbitration under this Scheme must be made within 9 months after the scheduled date of return from holiday (only in exceptional circumstances may it be offered outside this period).
Full details are available from the Association of British Travel Agents, 55–57 Newman Street, London W1P 4AH.
Your Contract With Enterprise Holidays
7.
Booking and payment
The person in whose name the booking is invoiced acts on behalf of all other persons named on it and becomes primarily responsible to us for all payments in respect of the booking.
Your reservation will be made definite upon payment of a deposit of £60 per person (excluding infants under 2 on the date of their return flight).
It is a condition of booking that you are adequately insured on your holiday.
Unless you or your Travel Agent have agreed alternative insurance with us, you will automatically be insured under your policy arranged with Commercial Union, and the appropriate premium will be added to your invoice.
We allow 7 days from confirmation of the booking for monies to reach us by post.
If we do not actually receive the money within this period, our computer will automatically cancel your reservation and we cannot be held responsible if that holiday is subsequently not available.
The full balance of the holiday cost must be received by us at least 8 weeks before the departure date please note that you will not receive a reminder that final payment is due.
You should post payment, or pay the balance to your travel agent, 10 weeks before departure to allow the payment to clear to our account, otherwise our computer will cancel your booking, and you would be liable to pay cancellation charges as shown in Condition (9).
Late Bookings.
For all bookings made within 8 weeks of departure, the holiday is confirmed as soon as a verbal confirmation is given over the telephone or your travel agent confirms the booking via Viewdata, and therefore if you subsequently cancel your booking, cancellation charges as shown in condition (9) apply.
Full payment for the holiday, including insurance premiums, must be made at the time of booking in order to secure the reservation.
8.
Changes by you
Cancellation charges are detailed in condition (9).
Timescales refer to the date of receipt of your instructions in writing.
If you wish to change your booking, the following charges will apply:
*Name changes within 42 days on bookings involving scheduled flights incur cancellation charges.
If all names changes on any booking, then cancellation charges will apply.
If the number of persons booked changes, the holiday price will be recalculated on the basis of the amended party size.
Any increase in price per person as a result of a part cancellation eg. underoccupancy, is not a cancellation charge and is not covered by our insurance.
A separate cancellation charge will be made against the cancelled booking as detailed in Condition (9), and the booking will be re-invoiced accordingly.
9.
Cancellation by you
If you wish to cancel your booking this must be done in writing from the person in whose name the booking is invoiced to the travel agent through whom the booking was made or to the Invoicing Dept, Redwing Holidays Limited, Groundstar House, London Road, Crawley, West Sussex, RH10 2TB, and sent by Recorded Delivery if you have booked with us direct.
In the event of cancellation or part cancellation, the following charges will become payable:
CANCELLATION CHARGE (including deposit paid) as % total price excluding insurance premium.
CANCELLATIONS MUST BE NOTIFIED IN WRITING TO YOUR TRAVEL AGENT OR TO US IF YOU HAVE BOOKED DIRECT, AND COMMENCE FROM DATE RECEIVED BY US
Please note that if the reason for cancellation falls within the terms of the holiday insurance policy, then any such charges will normally be refunded to you by the insurance company.
The insurance premium is forfeited on cancellation.
10.
Travel Insurance
It is a requirement when booking your holiday, that you accept our special travel insurance, unless you or a Travel Agent have agreed alternative insurance arrangements with us.
11.
Brochure Prices
The prices and offers printed in this edition are valid at time of publication in August 1989.
We reserve the right to increase or reduce these prices or amend these offers at any time after publication and in future editions of this brochure.
You will be advised of any change at time of booking.
12.
Miscellaneous conditions
Civil Aviation regulations specify that both the outbound and inbound sections of the air ticket must be used.
In the event that the outbound flight is not used the person concerned will not be allowed to return on the inbound charter flight.
Should anyone arrive less than 45 minutes before the ticketed departure time admission to the flight is likely to be refused.
Should anyone be refused admission to the flight or to the destination country by the airline or government authority then we are powerless to assist and cannot be held responsible.
In all such cases we will not be responsible for any costs involved.
When you travel with a carrier, the Conditions of Carriage of that carrier apply, some of which limit or exclude liability.
Such conditions are often the subject of international agreements between countries and copies of the Conditions which apply to your holiday/flight/sailing are available for inspection at the travel agent where you book your holiday or any of our offices.
The brochure is the responsibility of the tour operator.
It is not issued on behalf of, and does not commit, the airline(s) mentioned therein, or any airline whose services are used in the course of the tour(s).
Please note that to be classed as an infant, in accordance with Air Navigation Article 34, a child must be under 2 years of age on the date of their return flight.
This contract is made on the terms of these Booking Conditions which are governed by English law and both parties shall submit to the jurisdiction of the English courts.
Flight and Travel Information.
What your Enterprise Lakes and Mountains holiday includes:
Return flight between UK and overseas airport (unless a self-drive holiday or Lake Garda Discovery tour is booked, and on coach/air combinations travel in one direction will be by luxury coach).
In flight refreshment or meals according to the time of day.
Baggage allowance as confirmed on your ticket (normally 20 kgs — Heathrow flights 15 kgs).
Return transfer from the overseas airport to resort (unless a fly-drive or coach touring holiday is booked).
Accommodation and meals as confirmed on your invoice.
All obligatory airport taxes, security charges, VAT and flight delay protection.
On coach/air and coach touring holidays, all road tolls, ferry and port charges are included and on self-drive holidays, port charges are included when you book our special rate ferry tickets.
Services of your local Enterprise representative.
On Self Drive holidays, motoring/ferry charges and AA 5 star insurance cover, as booked and confirmed.
Don't forget to add
Holiday insurance.
Any applicable room, meal and flight supplements.
Optional prebookable excursions.
Baggage Allowance
Most of our flights have a maximum 44 lbs (20 kg) luggage allowance.
Some have a maximum 33 lb (15 kg) allowance.
Please check your ticket to see which applies.
Collapsible pushchairs and wheelchairs can be carried in addition to the allowance.
On charter flights skis and half a set of golf clubs can be carried free of charge in addition to your baggage allowance, unless otherwise stated.
On scheduled flights sporting equipment may be carried as part of your baggage allowance.
However, if this is in excess of your allowance a charge will be made.
Owing to space restrictions, sail boards are not allowed on charter flights.
NB: Only one small piece of hand luggage may be taken on the aircraft.
Infants under 2 years do not have a separate baggage allowance.
Tickets and Timings
Flight timings are shown for guidance only and are local times based on the 24 hour clock system.
Timings are subject to confirmation and alteration.
Please check the flight timings on your tickets carefully as these may have changed since our brochure was published.
Remember, too, that you must check in at least 1 hour before take off.
Your flight and the airlines we use
Your flight will be operated by leading British and foreign airlines.
For example, the following airlines and aircraft types are used: Caledonian Airways (737, L1011), British Airways 1–11, 737,757), Air Europe (757, 737), Dan Air (Airbus, 737,1–11, 727, 146), Air 2000 (757), Britannia (737, 767), British Midland (DC9, 737), BIA (1–11, MD83), Paramount (MD83), Inter European (737), and Air UK Leisure (737).
Alterations to your flight details sometimes occur for operational reasons and we reserve the right to make these if the need arises.
Flights are planned many months in advance, but alteration to these may be made by the IATA scheduling committee which regulates the movements of all international air traffic.
Further alterations may be made by airports or airlines later than this.
This may mean that timings vary from those originally published, and we reserve the right to substitute airlines where necessary.
In general only a minority of holidays are affected in this way and most changes to the published arrangements are small and whenever possible these changes will be advised at the time of booking or as quickly as possible after they occur.
When there are major changes, compensation will be paid as detailed in our Booking Conditions on page 81.
Immigration regulations specify that the names on the passports and tickets held by customers must be the same.
Flight Information Service
The majority of holiday flights depart and arrive on schedule.
However, there are occasions when, due to reasons beyond our control, flights are delayed.
In order to reduce any inconvenience caused by such delays we have introduced our special regularly updated Flight Information Service which monitors any major disruptions to flight schedules.
For details of how to get up to the minute information on both DEPARTURES and ARRIVALS from your local airport ring the following Index Line: 0836 402770 (Calls charged at 25p per minute cheap rate, 38p per minute at all other times).
Flight Information
FLY DRIVE
For complete  independence from the moment you land on foreign soil, hire a car.
Our rates include unlimited mileage, local taxes, and collision damage waiver.
For a small additional charge, payable on collection of the vehicle, you may take out personal accident insurance for yourself and passengers, PAI costs approx £18 (these rates are subject to change as they are based on summer 1989).
The car is collected on arrival at the overseas airport, and must be returned there at the end of your holiday.
Our car hire rates reflect the fact that you will not be using our normal transfer coaches.
Prices quoted are in £'s per car, irrespective of the number of occupants.
NOTE: Driving licence and passport must be shown on collection, and a deposit of approx £150 paid.
Credit cards or local currency accepted.
A full licence must have been held for at least 1 year, and the minimum age is 21.
SELF DRIVE — ACCOMMODATION ONLY HOLIDAYS SAVE UP TO £96!
Routes offered include Sealink ferry tickets and optional AA 5 star service.
Dover — Calais.
Folkestone — Boulogne, Newhaven — Dieppe, Harwich — Hook of Holland.
(Holidays available on all sailings).
Self drive holidays offer
The freedom to travel to and from your chosen resort in your own time — as long as you arrive and depart from the resort on the same day as our other clients.
Extremely competitive accommodation rates.
The services of an Enterprise representative.
Ferry delay protection (when your booking has been made with Sealink through Enterprise).
Optional AA 5 Star service — details of cover are to be found on page 82.
Prices: up to 12 days £21, over 13 days £25.
To calculate your self drive/accommodation only holiday cost, first deduct the following amount per person for accommodation only price:
Now add back in the ferry costs per person:
General Information.
This page is concerned with the ‘nuts and bolts’ of your Enterprise holiday.
We want you to get the very best out of your stay abroad, and a quick read through this section will help to smooth the way…
GOING FOREIGN
Remember that you're going abroad because it's different so please don't expect it to be the same as home!
If occasionally something is not quite right in your hotel, ask at the hotel reception, politely and firmly, for it to be put right.
If you are dissatisfied with the results, don't hesitate to enlist the help of our representative, who will also advise you on which local customs need to be respected.
Please note that certain animals and plants are now classed as ‘endangered species’.
If you plan to bring back any such item (or product made from them), please check first with the Department of the Environment  whether an import licence has to be granted.
BROCHURE DESCRIPTIONS
All brochure descriptions are advertised by us in good faith and every care is taken to ensure their accuracy.
However, a lot of detail is included in the brochure and prepared approximately twelve months in advance, so there may be occasions when a facility or entertainment advertised at the hotel or in the resort is not available during your own particular holiday.
For example, facilities like swimming pools, water sports, chair lifts etc. require maintenance and sometimes have to be temporarily withdrawn from use for such work to be done.
Outdoor activities may not operate for reasons such as unstable weather conditions or lack of support.
Similarly there may be occasions, especially during the low season, when certain advertised entertainments or amenities are changed, cancelled or curtailed.
Your holiday prices in the low season do reflect this and we feel sure that you will not be prevented from enjoying your holiday.
Public holidays and religious festivals may also affect the availability of resort and hotel facilities.
RESORT DEVELOPMENT
Building works and noise are almost unavoidable in certain developing resorts.
Unfortunately such developments are not always under our control.
However, where we are aware of any building works which may reasonably be considered to adversely affect your enjoyment, we will notify you as soon as possible.
If necessary, we will offer you the opportunity to transfer to an alternative holiday or cancel the holiday without penalty.
HOTELS AND THEIR RATINGS
All the hotels in this brochure have been selected for their good value and have been inspected by senior executives of Enterprise Holidays.
A great deal of care has been taken to ensure a fair and accurate description of each hotel and we suggest you consider this together with prices charged when choosing a holiday.
The star ratings shown in the hotel descriptions have been allocated by Enterprise and are not necessarily the same as official classifications.
YOUR ROOM
In the price panel we detail the type of room and the facilities on which the advertised price is based.
At the bottom of each hotel column are optional extras (such as a balcony etc.) which you may reserve at the supplement quoted.
Those clients who book rooms without private facilities may be charged for baths/showers locally.
Single rooms, and twin bedded rooms with extra beds are available at most hotels although the demand for single rooms always exceeds availability.
It should be noted that single rooms are generally inferior, and that when an extra bed (often folding style) is placed in a twin bedded room it is often cramped.
Two extra beds in a twin bedded room may sometimes be bunk beds.
We will do our best to comply with special requests (e.g. adjoining rooms), which may involve a supplementary charge, payable locally, but no guarantee can be made.
N.B. It should be noted that in Austria twin beds often consist of two separate mattresses attached to a single frame or headboard and they cannot be separated.
Our local representative will make every effort possible to allocate separate beds when this is particularly requested but it may on occasion be impossible.
Extras to pay: some facilities like tennis, watersports, entry to discos, solariums, saunas etc, usually incur a small charge, unless otherwise stated in the hotel descriptions.
HOTEL MEALS
Many of the hotels featured in this brochure offer a choice of board arrangement and full details are given in the price panel.
Bed and breakfast denotes bed and continental breakfast except where otherwise specified; half board denotes dinner, bed and breakfast; full board denotes lunch, dinner, bed and breakfast.
It should be noted that where a choice is given your requirement must be chosen at the time of booking and that all passengers travelling together must select the same arrangement.
Any request for a change to a confirmed meal plan will result in us having to levy a booking alteration fee.
It is also important to note that if on arrival at your hotel you decide to change your board arrangement, the very advantageous rate advertised in our brochure will not be available and you will be required to pay the hotel the amount requested.
PASSPORT AND VISAS
For a holiday abroad you will need a valid passport.
Make sure that it is valid for the duration of your holiday.
A British Visitors passport is valid for countries featured in this brochure.
You will need it for exchanging travellers cheques and currency.
Apply for a new passport or for its renewal at least eight weeks before departure.
Your travel agent will be able to assist you on any queries relating to passports and visas.
All holders of non-British passports and British passports issued abroad should check if any special permits are required for the countries they are visiting or passing through.
This is of particular importance on coach and motoring holidays.
The embassy or consulate of the country you are visiting will advise you what documents are required.
It is the responsibility of all passengers to ensure that they comply with all immigration requirements for the country(ies) to be visited.
We can accept no liability for clients who have insufficient/incorrect documentation.
Please note that everyone who does not have a British, EEC or Swiss passport must be in possession of a valid visa in order to be able to travel through France.
HEALTH
Health regulations are subject to change, and you should check with your own doctor prior to departure as to which inoculations the Department of Health consider it necessary for specific areas.
In addition, the Department of Health issues two leaflets (SA40 and SA41), Travellers' Guide to Health, which are available from your ABTA Travel Agent or the Department itself.
MONEY MATTERS
Carrying large amounts of cash abroad is not a good idea.
Order travellers cheques from your bank to cover the majority of your requirements, taking only a modest amount of foreign currency and sterling to cover purchases en route.
Traveller's cheques can be cashed at most hotels and any bank for a small charge.
If they are lost or stolen, you can recover their value so long as you have kept a note of their numbers separately.
Personal Cheques; you should be aware that facilities are no longer available for holidaymakers to cash personal cheques abroad.
The Eurocheque is widely accepted in shops and other establishments abroad check with your bank for details.
Credit Cards; Access (MasterCard) and Visa (Barclaycard) and mother credit cards are widely accepted in most places, with the exception of Austria.
DRIVING LICENCE
Do not forget to take a full driving licence if you intend to drive whilst abroad.
All drivers must be at least 21 years old to hire a car.
Please see page 80 for details of car hire.
TRAVEL DOCUMENTS
Your travel documents, luggage labels, etc. will normally be despatched to you or your travel agent two to three weeks before your holiday.
Please check your flight timings carefully.
Those shown in the brochure are for guidance only and may have changed since we went to press.
We strongly suggest you take your copy of your final invoice along with your travel documents.
This will help our local Representative to quickly resolve any query you may have about your travel arrangements.
CORRESPONDENCE
If you have made your booking through a travel agent, all communication between you and Enterprise Holidays must be through that travel agent.
If you book your holiday direct with us, we will send all communications directly to you.
Please always quote the reference number shown on your confirmation account, and the departure date.
YOUR HOLIDAY FLIGHT
During your flight you can relax with a drink from the duty free bar and a meal or light refreshment will be served according to the time of day.
Duty free goods will be available for purchase though the choice may be limited on certain flights.
Occasionally, flights may be delayed due to circumstances beyond our control.
In such cases we will do our utmost to help you and keep you fully informed.
Should your flight be delayed for more than two hours after the scheduled departure time, Enterprise will provide the following:
2–4 hours delay: light refreshments.
Over 4 hours delay: main meal.
In the event of extended overnight delays, depending on circumstances, Enterprise will endeavour to provide hotel accommodation.
In the case of a major delay on your homeward journey, we shall endeavour to delay your departure from your hotel.
ARRIVAL (AIR HOLIDAYS)
When you arrive at the continental airport you will be required to pass through passport control, claim your baggage and obtain customs clearance.
You will be met by your Enterprise representative who will direct you to your coach for the transfer to your resort.
The transfer times stated for each resort relate to the transfer journey only.
Sometimes it is necessary to wait for an incoming aircraft which might cause a slight delay before you proceed to the resort.
Similarly, and in the interest of keeping prices as low as possible, it may be necessary on the return journey to combine transfer coaches.
This may mean you will have time to spare at the airport before boarding your flight.
Please note that transfers in Switzerland are by rail; representatives will meet and escort you on the train.
COACH/AIR HOLIDAYS
Precise location of the check-in point in London will be notified with your tickets.
During the ferry crossing you will have time to purchase duty free goods.
The coach will make appropriate meal stops en route and you should take sufficient currency with you as meal/refreshment costs are not included in the cost of your holiday.
Ferry schedules and precise timings are subject to weather conditions on the day of departure.
Clients booked on coach and air combination holidays will be given details of their return journey whilst in their resort.
MOTORING HOLIDAYS
If we have made your ferry booking all you will need to do is relax and plan your journey and the AA can offer expert help with route planning for a small extra charge details will be sent with your tickets.
Don't forget to carry sufficient cash with you for your requirements en route and to allow time for delays.
Though we are note able to book hotels en route for you, a useful directory is the AA Travellers' Guide to Europe, available from AA centres and most bookshops.
Remember, you must arrive at and depart from your chosen hotel on the correct day (see flight information for the actual day).
EXCURSIONS
Each resort area offers a comprehensive programme of sightseeing excursions and entertainment.
These are introduced to you by your Enterprise Representative.
There should also be a Holiday Information Book in the reception area of your hotel giving full details, as well as helpful information about everything from stamps to church services, meal times to telephoning home.
All information correct at time of going to press, but subject to change without notice.
Brochure designed and produced by Charles Vyse Associates, London.
Date of issue August 1989.
All rights reserved.
No part of this brochure may be reproduced by any means without written permission from Redwing Holidays Ltd.
All holidays offered are operated by Redwing Holidays Ltd, holder of ATOL 2366 and ABTA member 95301.