

Published by M.W. Publications in co-operation with INSTITUTE OF EXPORT, N.I.
BRANCH  INSTITUTE OF EXPORT N.I.
Branch Backing Northern Ireland Exporters
GUIDE TO EXPORTING
CONTENTS
4–5
FOREWORD: Why exporting is central to development — By the Rt.
Hon.
Richard Needham, MP.
9
CHAIRMAN'S REPORT: All you need to know about the Institute of Export.
10–11
1992 WAS YESTERDAY: The need for a new positive and aggressive attitude to marketing.
13–14
IT'S THE LAW: How the CMR Convention governs the transport.
15–16
MARKETING: How the IDB is helping local companies discover new outlets for their exports.
17–18
RESOURCES: When it comes to trade, Banks have a great deal to offer.
19
FINANCE: The exporter and Foreign Currency.
23–24
CREDIT FACULTIES: The Letter of Credit has served us well.
25
EUROPEAN OFFICE: Northern Ireland's new centre seen as a bridge between the Province and the Community.
26–27
EXPORT AWARDS: Local firms recognised for export endeavours.
30–31
PORT OF BELFAST: The City's lifeline is playing key role in development of the economy.
35
TR SHIPPING: A company that's going places.
38–39
CARGO TERMINAL: A vital link for industry.
44–45
PORT OF LARNE: The gateway to Europe.
56–57
PLAN YOUR YEAR.
60–61
EMBASSIES AT YOUR SERVICE.
Guide to Exporting is published and produced by MW Publications Ltd., in cooperation with the Belfast Branch of the Institute of Exporting.
Typesetting and Printing by Regency Press.
All Editorial and Advertising enquiries to: Ruby McConkey.
Tel: 0232 743199.
FOREWORD
EXPORTING IS CENTRAL TO DEVELOPMENT
As minister responsible for the economy in Northern Ireland, I am delighted to be associated with the publication of ‘Guide to Exporting.’
Exporting is central to the economic development of Northern Ireland.
We have many companies exporting high quality products to markets throughout the world.
The challenge now is to spread the exporting ethos throughout our industry and to make exporting a normal part of business here.
With a home market of just over 1,500,000 people many Northern Ireland businesses have had to develop markets outside the Province in order to sustain long term growth.
Northern Ireland companies have been successful in the area of export development but they cannot afford to be complacent about what lies ahead.
The Single European Market will present fresh challenges to our companies.
The key to growth and stable employment will be through improving the international competitiveness and increasing the market share of our companies.
I am glad to say that all the relevant Government Agencies in Northern Ireland ie the Department of Economic Development, the Training and Employment Agency, the Industrial Development Board and LEDU, have taken steps to help local business prepare for the future.
A wide range of support is available to assist existing exporters and businesses about to export for the first time.
Information is available on export markets throughout the world; there is practical support for companies participating in trade missions and exhibitions or undertaking market research.
Exporting is essentially about products and involves a number of aspects from product identification, design, packaging and market research through to market visits and after sales service.
Above all, quality is the vital ingredient.
Quality of service is a concept which needs to be recognised and implemented by businesses who hope to survive  and grow in the years that lie ahead.
It applies to industry in the standard of product or in the service provided, both of which are essential to remaining competitive.
But the introduction and implementation of quality should not be confined to the design of products and the standard of service provided to customers.
Companies should also ensure that their employees have the skills and knowledge to play their part in the export drive, for example, by being aware of the standards set by competitors which we have to beat.
In this context, it makes sense for more local businesses to make use of the educational services of the Institute of Exports and indeed those of the other agencies in Northern Ireland who are more than keen to help Northern Ireland industry in export markets.
Let me add a word on peripherality.
Whenever I hear talk of the problems of Northern Ireland's peripherality I immediately think, peripheral from where?
We are in fact closer to one of the world's largest market places — USA — than other European countries.
I am also aware that four of the most successful economies in the world today are small peripheral islands — Japan, Singapore, Hong Kong and Taiwan.
These countries have worked very hard to overcome their locational disadvantages.
If they can do it — so too can Northern Ireland!
In Northern Ireland we have embarked on a major programme of investment covering all sectors of the region's transportation system.
It is aimed specifically at reducing the effects of peripherality.
It therefore complements the efforts of IDB and LEDU in promoting Northern Ireland abroad and in encouraging local businesses to export.
If I could just take one example to illustrate this.
The construction of new warehousing within the Port of Belfast will benefit directly Northern Ireland's export drive through the ability to aggregate goods from the many small companies making up Northern Ireland's manufacturing industry.
Many small businesses do not have the production levels to warrant a full container of their products for exporting to a single destination.
But when several such businesses are aggregated at a dockside location the economy of scale offered by the worldwide container business can be put to good advantage both in cost and speed by even the smallest manufacturing unit.
It will be precisely through such products with support from national and EC funds that the effects of the region's peripherality will be reduced over the coming years.
The publication of this Guide to Exporting is indeed opportune.
It will provide local business with an opportunity to increase their knowledge, not only of relevant services, but also of the views and experiences of others who are already active in this field.
RT.
HON.
RICHARD NEEDHAM M.P.
The Minister for the Economy, Mr. Richard Needham, pictured at a Press Conference called to announce details of the Laganside development.
OFFICERS AND COMMITTEE MEMBERS INSTITUTE OF EXPORT (N.I.)
Chairman:Mr. H.M.
McCLEMENTS M.I.Ex.
Treasurer:MR.
E. FERGUS M.I.Ex.
Secretary:MRS.
V. McWILLIAM M.I.Ex.
Vice-Chairman:MR.
J. ROBINSON M.I.Ex.
(Grad).
Committee:MR.
F. BULLICK F.I.Ex.
MR.
M. BURNS M.I.Ex.
MR.
B. CRAYTHORNE M.I.Ex.
MISS S. DEMPSTER M.I.Ex.
MR.
I. DICKIE M.I.Ex.
MISS R. FANNIN M.I.Ex.
MR.
R. HANNA M.I.Ex.
MR.
M. HART M.I.Ex.
MR.
B. JOHNSTON M.I.Ex.
MR.
G. MOONEY M.I.Ex.
MR.
A. O'NEILL M.I.Ex.
MR.
A. POLLOCK M.I.Ex.
A MESSAGE FROM THE CHAIRMAN
‘A high degree of professionalism is the key to success in today's complex and competitive world.’
How many times do we hear this being said?
Almost daily I would suggest, but what are we doing to ensure that those who are entrusted with this very important aspect in terms of the Export Trade have the necessary knowledge to ensure the ultimate in performance?
Clearly here lies the role of the Institute of Export, from an educational point of view and in providing professional guidance.
I believe that this, the first edition of Guide to Exporting will assist very considerably in respect of the latter in particular to conduct their business in a more  effecient and profitable manner.
I therefore welcome the introduction of this publication and would recommend it to you.
Hugh McClements Chairman, Institute of Export 
ALL YOU NEED TO KNOW ABOUT…
THE INSTITUTE OF EXPORT
The Institute of Export is the only professional body solely devoted to enhancing the United Kingdom's export performance.
It ‘seeks to’ set and to raise the standards of export management and practice through education and training and the exchange of information and ideas between exporters.
MEMBERSHIP
The membership of the Institute is now well over 4,000 and is attracting a rapidly growing number of corporate members.
With 23 branches throughout the United Kingdom, and more being established, the Institute offers members the opportunity to discuss export subjects with other experienced practitioners and to enjoy social functions with them from time to time.
BENEFITS
Export Today, the official journal of the Institute is published every two months and circulated to all members; a recruitment consultancy is operated on behalf of members and employers; an advisory and information service on export subjects is available together with the Institute's Export Specialists Register, which lists experts who can be contacted for project work; the views of professional exporters are represented, when necessary, at national and international level.
SEMINARS
The Institute has its own seminar training programme, offering one and two day courses on a wide range of export-related topics.
These are held at various venues in the U.K.
EDUCATION
The Institute of Export aims to set and raise the standards of export practice and management through training, formal and informal education and the exchange of ideas and information between exporters.
Since its foundation it has emphasised that the profit potential in exporting will be enhanced if export management is in trained hands.
The Institute defines export marketing as the complete process of discovering and satisfying the needs of overseas customers, at a profit.
The Institute, therefore, seeks in its educational programme to cover the whole business activity involved from drawing board to prompt delivery, payment received, an after-sales service established and, hopefully, a repeat order on the way.
This is reflected in the syllabus for the Institute examinations which are held at centres throughout the U.K. The first and most essential requirement of any student for any professional examination is that he or she must be able to communicate in the language (in which he or she will be examined.)
In the case of this Institute, it is the English language.
The Institute does not require that potential students shall have achieved any special competence in a language other than English, but would underline that such knowledge can be an important additional aid to extra profitability.
Other basic requirements for this Institute are a wide knowledge of the structure of commerce and an appreciation of economic geography.
Clearly it would be useless for any prospective export executive to attempt his final studies without a grounding in economics and geography, subjects which form the necessary foundation for detailed export studies.
INTERNATIONAL
The Institute is a founder member of the International Association of Institutes of Export, many of whose members have based their operations on patterns pioneered by the Institute in the U.K. 
MR.
HUGH McCLEMENTS
EUROPE
1992 WAS YESTERDAY
Success in exporting is largely based on good quality products delivered on time and at the right price.
But with 1992 just around the corner a new positive and aggressive attitude towards development of well trained exporters and marketeers is essential if this Province is to compete in the fierce competition which is gaining momentum.
Despite the millions of words that have been written and spoken on the subject of ‘1992’, there still appears to be much more to be said on the subject.
At a recent ceremony to reward companies on export achievement, one speaker reminded manufacturers that they must look beyond the home-market to sell their goods.
This was indeed good advice but considering that the full impact of ‘1992’ is just around the corner, his advice was rather belated.
Any manufacturer or service supplier not already established in the European market will be in no position to compete in ‘1992’.
Local firms who have ventured into the export market and committed themselves have done well in European markets and their learn curve has reached the stage where they are now venturing into markets beyond Europe including the U.S.A. and Japan.
More participation in exporting by companies is essential if secure jobs are to be created and businesses developed into medium and large factories capable of competing in price and quality against our continental neighbours.
There is still a great reluctance by many manufacturers in entering the export field.
Excuses vary from difficulties in obtaining payment to the daunting prospect of completing export documentation.
None of these excuses are valid.
Less  dependance on grant-aid and the prospect of hunger could eliminate this totally negative attitude.
Part of the supportive service for export participation is export knowledge and a well established export department properly educated in export and marketing procedures.
Unfortunately the Northern Ireland attitude seems to be, ‘throw them into the deep end and let them swim’, the result being too many export efforts sink to the bottom of the pool.
A new positive and aggressive attitude towards the development of well trained exporters and marketeers is essential if this Province of ours is to seriously compete in the fierce competition which is now gaining momentum.
Government is now showing interest in the support of export marketing through various schemes.
The current N.I.S.B.I., export development programme is however, the first indication that Government is showing interest in educating would-be exporters prior to export missions going abroad.
This is a most welcome initiative and should be extended to all trade missions.
During the past twenty years the role of export education has been fulfilled by the Institute of Export without any assistance or recognition whatsoever.
The present awareness of the importance of exporting for the Province in meeting the challenges of 1992 may mean a new role in education for the Institute.
A role which they are fully competent to perform and carry out if requested.
There is no choice but to accept the challenge and changes that 1992 will bring about and companies must continue to review export opportunities, both inside and outside Europe.
Entering into new markets is a necessity for any business which wishes to grow.
There is a genuine fear that being on the periphery of Europe will be an obstacle to trading with out partners within the community.
Having always been on the periphery of Europe it has not hindered our successful trading in the past.
There is, however, the question of transport links to Europe which is giving cause for concern to well established exporters.
Existing road links to the busy port of Larne Harbour and from the Port Stranraer into England must be improved, while airlines must increase cargo capacity on their flights to major airports on the U.K. mainland.
The issue of road links to ports is not being addressed by Government and time is running out.
The same is not the case in the Republic of Ireland with plans already activated to provide proper links to ports.
If it is not the intention to update shipping serviced to maintain land-bridge services then the establishment of a sea-bridge to Europe must be earnestly considered.
Success in exporting is largely based on good quality products delivered on time and at the right price.
The same requirements will determine how successful exporters will be in 1992 when attempting to increase market share in the European Community.
This Province is well placed to enter export markets and has the unique recipe for success, good products produced by dedicated people.
ARCHIE POLLOCK
The European Parliament in session in Strasbourg.
LEGISLATION
IT'S THE LAW
HOW CMR CONVENTION GOVERNS TRANSPORT
With 1992 being a significant date when the customs controls at frontiers within the European Community are abolished it is anticipated there will be an increase in the transportation of goods by road from the beginning of 1993.
The international carriage of goods by road is also to distant destinations, such as the Near East and Middle East.
It is not uncommon for goods to be carried by road from a European destination through several countries to a port, where they were then loaded on board a ship, taken to another continent and again despatched by road to their final destination.
Containers are often carried by multimodal transport, involving as part of the transport, international carriage by road.
This type of carriage of goods is regulated by international convention.
The Convention was given legislative force in the United Kingdom by the Carriage of Goods by Road Act 1965 indeed, it is annexed to it.
The Convention is normally referred to as the CMR Convention.
The CMR applies to every contract for the carriage of goods by road in vehicles for reward, when the place of taking over of the goods and the place of delivery, as specified in the contract, are situated in two different countries, of which at least one is a contracting country, irrespective of the place of residence and the nationality of the parties.
The contracting countries are specified by Order in Council made by virtue of the 1965 Act, and such an order is conclusive evidence that a country is a contracting country within the meaning of the Convention.
A considerable number of contracting countries have been so designated, among them, in addition to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Gibraltar, the following: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, West Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Poland and Yugoslavia.
The Convention shall likewise apply to carriage carried out by a state or a state organisation.
The CMR does not apply to postal carriage, funeral consignments and furniture removal.
The CMR further provided that where the vehicle containing the goods is carried over part of the journey by sea, rail, inland waterways or air, and, except in cases of emergency, the goods are not unloaded from the vehicle, the CMR shall nevertheless apply to the whole of the carriage.
But the loss, damage or delay has occurred during the carriage by the other means of transport and was not caused by an act or omission of the carrier by road is determined not by the CMR but by the applicable international convention.
If there is no such convention, the CMR applies.
The CMR does not apply to traffic between the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland.
The contract of carriage by road shall be confirmed by a consignment note, sometimes referred to as a waybill.
The consignment note has to be made out in three original copies signed by the sender, the second shall accompany the goods, and the third is retained by the carrier.
When goods are carried in different vehicles or are of a different kind or are divided into different lots, the sender of the carrier is entitled to require a separate consignment note for each vehicle or each kind or lot of goods.
The consignment note shall contain a great number of particulars specified in the CMR Convention but the absence, irregularity or loss of the consignment note does not affect the existence of validity of the contract of carriage which shall remain subject to the CMR Convention.
The consignment note is not a negotiable instrument, nor is it a document of title.
Exporters seem to be unaware the first 15 boxes on the consignment note should be completed by them.
The completion of the CMR consignment note does not relieve the sender from producing and attaching all necessary documents relative to the movement of the goods i.e. invoices etc; which the sender should produce to the carrier at the time the goods are handed over.
The sender has the right to stop the goods in transit or change the place of delivery.
However, that right ceases when the second copy of the consignment note has been handed over to the original designated consignee.
Should circumstances prevent delivery of the goods after their arrival or if the consignee refuses the goods, the carrier will ask the sender for instructions as to their disposal.
The carrier is liable for the total of partial loss of the goods and for damage thereto from the time of taking over the goods and the time of delivery.
The carrier is relieved of his liability if the loss or damage was caused by negligence on behalf of the sender when issuing instructions.
Should the sender require goods to be delivered by a certain date and having shown this date on the consignment note, the carrier is committed to meet that delivery date.
Should he fail to do so the carrier is required to refund in full the carriage charges in respect of the carriage of the goods.
The amount of compensation in respect of full or partial loss is subject to a maximum liability of 8333 SDR (Special Drawing Rights) per 1000 kilos.
Converted to sterling this means approx £5,000 per 1000 kilos.
If goods have not been delivered within 30 days following expiry of an agreed time limit or if there is not an agreed time limit within 60 says from the time the carrier took over the goods, this shall be taken as evidence of the loss of the goods.
Customs duties and other charges incurred in respect of the carriage of the goods are also the responsibility of the carrier and are additional to the above mentioned limitation of liability.
The consignee is required to give a general indication of apparent loss of damage within 7 days of delivery to the carrier.
No compensation for delay in delivery is payable unless a reservation has been sent within 21 days to the carrier.
The period of limitation for bringing an action arising out of carriage under the CMR convention is one year.
This only a short account of the main points of the Convention to alert exporters to what has been, up to now, an important aspect of International Trade which tended to be overlooked.
Bob Hanna, Managing Director, Ireland Freight Forwarding Services Ltd., looks at the CMR Convention and explains its application to the carriage of goods.
This legislation now applies to every contract for the transportation of goods by road and is an important aspect of International Trade.
MARKETING
HOW THE IDB IS HELPING LOCAL COMPANIES TO DEVELOP THEIR EXPORT POTENTIAL
In this article Alan Hingston, Executive Director of the Industrial Development Board's Marketing Development Division, discusses how the support available from the IDB can help companies develop their export potential.
The Minister for the Economy for Northern Ireland, Mr. Richard Needham, in the foreword to this publication has outlined a number of reasons why Northern Ireland companies should seek to increase their market share through exports.
This article describes how the Industrial Development Board for Northern Ireland can help companies develop their export potential through improved market intelligence and research, market visits and product development and design.
Many Northern Ireland companies already have well established exporting links.
However the increasingly open and competitive markets of the EC, USA and Japan present a special challenge, not only for locally-based exporting companies but also for those whose sales are restricted to the UK market.
In an increasingly de-regulated European market, companies based in Continental Europe are likely to view the UK as a considerable opportunity and market their products here.
For example, it may take a large German company only 30 minutes extra production to manufacture products sufficient to cover the Northern Ireland market.
The underlying aim of the IDB's new Forward Strategy is to encourage companies already established in Northern Ireland to become more internationally competitive and to increase their market share through first class marketing of top quality goods and services.
In pursuing this aim, IDB's Marketing Development Division has a key role to play through the wide range of support which it can offer to all sizes of companies in Northern Ireland involved in manufacturing or providing internationally tradeable services.
The support available from IDB represents a carefully structured package which provides assistance in those areas where it is most needed.
Truly successful marketing invariably begins with comprehensive and accurate market research, and here the IDB can assist through its Marketing Intelligence Centre and by using its links with the British Overseas Trade Board.
The Marketing Intelligence Centre based in IDB House, offers a free desk research facility for local companies.
It holds a wide range of directories and market research reports which contain information needed to help companies prepare export marketing plans, learn about competitors, source components and locate sales contacts.
The centre also has access to a number of marketing-oriented databases that contain full-text market reports, company information and extracts from trade journals and the press.
The purpose-built research facilities can be booked on appointment by anyone wishing to carry out their own desk research.
Telephone enquiries are also accepted and fully trained staff will be pleased to search for information that is difficult to locate.
The centre also houses the IDB sub-centre of the Northern Ireland Euro Info Centre and is well placed to give information on steps being taken to complete the Single European Market.
Through its link with the British Overseas Trade Board IDB's Market Information Enquiry Service can provide specific market research, relevant to a company's products, for any country in the World.
Other British Overseas Trade Board facilities include; an assessment by the overseas post of the market potential of a product in a specified market — an ‘Export Market Enquiry’; the Export Representative Service, through which a company can obtain a short-list of potential agents or distributors specifically tailored to its requirements; and the Export Intelligence Service which provides (to subscribers) information on current market opportunities for particular products on a world-wide basis.
The Export Development Branch of the IDB arranges an ongoing programme of seminars on specific export markets, at which experts give presentations, supported by representatives of local companies with experience of that particular market.
Commercial officers from a wide range of UK posts overseas regularly visit the Province to provide local firms with detailed advice on how to do business in their market.
This advice is usually given in ‘one to one’ meetings held in IDB House or on the companies' premises.
For companies seeking to develop an existing export market, or to examine a new one at first hand the IDB organises a series of trade missions to a wide variety of locations including Europe, Scandinavia, the Americas and the Far East.
The mission programme plays an important part in increasing local companies' awareness of export potential and rewards.
In 1991 new and developing markets have also been incorporated in this programme including Eastern Europe, Brazil and Indonesia.
The IDB aims to achieve a balanced programme of missions each year, by revisiting existing markets, focusing directly on the EC and exploring new areas.
This three-pronged approach has proved to be a successful formula, and many new markets have been opened up for companies as a result of participation on a mission.
The IDB's Trade Fair programme also aims to visit a balanced mixture of major UK and European exhibitions, with IDB group stands being set up for the Northern Ireland companies taking part.
On average, around 70 local companies take part each year and by providing this type of facility the IDB can help to ensure that the Northern Ireland displays are presented to a consistently high standard in order to maximise the impact made with international buyers visiting these exhibitions.
However to be successful in export markets companies must offer first class products of good design and proven quality.
Under its Product Development Programme the IDB can help companies with the development of new innovative products; design and best quality practices.
The effectiveness of the support provided by the IDB to encourage companies to develop their export potential may be illustrated by the results which they achieve through their involvement in these schemes, and during 1990/91, companies taking part in the IDB trade missions and trade fairs programme reported actual and potential orders totalling around £46 million.
This is an impressive performance which provides a clear demonstration that through the provision of a comprehensive and carefully targeted range of marketing support schemes, the IDB is helping local companies of all sizes to develop their international competitiveness, expand their exporting capability and market share and win significant new international business, thereby creating growth and sustained and stable employment.
While this necessarily brief look at the IDB support for export development will give an overview of the services we offer, it cannot hope to provide a detailed catalogue of the full range of support schemes which are available.
This information is however available in a new and comprehensive range of brochures which have been sent out to most companies and other business organisations in Northern Ireland.
They are also available on request from the Marketing Development Division of the IDB.
ALAN HINGSTON
For copies of these free publications about the single market ring DTI's Hotline: 081–200 1992
RESOURCES
WHEN IT COMES TO TRADE BANKS HAVE MUCH TO OFFER
In this article Barry Craythorne, Trade Finance Manager, Ulster Bank Ltd, discusses the role of the Banks as an important source for exporters — and importers and outlines the services and assistance available.
If you are engaged in international trade as an exporter or importer you should be in regular personal contact with the management of the Trade Finance Division of your bank.
If you are not, you may be heading for potential losses which could have been avoided and you are almost certainly not trading as effectively or profitably as you should!
Too often businessmen through reticence or unawareness neglect the resources available to them through the local banks and the purpose of this short article is to draw their attention to the  servies and assistance available.
The Trade Finance Division of the banks in Belfast not only have their own specialised staff but through their networks of foreign bank relationships have access to the major banks throughout the world and the local knowledge, expertise and specialist skills available therein.
These worldwide resources are available to you the Northern Ireland exporter/importer here in Belfast.
Indeed the staff of the Trade Finance Divisions are pleased to visit businesses engaged in or contemplating entering international trade to make these resources available.
Contact with the Trade Finance manager should in the first instance be made through your account holding Branch Manager.
The services referred to below are described as they would relate to a Northern Ireland exporter but it should be realised that similar services are of just as much importance to importers.
The FIRST stage in any good export is to find out as much as possible about the foreign market being considered and the most economic way of doing this is from your own base —‘the desk research’.
The SECOND stage will usually involve a visit to the actual market to see for oneself.
The THIRD stage will be finding the buyers, agents or distributors in that foreign market.
The FOURTH stage will be the selling and — realising that the only sensible sale is one on which you actually make a profit — getting paid.
Let us therefore look at these four stages in an export plan and see how the Trade Finance Division of your bank could help.
RESEARCH
Even at this initial stage the banks can assist by supplying:—
Reports on the economic conditions prevailing in almost any country.
Information on the credit terms and methods of payment currently applying to particular business sectors in the foreign market.
Details of any import restrictions or payment restrictions imposed by the government of the foreign country.
Information on foreign currency exchange rate movements over past years and dealers opinions on likely movements in the future.
TRAVEL
The banks are pleased to provide the following services to business travellers:—
Advice as to the most appropriate form in which to take their travel funds to balance security with convenience while bearing in mind any restrictions or peculiarities of the region to be visited.
Provision of Travellers Cheques in sterling or foreign currency and foreign currency notes.
Letters of introduction to international trade officers in banks in the foreign centres with whom meetings can be arranged.
BUYERS
Though only the exporter will be able to judge the persons with whom he should do business, help in making the initial contacts is available through the banks by way of:—
Lists of names and addresses of potential buyers, agents or distributors.
Reports on the financial standing and integrity of individuals and businesses abroad and suggested credit limits.
SALES
As indicated at the beginning of this article sales must not only be paid for by the buyer but the funds must be received quickly by the exporter and the banks are very much involved at this stage through:—
The provision of a very efficient fund transfer system and advice on its use.
Settlement methods such as the documentary collection and documentary credit systems (described in detail in other articles) designed to obviate the risks inherent in open account selling and payment with order buying to the exporter and importer respectively.
Funding of the exports from time of shipment by way of advances against shipping documents with possible non payment insurance built in.
Provision of forward exchange cover or currency options to protect against loss through fluctuation in rates of exchange.
It will be seen from the above comments that the local banks through their Trade Finance Division are in a position to offer real help — it would be foolish to ignore it.
My own bank, Ulster Bank Ltd, a wholly owned subsidiary of National Westminster Bank PLC, operating independently throughout Ireland, is keen to work with those engaged in international trade.
We are privileged to be part of one of the largest worldwide banking groups.
National Westminster Bank has overseas offices in the following countries: Belgium, Gibraltar, Greece, Hong Kong, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, Spain, USA, USSR.
Subsidiaries and affiliates are located in: Australia, Bahamas, Canada, France, Germany, Gibraltar, Hong Kong, Italy, Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland, USA.
Ulster Bank has also many correspondent bank relationships throughout the world.
My staff and I welcome the opportunity to sit down with local exporters and importers to offer not only our own expertise but to provide the link to the truly international help that is available.
FINANCE
THE EXPORTER AND FOREIGN CURRENCIES
Few exporters can now avoid involvement with foreign currencies as they trade in increasingly diverse and competitive markets and a willingness to accept a  customers preferred currency can be a strong marketing tool when negotiating a contract.
However, this flexibility involves risks as exchange rates can be highly volatile and adverse currency movements can wipe out profit margins overnight.
In a recent study a group of exporters indicated that financing their export activities, which included managing cash-flow as well as managing exchange rate fluctuations, was their most difficult task.
These problems rank well ahead of other difficulties such as handling export paperwork, obtaining market information and ascertaining product suitability in foreign markets.
Most exporters would like to avoid exchange risk by invoicing in Sterling but they are now finding that markets will set the price and the method of pricing.
In times of exchange rate volatility, such as we have been experiencing for the past few years, most overseas buyers will want to be invoiced in their own currency and avoid any exchange risk.
For this reason, all exporting companies should closely examine the possible impact of currency fluctuations before they agree a currency price and payment terms with an overseas customer.
Some companies overlook the fact that the foreign exchange exposure arises when the sales contract is signed or the order accepted.
It is at this stage that the exposure should be covered and exporters should not wait until the goods are being shipped.
In many companies the normal management accounting system will only pick up a currency exposure when the sales entry has been made and by that time adverse currency fluctuations could have eroded or wiped out the profit margin.
SOLUTIONS
In general, it is often unnecessary for exporters to cover every currency risk but imprudent for them not to cover any risk.
Selective hedging which takes into account what is happening in the currency markets is probably the best way forward.
There are many ways in which currency exposures can be eliminated or hedged and some may be more suitable than others for individual exporters:
Currency receivables can be sold forward thereby locking in the Sterling equivalent.
As  mentioned above, the timing of this will be influenced by the strength or weakness of the currency in the currency markets but the decision to cover or not to cover should be taken at the time the exposure arises.
Matching receivables and payables in the same currency or in closely related currencies is a very effective and less costly method of hedging exposures.
If an exporter has borrowings he could switch some of his borrowings into the currency of the country to which he is selling.
The borrowings are converted into Sterling when drawn down thereby locking in the exchange rate and the currency borrowings are repaid from the currency receivables.
When an exporter grants credit terms to the buyer abroad and the buyer (or his bank if a Letter of Credit is involved) accepts a Bill of Exchange, the exporter may be able to arrange to have the accepted Bill discounted, once again locking in the exchange rate from the discounting date.
Where receivables in a particular currency are sufficiently large, an exporter could consider using a Currency Option to hedge an exposure.
Currency Options differ from Forward Options as they give the Option buyer the right, but not the obligation, to deliver one currency and take delivery of another at a prearranged exchange rate on a pre-arranged maturity date.
Currency Options provide insurance against adverse exchange rate movements without penalty if exchange rates move favourably but they do have a fundamental drawback in that they are purchased with a cash premium, much like an insurance policy, which can be substantial.
However, their big advantage is that they leave the purchaser with unlimited upside potential in the event of a favourable exchange rate movement.
THE E.R.M.
On 8th October 1990, following much speculation and indecision, Sterling joined the Exchange Rate Mechanism of the European Monetary System.
The European Monetary System was established in 1979 with the ultimate objective of achieving one common currency within the E.E.C.
Working towards that goal it was necessary to establish a greater measure of monetary stability in the Community.
Within the E.M.S.
the E.R.M. is a mechanism for maintaining exchange rates of participating currencies around a central Value plus or minus 2.25%.
The exceptions are the U.K. and Spain who have elected to maintain their exchange rates within a plus or minus 6% band.
In recent years the currencies which have been participating within the E.R.M. have been remarkably stable within the system and it appears that the E.R.M. members benefited from enhanced policy creditability in the eyes of the foreign exchange markets.
If markets believe a Government's commitment to maintain a stable exchange rate, preceived currency risk is reduced and speculative attacks diminished.
Many felt that, as a result of joining the E.R.M. the Sterling exchange rate would be more stable against the other E.R.M. currencies (the  Deutschemark in particular) and that there would be less requirement for hedging exchange risks in those currencies.
This is not yet the case as the Sterling exchange rates can still fluctuate considerably against other E.R.M. currencies whilst it is in the wide band and exporters should cover or hedge currency exposures as heretofore.
The United Kingdom has now taken the first step towards European Monetary Union which is intended to lead eventually to a single European currency.
As we proceed down that road exchange risk will diminish between E.E.C.
currencies.
However, exports to non-E.E.C. countries in their currencies will still be subject to fluctuating exchange rates and Northern Ireland exporters will need to continue using the various mechanisms available to them to minimise exchange risks.
The Treaty of Rome was signed on March 25 1957.
CREDIT FACILITIES
THE LETTER OF CREDIT HAS SERVED US WELL
Letters of Credit have been adapted over the years to recognise new modes of transport and the changing requirements of importers and exporters.
In this article Peter J. Clarke, Manager, International Trade Services, AIB, traces the history surrounding the Letter of Credit from just after the First World War, when it reigned supreme, to the present day.
Marilyn Monroe in the 1953 film ‘How to Marry a Millionaire’ is seen in her cabin on board the Queen Mary trying to come to terms with her Travellers Letter of Credit.
Perhaps at Southampton she would bring the Credit to a specified bank who would pay her part of the proceeds, endorsing the credit with the amount utilised.
She might repeat the procedure at another specified bank in  Parish and so on until the Credit was fully utilised.
Still in use in the ‘seventies’ this type of Credit is now largely defunct having been replaced by a plethora of banking ‘products’such as Travellers Cheques, EuroCheques and Credit & Charge Cards.
At one time though, the Travellers Letter of Credit was the principal instrument used by the wealthy doing the Grand Tour of Europe.
The modern Letter of Credit (or Documentary Credit as it is often called) which is used in international trade can be traced back, at least in part, to the Travellers Letter of Credit.
After the First World War Letters of Credit became commonplace as payment instruments to facilitate international trade.
Their durability and versatility has proved to be quite extraordinary.
Whoever writes the history of the Letter of Credit will have some strange tales to tell.
Who, for instance, suggested to President Kennedy that he should use a Letter of Credit to secure the release of prisoners held on Cuba?
Who thought up the idea that the payment mechanism — the Letter of Credit — should be independent from the underlying sales contract?
How is it that banks issue certain types of Credit which they expect will never be drawn on?
The answer to the last question is, of course, the so-called Standby Credit which is really a form of performance guarantee which will only be drawn on in the event of default by the party who has contracted to perform some service.
This type of Credit is particularly popular in America where it is used ‘to guarantee payments to  shareholders in leveraged buy-outs, to receive reimbursement of the purchase price of a champion thoroughbred should it fail to sire offspring, and to underwrite the obligation of a boxing promoter to deliver the purse to the winner’(Letters of Credit — Euromoney Publications).
In many respects  Standy Credits are preferable to Bank Guarantees because virtually all Credits, including Standby Credits, issued by banks are subject to a set of internationally accepted rules drawn up by the International Chamber of Commerce in Paris, known as UCP 400.
This slim volume is essential reading for all involved with Letters of Credit.
Exporters are usually warned at seminars to ensure that the Letter of Credit they receive is an ‘irrevocable’ one.
While this is sound advice, the fact is that ‘Revocable’ Credits are very rare.
Article 10 of UCP 400 states that an irrevocable credit constitutes a definite undertaking of the issuing bank, provided that the stipulated documents are presented and that the terms and conditions of the Credit are complied with, to pay at sight or to accept an obligation to pay at a future date.
‘Such undertakings can neither be amended nor cancelled without the agreement of the issuing bank, the confirming bank (if any), and the beneficiary’.
A ‘Confirmed Credit’ is one where a second bank (usually one familiar to the exporter) adds it name to the Credit and thereby assumes all the responsibilities of payment mentioned in Article 10.
Confirmation is usually requested where the exporter is unsure of the standing of the foreign bank or is concerned about ‘country risk’— will the country run out of foreign exchange and be unable to pay?
Exporters, particularly ones who are acting like brokers — sourcing the goods from outside their own firm, will often try to use the fact that they have a Documentary Credit from a foreign bank in their favour as a way of financing their operation.
They may, for instance, assign the proceeds of a Credit to the bank to gain an increase in overdraft facilities or an exporter will ask his bank to issue a Credit to his supplier — an arrangement known as a ‘Back-to-Back’ Credit.
Banks usually have mixed feelings about these kind of arrangements as the exporter controls the security — leaving the bank exposed if they have to pay up on the Credit to the supplier but the  esporter fails, for whatever reason, to draw on the export Credit.
Nevertheless banks do enter into Back-to-Back Credits from time to time, each case is treated on its merits.
Another form of Credit which is known as the Transferable Credit can sometimes be the answer in situations like this.
Part of the proceeds of a Credit is transferred to a second beneficiary (or to more than one second beneficiary) who presents his documents to the advising bank whereupon the first beneficiary substitutes his invoices and claims a larger amount thus ensuring he receives his share of the proceeds.
This can either be a very neat solution or quite a complex one — it depends on the terms of the Credit particularly where insurance documents are called for.
Instalment Credits are sometimes used where capital goods are involved.
Payment is made in two or more instalments at various stages of the project.
The more usual situation is where payment is ‘at sight’ meaning when the paying bank has examined the documents and found them to be in order or at a determinable future date — for example‘90 days sight’meaning that payment will be made to the exporter 90 days after the paying bank has examined the documents.
This arrangement can be either on an Acceptance (Bill of Exchange) basis or on a Deferred Payment basis.
There is little difference between the two.
Banks are prepared to discount the proceeds of both types of future obligations.
One reason for using a Deferred Payment Credit is to avoid stamp duty in certain countries.
Both types are recognised by UCP 400.
Discounting Bills (or Deferred Payments) drawn under Documentary Credits has a number of important advantages for the exporter.
Firstly, it is a way of improving cash flow without utilising overdraft facilities.
Secondly, if the amount is in foreign currency the exchange risk is eliminated for the exporter on the day the discount takes place.
Thirdly, discounting removes interest rate risk — the discount rate is fixed whereas the alternative is usually to fund the post-shipment credit period from overdraft linked to variable Base Rate.
Letters of Credit have been adapted over the years to recognise new modes of transport and the changing requirements of importers and exporters.
I hope I have demonstrated some of the variety of ways in which Credits can be used and as I write perhaps some genius is thinking up yet another variation to deal with a particular problem.
Meanwhile, I wonder if they have ‘How to Marry a Millionaire’ at the video library?
EUROPE
A BRIDGE BETWEEN HERE AND EUROPE
The new Northern Ireland Centre in Europe will play a crucially important role in developing trade between the Province and the rest of the Community.
In this article Dr. Ben Wilson, Chairman of the new centre, outlines its aims and discusses the contribution it can make in helping to strengthen to Province's economy.
The creation of a separate Northern Ireland Office in Brussels is designed to draw the Province closer to the European mainstream.
Its creation represents the energies and commitment of organisations — individuals over many months.
The office is a tangible recognition at many levels in this community of a determination to ensure that the Province plays a significant role in the Europe of the Nineties, of the Single Market and economic integration.
Every sector of the Northern Ireland community — industrial, agricultural, commercial, social — will need accurate information from Brussels to maximise the benefits for Northern Ireland of the Single Market.
It makes sense that the Province should draw closer to the heart of the Community, where decisions which will affect every individual and company will increasingly be taken.
The Northern Ireland Centre in Europe, therefore, should be seen as a symbol of the commitment of the people of this Province to active membership of the European community.
It is also a signal to other European nations that Northern Ireland is anxious to participate fully in the affairs of the Community.
The Centre's Mission Statement highlights four objectives for the operation.
To promote direct access to the policy-making, advisory and legislative bodies of the Community and to provide accurate information about developments within the Community with particular relevance to the Province.
to provide an early-warning system in respect of all matters which affect or relate to any interest, right or claim of any person, group or association within the Province.
To encourage and help contributions by Northern Ireland people to the Community.
The office will tap into the agencies responsible for important programmes, such as Interreg, STRIDE, PRISMA and Telematique to ensure that Northern Ireland's needs are considered fully by the Commission.
The centre will play a crucially important role in developing trade between the Province and the rest of the Community.
It provides Northern Ireland exporters with another stepping stone into other member states, and beyond into the rapidly developing markets of Eastern Europe.
Its formation at a time when moves are well-advanced to remove customs and other technical barriers throughout the Community is well-timed.
It will be a pressure point in Brussels to ensure that business in the Province is not handicapped by any aspect of the Single Market.
With the support provided by organisations such as the Northern Ireland Chamber of Commerce, the Confederation of British Industry, the Chartered Institute of Marketing and this organisation, the centre will have sufficient expert back-up to assist its operations in Brussels.
Writing recently in Business Life, the magazine of British Airways, Sir John Harvey-Jones stated: ‘Successful international business is built around personal relationships, contacts, instincts, opportunities seen and grasped — and none of those can be faxed.
Would you call it a deal until you have shaken hands?
That means being out there, on the spot.’
The centre will help exporters by establishing relationships throughout the Community through personal contacts.
The staff of the centre will  known Northern Ireland business and the issues likely to affect it.
They will know the EC and the procedures of the Commission.
They will be able to marry the two sets of interests to the benefit of the Province.
The centre, therefore, will be at the heart of a new network for business throughout the Province.
It is a bridge between Northern Ireland and the rest of the Community, and one which I hope business people will use as often as possible to help strengthen the Province's economy.
EXPORT AWARDS
LOCAL FIRMS RECOGNISED FOR EXPORT ENDEAVOURS
The fifth Northern Ireland Export Awards Competition reached its climax when Mr. Sam Torrens, Chief Executive, Northern Bank, presided over a presentation luncheon at Belfast's Culloden Hotel.
The Export awards, which recognise and reward the valuable contributions made to the local economy, both in export turnover and employment created by export minded companies located in the Province, are sponsored by Northern Bank International in association with the Industrial Development Board, the Local Enterprise Development Unit, the Northern Ireland Chamber of Commerce and Industry and British Midland.
The keynote address was given by Sir Desmond Lorimer, who also presented the awards to the winners.
The Premier Export Award, for the company or individual prize winner whose performance in the opinion of the judges was the most outstanding went to F G Wilson (Engineering) Limited.
The Northern Bank International Perpetual Trophy, a cheque for £1000 and £1500 worth of British Midland business air travel was presented to the company's International Sales Director, Mr Brian Wilson.
The Belfast based company is now the largest specialist manufacturer of diesel generating plant in the world despite strong competition in the international market place.
For manufacturing companies employing more than fifty people, the Category A winner and recipient of the Industrial Development Board Award was Thermomax Limited.
The Bangor based company are involved in the export of advanced evacuated head pipe solar collectors and their major overseas markets include Germany, Switzerland, Austria, Italy and Japan.
The award was presented to the company's Managing Director, Dr. Faramarz Mahdjuri.
For manufacturing companies employing fifty or fewer people the Category B winner and recipient of the Local Enterprise Development Unit Award was Typerite Limited.
Based in Warrenpoint the company is involved in the manufacture of Cassetted Ribbons for use in typewriters, word processors, computers and cash registers which are currently being exported to some 27 countries.
The award was presented to the company's Managing Director, Mr. Gerry Barlow.
The Category C Winner for consultancy or other service companies selling abroad was Warrenpoint based company, Treatwater Limited.
As the name suggests this company is involved in the supply of effluent treatment plant which also includes the provision of technical support and expertise.
Managing Director Mr. Terry O'Flynn collected the Northern Ireland Chamber of Commerce and Industry Award on behalf of Treatwater Limited.
The Category D Winner for the best individual effort in achieving targets and developing new markets was Nicholas Hutchinson Regency Marine Limited.
In winning the Northern Bank International Award, it was judged that Nicholas Hutchinson displayed the total commitment and drive required to successfully market his company's products and services, involving extensive international travel and unsocial working hours.
Commenting on the Northern Bank's support for the Northern Ireland Export Awards Competition, Sam Torrens, Chief Executive said:
‘Anything that can be come to encourage companies to increase their efforts or to consider exporting as a viable means of increasing profitability has to be seen as a most worthwhile and objective exercise.’
THERMOMAX: Dr. Faramarz Mahdjuri, centre, managing director of Thermomax who won Category A, with Tony Hopkins of the IDB, left, and Sam Torrens of Northern Bank.
TREATWATER: Terry O'Flynn and Noel Mills of Treatwater Ltd, winner of Category C.
TYPERITE: Gerry Barlow and his wife Florence of Typerite Ltd, winner of Category B.
Mr. Brian Wilson, International Sales Director F. G. Wilson (Engineering) Ltd.,(front left) receives the Northern Bank International Perpetual Trophy, a cheque for £1,000 and £1,500 worth of British Midland business air travel on behalf of the company from Sir Desmond Lorimer.
Also included are Terry O'Flynn, Treatwater Ltd (front right) and (back row), Nicholas Hutchinson, Regency Marine Ltd, Dr. Mahdjuri, Thermomax Ltd, Sam Torrens, Chief Executive Northern Bank and Gerry Barlow, Typerite.
SUCCESS STORY
PORT OF BELFAST PLAYING KEY ROLE
The Port of Belfast now handles more than 55% of Northern Ireland's seaborne trade and this impressive figure is likely to increase in the year's ahead.
Belfast Harbour Commissioners are confident that during the 1990's the Port will respond to the challenges presented by changing trading patterns within an economically unified Europe with the ability to satisfy its customers' needs and demands for an efficient, cost effective service.
The Port of Belfast set a new trading level in 1990 for Irish ports of almost nine million tonnes of goods handled.
Trade increased by some 11% from the previous year and showed a massive 62% increase over the last decade.
Forty per cent of the Port's throughput is now unitised — both containers and freight vehicles.
Particularly strong growth was achieved by the six weekly direct European container services which are becoming increasingly important to the Province in the lead up to 1992 and the implementation of the Single European Market.
Significant growth was also recorded in liquid bulk products, especially oil based, with the Port successfully attracting another major oil company to use Belfast exclusively as its new importing and distribution base.
The Port remains the largest importer of animal feed stuffs in Ireland and with its silo and warehouse accommodation is uniquely placed to serve Northern Ireland's largest single industry — agriculture.
Over one million tonnes of agricultural related products pass over the quays in Belfast each year.
The export of high quality quarry stones and gravel mainly for road construction in South East England is a trade which is going from strength to strength.
From a modest start five years ago when 30,000 tonnes were handled the business has grown to 400,000 tonnes per annum.
This is a major boost to the Northern Ireland quarry industry and the Port of Belfast means to play its full part in seeing that this export trade is expanded even further in the years ahead.
The only negative feature of the year's trade was the closure of the Belfast/Liverpool ferry service.
However, many people in the industry feel that the linking of these two centres of population and commerce will be secured in the near future and already marketing efforts are being made to secure a new operator.
The Port of Belfast now handles more than 55% of Northern Ireland's seaborne trade and the Harbour Commissioners feel that this success is due in no small part to the investment programme which saw £25 million invested over the last five years in a modernisation programme designed to ensure that the Port of Belfast can offer its customers the most up to date, cost effective cargo handling facilities.
The pace of investment is planned to increase over the next five years with over £50 million of expenditure planned in new and improved port facilities and associated infrastructure.
Work has already started on a new 14 acre ferry terminal costing £7 million.
This terminal, situated at the entrance to the Harbour, is ideally placed just one mile from the M2 motorway and is due for completion in August.
The adjacent 20 acre site is earmarked for another container terminal and is currently at the advanced planning stage with work scheduled to commence by the end of this year.
During 1990 the Commissioners also commenced an extensive warehousing scheme designed to replace the old quayside transit sheds and cater for changes in port users' storage needs dictated by the new trends in cargo handling, particularly by the containerised mode.
80,000 ft of purpose built warehousing for goods in transit is ready for  occupation and this replacement programme is planned to continue over the next few years.
The Port's extensive land resources will be further developed by the construction of a major access to the County Down side of the Harbour Estate from the Holywood Road which will open up 300 acres of prime development land already zoned for port operational, industrial and commercial uses.
This new access, along with the proposed cross harbour road and rail bridges, shall ensure that all parts of the Harbour Estate are directly linked to Northern Ireland's motorway system.
Last September, in an effort to reconcile the genuine nature conservation aspirations of various wildlife groups with the Port's need for expansion, the Harbour Commissioners reached agreement with the major nature conservation bodies in the Province to preserve one of the Kinnegar lagoons as a bird sanctuary along with approximately 70 acres of land around the North end of Belfast City Airport's runway for development as a nature park.
This agreement is unique within the United Kingdom and demonstrates that trade, industry and commerce can live together with the natural environment.
Within the Laganside area the Commissioners are the largest landowners and they fully endorse the strategy, recognising the need for a high quality interface between the City and the Port.
They are determined that as port facilities move seaward no part of the inner city areas of the Port should become derelict, but that they should be immediately regenerated for property and leisure activities.
The Belfast Harbour Commissioners are confident that during the 1990's the Port of Belfast will remain Ireland's premier port, largely due to its ability to respond to the challenges presented by changing trading patterns within an economically unified Europe and by its ability to satisfy its customers' need and demands for an efficient , cost effective service.
PORT OF BELFAST
TRANSPORT
DFDS TRANSPORT IS ON THE MOVE
DFDS Transport is recognised today, and rightly so, as one of Europe's leading transport and forwarding organisations with worldwide links offering services to most, if not all, destinations.
In 1977 DFDS obtained a leading position in the door/door market between Denmark and the UK.
To continue this expansion, the company decided to increase the control of product quality by purchasing Danish and UK haulage companies, various types of trailers and containers and establishing offices and terminals abroad.
During that year the company changed its name to DFDS TRANSPORT.
DFDS TRANSPORT'S Danish organisation, with headquarters in Copenhagen and offices in Odense, Horsens, Arhus, Esbjerg, Aalborg and Ikast has 650 employees.
The organisation includes five haulage companies in Denmark and the UK and 35 international forwarding offices/ companies situated in Norway, Sweden, Finland, West Germany, Holland, Belgium, UK, Republic of Ireland, Northern Ireland, Portugal and Spain.
The organisation employs 1700 people and has an annual turnover of dkk 2.6 billion.
Today DFDS TRANSPORT is an international transport and forwarding organisation and although its home market is Europe the company can offer door-to-door transport to deep sea destinations for its own NVOCC-Service and as liner representative for international shipping companies such as CMA, Eimskip, Atlantic Cargo Services, Rosa Line and Hyundai Merchant Marine Co.
Ltd.
DFDS TRANSPORT's primary product is door/door transport, based on the customers' need with regard to flexibility, stability, transit-time, frequency and a competitive cost level.
The secondary products include other forwarding services such as distribution, warehousing, customs clearance and other services connected with in-/external transportation.
Together with the main exporting company of Danish meat products, ESS-FOOD, DFDS TRANSPORT have established an international transport company by the name of DANISH FOOD TRANSPORT I/S, specializing in temperature controlled transport.
Furthermore, the company has experience with tank container movements and heavy load/project transport.
Since 1980 the company has operated a Logistic Department, where, in cooperation with large international customers, they have developed integrated transport systems within Europe, based on the Just-In-Time principle.
The company also operates its own airfreight organization in Denmark, UK and Sweden.
The company has its own customer information system named CARGOLINK and by the end of the present year all the company's offices will be using this system thus enabling the organisation to control each individual consignment during the transport from booking to final delivery to end user.
This year DFDS TRANSPORT implements an EDI pilot project with IBM, Denmark and expects in the years to come to establish online data communication with a number of national and international customers based on common standards (EDI, EDIFACT).
‘We see an increasing interest concerning quality standards within the European trade.
This interest will ensure that the transportation service becomes an integrated part of the companies’ material management,’said a company spokesman.
T.R. SHIPPING
A COMPANY THAT'S GOING PLACES
In 1990, Mr. Tommy Rodgers and T.R. Shipping celebrated 10 years service to the Northern Ireland business community.
When Tommy was interviewed at the time, he made it clear that he was a man with his sights firmly set on the future, and so it is no surprise that in 1991, Tommy Rodgers is again setting new standards.
In 1988 T.R. Shipping took on the responsibility for the Rheintainer Line Agency in Northern Ireland.
Since the arrival of the very first ship, the Annika, this Belfast to Rotterdam service has grown from a weekly to a twice weekly sailing, offering importers and exporters a choice of shipping at the beginning or at the end of the week.
There have been regular changes to the vessels providing this service.
From the 180 TEU Annika, there has been no less than five different vessels involved in servicing this route, each one providing a larger carrying capacity than its predecessor.
This rapid growth recently resulted in the arrival in Belfast of The Rhein Trader, a German built ‘New Generation’ container ship with a carrying capacity of 372 TEU.
This is by far the largest container ship presently calling at any Northern Ireland port.
During her maiden voyage to Belfast, the Rhein Trader was host to many of the customers that support TR Shipping on this ever popular route.
They were able to see at first hand the handling procedures and planning involved in stowing their goods safely for transport to Europe, as well as being able to sample some of the other delights that Germany is renowned for; schnapps and Pils.
T.R. Shipping believed in the motto that the customer comes first.
This is proven by the size of the company's customer base and the loyalty customers have shown in the light of ever increasing competition.
Said Mr. Rodgers: ‘The customer is the most important factor of T.R. Shipping Manifest.
All of our departments are built round customer needs therefore they need to be regularly looked at and updated.
I thank all the people who have supported us over the past eleven years and assure them that T.R. Shipping will be every bit as dedicated in the future.’
Picture shows: The Rhein Trader —‘new generation’ container ship.
CAMPBELL FREIGHT
EXPERTS WHO KEEP TRADE ON THE MOVE
To International industrialists, mere thoughts of transporting total contents of factories from one side of the world to the other would create nightmares.
For experts like Belfast-based Campbell Freight Agencies Limited — who also operate from Dublin and Cork — such massive moves are a matter of course.
Managing Director, Alan Campbell, explained: ‘It's one of many diverse activities of our export business ranging from sending urgent parcels by air to project shipping which entails the transportation of bulk and bulk cargo.
‘In another area, within the shipping trade, we handle ships’ agency covering oil tankers, conventional and container vessels coming into various local ports.
‘In the past decade, the shipping business, generally, has progressed from dock-to-dock to door-to-door concepts involving inter-modal transport such as trains and trucks.
Now, to meet greater efficiency within ‘just in time’ manufacturing, we foresee the development of ‘floor-to-floor’services to further increase the speed of worldwide transportation by collecting/delivering containers from/to specific factory floors.’
The enterprising Campbell Freight Agencies' company was formed in May 1979 when Alan decided to go out on his own after working for a multi-National freight firm.
He commented: ‘I felt the time was right to make a personal move forward as I wanted to have direct control over my own destiny and re-invest into the Province.’
In only 12 years, Alan Campbell has developed a super-efficient, highly reputable, Internationally-acclaimed business affiliated (as Trading Members) to the British Institute of Freight Forwarders' Association providing exporters with the knowledge that the company has indemnity insurance and operates with properly and highly qualified staff.
In fact, the forward-thinking firm employs 13 administrative staff together with several drivers and warehouse staff and many dedicated sub-contractors.
Alan added: ‘While our senior managers have combined experience of over 100 years they are aged 40 and under, thus enabling us to offer the most up-to-date knowledge of shipping and air freight requirements.
‘Being fully appreciative of the importance of moving cargo urgently, we provide a ‘round-the-clock’ service to prove to customers that we are conscientious and keen to look after their business needs.’
It's another bonus that, being involved with the Direct Trader Input (DTI), Campbell Freight Agencies have computerised links with H.M.
Customs to guarantee the quickest possible clearance of cargo.
At his firm's headquarters in Portview (within Belfast Harbour's enterprise zone, off the M2 motorway's Fortwilliam interchange) Alan Campbell has created a purpose-built complex comprising offices and warehouses, some of which are let out to other companies.
He enthused: ‘Apart from the importance of our central location, a major advantage is 24-hour security as Belfast Harbour Commission has the only privately owned Police Force in the UK.’
Additionally, Campbell Freight Agencies is Northern Ireland's only agent to offer both sea and air freight facilities from its other offices in Dublin and Cork.
Regarding sea freight, the company represents the Royal Dutch Nedlloyd Group offering services to the Middle East, North and South America, the Caribbean and Australia.
It is, also, an agent for Cory Brothers (part of the Powell Duffeyrn Group) and Singapore's National, Neptune Orient Line for which it offers dedicated Far Eastern container services.
As Members of the International Air Transport Association (IATA), the firm represents the Hellman Worldwide Network, giving it the ability to work with other reputable agents throughout the world and provide consolidation air freight services at competitive costs.
In view of its excellent track record, it's not surprising that Campbell Freight Agencies Limited has received four prestigious awards within the past three years…two, presented by the UK Institute of Freight Forwarders, for being ‘Freight Forwarder of the Year’ and two ‘Link’charity awards, presented by British Midland, commending the company for organising free shipments of essential foods and goods to Ethiopia.
Alan Campbell concluded: ‘Having received good business since our start-up, it was rewarding to feel that we contributed, in some way, to provide a life-line to a country in need of urgent help.’
ROUND THE CLOCK — LAND, SEA AND AIR SERVICE
TRANSPORT
CARGO CENTRE
A VITAL LINK FOR INDUSTRY
The new £7 million Cargo Centre at Belfast's International Airport is one of the most modern in Europe.
It incorporates all cargo activities in relation to airlines, handling agents, customs brokers, freight forwarding agents and express transport operators.
Hazel Turkington went along to see this impressive complex and the many facilities it has to offer.
Belfast International Airport's impressive new £7-million Cargo Centre — one of the most modern in Europe — is a vital link for industry.
The comprehensive complex (to the west of the International pier and with its own dedicated access) incorporates all cargo activities in relation to airlines, handling agents, customs brokers, freight forwarding agents and express transport operators.
It was developed to keep all aspects ‘under one roof’ in view of the fact that, outside London, Belfast is second to Manchester as the largest cargo airport in the UK.
In 1990 alone, it handled 32,000 tonnes of freight, including a variety of perishable products.
Belfast's central location, on Europe's Western edge, makes it the hub of the Continent and an ideal stepping stone to trans-Atlantic destinations.
The airport's situation is further enhanced by excellent motorway and trunk road networks to all parts of Ireland.
Belfast International Airport has three major advantages…primarily, that it offers Ireland's most competitively priced aviation fuel.
Also, it has no night-time curfew (resulting in 24-hours' daily operation) or noise abatement procedures and doesn't experience air traffic congestion problems common to some other airports.
The new Cargo Terminal is totally Bonded…an extremely important attribute ensuring speedy Customs and Excise clearance, complemented by top technology in the DTI/SEP 90 computer system to guarantee efficient, rapid turn-around.
Facilities available within the well equipped complex include those for warehousing, distribution, containerised cargo handling and administration.
On site are fork lifts with maximum lift capacity of 7,000 kg. and maximum reach of 144 ins. and hi-lo scissor lifts with a maximum lift capacity of 7,000 kg. and maximum reach of 218.5 ins (capable of serving the main deck of a B747F).
There are, also, dock levellers and container dollies with a maximum width of 96ins.
In addition to normal handling equipment the centre has a pallet build hydraulic work station with weighscale; a 20 ft. truck dock interfacing with TIR road transport vehicles; a builtin livestock room; and a strong-room for valuable cargo.
The massive complex includes a 35,000 sq.m. (377,000 sq.ft.) aircraft parking apron capable of facilitating the latest and largest version of the Boeing 747–400 series.
The pavement-quality concrete apron  allows cargo to be off loaded directly to the terminal, thus enabling operational speed.
An extensive Freight Yard of 14,000 sq.m. (150,000 sq.ft.) includes new access roads, car parking and other ancillary works such as the latest aviation ground lighting installations.
The centre's two main buildings — the Cargo Terminal and Freight Forwarders Building — have a combined floor area of 8,350 sq.m.
Constructed to an exceptionally high specification and standard, they have associated mechanical and electrical engineering services.
The cargo terminal is a portal framed building with a clear span of 40 m. (131 ft.) and a height to eaves of 10 m.
The area provided is 5,000 sq.m. of warehousing and 860 sq.m. of offices.
The building — specifically designed to meet operating requirements of freight handlers — features the latest handling equipment, together with a 1.2 m. high loading dock (with electrically-operating, insulating doors) which runs the landside length of the building.
Within the cargo terminal the Post Office occupies a double module specially fitted out as a sorting room.
The freight forwarders building extends to 2,200 sq.m. (24,000 sq.f.) and provides warehousing/office units of varying sizes to the requirements of freight agents.
Warehouse accommodation has an eaves height of 6 m. (20 ft.) and single or two-storied, double-glazed, decorated offices are provided with fittings.
Each unit has kitchen and toilet facilities, together with lighting, heating and three-compartment skirting trucking for maximum flexibility.
Among the tenants are Air Bridge Carriers, Campbell McCleave, Cargo Air, Lep International and Northern Ireland Carriers.
Additionally, H.M.
Customs occupy a self-contained area within accommodation provided for freight companies requiring offices without warehousing.
Other tenants in Belfast International Airport's bright, modern Cargo Complex include British Airways, Servisair and Federal Express.
Accommodation is available on lease conditions to suit tenants' requirements and short-term lettings may be considered.
Interested parties requiring further information should contact Alexander Kinnaird & Son, Chartered Surveyors, Kinnaird House, 15–19 Chichester Street, Belfast BT1 4ND.
Tel.
Belfast (0232) 231824; FAX.
(0232) 242095.
An aerial view of the Cargo Centre at Belfast's International Airport.
AIR CARGO: THE PREMIER MODE OF DISTRIBUTION
The role of ‘Shipping Manager’ is taking on unprecedented importance in the headquarter buildings of major manufacturers.
Simply producing the finest facsimile machines, for example, just isn't good enough if the quality of your distribution doesn't match up to your technical know-how.
The two must go hand in hand.
Today, there is a growing realisation among senior business executives that much of their competitive advantage is lost if they fail to deliver their superior goods to buyers on time and ahead of their rivals.
Quite simply, the use of fast, reliable air cargo services adds value to any product.
Peter White, Managing Director of British Airways Cargo, comments: ‘Air cargo is increasingly proving its worth as the premier mode of distribution, especially as more companies practice ‘Just-In-Time’ inventory controls.
In volume terms, less than one per cent of the UK's international trade is transported by air.
However, in value terms, some 20 per cent of British exports are flown.’
British Airways is one of the largest cargo-carrying airlines in the world, earning revenues of £390 million from the carriage of 506,000 tonnes around the globe in 1990/91.
The airline serves 164 destinations in over 75 countries.
To keep abreast of the needs of its ultimate customers — manufacturers and purchasers — five years ago British Airways formed its ‘Shippers Club’, which today serves over 1,000 members.
Through forums and mini forums throughout Britain and a quarterly newsletter, the Shippers Club provides an ideal opportunity for discussion between shippers, freight forwarders and senior British Airways Cargo executives.
From Belfast, British Airways Cargo flies to London Heathrow, Manchester and Glasgow carrying export goods such as linen yarn, oil drilling equipment, aircraft parts and electronics.
The movement of perishables from Northern Ireland is another area of big business for the airline, transporting lobsters to Brussels, live eels to Amsterdam and oysters to Hong Kong.
In January, British Airways' Cargo Manager Northern Ireland, David McDougall and his 16 staff moved to the new cargo centre at Belfast International Airport which accommodates airlines, handling agents and freight forwarding companies in one area.
In the past year, the airline's throughput from the region was 6,600 tonnes.
British Airways also operates a trucking service from Belfast to Heathrow, Manchester and Gatwick airports for shipments too big to fit into aircraft belly-holds.
The airline has also developed one of the most diverse ranges of cargo products in the airline industry.
It operates the world's largest wholesale courier service, Speedbird Courier.
Courier bags up to 32 kilos in weight can be accepted up to 45 minutes before flight departure to over 60 destinations.
Speedbird Airport to Door is another British Airways Cargo wholesale product offering customers direct express deliveries from the UK to 150 countries, with features such as Timed Delivery.
Excess baggage is also handled by British Airways Cargo.
In the UK, for the convenience of passengers, excess baggage can be accepted at either Heathrow or Gatwick Airports and the London Victoria terminal.
British Airways Cargo's added value services include its Flying Pets Club plus specialist products for valuable and vulnerable cargoes as well.
The airline has developed a total package of distribution services for its freight forwarding agents, carefully designed to best service the ultimate customers; the manufacturer and the purchaser.
British Airways' aircraft fleet is complemented by a comprehensive road services operation in Europe.
From ground hubs at Helsinborg and Billund in Scandinavia, Maastricht in Holland and Lyon and Paris in France, trucks feed cargo to and from the airline's long haul flights at London's Heathrow and Gatwick airports.
Information technology is another area of multi million pound investment.
The CARAT (Cargo Agents Reservation and Air Waybill issuance and Tracking system) is now on-line to nearly 100 of British Airways' freight forwarding customers, enabling them to book shipments and track their cargo all over the world without needing to pick a telephone.
Newly-introduced Radio Data Terminals combined with the use of bar coding has made instant, electronic computer entries possible and cargo clearance times have been drastically reduced.
The Shippers Club is a vital communications link for the airline, helping it to monitor requirements such as the spread of capacity geographically.
For many years, trade across the Atlantic has provided the backbone of business for the air cargo industry.
Without losing any of its strategic importance, the north Atlantic is, however, seeing its number one position eroded by buoyant import and export traffic between Europe and the Far East.
Cargo forecasts suggest that a growth rate of 11.4 percent for Europe-Far East trade over the next 20 years will be more than double the expected increase across the North Atlantic.
Intra-Europe business, for all the promise of the Single Market, will grow at a moderate 4.3 per cent, analysts say.
‘Many companies are placing their main focus on the opportunities for intro-European trading after 1992 and rightly so.
However, at British Airways Cargo it is the global implications of the Single Market which are receiving most attention,’ says Peter White.
He continues: ‘Currently, major manufacturers from the United States and Asia tend to have two or maybe three plants in Europe.
Post 1992 when Europe becomes an area without internal frontiers, in which the free movement of goods is assured, one centrally located manufacturing and distribution base will suffice.
‘When this happens, British Airways’ global route network will further establish the airline as the perfect transportation partner.
We can offer a one-carrier service into or out of Europe or through the EC to the rest of the world.
Certainly we expect the biggest increase to be in long-haul carriage.
International cargo carriage now accounts for about 75 per cent of airfreight movements.
By the year 2010 this figure is forecast to grow to around 87 per cent.
‘Our customers buy a simple service; the transportation of their goods between two points in an agreed time and for an agreed price.
It is our role to ensure we have the people, systems, equipment and quality to deliver that service.’
SHIPPING AND FREIGHT
PORT OF LARNE…
GATEWAY TO EUROPE
The Port of Larne handles almost 100 per cent of Northern Ireland's tourist car and sea passenger traffic and 75 per cent of roll on/roll off freight.
Figures announced recently gave the port yet another record year.
‘Our success,’ says Denis Galway, Director and General Manager, ‘can be summed up in the ability to offer customers, old and new, the right facilities and service at the right price.’
Although the Port of Larne — Ireland's Premier Gateway to Europe — is best known as the country's busiest and most modern Ferry Port, it also features Lo/Lo facilities and handles bulk and general cargoes.
These include stone aggregate and rock armour, cement, forest products, steel and fertilizer.
The port also provides an extensive well-serviced, floodlit fenced marshalling area for new trade cars and has automatic weighing facilities for the export of heavy goods vehicles.
Handling equipment includes 35 and 32 tonne derrick cranes, mobile cranes, 5-tonne bulk and general cargo cranes, tractor units, forklift trucks, etc.
Conveyors and other specialised equipment are also available.
There are four Ro-Ro berths — three of which are equipped with twin-level ramps — the only ones in Ireland — capable of handling wide and heavy loads up to 180 tonnes.
Vessels up to 170 metres long and 30 metres beam can be accommodated.
Special areas are designated for hazardous cargoes and, while in general the majority of traffic through the port does not require customs clearance, customs are available if required.
Stevedoring is provided by Larne Harbour Limited and it is the company's proud boast that customers need only make one phone call to complete their requirements.
The port operates 24 hours a day seven days a week.
Larne's geographical position is an important factor.
Easily reached from most parts of the country, short sea crossings to Fleetwood, Stranraer and Cairnryan, coupled with up to 34 ferry arrivals and departures daily illustrate the Port of Larne's importance to Industry and Commerce.
Warehousing and transit sheds are available and the company has just announced details of an exciting proposal to develop its 70 acre Redlands Estate.
This prime site is adjacent to the dual carriageway at the main entrance to the port.
As well as having excellent road access and serviced sites, it is also bounded by the Larne-Belfast railway.
Redlands, therefore, is ideally placed for the establishment of warehousing, distribution, commercial and service facilities and hotel development.
Passenger facilities have not been overlooked.
A modern spacious terminal, situated alongside and integrated to the railway station just inside the main harbour entrance, provides passenger and car booking offices for P&O European Ferries and Sealink British Ferries, a travel centre for Northern Ireland Railways and the Northern Ireland Tourist Board, bookstall, buffet, currency exchange and car hire facilities.
There is a bus depot at the rear of the terminal.
Disabled persons and nursing mothers are provided with special facilities, including a lift, and there are pay phones, public toilets and a baggage handling hall.
Ample car parking is available.
Escalators carry foot passengers from the concourse on the ground floor to gangway level where a covered walkway leads to the ship gangway.
A lounge is also provided at this level to assemble  passenges at peak periods before embarking.
An interesting new development is Larne Harbour's entry into the conference and exhibition market.
The First Floor Departure Lounge in the modern terminal provides Larne with a much needed conference and exhibition centre capable of handling numbers up to 400 persons.
Standard conference equipment such as projection screen, overhead projector, television and video, fax, photocopying, with full secretarial services including translation can be provided along with full catering facilities including A La Carte, hot and cold buffets, finger buffets and licensed bar.
The venue is ideally suited to importers and exporters for product and new vehicle launches and answers the immediate community need of Larne for a conference and exhibition centre.
Figures announced recently gave the port yet another record year.
The biggest growth was in cars and caravans which reached 352,205, almost nine per cent up on 1989 figures.
Passengers rose to an impressive 1,631,631, a rise of 4.5 per cent.
Encouraging increases were also recorded in freight and cargo.
Commercial vehicles rose from 322,572 in 1989 to 333,732 last year.
In this category the Port of Larne is second only to Dover within the United Kingdom.
Net tonnage of goods broke the four million tonne mark reaching 4,001,353 tonnes — a rise of over three per cent.
The Port handles almost 100 per cent of Northern Ireland's tourist car and sea passenger traffic and 75 per cent of roll on/roll off freight.
Denis Galway, Director and General Manager of Larne Harbour Limited, explains: ‘Our success can be summed up in the ability to offer customers, old and new, the right facilities and service at the right price.
We enjoy good industrial relations and our tonnage and cargo dues are probably the lowest in the country.
In times of economic recession when business and commerce have to look closely at their finances, the low costs, top quality facilities and services which Larne provides are even more vital to the economy and to enable Irish industries to compete effectively in Europe.
‘The Port of Larne has always been in the forefront of development and modernisation.
Our aim is to maintain our leading position, to develop and improve the facilities and amenities offered to port users and to provide a top quality, efficient, value for money operation.’
DENIS GALWAY (left) Director and General Manager, Larne Harbour, and Tony O'Connor, Director for Northern Ireland, Hepper Robinson, study a model of the proposed development of the port's Redlands Estate for warehousing, distribution, hotel, commercial and service facilities.
SEALINK POISED TO SAIL AHEAD IN 90s
A four percent growth in freight carrying was achieved in 1990 by Sealink Stena Line's Larne-Stranraer route.
Now with the introduction of a new continental landbridge fare Sealink anticipate a steady growth in freight carryings during 1991.
The new package deal allows freight customers to book their passage directly to Europe, travelling Larne-Stranraer and onwards via a selected Sealink Channel port.
Offering considerable financial benefits to freight forwarding companies in the Province, Sealink believe the new fare structure will prove very popular.
Commenting on the new service, Freight Development Manager, George Walker said, ‘Our new ‘all in one’ fare is part of a continual preparation process for the Open Market in 1992.’
‘Companies based in France, Holland, Germany and Italy currently bring their products into the UK using Sealink.
The removal of trade barriers will certainly mean increased traffic and at Larne-Stranraer we will be ready to take advantage of the opportunities.’
Another important factor benefiting freight customers was the arrival recently of the Stena Antrim.
With a capacity for 1000 passengers and 306 cars, the Harland & Wolff built vessel provides an additional freight capacity of 25 vehicles per day.
Sealink can therefore now offer freight customers a choice of three similarly sized multi-purpose ferries, each with powerful engines aimed at combating adverse weather conditions.
All three vessels are fully equipped with video lounges, shops, cafes and bars in addition to special freight driver rest rooms.
Freight companies will also want to make use of the new business lounges.
These are fully equipped with 'phones, facsimile and photocopying facilities and desk space for working.
MIDDLE EAST DISTRIBUTION MADE EASY
DPA TO PLAY ROLE IN DUBAI'S GROWTH says SULTAN BIN SULAYEM Chairman and Managing Director of Dubai Ports Authority
The joining together of Jebel All Port and Port Rashid Authority into Dubai Ports Authority creates not only by far the largest single authority in the region, but one with the largest number of berths and ship handling capacity in the world, according to Sultan bin Sulayem, Chairman and Managing Director of Dubai Ports Authority.
‘Our confidence in the future of Dubai Ports Authority is most optimistic.
In view of the excellent performance of the dedicated staff of Jebel Ali and Port Rashid this has been very evident in the growth of Jebel Ali in the recent years.
They oversee the activities of both the port and the free zone.
Jebel Ali container volume has increased by over five times since 1988 and general cargo will be more than tripled by the end of 1991,’ he said.
‘The employees of Port Rashid have continued to provide outstanding service while handling in 1990 close to 700,000 TEUs with very limited handling equipment.
I am confident in the creation of DPA that the employees of both ports will now have a common objective of serving the shipping community with the continuing and ever improving level of service.
All of that will be possible by large investment by the Dubai Government.
In handling equipment and common information services the efficiency and the economy of single marketing operation maintenance and technical department will be evident in DPA,’ Sulayem added.
The chairman stated that DPA will have facilities of over 100 berths, 11 container cranes and tremendous cargo handling capacity.
A major purchasing programme of new equipment to provide even better service for shipping lines as well as imports and exports will be announced in the immediate future.
Sulayem also spoke of Jebel Ali Free Zone Authority which now has more than 325 companies as clients.
The free zone, while not part of the merger, will be closely associated with DPA and will benefit from the marketing and service effort of the staff.
‘I am sure both the new DPA and the free zone will contribute greatly to the growth of the economy, and the strength of Dubai to make it a major industrial and shipping base and the most attractive business environment between the Far East and Europe.’
The following appointments have also been made.
Appointed and reporting to David Gibbons are: Len T. Chapman, Technical Director, and John H. Fewer, Director of Operations.
Reporting to Ted Bilkey are: Saeed Al Tayer, Director of Administration; Jamal Majid bin Thaniah, Director of Human Resources, and Edward A. Butler, Commercial Director.
NORBROOK PRODUCTS SPAN THE WORLD
Norbrook Laboratories of Newry, Co.
Down is involved in the manufacturing of veterinary pharmaceutical products.
 It's main 32 acre site incorporates the most up-to-date laboratory and production facilities, bearing witness to the commitment to research and development which have played such an important role in the company's dramatic growth.
The company is now recognised as one of the largest and most important manufacturers of veterinary ethical pharmaceutical products in the world, with own-label and contract manufacturing services provided.
The production facility is licensed to produce high quality pharmaceuticals by most of the world's major governmental agencies including the Department of Health and Social Services in the U.K. and the Food and Drug Administration of the United States of America.
Products manufactured by Norbrook Laboratories include a wide range of injectable antibiotics, intramammary cerates, vitamins, cortisocsteroids, anthelmintics, fluid metabolites, local anaesthetics, oral preparations including liquids, powders, tablets, pastes and aerosols.
Norbrook Laboratories export to over 80 countries and currently hold two Queens Awards for Export, a testament to dramatic and sustained sales overseas.