

HOW TO RECOGNIZE FOSSILS
Fossils are not rare.
We have seen how millions of fossils may make up the rocks themselves, crammed together layer after layer to form formations thousands of feet thick.
The present land surface is a thin skin on top of a thick record of the past preserved in the rocks.
Once scientists began to collect the record of past life they soon came across the problem of how to order and arrange the huge variety of fossil forms they recovered.
In order to understand what they had found they needed to classify the fossil organisms into particular kinds, more or less similar, to impose an order on what would otherwise have been a vast and chaotic mass of different and apparently unrelated relics.
The urge to order the natural world appears to be an innate characteristic of human beings: ‘a place for everything and everything in its place’.
But classifying animals and plants, living and fossil, is more than just an attempt to find a convenient way of slotting them into different categories, like stamps in a stamp album, for neatness and convenience.
The classification of the natural world is supposed to reflect the great ordering process that itself gave rise to the variety and diversity of animals and plants that are alive today: the process of evolution.
Animals that look similar are classified together, and not only that, they are also closely related in an evolutionary sense (or put another way, they share a common ancestor).
So when we look at the grimacing gestures of a chimpanzee and wonder at the almost ludicrous parallels with our own behaviour this is just part of a whole host of behavioural and anatomical similarities that show without doubt that we ought to be classified with the apes (we are all of us primates), and that we share a distant ancestor with our diminutive caricatures.
Evolution has driven man and the chimpanzee further apart from our shared ancestral species, and in evolutionary terms the chimpanzee is as advanced as we are, although man dominates by virtue of numbers and adaptability.
Few people are offended today, as they were in the last century, by the thought of man and the chimpanzee being classified together by virtue of a common ancestor which has been extinct for probably more than three million years!
But enough family likeness remains to make the chimpanzees' tea-time a most popular attraction in zoos all over the world.
A word of caution here: not all similarities indicate relationships with evolutionary significance.
Some similarities can be misleading, because animals can superficially resemble one another that are not closely related in an evolutionary sense.
Often these resemblances are the product of a similar mode of life.
Both tortoises and armadillos are animals that carry around their own suit of armour, and at first glance we might think they were related.
But a little further investigation shows that tortoises are cold-blooded reptiles that lay eggs, while armadillos are in many respects typical warm-blooded mammals bearing their young alive.
Obviously tortoises and armadillos cannot be classified together in spite of their similarities.
When classifying fossils even more care is necessary because we have not got as much evidence to go on as with living animals.
We cannot see directly whether a fossil animal was warm or cold-blooded when alive; often the evidence is indirect and depends on careful study of little bits of bone.
The palaeontologist is like a detective trying to reconstruct a full story from a few  fragmentary clues.
He must be careful not to follow any ‘red herrings’ that will result in him classifying his fossil on the basis of ambiguous similarities.
He must distinguish snakes from eels, tortoises from armadillos, on the basis of the bones presented to him.
To do this, he must have thorough familiarity with the living fauna, because the information on living animals is so much more complete.
We shall see in the next chapter how carrying comparisons with living animals too far can result in curious and inaccurate pictures of the past.
Distantly related species may come to resemble one another closely.
Slow worm (left ), snake (right ) and amphisbaenid (bottom ), probably all descended from different ancestors, and reached their similar shapes along separate evolutionary pathways.
The number of species of animals and plants living today runs into millions, and similar numbers of species have probably lived on earth for at least part of the earth's history.
Perhaps it is fortunate that the fossil record preserved only a fraction of the truly stupendous total number of species that must have lived since the Cambrian, for otherwise the scientists' task to catalogue 600 million years of life would be an impossible one.
It is not surprising that new fossil species are discovered daily, and indeed the amateur collector has a good chance of finding a new species of fossil, if he looks hard enough and learns to recognize what he has found.
There must have been an increase in the number of different kinds of animals and plants since the Precambrian; for example, the conquering of land alone gave rise to a multitude of new opportunities for the colonizing organisms, resulting in an increase in the total number of species.
Within the marine environment itself some palaeontologists believe that the overall richness of the marine fauna was established early on, say by the Silurian period, and that there has not been a great increase in the total number of species living in the sea at any one time since then, although of course the kinds of organisms inhabiting the sea have changed many times.
And there have been several major episodes of extinction (Chapter 6), when the cast of characters in the sea changed almost totally.
Although the number of  species may have been at least approximately the same in marine environments for the last 300 million years or so the kinds of fossils have changed repeatedly, so that, for example , in marine limestones of Silurian age the shelled brachiopods may number dozens of species, whereas in similar looking limestones of Eocene age no brachiopods at all can be found, but there may be as many species of gastropods of kinds unknown in Silurian rocks.
Even by the beginning of the Cambrian period, when fossils start to become easy to find and many different kinds of animals had acquired preservable hard parts, it is possible to classify the fossils found in the rocks into broadly similar groups.
Nearly all of these groups correspond with major divisions of living animals, so the broad base of classification was established by the Cambrian.
These major groups continued to evolve throughout the following 600 million years, and they include the distant ancestors of our living fauna.
Not all the major living groups of organisms were present in the Cambrian, however, because the colonization of the land did not take place for another 200 million years, and so there were obviously no direct ancestors of land plants around, or of most of the land animals with which we are familiar today.
The major groups into which we can fit almost all fossils from the Cambrian onwards, and all the living fauna, are called phyla (singular:phylum ).
To identify any animal properly, the first stage is to determine to which phylum it belongs.
Of course even the phyla themselves originated from unknown ancestors, and they all ultimately derived from the first living cell.
Fossil evidence for some of this early history is shrouded in obscurity, hidden in the vast stretches of Precambrian time, but as is shown in Chapter 7 more evidence is being discovered each year.
Some of the answers are only now coming to light as we find out more about the structures of the proteins that go to make up living cells themselves.
By the time organisms had become sophisticated enough to have hard parts, evolution had already defined the phyla, and the great natural framework for classification had been almost completely constructed.
At the opposite end of the scale from the phylum is the smallest unit of classification usually used for fossils: the species .
To be strictly accurate a species can be defined precisely only in living animals, where it refers to populations that can interbreed under natural conditions, and which produce offspring that are capable of further reproducing their kind.
In practice, many species are recognized by having some peculiarity of shape, behaviour, plumage, colour and so on, that reliably set them apart from all other similar species.
Obviously we shall never know whether fossil species were capable of interbreeding until somebody invents a time machine, and we can go back and see for ourselves!
So our fossil species are defined in a rather practical way, as showing some consistent difference or differences from all other related species.
Because of the patchy nature of the fossil record many species (particularly of large vertebrate animals) are known from only one specimen; some of these are of almost inestimable value, which is why museums have to take good care of their material.
Every species has a unique scientific name.
The species are ‘christened’ when a scientist describes them for the first time, illustrates their peculiarities and publishes the name in a scientific journal.
The species name has two words:Tyrannosaurus rex is a familiar example.
The names are usually derived from Latin or Greek —‘Tyrannosaurus ’ means ‘tyrant lizard’and ‘rex ’‘king’so the animal is appropriately described as King of the tyrant lizards:rex is the specific name , unique to this species.
There may be other dinosaurs, which are similar to Tyrannosaurus rex , but belong to another species.
These may be included in the same genus — Tyrannosaurus —but will be given a different specific name.
Some species are named after their collectors, so if our new species of Tyrannosaurus were collected by a Mr Jones it might eventually be christened Tyrannosaurus jonesi .
Incidentally, the generic name always starts with a capital letter, and the specific name with a small one, even if it is named after Jones.
In this chapter typical examples of the kinds of fossils most commonly encountered are illustrated by beautiful specimens.
Very few fossils have everyday names, and so the scientific name is used.
Once a few have been mastered it is surprising how quickly the most ponderous sounding scientific name acquires a familiar ring.
The scientific name has the great advantage of being the same all over the world, so the language of nomenclature is a truly international one.
Between the species on the one hand and the phylum on the other there are a whole series of intermediate categories of increasing  inclusiveness.
Several genera (plural of genus) may be grouped together in a family , several families together in a superfamily , and the superfamilies themselves are clustered into classes , two or more of which combine to make the phylum.
It all sounds rather complicated, but it does serve a useful function in ordering the almost countless number of species in the most economical way.
All the species within any of the units of classification descended from a single, ancestral species.
We need not worry about families or superfamilies in this book, but classes often correspond to everyday groups of animals.
In the phylum Mollusca — the molluscs which include the majority of sea animals with shells — the class Gastropoda includes all the snails, and the class Bivalvia all the clams (mussels, scallops, etc.).
Many of the most familiar fossils, like the trilobites, are classes within larger phyla.
Plants are classified in much the same way as animals, but just to make things difficult the largest units of classification are not generally called phyla but ‘divisions’.
Many of the plants familiar in the garden — Dahlia, Chrysanthemum, Fuchsia — are generic names which have come into common language.
The fossil record of plants is rather patchy compared with that of some animal phyla.
Partly because of this the broad level classification of plants is still being argued.
We will now examine the commonest and most important kinds of fossils, the kinds that the reader will be able to find when he starts a collection.
The groups of organisms described have certain special peculiarities that set them apart from all others, and once these features are recognized the group to which the fossil belongs can be confidently identified.
Each group is illustrated in the plates by a typical species, but of course all the groups contain many species, and any specimen the reader is likely to find will probably differ from the one chosen for illustration in several details.
Most accounts of the different kinds of fossils start with the simplest organisms and work towards the most complex, often ending somewhat selfishly with man.
This can give the impression of a simple evolutionary tree: single cells to many cells, shellfish to fish, and then land vertebrates.
This is not correct.
Although single-celled organisms are obviously simpler than complex animals like ourselves, many single-celled organisms have continued to evolve actively since they lived in the ‘primaeval soup’.
It is known that some of the unicellular organisms in the sea today are only one or two million years old (very little in geological terms), in fact they are probably as young as man himself!
Very simple and very complex organisms have lived side by side for a long time and both have evolved together.
True ‘living fossils’ are really rather rare, and the term can be applied to both simple and highly complex organisms that have outlived the time when the earth was populated with many more of their kind.
It is easier to describe simple organisms first and move on to complex ones but this is just a convenience of arrangement, and we will follow this procedure here.
Some of the most important fossils are extremely tiny: these will be discussed in a later chapter, and what follows is concerned with the forms that can be recognized from hand specimens.
When they are first chipped out of the rock such fossils will often be partly concealed by matrix.
To identify them it is usually essential to clean off most of the enclosing rock, otherwise one can be misled by superficial resemblance.
The rule is never to try such cleaning in the field — it nearly always results in a pile of rubble and a frayed temper.
THE DIFFERENT KINDS OF FOSSILS AND HOW TO RECOGNIZE THEM
SINGLE-CELLED ANIMALS — PROTOZOA (Colour plate 2)
A large and heterogeneous collection of organisms are grouped in the Protozoa, including all those animals that can lead an autonomous existence as a single cell.
Most are microscopic, and many have no skeleton and therefore lack a fossil record.
The flexible amoeba, which is the protoplasmic ‘blob’ of popular imagination, is a familiar protozoan without much potential for fossilization.
A few protozoan groups secrete hard tests (shells) which are very common fossils, but again most of these are too small to be easily spotted in the field.
They are of great geological importance, however, and we shall return to them later in this book.
Such testate protozoans have a record extending back to the Cambrian.
A very few protozoans secrete skeletons of (for a single cell) gigantic size, and these also occur in such numbers that they form conspicuous and common fossils.
Particularly in rocks of Eocene age the coin-like nummulites are important as rock builders.
Nummulites are  known from England, but they are most numerous in the Mediterranean and eastwards, where they form limestone formations of great thickness.
The pyramids of Egypt are constructed of limestone blocks in which the species Nummulites gizehensis is conspicuous (opposite p. 64).
Nummulites are a giant kind of foraminiferan, an important group of rock-forming organisms as far back as the Carboniferous (and with ancestors in Cambrian rocks), and which still form deep sea oozes today.
Most foraminiferans require a microscope for their study.
Another group of giant foraminiferans flourished particularly in the Permian period: these are the fusulines.
Instead of being about the size and shape of a coin, the fusulines are spindle-shaped, with a round cross-section tapering at both ends; fusuline limestones again form thick rock sequences, particularly in Russia and the Orient.
Both fusulines and nummulites are divided into many small chambers internally, and details of their internal structure are used to classify them.
Both groups seem to have flourished in exceptionally warm, shallow seas in the tropics of the Tethyan region.
THE SPONGES — PHYLUM PORIFERA (Colour plates 1, 3)
The sponges are an important group of many-celled organisms, with the individual cells specialized for particular functions but rather loosely aggregated.
Some sponges have the property of being able to ‘rebuild’ their colonies of cells if they are mashed up.
Marine sponges have a long fossil record from the Cambrian onwards, and at many localities they are abundant enough to be important rock formers.
They have been prominent reef-building organisms too, often in association with bryozoans.
Not all sponges contain hard parts capable of being fossilized.
The skeletal elements of those with hard parts are fine, often branching elements called spicules .
The spicules may be only loosely associated within the sponge tissues, or may be more or less fused to form rigid skeletons.
Two major divisions of sponges are distinguished on the composition of the spicules: the glass sponges have a skeleton composed of silica, one of the few examples in nature where this material is used as a basis for a skeleton, while the calcareous sponges use calcium carbonate for their spicules.
Both kinds have Cambrian representatives and both flourish today, the glass sponges being especially numerous in deep-sea environments.
The sponge skeleton is highly variable in shape: many are cup or flask shaped, others spherical or cauliflower-like, while some form flat plates folded together, or are encrusting.
A successful group of sponges has taken to boring into the shells of other organisms.
In detail, sponges are distinguished by the form of the spicular structure, and the ways these combine to form the skeleton, as well as the overall shape.
Although sponges are widely distributed in the fossil record they are particularly numerous and easy to collect in Cretaceous rocks in Europe and North America, where dozens of well-preserved species have been described.
Sponges are often preserved inside flints, which were originally deposited as hard layers within the Cretaceous chalk.
As they are much more resistant to weathering than the enclosing chalk, the flints remain behind when the chalk is eroded away.
Flints containing sponges may be incorporated into younger sediments (they are then known as derived fossils ), and it is not unusual for such flints to be dug up in suburban gardens around London — a long journey from the Cretaceous seas.
The calcareous sponge Raphidonema faringdonense from the Cretaceous of Berkshire, England.
This sponge with a calcite skeleton was obtained from a gravel, an unusual type of rock in which to find fossils It is a broadly cup-shaped sponge, rapidly expanding from a narrow base.
The minutely porous external surface is covered with irregular bumps. number of species of this genus have been reported from Cretaceous rocks, and related genera occur back to the Triassic.
Species related to this one occur in France, Germany, Italy and Switzerland.
Sponges vary a good deal in size and shape.
The specimen shown has a height of 7 cm.
Specimens from unconsolidated gravels are not difficult to clean, any adherent sand grains being easily removed using a stout pin.
CORALS AND RELATED ANIMALS — PHYLUM COELENTERATA (Colour plates 4, 5, 6, 9)
The coelenterates are a varied group of organisms with cells organized into definite  tissues, a mouth surrounded by tentacles, and a stomach.
The tentacles are arranged in a circlet about the mouth, and the coelenterates are typified by such radial symmetry.
The majority of coelenterates have a jelly-like consistency, and the group includes the familiar jellyfish and sea anemones, as well as the smaller hydroids commonly kept in schoolroom fresh water tanks.
Coelenterates come in two main designs: they are either attached with the tentacles surrounding the mouth waving like an animal flower in the water (polyp ), or free floating with the tentacles hanging down, often as fine as hair (medusa ).
Coelenterates have stinging cells which they use to paralyse their prey.
It is surprising to find that the soft-bodied jellyfish have any fossil record at all, but in fact they have the longest one of the phylum.
Casts of the stomach cavities have been described from Precambrian rocks in many parts of the world, and many different Precambrian jellyfish have now been named.
It   is certain that the seas of 600 to 1000 million years ago swarmed with drifting medusae, just as they do at present.
These free-floating coelenterates are therefore both primitive and ancient.
Some groups within the coelenterates have developed the ability to secrete a hard skeleton, of which by far the most important are the corals (Class Anthozoa).
The lithistid sponge Pemmatites arcticus from the Permian of the arctic island of Spitzbergen (left ).
The sponge skeleton has weathered out of a limestone.
Unweathered specimens are sometimes difficult to see on the rock surfaces.
This sponge superficially resembles a living bath sponge more than the other sponges in this book, being bun-shaped, with a minutely pitted external surface.
Pemmatites species are known from a number of localities in the Permian and Carboniferous of Europe .
This specimen has a diameter of 7 cm.
To obtain a hand specimen we rely on the differential weathering of the sponge and the matrix.
Some related forms are better studied in polished section like the corals.
Section across a typical rugose coral (Palaeosmilia , Carboniferous)
A coral is essentially a sea anemone which supports its body by a skeleton of calcium carbonate.
This first happened early in the Ordovician (some believe even earlier), and there were no doubt simple polyps in the Cambrian and Precambrian from which the corals evolved.
The secretion of a skeleton gave the corals a great advantage over many other coelenterates; supported thus they could overcome the lack of rigidity of their soft tissues and grow large.
Many coral species form branching colonies in which hundreds of individual polyps live on top of their own houses.
Other forms remain solitary — a single polyp.
From soon after their inception colonial corals started to live together in large masses with one or many species forming large, mound-like, wave resistant structures — coral reefs.
Many organisms other than corals also contribute to the construction of the reef.
Fossil reefs are one of the prime sites to look for fossils of many different kinds besides the corals themselves.
Corals can be divided into several major groups.
In the Palaeozoic, corals looking generally similar to living reef corals may be only distantly related, if at all, to our present day fauna.
These rugose corals can be solitary, or massive in large reefs; in either case their skeletons are composed of the form of calcium carbonate known as calcite .
The finest details of the skeletal structure are well-preserved, and the corals can be cut and polished, or studied in thin sections (see p. 57).
The detailed structure of the individual plates that combine together to build the skeleton are the basis for the classification of the corals, as well as the general form.
The most obvious of these building elements are plates arranged radially, looking like the spokes of a bicycle wheel in section (septa ).
In rugose corals the septa usually have a basic four-rayed symmetry in each corallite.
Rugose corals are common fossils in rocks of Ordovician to Permian age.
Alongside the rugose corals low cushions or branching masses of a different kind of calcite coral are often found.
These have much smaller corallites usually only a millimetre or two across, and the septa typical of rugose corals are absent or inconspicuous.
These are the tabulate corals (Colour plate 5).
Both rugose and tabulate corals are extinct.
Devonian corals,Heliophyllum corniculum .
These silicified specimens have been weathered out of the rock.
They are small, simple corals with a gently curved form.
Note the deep cup which was occupied by the polyp (the living coral animal) in life.
Corals with this simple form are known from Ordovician to Carboniferous rocks, but there are differences in detailed structure.
Heliophyllum has numerous species in the Devonian of Europe and North America.
Length of the whole coral is about 3 cm.
Corals looking superficially very like the rugose ones are found in Mesozoic and younger rocks, and are important on reefs today (scleractinian corals).
Their calcium carbonate skeletons are composed of the mineral aragonite , chemically the same as calcite, but with the atoms arranged in a different way.
The septa in these corals are often arranged about a six-fold symmetry so that they are fundamentally different from the Rugosa.
Oddly enough, although they are younger than the rugose corals, the aragonite composing them does not preserve very well, and it is easier to find beautifully preserved examples of the older Rugosa.
Scleractinian corals are found in small numbers in Triassic rocks, and are abundant in Jurassic, Cretaceous and younger rocks, particularly in past and present tropical regions.
Jurassic reef coral,Stylina alveolata This massive coral is now composed of calcite It has been recrystallized, because in life it was composed of the mineral aragonite — chemically the same as calcite, but with a different crystal structure.
The matrix is a yellow limestone common in the European Jurassic.
Rounded, massive coral composed of individual corallites with about ½ cm diameter.
I he septa that line the edges of the corallites are here very short.
The little cups occupied by the polyps in life have been exposed by the weathering.
There are a number of species related to this one in coral reefs and clumps of Jurassic and later age The specimen is from Nattheim, Germany; related species of Stylina occur in Jurassic limestones in Europe, eastwards into Asia Minor, and in the US.
Diameter of the entire colony is about 10 cm.
THE GRAPTOLITES — PHYLUM HEMICHORDATA (Colour plates 7, 10)
The graptolites are an extinct group of colonial organisms, with a geological record extending from the Cambrian to the Carboniferous.
For many years they were regarded as colonial coelenterates, but it is now certain that they are unrelated to the jellyfish and their allies, and in fact are distant cousins to a small group of tube-dwelling organisms with little fossil record, which belong to the minor phylum Hemichordata.
Hemichordates are a primitive group that probably share a common ancestor with the chordates (including vertebrates).
The graptolites swarmed in the seas of the Ordovician and Silurian periods.
They are usually preserved as flattened impressions, which retain little of their finer detail.
The impressions generally show a serrated edge like a saw, each ‘tooth’ being the crushed tube (theca ) that housed an individual of the colony (zooid ).
The colonies vary widely in shape: some are shrub-like, with numerous slender branches, others have only a few, or even a single branch.
The bushy ones (Order Dendroidea-dendroid graptolites) are the more primitive, and were generally rooted to the sea floor.
The few-branched forms, which include the Order Graptoloidea or planktonic graptoloids, were derived from the dendroids at the base of the Ordovician and were successful and prolific until the early Devonian.
They then disappeared, to be survived by their more primitive bushy relatives.
The number of branches and the arrangement of   the thecae are important in their identification.
The graptoloids are one of the important groups used in dating rocks.
They evolved rapidly and spread widely, and with a little experience a glance at an assemblage of graptolites on a shale surface can be used to determine the approximate age of deposition of the rock.
Most of the later graptolites had only a few branches and, in the Silurian, species with only a single branch tend to dominate the assemblages.
One advantage of graptolites is that they occur predominantly in former oceanic environments — the deeper water shales or limestones discussed in Chapter 3.
Their preservation in inner shelf habitats is much more unusual — although not unknown.
Whether the graptolites were not living near shore, or whether the conditions were not right for their preservation, are questions that have excited some argument.
Whatever the explanation, other organisms, like trilobites or brachiopods, were more numerous in such sites, and have been used to date the rock sequences in the absence of graptolites.
Eight-branched graptolite,Dichograptus octobrachiatus,Ordovician.
This graptolite has eight equal branches, each lined with many tiny tubes in which the individual animals of the colony lived, although most of the microscopical details have been destroyed.
Dichograptus species are very widespread in the early Ordovician rocks.
Some species have very slender branches.
This species is found in the eastern United States, Texas, Britain, Canada and Australia.
The diameter of the colony is 6cm.
Brachiopod (left ) and bivalve mollusc (right ) compared, showing difference in symmetry when viewed sideways, reflecting fundamental internal distinctions
BRACHIOPODS — PHYLUM BRACHIOPODA (Colour plates 8, 11, 12)
A first collection of marine fossils will almost inevitably include a brachiopod or two.
Brachiopods have one of the longest histories and one of the best fossil records of any invertebrate.
They are already present in early Cambrian rocks and are still with us today, although living brachiopods tend to be rather inconspicuous in shallow waters.
But during the Palaeozoic and Mesozoic they occurred in such profusion in inshore sediments that they are frequently important components of the rocks in which they are found.
Brachiopods have two valves, and this gives them a superficial resemblance to bivalved molluscs.
The drawing below shows that bivalves and brachiopods really differ in fundamental symmetry, and the differences in the shell reflect even more profound ones in the internal, soft anatomy.
Brachiopods have probably always filter-fed, living off small organic particles brought on currents.
The particles are harvested by a lophophore covered in cilia — which serves the dual purpose of both creating a current and catching the food.
Most brachiopods were attached to the substrate by a stalk, and the hole through which the stalk entered the shell can often be seen on the fossils.
This method of food-gathering and the inactive mode of life may seem sufficiently dull for us to anticipate that the brachiopods would have changed little in their long history.
It is true that one brachiopod —Lingula — is one of the most famous ‘living fossils’.
Lingula -like species, looking much like the living form, can be found in rocks as old as Ordovician.
But the other brachiopods have been far from evolutionarily inactive — they have gone through several major proliferations and diversifications, and suffered dramatic major extinctions as well.
In the Ordovician and Silurian periods they became adapted to life in most marine environments, but were particularly numerous in shallow water habitats, in some cases forming whole banks, as mussels do today.
Although generally small (and hence easily collected) some species grew to 1O cm long or more.
Some brachiopods are smooth, but   many became corrugated or ornamented with course or fine ribs.
The margins of the valves are often wavy, and deeply folded in other species.
Long spines on the exterior of the shell were developed especially during the Carboniferous.
Even more profound changes happened in the internal structures of the brachiopods, partly those concerned with supporting the lophophore — these changed from simple loops to complex ‘doubled back’ structures, or to fantastic spirals and whorls — all presumably designed to increase the ways of food-gathering, and its efficiency.
Quite complicated tooth-and-socket hinges were developed between the valves.
Although the variety of brachiopods in the Jurassic and Cretaceous is somewhat less than in the Palaeozoic, they are still very abundant and varied fossils.
It has been suggested that their slow decline in the last I00 million years or so has been caused by the commensurate rise in diversity of filter-feeding bivalve molluscs, which ousted them from their former habitats.
It is an attractive idea but one difficult to prove; in any case many of the greatest successes of the bivalves have been in life habits that the brachiopods never adopted burrowing and swimming free for example).
Brachiopods fall into two major classes; the more primitive have shells composed of calcium phosphate plus organic material and hinge development is imperfect — hence their name, inarticulate brachiopods.
Inarticulates can be recognized on the rock from their shiny lustre.
Lingula is one of the best known genera.
Inarticulates were numerous in the Cambrian and Ordovician periods.
The other class, the hinged brachiopods (Articulata) have shells composed of calcium carbonate, and they comprised more varied and abundant group as fossils.
Though their long history from the early Cambrian to the present different groups of articulate brachiopods rose to prominence only to decline.
As with other invertebrates the combination of brachiopod types in an assemblage gives a quick clue to the age.
Modern studies rely particularly on the internal structures for their identification: some brachiopods with similar exteriors can have very different ‘insides’.
But the overall shape of some kinds is distinctive enough for quick recognition — the large spiriferid brachiopod shown on Plate II is unlikely to be confused with any other, and brachiopods of this type are abundant in the Carboniferous limestone.
Above all it is the sheer variety and abundance of brachiopods that give shallow water Palaeozoic assemblages of fossils their distinctive ‘feel’.
The brachiopod Macrocoelia expansa is a common species on this slab of Ordovician age.
These brachiopods are preserved in a distinctive way.
The rock surface is covered with both internal and external moulds.
No trace of the original shell material remains.
The enclosing matrix is a fine-grained sandstone, and the original calcite shell material has dissolved away to leave impressions of the shells on the sandstone.
This sort of preservation is very common in European Ordovician and Silurian rocks.
The fine radial ribbing is characteristic of many such brachiopods; internal moulds show the impressions of strong hinge teeth (showing as hollows on the rock surface).
Species like these are abundant in rocks of Ordovician age, often forming shelly bands.
This species is from Near Meifod, Wales, but similar species are very widespread.
Precise identifications are difficult, and require expert knowledge.
The rock specimen is 20 cm across.
Jurassic spiriferid brachiopod,Spiriferina walcotti .
This elegant brachiopod is characterized by its broad shell, thrown into folds at its margin.
The hinge line is wide.
Faint concentric growth lines can also be seen.
The species shown here is from the Lias rocks of England and its close relatives may be found worldwide.
It does not exceed 3cm in length.
Fossil lamp shell,Terebratula maxima , Pilocene of East Anglia, England.
The specimen shown has both its original valves preserved, and looks today much as it did when it had just died.
This Terebratula is a particularly large brachiopod, as its Latin name ‘maxima ’ implies.
One of its valves is larger than the other, and that valve has a circular opening at its apex, through which a fleshy stalk passed which served to attach the animal during life.
It lacks the strong ribbing seen on many brachiopods.
Species superficially resembling Terebratula maxima may be found all over the world in rocks going back at least to the Jurassic period.
Its close relatives, in the Tertiary rocks, are rather rare.
Adult shells are 10 cm or more long.
SEA MATS — PHYLUM BRYOZOA (Col. plate 13)
Bryozoans are an important group of colonial organisms which form encrusting mats on other marine shells or rocks, or branching, leaf-like hummocky colonies on the scale of a few centimetres.
Their colonies can often be seen on seaweeds stranded on the shore, where they resemble a fine, white net attached to the darker weed.
They are rather common fossils from the Ordovician onwards, and in spite of their small size can be abundant enough to be important as rock-formers (especially in limestones).
Bryozoans found as fossils have calcium carbonate (calcite) skeletons that have a high chance of being preserved, and the fossil forms seem to have been exclusively marine (some living bryozoans live in  fresh water).
A microscope is essential for their proper study, but even with a hand lens a glance at the surface of a bryozoan colony reveals a number of tiny openings.
Each one of these openings, was in life, occupied by an individual of the colony (zooid), a minute animal with tentacles covered in cilia, that entrapped passing microorganisms and edible particles.
Larger colonies would have hundreds of individual zooids.
In more advanced bryozoans of the Mesozoic to Recent individual zooids have become specialized for particular functions — some have become totally modified to curious, snapping structures looking remarkably like miniaturized parrot heads, which may function to prevent the settling of larvae of unwanted alien organisms on the bryozoan colony.
The zooids themselves are, or course, not preserved as fossils — we only have their vacated homes.
But from a study of detailed thin sections through the colonies we can deduce a good deal about the growth (astogeny)of colonies of bryozoans long since extinct.
Although they were filter-feeders like the graptolites the bryozoans have not taken to free-floating planktonic existence — they are characteristic benthic organisms.
They are divided into a number of groups on the basis of details of structure of the individual ‘boxes’ that housed the zooids, and the construction of the colony.
It is always worth examining the surfaces of fossils like brachiopods or sea urchins to see if the fine matted or delicately branching colonies of bryozoa are preserved on their surfaces — they are easily overlooked.
Other bryozoan colonies are more immediately conspicuous, particularly the stout, twig-like branches of the Palaeozoic trepostomes, which can make up thick limestone beds, and formed their own ‘reefs’, or the large, often net-like colonies of the ‘fenestrellids’ common in the Upper Palaeozoic.
A relative of the latter, the curious, screw-like Archimedes is shown on p.65.
Bryozoans are quite commonly preserved as internal moulds — the calcite skeleton is dissolved away leaving only the sediment fillings of the chambers once occupied by the zooids.
In this case they can present a different appearance, a host of little tubes combining together into branching twigs or nets.
Such preservation is usual in sandy or silty rocks.
The variety of colony structure in the bryozoan exceeds that even in the corals, and ranges from compact humps to cobweb-like branching colonies of exceptional delicacy, and their small size in no way detracts from the beauty and variety of form they display.
MOLLUSCS — PHYLUM MOLLUSCA
The molluscs are one of the most varied, successful and numerous of the invertebrate phyla.
Thousands of living species occupy every marine habitat from the shallowest to the deepest abyss, and, as every gardener knows who has tried to protect his vegetables against marauding hordes of snails and slugs, they have been remarkably successful in making the transition from sea to land.
the most primitive molluscs lack a shell, but the most diverse groups, and those that concern us here, have well-developed hard parts that are readily fossilized.
Molluscs have the lower part of the body developed as a muscular foot , which may variously function locomotion, digging or swimming.
The molluscs were ultimately derived from a soft-bodied creature somewhat like the living flatworms, but the acquisition of hard parts happened very early on, low in the Cambrian of before, and by the Ordovician the important living classes were well established.
A few molluscs, like the slugs and octopuses, have secondarily lost their shells, having developed other means of protection.
As with the other phyla, the great span of geological time has seen different groups rise to prominence, decline, to be replaced by others.
But unlike the brachiopods the molluscs are probably as diverse today as they have ever been.
Measured by their total living weight (biomass) molluscs are one of the most important groups in the whole marine biosphere: the swarms of squid in the oceans are the match of any species of fish.
The level of organization achieved by the most advanced molluscs, for example the octopus, is the most intricate and sophisticated of any invertebrate: one cannot over-estimate the importance of the Mollusca in shaping the patterns of marine communities we see today.
Different molluscs fill most of the possible ecological roles available to marine organisms: some are voracious hunters, others graze on algae or feed directly on organic material in muddy sediments, others again are filter-feeders.
The great majority of molluscs have a minute, planktonic larval stage, a small ciliated object bearing no resemblance to the adult, that drifts as part of the plankton until ready to settle and assume its mature form.
Thus even bottom-dwelling molluscs can be dispersed widely   over long distances, and are quick to colonize vacant sites that appear in the ocean (new volcanic islands like Surtsey, for example).
Most molluscs are small, a few centimetres long and some are really tiny, but a few species have attained considerable dimensions.
The most famous (or notorious) is the giant squid at 15 m or more in length, but some of the extinct ammonites and nautiloids were of similar dimension, and were the largest shelled animals ever to have lived.
Fossil glass sponge,Hydnoceras tuberosum from the Devonian of New York.This exceptionally large beautiful sponge is preserved in full relief in a fine sandstone.
Hydnoceras is a Devonian and Carboniferous genus, but glass sponges of similar general form (but without knobs have a History going back to the Cambrian, and surviving species today.
A large species with length of 20 cm.
The giant foraminiferan Nummulites gizehensis (nummulites) from the Eocene of Egypt.
Numerous species of this species are preserved together, actually forming the rock — an example of fossils as rock builders.
The small, lentil-shaped fossils are a separate form of the same species.
The ‘coins’ are up to 4 cm across.
3 The hexactinellid sponge Coeloptychium agaricoides from the Cretaceous of Westphalia, Germany.
These two specimens are beautifully preserved, extracted from a matrix of white chalk, which gives them their colour.
Species of Coeloptychium can be found in England and elsewhere in Europe.
The ‘cap’ of this specimen is 8 cm across.
4 The solitary rugose coral Cyathophyllum sp.,
Devonian of Devon, England.
Sections have been cut through well-preserved coral in limestone.
The gaps between the walls of the coral skeleton have been filled with calcite, showing up as the lighter colours of the sections.
The longer diameter of the section is 6 cm.
Corals are often best sectioned like this one to reveal the internal structures.
5 The tabulate coral Halysites escharoides (chain coral) form The Silurian of Ohio Falls, USA.
This massive coral has weathered out of limestone because the material of the coral is slightly harder than the enclosing matrix.
Large numbers of tiny oval corallites are linked together to form chains.
Specimen 10 cm across, part of a larger colony.
6 Fossil brain coral,Coeloria labyrinthiformis (Scleractinia).
Miocene, Antigua.
Polished section.
Long meandering corallites with thin septa form a dense meshwork to give this coral an appearance like the labyrinth implied in the specific name.
Specimen 8 cm across.
7 Dendroid graptolite.
Dictyonema flabelliforme , Ordovician, North Wales (European geologists often regard rocks with Dictyonema as latest Cambrian).
The large colony of this net graptolite is preserved in a light-coloured shale.
Of the many species of Dictyonema only a few have a colony as regular in shape as this one, which can grow to a length of more than 20 cm.
8 Lingulid brachiopod,Lingula beani , Jurassic, Yorkshire, England.
These tongue-shaped brachiopods are composed of calcium phosphate, with a shiny lustre, contrasting with the clay matrix.
9 Pliocence coral,Septastraea forbesi Maryland, USA.
A massive coral with irregular knobs, composed of corallites with a diameter less than ½ cm, with polygonal outlines, and with about twelve prominent septa like the spokes of a wheel.
The specimen is 10 cm long, and is a fragment of a much larger colony.
10 Tuning-fork graptolite Didymograptus murchisoni , Ordovician, Wales.
Several of these graptolites are preserved on the flat bedding surfaces of a black shale.
The Graptolites are flattened, and their original skeletal material has been destroyed.
Didymograptus species of this type have a distinctive shape like a tuning fork.
Individual specimens grow to a length of 5cm or more.
11 Brachiopod, Spirifer striatus , Carboniferous, Kildare, Ireland.
This barachiopod had a wide hinge line, and the apertural margin is deflected downwards to form a broad ‘v’.
The radial ribs are more numerous than those of the related brachiopod Spiriferina p. 63.
These specimens are 5 cm across.
12 The rhynchonellid brachiopod Cyclothyris difformis , from the Cretaceous of Devon, England.
Wide, ribbed shells with a small beak projecting from the upper valve, the lower valve is deeply convex.
Cyclothyris is found in both Europe and North America.
These specimens are 3–3½cm long.
13 Net bryozoan,Fenestrellina plebeia , Carboniferous of North Wales.
These net-like bryozoa form colonies large enough to be conspicuous fossils.
This is particularly the case when as here, they are preserved in dark shales, the white calcite of the animal's skeleton standing out against the background.
Fenestrellina species are widespread in Carboniferous rocks, and colonies are generally 5–6 cm across, but may be 10 cm or more.
14 Trigoniid bivalve,Scabrotrigonia thoracica , Cretaceous, Tennessee.
A single valve of this species is exceptionally well-preserved showing the finest details of the shell structure.
The radial ribs ‘chopped up’ into little knobs are characteristic of the trigoniid bivalves.
The shell is very robust, and inside there are very few, powerful hinge teeth.
The longest diameter of this specimen is 5½ cm.
15 Carboniferous bivalve,Aviculopecten planoradiatus , Derbyshire, England.
For a fossil of this age the preservation is remarkable, because the original colour banding is preserved, showing as broad, V-shaped patterns.
The single valves are preserved in a fine-grained limestone.
Pectinid shells have grooves widening towards the margin, and, at the apex, flattened ‘ears’.
Length, 3 cm.
16 The gastropod Desmoulia conglobata , from the Pliocene of Italy.
As befits its relatively young geological age, the specimen is preserved with its original shell material.
It has been sliced longways to show the internal structure.
Note the columella,which is twisted like a corkscrew.
Length, 4 cm.
17 Jurassic nautiloid,Cenoceras pseudolineatus , Dorset, England.
Specimen largely preserved as an internal mould.
A section cut and polished through the specimen (on the right) shows the internal chambers filled or partly filled with calcite.
The internal mould shows the gently-curving suture lines.
The specimen has a diameter of 7 cm.
Peculiar, screw-like bryozoan,archimedes sublaxus , Carboniferous.
The calcareous skeletons of this distinctive species have weathered out from the limestone matrix.
Whilst most bryozoa require microscopic examination, a few form colonies large and distinctive enough to be easily recognizable.
This is one such form, with its colonies forming peculiar miniature helter-skelters.
The genus is named after the famous Greek philosopher, and inventor of the ‘Archimedes screw’.
Numerous Archimedes species occur worldwide in rocks of Carboniferous and Permian age.
The colonies grow to a length of 5 cm.
Larger species have been described.
Because the molluscs are such a large and varied group, with such an extensive fossil record, we shall consider them below in their various classes.
Accurate identification of molluscs is a skilled business, and there is a vast literature describing fossil species, but it is easy to recognize the most important types preserved in fossils.
The fossil record, particularly in the Cambrian, is still turning new and fascinating kinds of molluscs, some of them really weird, and a few of these will be touched upon after the most  important and familiar groups have been described.
Tellin bivalve,Tellinella rostralis .
Eocene.
The original shell is here preserved in a sandstone.
In life the tellin would have had two valves, but only one is preserved here.
The species has an elongated form, which is extended at one end into a shovel-like tongue; fine concentric ribs are nearly parallel to its margin.
Species somewhat resembling that shown are numerous in the Tertiary marine formations, and similar species live today in sandy sea bottoms.
This species is from the Eocene of Belgium; related species are very widespread.
The specimen is about 3 cm long, but may grow larger
THE CLAMS — CLASS BIVALVIA (Colour plates 14, 15)
In clams the body is enclosed in a pair of valves, which in most species are mirror images of one another.
The valves are composed of calcium carbonate, are quite strong in most species, and hence easily fossilized.
Between the valves a springy ligament keeps the valves in a gaping attitudes — the position used for feeding.
If danger threatens powerful muscles can snap the valves tightly shut, and once a bivalve has closed itself in this way it can be very difficult to force it open — it has ‘clammed’ up.
the strong muscles leave scars on the interior of the shell at the places to which they were attached (usually two in each valve), and these muscle scars may also be seen on fossil shells.
To make the the hinge strong and efficient there are usually complex arrangements of teeth and sockets there, and the arrangement of these articulating devices is very important in identifying the different kinds of clams.
So it is important to find the internal structures in fossil bivalves, as in the brachiopods.
The clams use their foot for digging and movement generally.
The group has adapted to a range of marine and fresh water habitats where they are often filter-feeders.
Their fossils often occur gregariously as they lived, forming beds largely composed of fossil shells.
Many living species burrow into sand or mud, sometimes to a considerable depth — these species maintain contact with the sea by means of long siphons , tubes that permit the passage in and out of water and bring to the animal both the necessary oxygen and the small organic particles on which it feeds.
Other species are attached to rocks by means of tough threads (byssus ) that enable them to hang on even in turbulent situations; mussels can colonize even the most inhospitable rock surfaces in this way.
A few bivalves have become free-swimming — such pectinids can escape predators rapidly by ‘clapping’ their valves together.
Still others have taken to burrowing into wood or even into limestone, and fossils of these curious animals can be found lying in their home-made burrows (see p. 21).
With such a wide range of adaptations it is not surprising to find that the shapes of bivalves are highly varied — some are globular, others flat and plate-like, some like razor shell (Ensis ) have become greatly elongated to avoid burrowing, and some in forms of the usual ‘mirror image’ symmetry has been lost.
The thicker shelled  species often carry a distinctive sculpture, which is also important in identifying fossil species.
Fossil gastropod Poleumita discors,Silurian.
The shell is preserved in calcite, with a limestone infilling.
The topmost whorls of the shell are broken off.
this is a very ancient snail with a flat nearly disc like form, with fine growth lines and occasional courser knobs.
The outer perimeter carries a raised ridge.
Gastropods of this kind are typical of Ordovician and Silurian strata, where there are a number of genera and many species of comparable form.
This species is from the Wenlock Limestone of Dudley, England.
Similar species can be found in Silurian limestones all over Europe and North America.
The specimen has a diameter of 6 cm.
Gastropods of this antiquity preserved in limestone can be difficult to clean.
In this case the shell material is a little more resistant than the enclosing limestone, and the specimen has been weathered out of the rock in good condition.
Most bivalve fossils are a few centimetres long; the ideal size for collecting.
But a few giants are known.
The Cretaceous genus Inoceramus sometimes grew well over a metre in length; fragments of this particular genus are frequently important components of the soft, white Cretaceous limestone known as chalk.
The giant clam (Tridacna ) of modern reefs is a familiar living goliath, but reports of it greedily trapping divers are legends of dubious veracity.
The bivalves have long geological history, with a few doubtful species known even in Cambrian strata, but like many other molluscan groups they really become established and diverse during the Ordovician.
By the end of the Ordovician they had already radiated into many of the niches they occupy today.
Their story from then on is one of slow, but steady, increase and diversification.
Bivalves seem generally to have evolved at a slow canter rather than a brisk gallop (see ammonites pp. 73–6) and some living bivalves have a very long ancestry; the small sized genus (Nucula ) has relatives in Ordovician rocks not very different from Recent species.
But the ancestors of many of the modern bivalves arose during the Mesozoic, and unlike many of the animals in this book the bivalves were affected in a much lees dramatic way by the Mesozoic-Tertiary extinction events that extirpated so many other major elements in the marine fauna.
In spite of their general conservatism the bivalves did produce some short-lived, bizarre forms with no living survivors.
Most extraordinary of these are the Cretaceous rudists (p. 47) a group in which one valve became modified to a long cone, on which the other valve rested like a lid, the whole effect being most un-clammish.
Some clams have shells composed of the form of calcium carbonate known as aragonite (like scleractinian corals) which is easily dissolved away when they are entombed in sediment: this leaves the clam preserved as an impression on the sediment of its internal and external surfaces (internal and external moulds).
It is important to collect both ‘halves’ of the fossil to get an accurate representation of the shell — the external mould will preserve the overall shape and sculptural details, while the internal mould shows what the teeth and muscle scars were like.
The reader may be confused to find what we here call bivalves, referred to in other books as pelecypods or lamellibranchs — these are just different names for the same animals.
The name accepted by most scientists today for the two-shelled class of molluscs is also fortunately the simplest — Bivalvia.
THE SNAILS — CLASS GASTROPODA (Colour plates 16, 18)
‘Slugs and snails and puppy dogs' tails’— there seems to be something in the popular imagination that finds snails slightly repulsive.
But this class of molluscs includes not only the greatest number of living molluscan species, including those that have most successfully colonized land, but also some of their shells have a financial value that may even be out of proportion to their aesthetic qualities.
The gastropods are molluscs with a single, usually helically-coiled shell, with the foot modified into an efficient creeping organ with a head usually with eyes and tentacles, and with a rasp like feeding organ (radula ) composed of a series of pointed teeth.
The gastropods have become adapted to a very wide range of habitats, from high mountain streams to deep oceans, and each habitat type has its own species confined to it.
Fresh water gastropods are different from  marine ones, and within the marine habitat itself the gastropods are strongly zoned ecologically, so that even on the same shore different species will be found in different areas according to their relation to the tide marks, degree of exposure, their diet, and so on.
Usually such fine habitat details are not preserved in the fossil record, and the gastropods we find are a jumble of shells displaced from their original microhabitats.
Many gastropods are grazers: they use their radula to rasp away at algae.
Some feed more or less directly on sediment, from which they extract edible particles.
There are a large number of living species that are predators, some species using the modified radula as a kind of poison dart, others employing it to bore neat, perfectly round holes through the shells of prey (often bivalves) in order to get at the nutritious interior.
Some of these predators are specialists concentrating on one particular prey   type.
It will now be clear why you can sometimes find so many different fossil gastropod shells together in a single fossil deposit.
Fossil limpet gastropod,Symmetrocapulus tessonii , Jurassic.
The species is preserved with its original shell, its interior being filled with limestone.
The fossil shows well the original concentric growth wrinkles.
Fossil limpets of this kind are generally rare as fossils, and the amateur will be lucky to find one.
This specimen is very rare indeed.
It is from the Jurassic limestone of Les Moutiers en Cinglais, France.
It is 11 cm long — large for a limpet-like mollusc.
Fossil sundial shell,Architectonica millegranosa Pliocene.
The well preserved shells of this gastropod have been washed almost free of their enclosing silty matrix.
The low spire of this species, with a minutely beaded ornament, and the sharp rib around its outside edge, are features that discriminate this species from other gastropods.
This species is one of a fairly large genus that survives today.
They are uncommon in the tropical or subtropical molluscan faunas of the Tertiary.
Species resembling this one in general shape are met with in rocks of Cretaceous and younger age.
This species is from Orciano, Italy.
Diameter about 3cm.
Gastropod,Harpagodes wrightii , Jurassic.
This large gastropod is preserved in an oolitic limestone.
The long, stout spines are an unusual feature which discriminates this species from other gastropods.
Note that the surface of this species bears encrusting oysters of a species that took advantage of the hard surface of the dead gastropod.
This species is a real rarity.
It was discovered in the Great Oolite limestones of Gloucestershire, England.
A few related species occur in the Jurassic.
The longest diameter of the specimen is nearly 15 cm.
Cleaning out gastropods from oolitic limestones can be a lengthy business.
Usually the weathering has done part of the job, but thereafter a combination of small chisels and stout needles (to prise away individual grains) is needed.
Always remember to keep clear of the soft calcite shell with these tools.
Typhis pungens , a fossil gastropod, Eocene.
These specimens are well-preserved in a clay matrix, some of which adheres to one of the specimens.
Such spiny little fossils are unlikely to be confused with other gastropods.
Note also the oval aperture surrounded by a narrow rim.
There are a number of Typhis species, with various numbers and arrangements of the spines.
Fossil Typhis are frequent fossils in the Eocene rocks of Europe.
Typhis still lives today — in the seas around Japan, for example.
The series of fossils shown here demonstrate the different sizes gastropods of one species attain.
The largest here is 3 cm long.
The gastropod shell can vary from a millimetre in length to several tens of centimetres; many are thick and robust, others delicate and fragile.
While the majority are coiled in an upward spiral, some are modified into simple, cap-like forms (like the limpets), and others are coiled in a flat plane, like a ram's horn.
Some genera have high spires, with many turns of the shell visible externally, others have low, broad spires in which the last whorl overlaps the earlier ones.
Perhaps more than any other group of molluscs the gastropods are remarkable for  the variety and beauty of the external sculpture on the shell, which may be covered with a delicate tracery of ribs and lines, or stout spines, or fine prickles.
Many species have the aperture flared, or extended into a long tube (siphonate forms).
Sometimes you can find a lid (operculum ) preserved as a fossil, that closed the aperture when the mollusc withdrew into its shell.
All these characters are used in the identification of fossil species, but of course the colour patterns that may be characteristic of living species are not available in the great majority of fossils.
Like some of the bivalves, some gastropods had shells composed of the mineral aragonite, and these are usually preserved as moulds: but a cast taken from the external mould will replicate the fine detail of the external sculpture.
Right The Pliocene gastropod Busycon contrarium .
As with most fossils of this comparatively recent date, the shell looks now much as it would have done when the animal first died, except for the loss of pigment.
This gastropod is unusual in that its aperture lies on its left-hand side, not on the right as in most other species.
Its specific name ‘contrarium ’ indicates this.
Its low spire and long, projecting apertural extension are also characteristic.
Forms related to this species are quite widespread in the Pliocene.
The specimen is from Florida, USA.
The species still lives in the seas off Florida today The specimen is 6 cm long — but like all gastropods, smaller or larger specimens can be found according to growth.
Far right The Eocene gastropod Athleta spinosa .
These exquisitely preserved gastropods are largely free of the enclosing matrix, and look now much as they would have done 60 million years ago.
Gastropods of this type are characterized by strong ribs produced into spines, a long aperture, and relatively low spire looking rather like a Mayan pyramid.
There are many similar species, widespread in Tertiary times.
These specimens are from the Eocene of Grignon, France, but similar species occur on most continents The specimens illustrated range from 2–4 cm long, according to the stage of growth they have reached.
Many species of Athleta occur in clays, and the matrix can usually be removed with only gentle washing to give fine, clean specimens.
The species shown here is in a crumbly limestone, easily removed with gentle brushing.
There are small helically-coiled shells present even in Cambrian rocks, and it seems likely that the gastropods diverged from the other molluscs late in the Precambrian.
By the Ordovician the gastropods were a varied group present in a variety of shallow water habitats.
As might be expected most of the Palaeozoic gastropods belong to primitive groups: a few of these primitive snails survive today as inconspicuous members of the Recent fauna.
By the Carboniferous many of the shapes we see in living gastropods can be matched in the fossils, but despite these similarities the majority of the Palaeozoic forms were not closely related to their living analogues; this is another example of similar-looking forms evolving independently probably in response to similar life habits.
It was during the Mesozoic that the forms ancestral to many of the living gastropods evolved.
In particular the adoption of predatory habits was a new departure for the gastropods, and was in part responsible for a proliferation of the group unmatched in their Palaeozoic history.
They continued to evolve with undiminished vigour through the Tertiary, and their fossil remains are nowhere more abundant than in the ‘crags’ of later Tertiary age.
The gastropods are one of many groups that record the faunal changes connected with the advance and retreat of the Ice Sheets during the Pleistocene.
The invasion of the non-marine habitat probably first happened in the Carboniferous, but relatives of the living land snails are rare before the Cretaceous, at which time the familiar Helix made its first appearance.
The slugs were derived from this group by reduction of the shell, at which stage they become distinctly less qualified to have a fossil record!
Gastropods can leave other evidence of their activities.
Grazing species leave characteristic winding trails, and these have been  tentatively identified as fossils, but with the usual caution that the trail makers themselves are never apparently preserved at the end of their tracks.
NAUTILOIDS, AMMONOIDS, BELEMNOIDS, SQUIDS — CLASS CEPHALOPODA (Colour plates 17, 19, 20, 21)
The cephalopods include the most complex and ‘advanced’ of the molluscs, and are a group of the greatest geological, as well as biological interest.
They have muscular tentacles in a well-developed head region, highly efficient eyes which are similar in construction to those of vertebrates (although obviously independently derived), and they feed with the aid of strong, beak-like jaws.
They are predators, and probably always have been, and it may have been the adoption of hunting habits that favoured the development of high intelligence.
Certainly, living cephalopods have a sophisticated nervous system and a relatively large ‘brain': octopuses seem to be capable of very rapid learning.
Perhaps H. G. Wells made the right choice when he cast octopus-like animals in the role of intelligent alien invaders in The War of the Worlds .
The cephalopods evolved from another (gastropod-like?) mollusc at some time during the Cambrian, but their earliest history is little known.
Like most other molluscan groups they rapidly diversified in the Ordovician.
These early nautiloids were probably predators also, and if this were so they may have been the first rapidly moving, efficient hunters in the sea.
Their impact on the marine communities of the Ordovician must have been profound.
The presence of efficient predators would have acted as a stimulus in the evolution of other groups: even algal grazers would be compelled to evolve protective devices or rapid reproductive strategies to outpace predatory depredations.
We have seen how many animal groups diversified during the Ordovician; the rapid evolution of nautiloid cephalopods at the same time may be more than coincidence.
Rapid movement in cephalopods is achieved by expulsion of water from a muscular funnel beneath the head.
Most of the living cephalopods also have an ink sac which injects a smoky fluid into the water when the animal is threatened, under cover of which they can make their own jet-propelled escape.
Since living Nautilus does not have an ink sac, this must have been a protective device evolved at a later stage in cephalopod evolution.
Many cephalopod species behave gregariously today, travelling in swarms in pursuit of their favourite prey (often small crustacea).
Fossil cephalopods belonging to one species are often  found together in large numbers and this may reflect similar gregarious habits, but there are other possible explanations — for example, concentrations of fossil shells may have been sorted by currents.
The living pearly Nautilus ; section showing its internal division into chambers
NAUTILOIDS
The earliest cephalopods found as fossils are nautiloids and they also have the longest history, because the living pearly Nautilus belongs to the same group.
The single Recent genus scarcely reflects the diversity attained by the group in Palaeozoic seas, and more than a hundred different genera have been described from the Lower Palaeozoic alone.
Sections through the living Nautilus (see p.72) are often sold as ornaments, and well illustrate the distinctive features of nautiloid hard parts.
The body of the animal occupied the cavity at the end of the spiral — the living chamber.
Behind the living chamber the rest of the shell is divided into smaller chambers.
As the animal grew it secreted a wall (septum ) between the body chamber and the chamber immediately behind — walled off part of its home as it were.
Running along the middle part of the shell there is a narrow tube — the siphuncle — which connects the living chamber with the earlier parts of the shell.
The empty chambers are usually supposed to have been filled with gas, which help to give the animal buoyancy , and via the siphuncle the animal can vary its buoyancy to control its position in the water column.
Some of the early nautiloids deposit calcium carbonate in the voided chambers, which may also have been connected with controlling buoyancy.
Where the septum meets the body wall it does so in a smooth curve.
Internal moulds of fossil nautiloids often reveal a series of such lines marking the boundaries of the chambers — these are known as suture lines .
All nautiloids have simple suture lines.
When they first appear in the early Ordovician the majority of nautiloid shells are straight or slightly curved; they are ‘unwound’ forms.
Some of these straight orthocone nautiloids achieve considerable dimensions, several metres long, and they must have been formidable predators on the other marine animals of the time.
Quite early in their history some partly coiled or even tightly coiled species evolved, and the various coiling types seem to have coexisted successfully side by side.
Some of these early nautiloids occurred in such abundance that they are conspicuous enough to form an appreciable part of limestone formations — the ‘Orthoceras Limestone’(Ordovician) is one of these, widely distributed through Scandinavia.
The nautiloids achieved their widest range of adaptations and greatest variety of form in the Ordovician and Silurian periods, with various coiled forms, straight, pipe-like forms, and curious dumpy species with restricted apertures that may have adopted a sluggish (possible filter-feeding) mode of life.
Thin sections show a great variety of internal structures important in accurate identification.
In the Devonian period the nautiloids were still abundant and varied, but they suffered a slow eclipse coincident with the rise of the ammonoids.
Nonetheless unlike many of their Palaeozoic companions, they survived the late Permian extinction, and the ancestors of the living Nautilus even underwent a minor evolutionary burst in the Mesozoic, where forms quite similar to the pearly Nautilus can be common fossils.
And in the end the nautiloids even survived the ammonites, the molluscan group that evolved more rapidly and more spectacularly than any other.
AMMONOIDS (‘AMMONITES’)
The ammonoids were derived from the nautiloids probably during the early Devonian, and from the Carboniferous until the Cretaceous are among the most abundant of fossil groups, in some rock types dominating to the exclusion of most other members of the fauna.
Ammonoids differ from nautiloids in the suture lines being wavy or crimped; this of course reflects an elaboration of the outer part of the walls (septa) separating the chambers in the earlier part of the shell.
The siphuncle in most ammonoids runs not through the middle of the whorl but along the outer edge.
There has been a lot of debate about the reasons for producing complicated patterns on the suture line; what advantage would this have given the ammonoids over their nautiloid ancestors, that allowed for the explosive bursts of ammonoid evolution?
It cannot be coincidence that the folding of the septal walls occurs at the point where they meet the body shell of the animal; this is a point of relative weakness, and all good joinery benefits from strengthening the joint.
The earlier ammonoids had gently wavy sutures, and many of the Mesozoic ones had sutures almost incredibly folded and contorted, so it looks as if natural selection were generally favouring increase in the elaboration of the folds.
One simple explanation, which is attractive  and plausible, is that the strengthening enabled the ammonoid shell to withstand the hydrostatic pressure at relatively great depths in the ocean — they need not be confined to the surface waters or to relatively shallow depths.
Certainly individual ammonoid species became extremely widespread, and oceans were not a barrier to their distribution.
They became masters of the pelagic realm, possibly swimming in schools like their distant relatives the squids.
Like living pelagic animals they had preferences for particular water temperatures; different types of ammonoids were found in high or low latitudes.
Since the disposition of continents has changed, these ‘faunal realms’ offer a method of deducing the distribution of past climatic belts.
Ceratite ammonoid,Ceratites nodosus , Triassic.
This specimen is an internal mould in limestone, and shows the suture lines well — the boundaries between chambers on the inside of the shell.
This ammonite has only a few strong ribs, with a number of small tubercles in addition.
The looping form of the suture lines is also characteristic Ceratites are typical of Triassic rocks and there are numerous related species differing in details of ribbing and suture lines Such ammonites are plentiful in marine limestones of the right age across the continent of Europe (though not in England).
Related forms occur in America The specimen shown here is from Göttingen.
This specimen has a diameter of 6 cm but some are larger.
Jurassic ammonite,Promicroceras planicosta .
Numerous small specimens are preserved higgledy-piggledy in an impure limestone.
Some retain their shell, others show the dark internal moulds.
Small size, unbranched and strong ribs, giving the shell a ramshorn appearance, are important characters This form has a number of related species, but the situation is complicated by the fact that some large ammonites have inner whorls looking rather like Promicroceras This specimen is from the Lias of Somerset, England.
Individuals do not exceed 2 cm in diameter.
Whatever the reasons for their change from their nautiloid ancestors, the ammonoids were an enormously successful group: thousands of different species have been described, and their variety is so bewildering that many specialists devote their lives to studying only the ammonoids of a particular, short time period.
The changes that they underwent are an infinite set of variations on a relatively limited number of themes.
Most important, perhaps, are the characteristics of the suture lines, which are displayed on internal moulds.
The mature shell size also varies from small species a few centimetres across to giants of a metre or more in diameter.
Some species grew in such a way that the last whorl overlaps the inner ones; often these species become flat and discus-shaped: it has been suggested that this was a more ‘streamlined’ shape for active swimmers.
Other species have squat whorls, the whole ammonoid being so tightly rolled up as to be almost spherical.
The exterior surface of most ammonoids is covered with ribbing — dense on some species, sparse on others — the ribs often split into two or more smaller ribs as they pass over the back of the whorls.
Many ammonoids additionally carry spines, warts, tubercles or lumpy excrescences, so that the large shells can look positively burdened with sculpture.
It is difficult to imagine that such species were rapid swimmers.
Others, particularly the discus-shaped forms, were smooth externally.
All these features are used in the classification of the group.
A particularly puzzling aspect of the ammonoids is a great resemblance between external shell features that can be produced at different times by otherwise unrelated ammonoids.
Such homoeomorphs are presumably produced in response to very similar life habits.
The origins of a particular homoeomorph can usually be deduced by studying the internal features (in particular the suture lines), or by tracing its derivation from geologically older species in underlying beds.
It is only in relatively recent years that two sexes have been recognized in ammonoid species.
They were originally thought to have been two closely related species occurring together in the same rocks, but these ‘pairs’ were so consistently found together that it became more and more probable that they were sexual forms of the same species.
The smaller of the two is considered to be the male, which also tends to have rather stronger ribbing, and sometimes a differently shaped aperture from the larger female.
A group of belemnites,Acroceolites subtenuis , Jurassic.
This fine group of belemnites is preserved on a soft shale.
The belemnite guards themselves are composed of calcite There are very many belemnite species in Jurassic and Cretaceous rocks, sometimes occurring in vast numbers.
They require expert determination.
The specimen shown here is from the Jurassic shales of Yorkshire, England, but similar species occur worldwide.
The longest specimen shown here is 9 cm long.
Some belemnites are as much as twice that length.
Anomalous ammonites: the Cretaceous genus Nipponites.
About × 1½.
The early ammonoids of the Devonian (Anarcestes and allied genera) have only gently sinuous suture lines.
In the Carboniferous a great variety of forms with highly zig-zag suture lines are a distinctive group of ammonoids usually known as goniatites .
By the Permian-Triassic the suture lines of many ammonites had begun to assume the highly crimped and complex form that was to characterize much of their later history; the ceratites of the Triassic combined broad loops and tight folds in a distinctive pattern (see p.74).
It was in the Jurassic that the ammonoids achieved their greatest flowering, when the clays and shales of the period may be solid with the remains of their shells.
The whole gamut of shell shapes, ornaments, and sutural complexity was present during this time.
Their rise was not, however, one of simple and progressive increase in variety.
At several times, notably at the end of the Palaeozoic, they suffered massive and largely unexplained extinctions, a few survivors giving rise to the variety of forms that followed.
In spite of their success they seemed to be vulnerable to extirpation in a way that some of the less imaginative molluscs, like the bivalves seemed to be immune.
The group persisted, successfully, into the Cretaceous, at the end of which period the whole group, apparently rather suddenly, became extinct.
We shall return to this sudden death of an important group in Chapter 6.
No description of the ammonoids is complete without mentioning the heteromorphs These are forms which abandoned the usual plane spiral mode of coiling, and instead became partially or even completely uncoiled, or became twisted in some other fashion.
Some forms (Turrilites ) adopted the helical spire, and were it not for the obligatory suture lines it might be possible to mistake these species for large gastropods.
In others the coils became loose, like a watch spring.
Still others developed a bizarre backward hook in their mature stage.
The extreme heteromorphs are perhaps to be found in the genus Nipponites , which looks like a tangle of whorls where any obvious semblance of symmetrical coiling seems to have been lost (see left), and Baculites which is virtually straight after its earliest whorls.
Most of these heteromorphs were derived from ‘normal’ ammonoids, but there is one  famous example where an uncoiled form actually gave rise to a conventional-looking ammonoid by coiling up again!
Heteromorphs are particularly common in, but by no means confined to, Cretaceous rocks.
At one time it was supposed that the ammonoids were suffering from ‘racial senescence’ at that time and that the uncoiling represented a kind of genetic exhaustion.
This resulted in their reversion to resemble some of their earliest ancestors (the straight nautiloids) and squared with the observation that some of the heteromorphs even reverted to simple, wavy sutures again.
However, the heteromorphs were extremely successful and widespread, and they are accompanied by, and even survived by other species with a perfectly usual appearance.
The explanation lies in something less mysterious than ‘racial senescence’.
Far from being an expression of decline the heteromorphs show the ammonoids adopting new (and successful) life habits.
Some of them may have become bottom living, crawling hunters for which a gastropod-like shell would have been more appropriate.
Loss of active swimming habits may have rendered the complex suture lines superfluous.
But their displacement from a dominant role in the pelagic habitat may have accompanied the rise of squid, sepioids, and octopods.
Ammonoids, heteromorphs included, are almost without parallel as stratigraphic indicators.
They evolved rapidly and spread widely, and have a range of distinctive characters to help the investigator in his identifications.
Study of evolving populations of ammonoids has produced very fine subdivisions of Jurassic and Cretaceous rocks, and their only disadvantage, curiously enough, is the feature that makes them so attractive to collectors.
They are large, and hence the chances of recovering complete specimens from all boreholes is relatively low.
Microfossils (Chapter 8) are often used in their stead for subsurface work.
BELEMNOIDS
The cigar-shaped belemnoids ('belemnites') are common fossils accompanying the ammonoids in Jurassic and Cretaceous rocks.
The fossil is an internal skeleton (enclosed within the body) of a squid-like animal, in a way comparable with the cuttle bone of the living cuttle-fish.
The solid calcite of this internal skeleton makes the belemnoid a resistant fossil, and fragments are common survivors of erosion, often picked up on ‘Recent’ beaches.
The chambered shell (phragmocone ) is less conspicuous — it is tucked into the broad end of the fossil guard, where the series of closely-spaced septa reveal the cephalopod nature of these otherwise somewhat featureless fossils.
Belemnites vary from small fossils a centimetre or two long to large specimens tens of centimetres long: of course these are only a fraction of the size of the living animal, with their tentacles extending well beyond the guard.
The belemnoids disappear from the fossil record at the end of the Cretaceous, but some of the group gave rise to living squid-like animals, and so they are not to be regarded as extinct in the same, final way as the ammonoids.
OTHER MOLLUSCAN CLASSES
Some molluscs are found as fossils which belong to groups other than the familiar ones described previously.
Although they are rarer fossils, some of them are of such interest that they are worth mentioning here.
One of the most exciting are the Monoplacophora.
These are a group of extremely primitive molluscs, which are found in any abundance only in Lower Palaeozoic rocks.
They are usually simple cap-shaped shells looking somewhat like limpets, but on their internal surfaces they carry a series of paired muscle impressions.
Many authorities regard the Monoplacophora as lying at the root of the other molluscan groups; gastropods, cephalopods and even bivalves may have been derived from them.
For many years they were known only from fossil representatives and were believed to be extinct.
It was an amazing discovery to find that monoplacophorans were still alive and well — living ones were dredged from the deep ocean in the early 1950's.
Not only that, the living form had hardly changed from its Silurian predecessor (see p. 77).
The monoplacophorans really reached their acme in the Cambrian, with curious forms having shapes that have never been paralleled in other molluscs (Yochelcionella ).
Another odd group that did not survive the Palaeozoic were the Rostroconchs.
These look rather like bivalves without a hinge.
They really are extinct, but managed to compete successfully with the bivalves for a considerable time.
Finally, the tusk shells (Scaphopoda) are a long-lived group with a record stretching from the Ordovician to the present.
They are the only molluscs with a truly tubular shell, usually gently curved, with an opening  at both ends.
They live today with the broad end buried in the sediment, where they forage for food using small prehensile filaments.
Their habits have probably always been similar, and if survival is to be taken as a measure of success, their conservative way of life has ensured them of a leading place in the evolutionary marathon.
Other animals described in this book have occupied a specific ecological niche where they can quietly pursue their own speciality without embarking on any spectacular radiation in the manner of the ammonoids.
It is a curious paradox that often the most spectacularly successful and numerous organisms are also those with a finite geological record.
Primitive molluscs: Monoplacophora.
Silurian fossils very like the ‘living fossil’Neopilina (above ), and the peculiar Cambrian form Yochelcionella (below ).
THE ECHINODERMS — PHYLUM ECHINODERMATA
Sea urchins, starfish, sea lilies and sea cucumbers are living echinoderms — the ‘spiny skinned’ animals, according to the Greek name of the phylum.
It is an appropriate name, for most echinoderms do feel prickly to the touch, and the sea urchins are equipped with fearsome spines.
The skeleton of all echinoderms except the sea cucumbers is a relatively strong assembly of calcite plates; the animals are built from an interlocking mosaic of such plates, and mostly the skeletons are rigid enough to have a high chance of fossilization.
The geological record of the phylum is accordingly excellent.
The echinoderm skeleton is not a truly external one, like that of the molluscs, for it is surrounded on the outside by a thin skin of living tissue.
The mosaic of calcite plates is a particular feature of the phylum, and serves as one of the characters linking together such dissimilar-looking animals as starfish and sea lilies.
Another unique feature is the water vascular system, a system of internal plumbing that drives the tube feet : mobile, club-shaped sacs arranged in serried ranks on the outside of the animal, which operate in harmony to convey food to the mouth, or in locomotion.
They have a well-developed nervous system.
Most echinoderms also have an unique five-rayed radial symmetry in the overall shape of the skeleton.
This five-fold (pentameral) symmetry seems a peculiar number to be present over such a wide range of organisms.
Why not four, six or thirteen?
The answer is still not clear, but what is certain is that the five-rayed plan was established even in the Cambrian in a number of diverse echinoderms; it is evidently highly functional.
In detail the echinoderms show evidence of bilateral (mirror image) symmetry, from which five-fold symmetry was probably derived.
Once acquired it is rarely lost, even in echinoderms like sea urchins that (perhaps) could also function on a different symmetry pattern.
Each plate of an echinoderm is composed of a single crystal of calcite, whereas all of the organisms we have discussed above have skeletons composed of felt-like masses of tiny crystals.
Broken echinoderm plates ‘catch the light’— the single crystals break along cleavage planes and so present a uniform reflective surface.
Many rocks are composed of a high proportion of echinoderm debris, which is easily recognized because of this optical property.
Through their long history the echinoderms have never left the sea, but within their preferred medium they have adopted most of the life habits available to marine organisms.
They include grazers, feeding on simple plants, scavengers, mud eaters, filter-feeders extracting microorganisms from currents, and some efficient and versatile hunters.
Like other marine organisms they have a planktonic larval stage that assists their dispersal, but almost all adult echinoderms lead a bottom dwelling  existence; a few sea lilies have successfully cast off their anchorage to the sea floor and become widespread swimmers.
The echinoderms are such a varied and important group that the different kinds have to be considered separately.
I should add that some of the most interesting echinoderms are also some of the rarest — peculiar, plated animals that do not fit comfortably into the array of living forms.
Many of these occur in the Cambrian — it is as if the echinoderms tried out various designs before settling for the successful models that mostly survive today.
The echinoderms are a phylum closely allied to the Chordates — including the vertebrates, and both phyla probably have a common ancestor in the Precambrian.
SEA LILIES — CLASS CRINOIDEA, AND OTHER STEMMED ECHINODERMS (Colour plates 22, 23, 24)
Crinoids are abundant and important fossils from the Ordovician to the Tertiary.
They are still abundant at present, although a little less common in shallow water sites than they were in the Palaeozoic and Mesozoic, but they are conspicuous and varied components of deep water faunas.
The great majority of the group have long stalks, which are anchored to the bottom.
The main part of the animal consists of a cup (or calyx ) to which the stalk is attached at its upper end, and from the top of the calyx stretch long arms, which are five in number or more usually a multiple of five.
The arms are often repeatedly branched.
The distal parts of the arms carry fine pinnules , which are instrumental in gathering the fine, water-borne food such as micro-organisms on which the animal feeds.
Since crinoids often occur together in large numbers ('gardens') with their arms waving in the currents, it is easy to see how they came to acquire their botanical analogy.
Food grooves in the arms channel the food to the mouth, which lies in the centre of the calyx.
Stem, calyx, and arms are all made of calcite plates.
The stems are often common fossils, even when the calyx cannot be found — many of the ‘crinoidal limestones’ are composed largely of stem debris.
The individual plates of the stem slot together like a stack of coins; they are termed ossicles .
These can be round, or five-sided, up to a centimetre or so across, and have a small hole in their centre; the stems can look like corals to the casual observer, but where they are broken they show the typical echinoderm reflective surfaces.
Detailed classification of the crinoids is based principally on the way the calcite plates are arranged on the calyx with the number and branching patterns of the arms, the external sculpture on the calyx, and important internal features of the cup connected with the nervous and respiratory systems.
In detail they are a very complicated group.
Complete specimens of fossil crinoids are rather rare, and deserve pride of place in anyone's collection.
Complete cups are more common — many of them were evidently rigid, and they are easily preserved as fossils.
There are famous examples where whole ‘gardens’ seem to have been preserved, with the arms frozen, as it were, in motion, and even the roots at the base of the stems in place.
Crinoid,Onychocrinus exsculptus from the Carboniferous ( Mississipian ).
The species is preserved in relief in limestone, which is very fine grained, and retains many fine details.
The long stem of this crinoid, with a small cup at the top, and stout arms composed of easily visible calcite plates, these first arms themselves dividing, are some of the more important characteristics of this species.
There are numerous Carboniferous crinoids not unlike this one, which require expert knowledge in their discrimination.
This specimen is from Illinois, USA, but forms related to it may be found in Carboniferous limestones in many areas.
The specimen is 15 cm long.
The crinoids have had an eventful geological history.
True crinoids are doubtfully known before the Ordovician, but once established they diversified rapidly in the manner we have seen repeatedly with other groups.
They soon spread to a variety of habitats, but in the Palaeozoic they were conspicuously abundant in relatively shallow environments.
The most mouthwatering specimens tend to be found in limestones — famous sites are in the Silurian rocks of England and  Mississipian rocks of the U.S.A. The group as a whole had a   major crisis in the Permian, during which most of the Palaeozoic forms died out.
A very few of these survived into the Triassic.
In the Mesozoic there was another great radiation of the crinoids, the typical forms having flexible arms, and it is crinoids of this kind that survive today.
Some of the most famous crinoidal deposits are of Jurassic age, and marvellous specimens have been collected from the Lias rocks of Britain and Germany.
A new and successful innovation was the evolution of stemless crinoids — some of these acquired pelagic habits, and during the Cretaceous the genera Marsupites and Uintacrinus (see p.79) were widespread enough to be useful marker fossils.
Some of these stemless forms developed grappling hooks at the base of the calyx — with these they can attach in a favourable site, and move when conditions become adverse.
Such feather stars are very numerous in some reef habitats today.
The long and varied history of the crinoids demonstrates how well the echinoderms have attacked the problems of filter-feeding.
The stemless crinoid Uintacrinus , widespread during the Cretaceous.
Natural size.
Fossil crinoid (sea lily),Dizygocrinus montgomeryensis,Carboniferous ( Mississipian ).
The specimen is unusually complete for a fossil sea lily, and lies on a fine-grained limestone.
There is a certain amount of crushing of the cup beneath the arms.
The stem is broken off.
Note the fine, thread-like pinnules attached to the arms — used by the animal to trap food particles — and the thin and flexible stem.
There are quite a large number of species in Carboniferous and Permian rocks which resemble the species illustrated here This species is from the limestones of Keokuk, Iowa, USA.
The arms of this specimen have a length of about 4 cm.
Blastoid,Pentremites spicatus,Carboniferous ( Mississipian ).
The specimen is preserved in its original calcite; its lack of distortion may be seen from its perfect five-fold symmetry.
The five finely striated food grooves, which in this view occupy much of the surface of the animal, are typical of the blastoid.
The name ‘blastoid’ is derived from the Greek for ‘bud’because of the resemblance of the animal to a flower bud.
Pentremites is a large genus with many species in limestone of Carboniferous age, particularly in the  Mississipian limestones of North America.
This specimen is from Grayson co., Kentucky, USA.
Similar species occur in North and South America, and related genera almost worldwide The specimen has a diameter of 3 cm.
In the Palaeozoic rocks there were other stalked filter-feeding echinoderms, which failed to survive the crisis at the end of the Permian, weathered by the crinoids.
These extinct groups can exceed crinoids in number and variety at certain horizons, and they were evidently competing on equal terms.
The blastoids (class Blastoidea) had compact cups up to a few centimetres long, with five broad food grooves running down the sides (lacking crinoid arms).
In life the food grooves were flanked by lines of delicate armlets (brachioles ) which served to gather the food.
Blastoids are sometimes abundant fossils in rocks (usually limestone) of Silurian to early Permian age, and their perfect, compact pentameral symmetry makes their calices among the most attractive of fossils.
Like crinoids they evidently grew in gardens, for their remains (especially in Carboniferous rocks) tend to occur packed together in thousands.
Cystoids (class Cystoidea) are even odder animals: often rather irregular bags of calcite plates, or if composed of a few plates these may carry powerful ribbing.
The five-fold symmetry is often hard to detect in the calyx as a whole, although five food grooves are usually developed.
They are a primitive, but very interesting, group with Cambrian origins, and reached their greatest variety in the Ordovician.
Some of them evidently lacked a stem, and must have lain loosely on the bottom.
There are several more groups of odd echinoderms in the Lower Palaeozoic rocks — some of them only recently discovered, like the bizarre helicoplacoids, which look like nothing so much as spinning tops (see p. 84).
All are of the greatest interest, and any plated animal from the Cambrian is likely to be an important specimen.
Sometimes these early forms are found as moulds — the original calcite having dissolved away.
The external moulds then present a characteristic appearance, like the impression of a mosaic pressed into the rock.
It is well worth keeping a   special watch for fossils of this kind when hunting in Cambrian localities — it is still perfectly possible to discover a completely new kind of echinoderm!
18 Eocene gastropod,Voluta muricina .
The species is beautifully preserved, retaining something of its original lustre, and all the fine details of its ornament.
It is distinguished by its tall spire, elongate aperture, prominent spines, but without the spiral ridges seen on many species.
The specimen here is from Epernay in France, and related forms can be found in Eocene clays over much of Europe.
Length, 7 cm.
19 Carboniferous goniatite Goniatites crenistria , Derbyshire England.
This handsome goniatite is an internal mould preserved in limestone.
The mould reveals the suture lines which in goniatites have a distinctive zigzag form.
The aperture is broken off along one such suture, giving the specimen a pointed margin.
The last whorl conceals most of the earlier ones.
Diameter 5 cm.
20 Ammonite,Kosmoceras acutistriatum , Jurassic, Wiltshire, England.
This ammonite occurs in a fine-grained grey shale, but has been severely flattened.
The original lustre of the shell has been retained.
This species is particularly distinctive because of the extended flanges at its apertural margin (lappets ).
Longest diameter of this specimen is 9 cm, but some forms grow larger.
21 The heteromorph ammonite,Scaphites nodosus , Cretaceous, Badlands, South Dakota, USA.
This species retains much of its original shell, giving it a beautiful pearly lustre.
This is one of the later ammonites, in which the normal ammonite plane spiral has begun to ‘unwind’ in various ways.
This species has a distinctive combination of fine ribbing and coarse tubercles.
Long diameter of this specimen 8 cm; smaller examples are perhaps commoner.
22 Blastoid,Pentremites robustus , Carboniferous ( Mississipian ), Illinois, USA.
The specimen is preserved in its original calcite with only the slightest compression.
The view shown is from the side.
The length of the illustrated specimen is 4 cm.
In some localities blastoids like this one break easily out of the enclosing matrix, or are weathered out in considerable numbers.
23 The Silurian cystoid,Pseudocrinites magnificus , Wenlock limestone, England.
The calcite skeleton of this species is preserved in a grey limestone-shale matrix.
The individual calcite plates of which the fossil is composed can be clearly seen.
The stem is composed of a number of rings.
This rare and peculiar fossil looks rather like a sea-lily without arms, and has more than a passing resemblance to a tennis racket!
It has a length of 5 cm.
24 Triassic crinoid,Encrinus liliiformis .
The calcite of this species is preserved with a gloss on the surface, in a matrix of slightly cavernous limestone, which is composed of many broken fragments of other fossils.
Encrinus is typical of the marine limestones of the Triassic of Europe.
This specimen is from the Muschelkalk of Germany.
Total length 18 cm.
25 Cidaroid sea urchin,Plegiocidaris coronata , Jurassic, Ulm, Germany.
Two beautiful examples of this sea urchin are illustrated preserved in a fine-grained limestone in full relief.
Note however, that the stout spines are not preserved on these specimens.
Plegiocidaris is found in Triassic and Jurassic rocks of Europe.
The specimens have 5 cm diameter.
26 Jurassic sea urchin,Hemicidaris intermedia , Wiltshire, England.
This specimen is exceptionally well-preserved, retaining its spines where they fell around the animal as it died.
The matrix is a yellow limestone.
The long spines of this species are characteristic — they resemble lances used in medieval jousting.
Note the prominent articulating tubercles, like those of other cidaroids.
The longest spine on this specimen has a length of 7 cm.
27 Sea urchin,Tylocidaris clavigera , Cretaceous, Gravesend, England.
Magnificently preserved in its original calcite in a matrix of chalk, this specimen is unusual because it has the spines still joined to the rest of the animal.
The ferocious-looking spines, which seem almost too large for the central animal, are mostly attached, but one or two have come adrift.
8 cm across.
28 Spatangoid sea urchin,Micraster coranguinum Cretaceous.
This specimen is preserved in its original calcite.
It is frequently found also as siliceous internal moulds.
Micraster is sometimes called the heart urchin, because of its distinctive shape.
Most specimens have a length of 5–7 cm.
29 Sea urchin,Schizaster canatifera , Pliocene, Perpignan, France.
The specimen is perfectly preserved — retaining even the finest details of its external surface.
But the fine fuzz of tiny spines that covered it in life are not present.
This species looks rather like the heart urchin but the petal-like areas are much more deeply sunken, the forward pair very short.
Related species are worldwide.
It is 8 cm long.
30 Fossil starfish,Archastropecten cotteswoldiae , Jurassic, Gloucestershire, England.
The original calcite of the starfish is stained slightly yellow on the surface.
The specimen occurs in a fine-grained limestone, one which fortunately splits easily around the enclosed fossils.
This species has a small central disc, and long, slender arms.
A related genus,Astropecten , occurs in Tertiary rocks, and survives today.
Maximum diameter 7 cm.
31 Carpoid,Cothurnocystis evae , Ordovician, Ayrshire, Scotland.
This curious species is preserved in a fine-grained sandstone as an external mould — that is, all the original shell material has been dissolved away, but this still allows an accurate view of the original organism, especially if an artificial cast is taken from the natural mould.
The greatest length of this specimen is 4 cm.
Fossil brittle (serpent) star,(Palaeocoma egertoni , Jurassic Lias, England.
A beautiful species preserved in an impure limestone.
The limestone was deposited in very quiet water conditions, which accounts for the preservation of this delicate little fossil.
The long slender arms are flexible, unlike the starfish shown previously.
Other localities for brittle stars include Miocene rocks in Maryland, USA.
Maximum diameter 8 cm.
Permian blastoid,Deltoblastus delta .
These beautifully preserved little blastoids are stained slightly, because of iron compounds.
The slender stems, like those of the crinoids are not preserved here.
Compared with the other blastoids in this book the food grooves are very long, extending almost to the base of the animal, and occupying much of its surface area.
This species may be one of the last of this kind of echinoderm, which did not survive beyond the Permian.
This rare species is unlikely to fall into the hands of the amateur, being from a unique echinoderm fauna in the Permian rocks of Amanoebang Province, Indonesia.
The largest specimen here does not greatly exceed 2 cm in length.
SEA URCHINS — CLASS ECHINOIDEA (Colour plates 25–29)
Anyone who has waded into the clear blue waters of the Mediterranean without proper footwear may have encountered the protective covering of the sea urchins.
Many of the living echinoids are protected by spines, some sharp and breaking off easily into the unwary foot, others stout and clublike; a few groups have taken to burrowing into sediment, and the spines have become small and felt-like.
Under the spines there is a test composed of hundreds of calcite plates.
Of course there is no stem — the sea urchins are self-propelled.
Looking more closely at the arrangement of the calcite plates the fivefold symmetry is still in evidence — in this group there are five areas of finer plates (ambulacra ) radiating from the centre.
Under a lens these small plates show perforations, and during life the tiny tube feet passed through these to assist the animal in locomotion.
The perfect polygonal joinery of all the plates is a striking feature of the echinoid test.
Some sea urchins are almost spherical, with large strong plates looking rather like shields with a boss in the centre.
These kinds of sea urchins carry the stoutest of spines attached to the bosses.
Many living sea urchins have undergone a modification of the pentameral symmetry typical of the rest of the echinoderms — they have become bilateral again.
Perhaps this is not surprising in animals that are accustomed to moving in a particular direction — they need a front and a back.
In burrowing forms the mouth moves to one (forward) side and the anus to the back, which is obviously a sensible arrangement.
Some species have become greatly flattened like the living sand dollar, which has a covering of very fine spines and can bury itself in sand with remarkable speed.
The sea urchins are among the most efficient scavengers in the sea-hence their somewhat unsavoury association with human effluvia.
They also include species that eat their way through enormous quantities of sediment, extracting edible particles from it, and in the process reprocessing all the sediment; some of the fossil heart urchins probably had this habit (see p. 128).
These vacuum cleaners of the sea are vital in preventing fouling of the marine environment.
Species with club-shaped spines include active hunters (although they tend to hunt sluggish animals like other sea urchins) and they have powerful jaws on the lower side of the animal that can munch their way through a sand dollar as if it were a biscuit.
Some urchins use their jaws to make burrows in solid rock.
Like other major echinoderm groups the geological record of the sea urchins goes back to the Ordovician.
In my experience they are generally rare fossils in the Palaeozoic, but as so often with echinoderms there are localities where large numbers of specimens can be recovered from a bedding plane or two.
They must have been gregarious from the start.
The early sea urchins tend to have rather a large number of plates in a much less regular mosaic than their later relatives.
By the end of the Palaeozoic, echinoids with club-shaped spines and beautifully regular tests had become well-established, and their distant descendants survive today.
It was in the Mesozoic that a really considerable proliferation of urchins occurred, and they acquired the importance in the marine economy that they retain.
They are abundant in Jurassic and Cretaceous rocks, represented both by the spherical spiny forms, and some of those with bilateral symmetry.
Isolated spines are common fossils, and useful ones too, because their patterns vary from species to species.
Some of the burrowing forms have left their burrows behind as well.
In England sea urchins are especially easy to collect from the Cretaceous chalk, where they have been used as one of the fossils for dating the rocks.
STARFISH — CLASS STELLEROIDEA (Colour plates 30, 32)
The starfish are among the most important of invertebrate predators living today.
They make major depredations on oyster beds and the recent activities of the ‘Crown of Thorns’ starfish (Acanthaster ) in chewing up great chunks of the Great Barrier Reef have become a modern ecological object lesson (and, incidentally, a source of funds for many marine biologists).
There are two major kinds of starfish (which may not be closely related)— the familiar large, stiff-armed asteroids , and the delicate ophiuroids , brittle stars, with lithe, slender, snake-like arms radiating from a circular central disc.
Ophiuroids are especially abundant in deep sea environments, and it is unusual for a deep sea dredge to miss one of these small animals.
Asteroids often have five arms, but many species have more — up to about forty.
Although they are common today starfish are not generally common fossils, but as so often with echinoderms, they seem to be local in occurrence.
Their remains are commoner from the Mesozoic onwards, and at some levels, as in the Cretaceous chalk, they can be found in considerable numbers.
Their history goes back at least to the Ordovician, although some of the Palaeozoic asteroids are distantly related, if at all, to the living species.
Ophiuroids have fossil representatives as old as Carboniferous.
Cassiduloid sea urchin,Pygurus costatus , Jurassic.
The species is preserved without flattening in a hard limestone, which fills the interior of the specimen.
This species looks rather like a bun, but not highly convex, and with a five-sided outline.
The five ambulacral areas — like the petals of a flower — are clearly visible.
They are not sunken into hollows as on many echinoids This genus and its allies are quite commonly found in Jurassic and Cretaceous rocks.
This species is from the Corallian rocks of England, but its relatives occur in Europe, North America and Africa.
This specimen has a diameter of 8 cm.
Related species often grow to twice the diameter.
Jurassic echinoids in this sort of preservation in hard limestones are often difficult to clean.
Sometimes the natural processes of erosion will etch a perfect specimen.
THE CARPOIDS — ECHINODERMS OR CHORDATES?
(Colour plate 31)
One of the oddest groups of animals covered with calcite plates are known as carpoids (occasionally referred to as calcichordates).
Although they have been known for many years their evolutionary position is still hotly debated.
They lack any pretence of five-fold symmetry, some are bilaterally symmetrical, but others have no obvious plane of symmetry at all, a most unusual thing for any animal.
They appear to have a stem: could they be related to the crinoids?
But the ‘stem’ tapers out to a point, and in some cases had a whip-like flexibility; the same structure has been interpreted as a ‘tail’.
Similar kinds of arguments can be applied to different parts of these extraordinary fossils.
Internally they are really quite complicated, and some possess lobes and channels incised within the plates strikingly similar to the appearance of the brain and nerves in some fishes.
Some authorities  have suggested that the carpoids may include ancestors of particular chordates.
They have a record going well back into the Cambrian, when it might be supposed that the chordates were undergoing a major diversification.
Regardless of whether they include direct ancestors or not, the carpoids do serve to demonstrate the likelihood of evolutionary links between chordates — including vertebrates — and the echinoderms.
Carpoids are rare fossils ranging from the Cambrian to the Devonian, when they disappeared completely — unless their descendants live on in one of the chordate groups.
Starfish,Crateraster coombi , Cretaceous.
The starfish is preserved in soft white chalk, which fills in the interior of the animal.
The individual calcite plates can be clearly seen.
This starfish has a broad central disc, and slender arms.
They are stout plates around the perimeter, but tiny-plates in the central part of the animal.
Starfish are uncommon fossils, particularly in this state of completeness, since they easily break into their component plates.
A few species generally resembling this one occur in Jurassic and Cretaceous rocks.
This specimen is from Kent, England, but similar forms occur in the chalk over Europe and in Cretaceous rocks in North America.
Related forms survive today.
The specimen measures 10 cm across its longest diameter.
THE ARTHROPODS — PHYLUM ARTHROPODA
There are more living arthropod species than all other phyla combined; if diversity is a measure of success then the arthropods are the easy winners.
Arthropods are those animals with an external, usually ‘chitinous’ skeleton (exoskeleton ) and have characteristic legs, feelers, etc., with joints to give them flexibility (arthropod is derived from the  Greek for ‘jointed leg’).
They have bodies divided into segments, and their legs and jaws are arranged in pairs.
They are mostly small and there is a good physiological reason for this: gigantism is mechanically difficult for animals with external skeletons, and above a certain size it is difficult to get enough oxygen into the organism to sustain activity.
Despite this one limitation the arthropods have the most varied habits and habitats of any phylum: they can be found anywhere on land, sea or in the air.
They inhabit the driest parts of the desert and the deepest parts of the ocean with equal facility.
This is partly due to the flexibility of the external skeleton — it can be modified into wings, fortified into claws, sealed against searing heat, or turned into eye lenses.
Segmentation, too, has proved very versatile; individual pairs of legs, or appendages, can be specialized for particular functions without affecting the routine business of locomotion taken by the others; appendages are modified for feeding in a host of ways, for grasping, swimming, spinning, copulating, cleaning or camouflaging.
And their small size enables tiny arthropods, some almost too  small to see with the naked eye, to live in crannies, within the soil, between sand grains, and the like.
They are truly ubiquitous.
Helicoplacoid — a peculiar and puzzling Cambrian echinoderm
Tube of polychaete worm, Rotularia bognoriensis, Eocene.
Serpulid tubes are preserved here in a siltstone, with parts of the original shell material adhering.
The same piece of rock also includes internal moulds of gastropods and bivalves.
Worm tubes like these may, at first sight, be confused with gastropod molluscs.
The irregularity of the tubes, which become straight near their apertures, distinguishes them from snail shells.
Serpulid worm tubes are found in many different sediment types in rocks of Mesozoic and Tertiary age.
Some species are very tiny, and encrust other shells.
This species is from Bognor, England, but related forms occur the world over.
Overall length of specimens about 3 cm.
Cambrian trilobite,Wanneria walcottana , preserved on a fine sandstone, with a certain amount of crushing.
This is one of the most primitive trilobites known.
The crescent-shaped eyes are attached to the middle part of the head.
There are a number of similar species from early Cambrian rocks distinguished on the size of the eyes and details of the thorax.
The specimen has a length of 10 cm.
They are also an ancient group, since obvious arthropods, of primitive kinds, can be found in the earliest of Cambrian rocks.
At this time, of course, they were wholly marine.
They were probably derived from some sort of segmented worm (annelid)— a few scientists adopt the view that different arthropods may have come from different and separate worms, independently, which became ‘arthropodized’ by acquiring an external skeleton.
With certain exceptions, the fossil record of the arthropods is not commensurate with their diversity today, and their probable diversity in the past.
Some forms have delicate exterior skeletons that are only preserved under exceptional circumstances (see p. 16).
Many terrestrial forms simply did not live in environments in which preservation was possible.
So the record of the group as a whole is a bit patchy, with ‘jumps’ in time between one fossil find and the next.
Some groups, those with good, solid (and especially calcified) hard parts are frequent and important fossils, with an unparalleled record.
A brief summary of the arthropods cannot do justice to all the fascinating specialized groups — sea spiders and mites for example— that have an incomplete fossil record.
We shall concentrate on the arthropods with the best fossil record.
Some of these are common enough to dominate fossil assemblages, and they are among the most attractive of the common invertebrate groups.
TRILOBITES — CLASS TRILOBITA (Colour plates 33, 34, 36, 43)
The North American Indians had a name for trilobites that meant ‘little water bug in the rocks’, which shows extraordinary zoological acuity.
The trilobites were one of the dominant forms of marine life in the Lower Palaeozoic, known from thousands of different species and found in every continent.
Not surprisingly they were among the first fossils to attract widespread attention.
They have a high degree of organization and a variety of form that shows how quickly the arthropods were able to exploit the advantages of their external skeleton.
All trilobites  are divided lengthways into three lobes — hence their name.
They can also be divided crossways into three regions, a well-defined head (cephalon ) at the front, usually equipped with a pair of eyes, a thorax with a variable number of articulated segments, and at the back end a tail (or pygidium ) formed by the fusion of several segments.
The parts of the animal we find fossilized are usually only the carapace, the hard parts that formed a protective covering on the back of the animal.
If we could have turned over a living trilobite we would have seen an array of jointed legs on the underside, and flexible antennae.
The traces of these appendages are preserved in exceptional circumstances, so we do know that trilobites had walking legs gills, antennae, and the bases of the legs modified into primitive jaws in some species.
The appendage pairs are generally similar along the length of animal.
Few examples of complete trilobites are known and for the most part we have to be content with the exterior skeleton.
Photograph of ‘happy buttons’ taken through the lenses of the eye of the trilobite Phacops (see p. 87) of Devonian age.
Cambrian trilobite,Elrathia kingi .
This trilobite has been preserved in a curious way: the original shell has been thickened by mineral growth, still of calcite, to give the fossil a distinctive, medallion-like appearance This trilobite has a large number of wide thoracic segments, not greatly convex.
The tail is wide, well-segmented.
The inflated middle part of the head tapers forwards This species occurs in great numbers in the Wheeler Shale of Utah, USA.
Related species occur over a much wider area around the margin of North America and in Europe.
Complete specimens are usually ½-3 cm long.
They are sold in rock shops and souvenir centres, often mounted into jewellery.
Moulting in trilobites; breakup of the exoskeleton into several pieces helped the animal shed its old carapace
The great variety of form of the hard parts surely shows that trilobites were adapted to a wide range of habitats and life styles.
We know that they could live in extremely shallow to very deep-water environments, that most lived on or near the sea bottom, but a few were adapted to open-ocean swimming.
They probably had a variety of different habits, some no doubt were scavengers, others sediment grazers, and it seems probable that some trilobites were also active hunters, pursuing worms and other soft-bodied prey, which they shredded using the spines on the base of their legs.
The eyes of trilobites include some very sophisticated structures that show they were far from primitive visually.
Many species have thousands of lenses — like a fly's eye — which were very sensitive to detecting any movements in their field of view.
Others had fewer lenses of remarkably efficient construction; photographs have actually been taken (p. 86) using these ancient lenses in a camera — and they still focus precisely after 400 million years or so.
The lenses, like the rest of the exoskeleton, are made of calcite.
Trinucleid trilobite,Trinucleus fimbriatus , Ordovician.
An extraordinary little trilobite looking like an ancient medallion, preserved in shale, with some of its original exoskeleton retained, coloured by iron compounds.
Trinucleid trilobites are blind, and with a greatly inflated mid-part of the head region.
Around the perimeter of the head there is a pitted fringe, which is unique to this kind of arthropod.
Trinucleid trilobites, with various types of fringe, are characteristic of Ordovician rocks.
There are more than 100 species.
This species is from Builth, Wales.
While perhaps commonest in Europe (Wales, Scotland, Sweden, Norway, Czechoslovakia), trinucleids are also known from North America (Virginia, Nevada and various localities in Canada), North Africa and South America.
Specimens do not usually exceed 2½ cm in length.
Trilobites vary in length from a millimetre or two to fifty centimetres or more — the ‘average’ trilobite is 5 cm or so long.
It is actually rather unusual to find a complete trilobite as a fossil — usually they are in pieces.
Trilobites, like most arthropods, grew by moulting (casting off the old carapace and growing a new, larger one) and many of the bits we find are probably the ‘cast offs’ and not the dead animal.
During moulting the head split into several pieces along special sutures , the thorax often parted into its individual segments and the tail was displaced (see p. 86).
The early moults, ‘baby trilobites’, have been discovered.
Some trilobites lost their eyes, probably those that burrowed in mud or lived in lightless parts of the ocean.
Many trilobites could enroll when threatened, just like the living woodlouse some of them even evolved locking devices to make their enrollment really secure.
In some places you can find dozens of enrolled trilobites together; these are the remains of the animals themselves, not the moults, which presumably perished together after a fruitless attempt to protect themselves from a miniature catastrophe such as a sudden influx of sediment.
Typical trilobites of several kinds are present in the earliest Cambrian rocks; they must have had late Precambrian ancestors, but of these nothing is known.
They swarmed in the Cambrian seas, outnumbering all other invertebrates in most localities.
The trilobites evolved rapidly, and can therefore be used extensively in the dating of rocks at this time.
They continued to proliferate in the Ordovician, although many of the Cambrian kinds had died out; in terms of the variety of forms present this period was perhaps their heyday.
Several kinds of trilobite failed to survive the end of the Ordovician, but other trilobites were still conspicuous during the Silurian and Devonian.
Only a few major groups survived into the Carboniferous, but they can still be locally  abundant.
The last trilobites are found in Permian rocks, and before the Triassic they had disappeared forever.
We might perhaps hope that one species lingered on, like the brachiopod Lingla , in some inaccessible part of the sea, but as even the deep sea faunas become well-known this possibility is fading.
Since many of the extremely ancient rocks in which trilobites can be found are folded or otherwise distorted their remains can often be found twisted or fractured.
But in other sites, particularly in limestones, they can be found with every fine skeletal detail preserved.
The many different kinds are distinguished by the nature of the segmentation, particularly in the head region, the structure of the thorax and pygidium, the size, position and structure of the eyes, the development of the moulting sutures, and the surface patterns on the exterior of the exoskeleton.
New trilobites are being discovered every year, and there is always the possibility of finding one with its legs preserved!
Asaphid trilobite,Isotelus gigas , Ordovician.
This fine, large trilobite is preserved in relief in a limestone — a common mode of preservation for North American Ordovician trilobites.
A ‘smoothed out’ trilobite, with the head of similar size and shape to the tail, and only eight thoracic segments (contrast the Cambrian trilobites in this book).
The eyes are small.
Asaphid trilobites of many species are common in rocks of Ordovician age.
Many grew to an impressive size.
Isotelus is typical of the North American continent, where it occurs in many localities.
Other asaphids occur in most countries of Europe, especially Norway and Sweden, and widely in Asia and Australia.
This specimen has a length of 9 cm.
CRABS, LOBSTERS, SHRIMPS AND THEIR ALLIES — CLASS CRUSTACEA (Colour plates 39, 41)
The seas today swarm with crustacean arthropods ranging in size from the tiniest krill in the surface waters to giant bottom-living crabs with a reach like that of a man.
The majority of crustacea have appendages that are specialized to do different jobs along the length of the animal — some for grasping, some for swimming and so on.
Most smaller crustacea have exoskeletons that are rather delicate, and for this reason the fossil record of the shrimps, for example, is somewhat incomplete.
Undoubted crustaceans are found in rocks as old as Cambrian, at which time free-swimming species were living happily alongside the trilobites.
It is not until the Carboniferous that we start to find evidence of a variety of forms including the putative ancestors of some of the living dominant groups.
Crabs and lobsters have the thickest exoskeleton of all the group — one like that of the trilobites reinforced with calcium carbonate — and the fossil record of this important group (only a small part of the whole class however) is much better.
Lobster-like animals are found as far back as the Triassic, and both crabs and lobsters are frequent and appealing fossils in Cretaceous and Tertiary rocks.
The group was hardly set back at all by the major extinction at the end of the Cretaceous, and has never been more varied than it is today.
The most highly  specialized crustacea are probably the barnacles (Cirripedia) and individual barnacle plates are rather commonly encountered in rocks of Cretaceous age and younger.
Finally the diminutive, bivalved ostracods are important and abundant fossils, which we will consider with other microfossils in Chapter 8.
SPIDERS, SCORPIONS, SEA SCORPIONS, HORSESHOE CRABS — CLASS CHELICERATA (Colour plates 37, 38, 40)
This large and varied group of arthropods includes the giants of the phylum, as well as tiny spiders hardly visible to the unaided eye.
They are classified together because of basic similarities in the appendages, even though they have diversified into very different-looking creatures living equally happily on land and in the sea.
Predatory habits are typical, and many species have specialized clutching appendages, or stinging organs.
None of the group is especially common as fossils, but they make up for their general rarity by their interest.
Most spectacular are the sea scorpions (eurypterids), which include arthropods as large as any that have lived (two.metres or more in length).
Appendages in the ‘head’ region often include powerful claws, and it does not take much imagination to conclude that these eurypterids were among the fiercest predators of their day.
They were prominent in the Silurian and Devonian, where they can be found with the fish-like animals that abounded in the fresh- and brackish water deposits of the time, although some of the Ordovician ones are in marine sediments.
Some of the eurypterids may even have made tentative excursions on to the land.
They are also probably the earliest animals in which two sexes can be certainly identified.
The eurypterids are probably allied to the scorpions, which originated in the Silurian or even earlier, and successfully made the transition from the aqueous environment to land.
They are abundant enough today in warmer climates to be a serious cause of death in some countries.
Perhaps it was the transition to land that enabled the scorpions to survive beyond the Palaeozoic, which saw the end of the sea scorpions.
Spiders are known as far back as the Carboniferous, but their remains are principally known fossilized from the Tertiary ambers, where perfectly preserved specimens retain even the hairs on the legs.
The Horseshoe Crab (Limulus ) is one of the most celebrated of ‘living fossils’, and it is a genuine survivor having changed little in 150 million years (see p. 91).
It is the last of the merostomes the group of fossil horseshoe crabs that were varied and numerous in the coal swamps of the Carboniferous and have a history that extends back to the Cambrian.
Why Limulus alone should have survived is something of a mystery.
It appears to have rather generalized habits, feeding on everything from worms to clams, which it can crush with its powerful appendages, using the bases of its legs like nutcrackers.
It can swim, flipped over on to its boat-like carapace, or crawl.
Presumably its ancestors were not so different when they shared the marine habitat with the trilobites.
Below left Fossil spider,Eomysmena moritura , Oligocene.
This is another amber specimen, exquisitely preserved in its entirety.
It is an important and rare specimen.
This species has a short and fat abdomen, which preserves something of its original light colour.
The legs are shorter than those of the other spider in this book, and the four pairs are clearly visible.
This fossil specimen is probably unique.
There are species living today related to this fossil species.
This specimen was obtained from the Baltic bays.
The spider is just over ½cm long
Below Fossil swimming crab,Notopocorystes broderipi , Cretaceous.
This crab is preserved in a rather soft clay, which makes it more fragile than the other crabs in this book.
The crab has a longer body than the other species shown here, and the legs are flattened and held away from the carapace.
There are a number of species generally similar to this one in rocks of Cretaceous and younger age.
This specimen is from Folkestone, England.
Length of the carapace is 2½ cm, but the species grows to more than twice this size.
INSECTS — CLASS INSECTA (Colour plates 35, 44, 45)
The insects — flies, butterflies, beetles, ants, fleas, bugs, dragonflies, grasshoppers, aphids, wasps, etc. — are the most varied and numerous of the arthropods both in numbers of species and individuals.
They are also the most perfectly adapted of terrestrial organisms, inhibited neither by extremes of climate nor altitude.
If this book were written in proportion to the number of species in the group the rest of it would have to be devoted to the insects.
But the fossil record of the insects is far from perfect — very sporadic and selective.
Where insects are preserved they seem to occur in large numbers and in variety, so that a few famous localities have yielded a disproportionate number of the fossil species.
Insects are fragile and easily damaged, and it is not surprising that they are sometimes destroyed completely.
Many species live, and presumably lived in the past, in inland or upland sites where little sediment accumulates.
Naturally the commonest insect fossils are the most durable parts, like the wing cases (elytra ) of the beetles.
But their small size also means that insect fossils are easily overlooked and they may be more common than is supposed.
The best sites are in rocks originating from sediments that accumulated in quiet, freshwater sites — lake bottoms, peat bogs and the like and they are generally rarer in marine facies.
Fossil crab,Xanthopsis rugosus , Eocene.
This specimen comes from a clay; the best specimens often occur in slightly harder, nodular layers within the clay.
Two strong furrows run across the back of the carapace of this crab, which is knobbly, and, on a fine scale, covered with minute pits.
As with Palaeocarpilius powerful claws are held close to the body, like the living shore crab.
A number of Xanthopsis species are one of the characteristic crabs of Eocene deposits.
This specimen was obtained from a tunnel under London!
Similar specimens are to be obtained from elsewhere in southern England, in France, and in the USA.
Diameter of the carapace 6 cm.
Most insects have six legs in three pairs, and are equipped with wings (a number of primitive forms are wingless).
The early evolutionary stages of development of wings are still in question they may have developed from outgrowths of exoskeleton from the body that assisted gliding initially, and then acquired a propulsive function.
In any case winged insects were well established by the Carboniferous, when some of the giant ‘dragonflies’(not really a close relative of the living species) had a wingspan of tens of centimetres.
No doubt many of the crucial steps in insect evolution took place during the Devonian, but of this phase of insect history there is very little record.
In the Carboniferous and Permian the insects were highly diverse, and there is still debate over how closely these forms are related to our living fauna: some forms, like the cockroaches, undoubtedly have a long history.
Flight gave the insects the chance to exploit habitats previously vacant, and unrivalled dispersal.
The extraordinary flexibility of the group has meant singular problems in their classification, but certain characteristics, like the structure of the mouthparts or the wing vein patterns serve to define major subdivisions.
During the Mesozoic some of the most important types of insects still living  — like the butterflies originated.
Butterflies have an intimate relationship with flowering plants, which they pollinate, and themselves derive nourishment from the nectar.
It is difficult to imagine a butterfly without a plant to feed on, and we have to assume that both the plants and the appropriate pollinators diversified together.
Other kinds of insects besides butterflies have used the nectar of plants for a livelihood, including bees and some flies.
The living horseshoe crab,Limulus ; compare with Fig. 38.
The fossil record of insects is at its best from Tertiary deposits, where amber, the fossil resin of coniferous trees in which insects became entrapped, yield great numbers of exquisitely preserved specimens.
Even the most delicate are present.
The oldest amber is Cretaceous.
The fossil remains of beetles, including the hard elytra, have been extensively used in the interpretation of the climatic history of the Pleistocene ice advances and retreats, because the species of beetle present in peat deposits change in harmony with the climatic fluctuations.
PHYLUM CHORDATA
The chordates include the dominant living animals, if you measure dominance by size, or the capacity to alter the world.
Man is a chordate.
The phylum at the present is dominated by its more advanced members — the vertebrates.
But in the Cambrian or earlier the chordates no doubt included animals little more highly organized than the contemporary arthropods or brachiopods.
A few of these survive.
The lancelet,Branchiostoma , one of the standard laboratory animals for dissection, is a primitive chordate (there is a single fossil lancelet from the Middle Cambrian).
Hardly anything is known about the fossils from the earliest history of the phylum, possibly because the early chordates lacked hard parts, unless the enigmatic carpoids belong here.
The acquisition of a skeleton of calcium phosphate marked the point at which the fossil record began to contribute to the history of the group which, from our selfish viewpoint, we are conditioned to think of lying at the pinnacle of all evolutionary trees.
Curiously enough the use of phosphatic material to build hard parts is generally primitive — calcium phosphate shells are nowhere more numerous than in the earliest Cambrian.
All chordates have a nerve chord running along the back, and all higher chordates were derived from forms with gill slits.
We are mostly concerned with the history of the vertebrates.
Once the vertebrates were established they quickly acquired hard parts displaying great complexity when compared with most invertebrate phyla (we should except the arthropods, perhaps).
So it is possible to deduce more about the course of evolution from the study of vertebrate  skeletal remains than is possible with most invertebrate groups, but even now, many mysteries remain.
As a generality, the fossil record of the vertebrates is not as complete as that of many of the invertebrate groups, and particularly those with a continuous fossil record like the ammonoids.
Vertebrate remains are decidedly patchy, particularly the terrestrial species.
This is not altogether surprising considering the factors militating against their preservation — break-up of skeletons after death, the necessity to have a skeleton incorporated with sediment, and the activities of predatory and scavenging animals to destroy remains.
So land vertebrates in particular tend to come from relatively few sites, which become exhaustively collected compared with most invertebrate localities.
Some of the sites are enormously rich, however, and the history of palaeontology is punctuated by quite unscientific feuds between experts trying to find and hold on to the best sites for the most spectacular vertebrates.
The more impressive the animal the greater the feud; the fights between Professors Cope and Marsh in the last century over the dinosaur remains of North America include examples of double dealing that would not shame an oil tycoon.
Even fish remains are rather local, and do not adequately reflect the abundance of a group that has occupied the seas for more than 400 million years.
There is room here to give only the briefest account of the different kinds of vertebrates.
The higher vertebrates, fossil mammals and dinosaurs in particular, have been described in so many books that they sometimes seem to have as much flesh and blood as any animal in the zoo.
The dinosaurs alone have commanded as much popular attention as the rest of the fossil animal kingdom combined.
This reflects their spectacular size and the drama of reconstructions of battles to the death between Tyrannosaurus and its armoured contemporaries.
The sad truth is that the average collector is unlikely to recover more than the most fragmentary remains of dinosaurs.
The commonest vertebrate remains are of teeth or other resistant pieces.
Fortunately the teeth of higher vertebrates can tell us a good deal.
JAWLESS FISH (Colour plate 47)
The oldest fossil fish, which are the earliest known vertebrates, lack jaws — the mouth is a simple opening — and are covered on the outside with bony skeleton.
The first ones seem to have lived in the sea, but by the Silurian the jawless (Agnathan) fish were a prominent component of fresh- and brackish-water sites in many areas of the world, and continued to diversify into the Devonian period.
Some of these freshwater fish are heavily armoured and make robust fossils — particularly the headshields.
The insides of the shield have been known to preserve quite tiny details of the nervous system, for example.
It is probable that the jawless fish lived by grubbing in the sediment, or perhaps by filter feeding, possibly exploiting organic material derived from the plants that were taking to life on land at the same time.
A few living jawless fish are the only remnant of this ancient group, and they are highly specialized forms.
The hagfish feeds on dying fish using its rasp-like tongue in conjunction with a solitary tooth on the roof of its mouth.
The lampreys (Petromyzon) are rather nasty external parasites of other fish, to which they attach themselves with a sucker, and proceed to rasp away at the living flesh.
The specialized habits of both these ‘pseudo-fishes’ may have contributed to their survival, when none of their bony-plated relatives survived the Palaeozoic.
Modern specialists often divide the jawless fishes into two broad groups, one containing the hagfish and the other the lamprey, with the fossil jawless forms distributed between the two.
Jawless fish are particularly common in red rocks of the Silurian and Devonian periods, which was a time when non-marine rocks were widespread, and have survived subsequent erosion.
They accompany the eurypterid arthropods (which may have preyed upon them), and we can visualize the rivers and lakes of the time thronging with the first invaders from the sea.
The subsequent development of the jaw enabled the vertebrates to exploit a wider range of lifestyles than were available to the jawless fish, and it would not be too gross a generalization to say that much of the evolution of the vertebrates was intimately related to things that happened to jaws.
SHARKS AND ALLIES
The sharks and their relatives (known by the indigestible class name Elasmobranchiomorphi) are the most successful of long survivors among the vertebrates.
Their rapacious habits have been the subject of bloody hyperbole in films and bestsellers, so everybody knows that the shark has ranks of  fearsome, pointed teeth, an elegant, incessant swishing swimming motion, a tail with a long ‘point’ uppermost, and a big appetite.
Their skeleton is made of cartilage — bone has not ‘grown into’ the cartilage, as in the higher vertebrates.
Their true jaws are of obvious advantage for grasping prey.
Cartilage does not preserve as fossil as a rule, so most of the evidence of the shark-like fish rests upon teeth.
Sharks of essentially modern type go back to the Jurassic.
In the later Palaeozoic a number of shark-like fish include some related to living forms, others whose zoological position is still a puzzle.
The Devonian placoderms are an especially exciting group of fish (see p. 4) with powerful, armour-plated heads and frequently fang-like teeth, the function of which is obviously predatory.
The lower jaw of these fish is loosely slung to the brain case so that they had a very wide ‘gape’.
The trunk was also protected with a shield.
This group may include the distant ancestors of the sharks, but they must have been somewhat ponderous animals compared with the streamlined hunters of modern seas.
Most of them were dogfish-sized, but Dunkleosteus was twice the length of a man, and was surely the most formidable predator of its day.
Sharks of modern type replace their worn teeth with new ones by a sort of conveyor belt system.
Isolated, bladed shark's teeth are really rather frequent finds in Mesozoic and Tertiary rocks, often in the absence of any other fish remains.
They have a handsome shiny lustre which makes them conspicuous from a distance.
The rays are related to sharks, and are in essence sharks that have been ‘squashed’ flat in response to life as rather sluggish bottom dwellers.
The mollusc-crushing teeth of rays, with the same lustre as shark's teeth, but formed as low, ridged cushions, can also be found in Mesozoic and younger rocks.
The early jawed fish,Cheiracanthus murchisoni , from the Devonian.
The fish is preserved in a siltstone nodule, which has partially formed around the body of the fish.
The body is of normal ‘fishy’ outline covered with minute rhomboidal scales Note prominent spines which supported paired fins.
The species is named after Sir Roderick Murchison, a great pioneer of the study of  Palaeozic rocks.
Acanthodian fishes generally resembling this one are known from quite complete specimens from Devonian to Permian rocks.
Some achieved a considerable size In the Devonian rocks, fishes of this kind are known from (mostly) freshwater deposits in Scotland, Wales, Norway and arctic Canada.
This specimen is from Banffshire, Scotland.
It is 15 cm long.
BONY FISH — OSTEICHTHYES (Colour plates 46, 48, 49)
Every experience with an unfilleted kipper demonstrates the aptness of the general name of this group.
The vast majority of living fish belong here (18,000 species or so), which rival the insects in their multitude of adaptations and variety of external form.
They can live in hot springs, or can be dredged from the deepest abyssal depths of the ocean; the latter are grotesque gargoyles that seem to belong in the paintings of  Heironymus Bosch.
Some are rapid swimmers gathered together in silvery shoals, others sluggish bottom dwellers spending most of their time buried in sediment.
Most have a characteristic arrangement of paired fins, but these can be lost, or fantastically modified to form fans or poisonous barbs.
Most species are a few centimetres to a few tens of centimetres long.
Their rapidity of evolution is well known: dozens of species have evolved in African fresh water lakes within the last million years.
They have as wide a range of life habits as any group, from scavengers, grazers, filter feeders, vegetarians, omnivores, to fierce predators with reputations to rival that of the sharks.
A coating of scales is characteristic, and the gills are covered by a movable flap (the operculum ).
It would be difficult to overestimate the importance of the bony fish in the economy of the sea.
Fish of various sizes feed on the plankton (and on each other), and themselves are food for larger predators, such as seals and many whales, and man.
Many of them have bizarre adaptations, as parasites, or as permanent ‘guests’ within particular species of coral or sponge, which it would be impossible to infer from fossil remains.
Many have good sight, but there are a few forms which have lost their eyes, some of them living in the lightless world of caves.
Considering their abundance in the oceans and rivers today, bony fish fossils are rather rare, and poorly reflect their true importance.
Where they occur, however, they are found in large numbers, and in variety.
Presumably these sites were protected from the kinds of influence that normally destroy fish remains, such as the activity of scavenging animals that disarticulate the skeletons, or currents.
The classic fish sites produce fossils of quite outstanding beauty (see Plate 49) and ones which have considerable monetary value.
The fish of the Eocene and later are clearly related to today's fauna, and some relatives of the living groups can be found in Mesozoic rocks.
The classification of bony fish is extremely complicated, particularly fitting in the fossil forms, and there are many bones of contention (literally!).
The group as a whole goes back to the Devonian (?
Silurian) period, and from rocks of this age predatory fish (Palaeoniscus and allies) have been recovered.
Some living survivors of these early forms include the sturgeons and bichirs (the former have reverted to a cartilage skeleton).
The early fossil bony fish have tails with the long blade uppermost, whereas the more advanced living bony fish have a tail that is symmetrical, and more effective in producing a horizontal thrust.
The surface of their body was covered with an interlocking series of shiny scales (‘ganoid’) which are still found in the bichir.
One important division of bony fishes includes the lungfish and the ‘lobe-finned’ fishes (including the coelacanth, the most famous of living fossils).
This group of fish was also fully fledged in the Devonian, and this is of particular significance because the origin of all land vertebrates has been considered as lying within a species of this group.
The freshwater lungfish retain their lungs, which help them to survive periods of drying in the rivers in which they live.
Many fish specialists believe that in the Devonian all the bony fishes had lungs (and that the swim bladder of the recent forms was a modification of the early breathing apparatus).
It is not an easy business to identify the actual ancestor of the land-going organisms, and perhaps it has not yet been found.
For many years there have been proponents of the theory that one of the ‘lobe-finned’ fishes included the ancestor of the tetrapods, and it is not difficult to imagine their stumpy fins, with a fleshy core, making the uneasy transition into a walking leg.
Other features do not agree with this, and recently there has been a swing to favour the lungfishes as nearer the origin of amphibians and, ultimately, ourselves.
Whatever momentous steps they took in the Devonian, the lungfish and lobe fins have been very conservative since, for the living lungfish are clearly similar to their Palaeozoic relatives and coelacanth lobe fins like the living genus (Latimeria ) are known from Cretaceous rocks.
Armoured placoderm fish of the Devonian
AMPHIBIANS —CLASS AMPHIBIA (Colour plate 51)
Frogs, newts, and salamanders are living amphibians.
The frogs in particular are one  of the most diverse of the higher vertebrate groups and peculiarly endearing animals with their lugubrious expressions and vocabulary of squeaks and belches.
Yet the amphibia as a whole represent an early level of terrestrial organization; they are tied to water for reproduction, because their larvae have to pass through a wholly subaqueous phase, and desiccation of the adult is a constant danger.
The amphibians had their origins in one of the freshwater lung-carrying fishes in the Devonian.
We have to visualize the process of change as a gradual one, with progressive forays from the water, until the first animal with true limbs developed (the bony elements of the limb are present in the fish fin).
From the Devonian of Greenland and other localities comes a true four-legged animal (tetrapod) that is not far from the ‘fish with legs’ we might have visualized (which is commemorated in its name —Ichthyostega ).
But as always it is not quite that simple.
The transition from water to land required not only the perfection of a walking limb, but modifications to the hearing system, palate, eyes and so on, and Ichthyostega had already established most of these terrestrial modifications, so it is in no sense an ‘ancestor’, although it has many ancestral features.
Bony scales were inherited from its ancestors and no doubt this helped the animal against desiccation .
The subsequent history of the amphibians includes a further development of terrestrial forms, but others remained wholly or partly aqueous.
These flourished in the waterlogged swamps of the Carboniferous period.
The earliest amphibians were certainly predators, and there was suitable prey both on land and in the water.
Bony fish,Lycoptera middendorfi , Cretaceous This little fish is preserved in a soft, pale grey shale Like many shale specimens it is flattened, but the still-water conditions under which the rock was deposited have permitted complete preservation of a delicate skeleton.
This fish has a rather expanded, frog-like head behind which there are prominent fins; a slender body, which is flexible, supported by a host of tiny ribs, which are clearly visible.
A number of related fossil species are known from cretaceous rocks This species is from Cretaceous fish beds in Turga, Nertchinsk, Siberia.
Similar species occur in Mongolia and China.
It is 6 cm long.
The Carboniferous is popularly known as the ‘Age of Amphibians’, and it is true that the amphibians reached a dominance in the vertebrate world at this time which they never again equalled.
All of the walking species had the widely-splayed legs that gave them a slow and lumbering gait, but, in the absence of more streamlined animals, they prospered.
The group informally known as labyrinthodonts (from their characteristic labyrinth-ridged teeth) included some impressive animals almost as long as a man: perhaps the alligators of the time.
Most of the fossils recovered are of wholly or partly aquatic amphibians, the sort that were easily preserved in the coal swamps that were characteristic of the Carboniferous non-marine environment.
Other environments, particularly later in the Permian period, which was one of general ‘drying  out’, probably included species that were more truly terrestrial in their habits.
But even during the Carboniferous the first true reptiles had evolved, and this was the group that was to make itself wholly independent of the water.
The living amphibians have turned the limitations of the aqueous connection to advantage.
Frogs have their origins in the Triassic (they are a relatively recent amphibian innovation, and highly specialized).
Their tadpoles can exploit bodies of water not excessively populated with competitors, and some are adapted to very restricted niches.
The adult frogs have a different diet (worms, flies, etc.), and the species therefore get ‘the best of both worlds’.
Frogs throng in almost any site with high humidity and standing pools of water.
The large amphibians of the Palaeozoic did not survive beyond the Permian, and so our inferences about their modes of life have to be made entirely from the bony fossils that survive.
Palaeontologists recognize fossil Palaeozoic amphibians from their teeth, their flattened skulls and the arrangements of bones on the skulls.
They are not generally common fossils, but there is always a chance of turning up a skeleton from the coal deposits, or finding a fossil frog (see Fig. 51) in the Mesozoic.
REPTILES — CLASS REPTILIA
The living reptiles are almost all predators, and the vast majority are also small, the only giants remaining being the crocodiles, alligators and caymans (and one or two big lizards).
We tend to think of the reptiles as somehow past their ‘prime’, but it would be more accurate to say that they had been displaced from the top jobs in nature, while more than holding their own in the shop floor.
The warmer the climate the more they are in evidence, because the living reptiles are ‘cold blooded’(without their own internal heat regulator) and they cannot successfully live in very cold climates.
Living snakes and lizards are highly varied, and manage to live in some environments (e.g. dry deserts) where the mammals are pushed to survive.
Most living reptiles and all of the primitive ones lay eggs, and this amniote egg, from which perfectly-formed baby reptiles hatch, marks the complete emancipation from the necessity of returning to water for reproduction.
And a scaly skin solves the problem of drying out even in intense heat.
Add to this the change in orientation of the legs in many reptiles, which can be used in an efficient running action, unlike the ungainly waddling of the amphibians and it will be apparent why the reptiles were better adapted to terrestrial life than the amphibians, and why they largely displaced them.
This was far from instantaneous, and the Permian period saw both advanced amphibians and early reptiles living side by side.
The reptiles were probably derived from an amphibious ancestor, probably early in the Carboniferous.
Once established they underwent a number of evolutionary ‘bursts’ in which diverse kinds of reptiles occupied a variety of habitats, the most spectacular of which was the dinosaur radiation in the Mesozoic, to which we shall return later.
by no means all of the large reptiles that are found in the Mesozoic rocks are dinosaurs — the reptile groups that took up life in the sea or the air were only distantly related.
One of the most important steps for the complete colonization of the land was the evolution of herbivorous (plant-eating) reptiles, tapping a prolific and nourishing source of food that opened up a new dimension to the ‘food chain'.
Larger and better herbivores meant larger and more ferocious carnivores to prey upon them, scavengers to clean up the mess, and a whole host of subordinate trades for other animals.
The reptiles underwent tremendous changes in their skeletal structure, their jaws and their teeth during over their history of more than two hundred million years, some of the predators developing razor sharp rows of fangs, other herbivores losing their teeth and acquiring beak-like jaws.
At some time in the Permo-Triassic one group of reptiles (‘mammal-like reptiles’) actually gave rise to the warm-blooded mammals, which were to lead a rather subordinate existence during the heyday of the dinosaurs.
And the birds probably had their origin in a particular group of dinosaurs.
So in a sense the reptile dominance is still with us, transmuted by time and evolution.
The scenes of Jurassic or Cretaceous landscapes in picture books show dinosaurs swarming over the landscape, giving the impression that we know the whole story.
The truth is that there are a few sites (especially in North America) where abundant remains of complete animals have been recovered, and from which a passable idea of the fauna of the Mesozoic can be obtained, but there are still great gaps in our knowledge, and many of the dinosaurs are known from a handful of individuals, or even a single specimen.
There are doubtless still new kinds to discover  
33 Trilobite,Calymene blumenbachii , Silurian Worcestershire, England.
This trilobite is exceptionally well-preserved, retaining its original convexity and shell-material.
A convex trilobite with the lobation of the middle part of the head distinctly defined.
The thorax has thirteen segments.
8 cm long.
34 Giant trilobite,Paradoxides ‘spinosus’, Cambrian, Bohemia.
This large trilobite is preserved in a black mudstone, slightly crushed.
The swollen mid-part of the head expands forwards.
There are many thoracic segments extended into spines, and a tiny tail.
There are a number of Paradoxides species, which include some of the largest trilobites.
This species is relatively small for the genus (15–20 cm); some species approach 60 cm in length.
35 Fossil rhagionid fly Chrysopilus sp.,
Oligocene.
This insect is exquisitely preserved in amber.
The amber was at one time polished to make a pendant with the fly as centre piece.
This is a Baltic amber specimen from East Prussia.
Living  Chrysopilus live in marshy areas in Europe, their larvae growing up beneath the soil.
The fossil is just over l cm in length.
36 Devonian trilobite,Phacops rana , Ontario, Canada.
This species is beautifully preserved in limestone in full relief.
With luck the amateur collector should be able to obtain specimens as splendid.
A convex trilobite with eleven thoracic segments.
The mid-part of the head is covered with coarse tubercles and expands forwards; the eyes include a few, very large lenses.
Complete specimens are usually in the range 3–8 cm.
37 Sea scorpion (eurypterid)Eurypterus lacustris , Devonian.
The sea scorpion is preserved on a fine siltstone, and is exceptionally complete.
Fragments are more usual.
The rather fat body, with distinct segmentation, and a long tail-spine are characteristic; the head region carries appendages of grasping aspect.
This species is from Canada, but eurypterids occur on most continents.
38 Fossil horseshoe crab Mesolimulus ornatus , Jurassic, Solenhofen, Germany.
The horseshoe crab is preserved on a flat-bedded limestone.
Some of the original flexible material of the skeleton still remains.
The king crabs have a nearly circular carapace, beneath which powerful legs helped the animal to swim and catch prey.
Note the long pointed tail spine.
This specimen is 8 cm long.
Larger fossil examples are known.
39 Fossil crab,Palaeocarpilius aquilinus , Miocene, Libya.
This perfect and nearly complete crab is exceptional.
The white colour is because of the white limestone matrix.
This beautiful crab has a wide carapace, with a few faint depressions on its upper surface, and a spiny margin.
Powerful pincers are held close to the body, also equipped with a good ‘cutting’ edge.
Carapace measures 6 cm across.
40 Fossil spider,Abliguritor niger , Oligocene.
This spider is encased in amber.
The colour of amber is related in part to its age — darker amber is usually older.
The spider, less than 1 cm long, is perfectly preserved except for its soft parts.
This fossil is known only from Baltic amber, the source of many famous fossil arthropods.
41 Fossil lobster,Thalassina anomala , Pleistocene, eastern Australia.
The original shiny cuticle of the lobster is here preserved in a yellow, limy matrix.
All the legs are attached, some partly concealed.
This species has long thorny pincers with little upturned ‘fingers’ at the end.
It also has the distinction of being the youngest fossil in this book.
Length, about 12 cm.
42 Fossil millipede,Euphoberia ferox , Carboniferous.
This fossil millipede is preserved inside a nodule of siltstone (part and counterpart of the specimen are shown).
Each pair of legs, shows as white, hair-like lines on this specimen.
This specimen is from the coalfield of Yorkshire, England.
Similar species occur at Mazon Creek, Illinois, USA.
Length 6 cm.
43 Spiny odontopleurid trilobite,Acidaspis coronata , Silurian, Worcestershire, England.
This spiny little trilobite is preserved in a fine-grained hard limestone.
Most of the original detail of the skeleton is still visible.
Trilobites of Acidaspis type have thoracic segments extended into long spines, which also fringe the head and tail.
Complete specimens are generally 2–3 cm long.
44 Fossil dragonfly,Cymatophlebia longialata , Jurassic, Solenhofen, Germany.
The dragonfly is splendidly preserved on the flat bedding plane of a limestone.
Much of the fine detail is preserved, especially on the wings.
Dragonflies have stiff, long wings, with finely netted veining, long slender bodies, and large eyes, which are well seen on this fossil.
Longest wing here has a length of 7 cm.
45 Fossil ant,Iridomyrmex geinitzi , Oligocene.
Ants frequently got caught in the pine resins that were destined to become amber, and numerous fossil species have been recognized.
This specimen is from Baltic amber.
Living Iridomyrmex are found principally in Australia and South America, with a few species in India.
Length about 4 mm.
46 Fossil lungfish,Dipterus valenciennesi , Devonian.
The specimen is flattened, 18 cm long, but otherwise exceptionally complete on a bed of fine siltstone.
It has a long body with overlapping scales, with a concentration of fins at the hind end.
This specimen is from the Achanarras fish bed, Caithness, Scotland, a famous locality.
47 The armoured fish,Bothriolepis canadensis , Devonian, Quebec.
The trunk of this armoured fish is preserved in a fine-grained siltstone.
The original bony material is well-preserved.
The 5 cm long trunk is composed of a few, very large plates which have a tuberculate ornament.
In front there is a pair of powerful, flattened appendages which are hinged on the side of the body
48 Eocene bony fish,Pristigenys substriatus , Monte Bolca, Verona, Italy.
This exquisite fish is preserved flattened on the bedding plane of a flaggy limestone.
The original outline of the fish is clearly visible.
This fish has a deep body, narrowly compressed from side to side, very large eyes, prominent fins on both the upper and lower surfaces of the body, and a manlike tail.
From tail to mouth the fish measures 10 cm.
These other groups of reptiles lived alongside the more spectacular dinosaurs during the Mesozoic: turtles, lizards and crocodiles
The dinosaurs have dominated the popular conception of the fossil reptiles, sometimes to the extent of seeming almost synonymous with the word ‘fossil’!
The group includes by far the largest of terrestrial animals ever to have lived (Brachiosaurus ), creatures to dwarf the largest bull elephants.
The predators that preyed on the giants were even more spectacular, and by now the name of Tyrannosaurus is so well-known that it seems to be one of the first tongue-twisters mastered by small children.
Of course there is little chance of an amateur collector acquiring an appreciable part of one of these great animals, but in the right site fragments of dinosaur skeletons may be picked up.
The term ‘dinosaur’ includes a number of really rather separate groups of animals, with more or less independent evolutionary history during the Jurassic and Cretaceous.
The real giants were the lumbering sauropods (Diplodocus, Brachiosaurus , etc.), four-legged dinosaurs, with enormously long necks only matched by equally long tails.
The giant predators that walked on their hind legs (Tyrannosaurus, Allosaurus and other theropods) share structures of the hip bones with the sauropods that show they are more closely related to them than to the rest of the dinosaurs.
These latter (Ornithischians) include some animals that walked on their hind legs like Tyrannosaurus , but with vegetarian habits (Iguanodon , the first dinosaur to be discovered); the group also includes various types of vegetarian armoured and plated dinosaurs, often shown in pitched battle with their carnivorous contemporaries.
These well-protected dinosaurs each diversified into a number of genera; the three main groups are: the stegosaurs of the Jurassic, with paired plates along the back and a nastily spiked tail (Stegosaurus ); the ceratopsians, horned, rhinoceros-like dinosaurs of the Cretaceous, including the familiar Triceratops ; the spiky armoured ankylosaurs, tanks on stumpy legs.
Specialized ornithischians in the late Cretaceous were the remarkable duck-billed dinosaurs, animals that lost their front teeth and had arrays of tiny grinding teeth at the back of the jaw that were continually replaced, like those of the shark, and must have been able to cope with tough vegetation.
Some of the duck-billed forms  evolved crests and protuberances on top of their heads.
All the dinosaurs, vegetarian and carnivore alike, became extinct at the end of the Cretaceous period (see p. 135).
A whole range of other reptiles were present in the Jurassic and Cretaceous; none of them are dinosaurs.
They include the products of the spread of the reptiles back into the aqueous environment from which their distant ancestors emerged, and, for the first time in the history of the vertebrates, the conquest of the air.
The marine plesiosaurs , with their long flexible necks and sharp teeth, were formidable hunters of Mesozoic fish.
The limbs were modified into efficient paddles, perfectly adapted for sculling through the water.
Even more streamlined for marine life were the ichthyosaurs ('fish lizards'), which, as their name implies, include species that look remarkably fish-like, although perhaps the better analogy would be with the porpoises, a group of mammals that ‘returned to the sea’, and may fill a similar role in modern seas to that of the ichthyosaurs in the Jurassic.
These marine reptiles have a higher chance of preservation than many of the terrestrial species, and their carcasses often seem to have sunk to the sea floor, so that some localities have yielded numerous complete specimens.
The Liassic (Lower Jurassic) rocks of Europe furnished many of the magnificent specimens which are now on display in museums.
Some of the ichthyosaurs include baby individuals within their skeletons which either implies  cannabalistic habits, or, more probably, the ability to give birth to their young alive.
Isolated vertebrae of marine reptiles (see Fig.50) are one of the reptilian fossils that are the easiest to collect.
The pterosaurs, flying reptiles, also had their origins in the Triassic and became widespread and varied during the Jurassic and Cretaceous.
Like the bats, the pterosaurs had membranous wings stretched between highly modified arms and ‘hands’ and the fore part of the legs; unlike the bats some of them grew to an enormous size and the front support for the wing was provided by only one finger of the hand, grotesquely extended.
Most of them, and particularly the larger ones, combined slow, flapping flight with gliding, spending a large part of their lives effortlessly aloft.
As in the case of the sauropod dinosaurs they seem to have got bigger and bigger during the Cretaceous — some of these later pterosaurs are supposed to have had wing spans exceeding lo metres, which would make them almost comparable to a man-made glider.
Why this large size evolved is something of a mystery: it may have been that larger gliders cruise at slower speeds without ‘stalling’.
Quite how these amazing animals landed and took off (if they did) can only be guessed at.
Like the plesiosaurs and ichthyosaurs, they were successful and varied for a long time, but all three groups failed to survive the Cretaceous.
Examples of the two major kinds of dinosaurs, showing the structure of the hip bones which distinguishes them.
Above saurischian (Tyrannosaurus ), below, ornithischian (Scelidosaurus )
Other groups of reptiles were not exterminated at this time, even though their fossils may be found in rocks as old as those that yield dinosaurs and the other spectacular, extinct groups.
Crocodiles and lizards have a fossil record extending back to the Triassic, snakes to the Cretaceous.
The turtles and tortoises have almost as long a history as the crocodiles.
The fused, bony plates that protect their soft parts make  them well-nigh invulnerable.
All the long survivors show every sign of flourishing today: one might suppose that the tortoise will continue its lumbering progress no matter what catastrophes may come to pass in the future.
MAMMALS — CLASS MAMMALIA
Mammals animals with mammary glands that suckle their young — were certainly present during the Triassic, and were a continuous if subordinate component of fossil faunas throughout the acme of the dinosaurs.
It was only after the demise of the ruling reptiles that the class had the opportunity to capitalize on the evolutionary advantages which propelled them to the dominance they have enjoyed ever since.
Many of the early mammals were probably insect eaters, as are many of the primitive representatives of the group today.
Small mammals were present in the Triassic — shrew-like animals with long noses, and probably insatiable appetites for smaller items of the fauna.
We can imagine animals like these darting through the undergrowth in search of food while the colossal reptiles lumbered obliviously around them.
It would be wrong to suppose that there was no evolutionary activity among these early mammals: in fact there were considerable changes, which by the late Cretaceous had established early members of several of the principal groups of mammals which dominate the terrestrial world today.
The marsupial (pouched) and placental (womb-bearing) mammals had separated, and lived side by side.
Many of the early mammalian remains are fossil teeth.
More than those of any other vertebrate group, the teeth of mammals have changed in distinctive ways, and the different types of mammals can be reliably identified from a study of their dentition alone.
This is particularly fortunate, because teeth have a high fossilization potential, exceeding that of other parts of the skeleton.
The sediments filling caves or fissures in limestone are frequently repositories for fossil teeth.
Sampling for mammal fossils often involves the patient sieving of great quantities of sediment to extract the fossil teeth.
If you are very lucky you might find a whole jaw (see p. 100).
Mammal jaws often have specialized teeth for particular jobs — nipping, chewing, biting, gnawing teeth and so on— which function in perfect cooperation between the upper and lower jaws.
Mammal teeth often have distinctive patterns of crests or bumps (cusps ) that serve to identify large groups within the mammals.
Teeth for grinding vegetation are often large and ridged, while the rodents have their fast-growing gnawing teeth at the front of the jaw.
The most specialized dental structures of all are probably the baleen plates of the largest whales, modified for straining plankton from sea water.
The evolution of mammals after the Cretaceous was both extremely rapid and very complex, and we can do no more than give the roughest sketch here.
Compared with what was happening in contemporary marine invertebrates, the visible changes in mammalian skeletons during the early part of the Tertiary were fast and dramatic; it did not take long before the roles of larger herbivores and carnivores were filled by mammalian animals.
By the end of the Palaeocene, only a few million years from the Cretaceous extinction of the giant reptiles, there were representatives of many of the living mammalian orders, including, for example, the primates (the order to which man belongs), the carnivores (cats dogs, and most living predators) and the rodents (rats, mice).
The history of the mammals in the Tertiary involved not only this one major diversification, but several, with major extinctions between, so that the largest mammals of the earlier parts of the Tertiary are not related to the large mammals of the Recent.
The roots of our present European fauna extend back to the Miocene.
The whole story is complicated by the fact that this was also the time of break-up of the supercontinent Pangaea.
Mammalian faunas on isolated continental fragments could evolve, at least for a time, separately from faunas in other parts of the world, producing a whole series of peculiar animals that have no direct relationships to animals with a similar mode of life elsewhere.
The obvious example is Australia, which was separated early, and in which the marsupial mammals had the opportunity to adapt to a whole range of ecological niches, which they managed with remarkable success in spite of a low cranial capacity and a primitive mode of reproduction.
Some of the largest marsupials (Diprotodon ) seem to have survived to a time tantalisingly close to the present.
Similarly, in South America a whole range of peculiar mammals evolved largely in isolation, including giant sloths, specialized grazing species, and the extraordinary glyptodonts (see p. 100).
A lot of argument among mammalian palaeontologists  seems to centre on how and when links between North America, Europe and Asia existed, resulting in interchange and invasions of animals between the two regions.
It is clear that some groups of animals, like the proboscideans (elephants and allies), are much reduced now compared with the late Tertiary, both in variety and geographic distribution.
A late stimulus for the evolution of distinctive mammals was the Pleistocene Ice Age, although a variety also became extinct at this time.
A number of species, adapted to the widespread cold conditions, roamed widely around the northern hemisphere, including woolly mammoths and rhinoceros, and extinct species of tigers.
On the other hand interglacial periods were very much warmer than conditions in temperate latitudes today, and these climatic fluctuations resulted in periods when hippopotamus and tropical rhinoceros thrived in the areas occupied by Europe's capital cities today.
With the final retreat of the ice many of the cold climate specialists perished (possibly with the help of man), although some of the species that accompany them, like lemmings or musk ox, survive today in the harsh conditions of the arctic tundra.
BIRDS — CLASS AVES
Fossil birds are distinctly rare, and to find a well-preserved and complete example is a palaeontological event.
The evolution of flight led to generally light and fragile skeletons, and it is perhaps not surprising that avian fossils are so uncommon, and when found, so often fragmentary.
The derivation of the birds from a reptilian (possibly dinosaur) ancestor is certain, and because the earliest fossil bird,Archaeopteryx , is Jurassic in age, it is usually assumed that the split from the reptiles occurred in the earlier part of the period.
Unfortunately, there is much that is not understood about the history of the birds between Archaeopteryx (see p. 101) and the good assemblages of fossil birds undoubtedly related to living species in the   Eocene and Miocene.
Cretaceous birds are generally scarce, and some of the ‘toothed’ birds that are known, like the flightless, aquatic Hesperornis , seem to be difficult to relate to any of the living species.
It is probable that like the mammals the roots of the great variety of living birds are to be found in the Cretaceous, but fossils, which could document this, are only now slowly coming to light.
Right The Berlin skeleton of the early bird,Archaeopteryx 
Left Some of the specialized mammals which evolved in isolation in South America: top Glyptodon ; middle,Toxodon ; bottom,Megatherium 
Below Lower jaw of Pleistocene bear showing typical mammalian specialization of teeth: sharp canines, chewing teeth at the rear
FOSSIL PLANTS
The fossils of plants are some of the most attractive that the amateur collector is likely to find.
Those plants that concern us here were terrestrial or lived in bogs, rivers or lakes.
Like animals that dwelt on land, the terrestrial flora also arose from ancestors that lived in the seas, a change that is known to have happened before the end of the Silurian.
However, marine algae were very important in the early history of the evolution of the earth, and they are described in some detail in Chapters 7 and 8.
They are not generally conspicuous fossils in the field.
A few algae, however, produced hard calcareous skeletons, and were abundant enough to produce small gardens beneath the sea.
Such calcareous algae (see Plate 52) have a long history, extending back into the Precambrian, and they are still numerous today.
They were often components of reefs, and in some environments it is the algae that bear the full brunt of the attack by the breakers on the exposed, seaward side of the reef.
They are also important rock builders; in northerly latitudes today limestones are being formed from the skeletal debris of such calcareous algae as Lithothamnion .
The first land plants must have been derived from a marine alga.
We have to visualize this as a very gradual process, the early transitional plants perhaps creeping across mud flats, or partially submerged.
The change involved the production of a protective ‘skin’ to ensure that water loss to the atmosphere was not excessive, and the stems had to acquire sufficient rigidity to stand up without the support of surrounding water, but also the cellular structure had to allow the passage of nutrients to the growing shoots (ultimately, a vascular system).
The evolution of such a plant could not have been achieved at a single stroke.
Reproduction in these early plants was by means of minute spores.
Quite a variety of Silurian plants are now known, and by the end of the Devonian it is apparent that most of the problems of terrestrial living had been solved, to the extent that large tree ‘ferns’ of the time would have had dimensions comparable with forest trees today.
The fossil record of plants is not good enough simply to ‘read out’ the story of their evolution by collecting from successively younger, non-marine rock formations.
Some of the earliest plants do not appear to be the most primitive, and vice versa .
True, there is a general drift through time towards more complex plants, more perfectly adapted to life away from water, but primitive species have persisted alongside the innovations.
The fossil record is full of curious plants that do not fit comfortably into classifications — this is one of the things that makes the study of fossil plants so fascinating.
Consequently there are arguments among botanists about the relationships of many plants, living and fossil, and some classifications have quite large categories containing only a few plants, which may be rare.
Not all of the major groups will be described here, but only those that are likely to be found by the non-specialist collector.
Some important groups, like the mosses and liverworts, have a sporadic fossil record extending back to the Carboniferous, but they are not likely to be encountered without a special search.
Plant fossils are often to be found in particular beds, reflecting conditions of deposition that were just right for their preservation.
Of course, the rocks that contain abundant plant remains are mostly those which were deposited in freshwater lakes, or on deltas, or the fossilized remains of peat beds.
There were probably plants living in hilly regions from quite early which have left little fossil record, and this may account for some of the gaps in the preserved fossils.
Many fossil plants are now more or less black, carbonized (‘coalified’) compressions.
In some cases, however, the fine structure, even down to individual cells, is splendidly preserved, and these are the most important specimens from a scientific point of view.
The problems of associating the different organs of the same fossil plant species were mentioned earlier in this book (p. 23)..
Right Seed fern,Trigonocarpus parkinsoni , Carboniferous.
These fossil seeds are preserved in a relatively coarse-grained sandstone.
Although they are uncrushed, only parts of the original seed covering remain — so that they are largely internal moulds.
They are the seeds produced by the fern-like plants such as Mariopteris , but because they are difficult to link with their foliage they have been given separate names.
The three raised ridges on their surface are typical.
Seeds of similar type have been found associated with a number of the Carboniferous seed-fern leaves.
They are from Ayrshire, Scotland; length, 2 cm
EARLY LAND PLANTS — DIVISION PSILOPHYTA
The earliest land plants, to be found in Silurian and Devonian rocks, had simple shoots that arose from a creeping ‘axis’, which were little different in structure from the shoots themselves.
Leaves, if they were  present at all, were humble scales or spine-like projections.
The upright twigs often branched in a simple way, forking into two, and then into two again, and sometimes terminating in little capsules that carried the spores.
The plants are often preserved as dark markings on shales, and were less than half a metre in length.
The best-preserved examples, from which their cellular construction has been described, are from the Devonian Rhynie Chert (p. 17).
FERNS — DIVISION PTEROPHYTA (Colour plate 60)
Right Some of the commoner types of fern-like foliage from the Carboniferous Such foliage often belongs to the seed ferns, rather than the true ferns
The feathery and delicate fronds of the ferns make them among the most beautiful of the foliage plants, and they attract a fanatical group of devotees dedicated to growing exotic species in inhospitable cities.
They are also a very ancient group, with many Carboniferous representatives and a number of preferns in the Devonian as well(plate 59).
Then as now they are generally preferred humid environments in which to live.
They reproduce by means of minute spores, which form in clusters on the undersides of the fronds, or sometimes on specially modified fronds.
To be really sure that one is dealing with a fossil fern it should be possible to see the spore cases, because other kinds of plants can produce fern-like foliage.
In practice, many of the fossil fronds that one finds are sterile, and for these there a number of form genera , units of classification based on the shape of the fronds alone (see p. 23).
Although many ferns are low herbaceous plants, they have periodically attained the dimensions of trees; forests of such tree ferns exist today in humid regions, for example in New Zealand.
Large ferns were present as early as the Upper Devonian and different genera as large or larger were significant components of forests during the Carboniferous to Cenozoic.
In these cases one never finds a whole tree fossilized, and it is necessary to piece together the whole plant by making intelligent guesses about whether a frond of one kind is persistently found with a particular fossil trunk.
SEED FERNS — DIVISION PTERIDOSPERMOPHYTA (Colour plate 57)
Many of the fern-like fronds that can be found in Carboniferous rocks belong to an extinct group of plants sharing a common ancestor with the ferns, but distinct enough to be regarded as entirely separate.
These seed ferns had much-enlarged female reproductive bodies — forming true seeds which were fertilized by pollen born on separate organs.
Some of the seeds hung like bells from the ends of the ferny frond, and in some species they were several centimetres long.
The plants were generally bushy shrubs, but some may have been climbers, and others robust enough to form small trees.
A lot of the species belonging to the commonest of the Carboniferous and   Permian ‘leaf genera’— like Neuropteris, Alethopteris and Mariopteris were seed ferns of this kind (rather than true ferns), but associations of seeds with foliage are extremely rare.
The seeds themselves (see p. 103) can be locally common.
Although they are commonest in rocks of the Late Palaeozoic, some Mesozoic plants have been regarded as a later branch of the seed ferns.
Fossil fern,Onychiopsis mantelli , Cretaceous.
This delicate fern is preserved in a very fine-grained sandstone, which fractures rather irregularly.
Slender and delicate branching patterns with many fine subdivisions are characteristic of this kind of fern.
There are a few similar species, known rarely from rocks of Cretaceous and Tertiary age, distinguished on the branching patterns of the fronds.
This specimen is from Sussex, England.
Related forms occur in North America.
The total length of the frond is 12 cm, but it was originally part of a much larger plant
LYCOPODS — DIVISION LYCOPHYTA (Colour plates 53, 54, 56)
Many of the great trees of the Carboniferous were lycopods, the trunks of which contributed largely to the formation of coal.
This large and important group of plants is represented today by a mere four genera of humble herbaceous plants —Lycopodium, Selaginella, Isoetes and Phylloglossum — living fossils which have survived with little change from the Mesozoic or even the Carboniferous.
The lycopods have long, narrow leaves like little straps, each of which leaves a characteristic scar on the stem at its point of attachment.
The plants reproduced by means of spores, which were born in cones; the spores were often of two kinds — large (female) megaspores up to 2 mm in diameter and much smaller (male) microspores.
The study of the spores of these plants is important in correlating rocks of late Palaeozoic age.
The large trees had extensive roots, which grew nearly horizontally through the soil, repeatedly forking, and often bearing long rootlets.
Fossil roots (Fig. 5 6) are quite common, and may be preserved even when the trunks are not.
The distinctive patterns formed by leaf scars are visible on fossils of the bark, which is often found in coal and in the deposits overlying ones containing roots.
Lepidodendron has many spiral rows of lozenge-shaped leaf scars, while Sigillaria has long rows of elliptical scars; both are very common fossils in association with coal measures.
Cones are much rarer; these are about the size and shape of an asparagus spear, with rows of cavities, which contained spores, so that if they are flattened they can appear almost segmented in the manner of an arthropod fossil.
Some of the best specimens of trunks were preserved cell by cell in silica, and these show even the finest details if they are cut and polished.
The lycopods can be found in Devonian or even Silurian rocks, but they are generally uncommon in rocks younger than Permian, and all the tree species apparently disappeared before the end of the Palaeozoic.
HORSETAILS —DIVISION ARTHROPHYTA (Colour plate 58)
On any walk through a bog or fen one can see the delicate shoots of the horsetails, looking almost like miniature fir trees, sometimes clustering into dense masses.
If one plucks a piece from one of these plants it will almost certainly break along one of the numerous joints that divide the whole plant into segments, right to the tips of the branchlets.
These joints give the arthrophytes (‘jointed plants’) their scientific name, and the little whorls of tiny branches produce the bushy appearance which accounts for their popular one.
There is only one living genus of horsetails —Equisetum — although its many species are very widespread.
The group were formerly varied and numerous, and even included trees perhaps 20 metres in height.
The horsetails reproduce by means of spores, which are born in small cone-like structures at the tip of the branches or on modified shoots.
They are among the easiest of fossil plants to recognize, for even flattened stems retain the characteristic jointing, and the feathery distal branches cannot be mistaken for anything else.
The flattened whorls are particularly easy to recognize, and are frequently encountered in the soft, dark shales associated with coal seams.
As with so many of the primitive plants the arthrophytes had their heyday in the Carboniferous after a probable origin in the Devonian.
Because they are common in aquatic environments they have a rather good fossil record, and are not uncommon in freshwater sediments of Jurassic and Cretaceous age.
It is a mystery why only one genus of this formerly diverse group should have had the capacity to survive to the present day.
CYCAD-LIKE PLANTS
In the forests of the Mesozoic there were large numbers of trees and shrubby plants that looked at first glance like palm trees, with leafless stems crowned with bouquets of stiff, large leaves, deeply divided into long, unbranched leaflets.
These were cycads and bennettites.
A small number of cycad genera survive in the tropical and subtropical regions today, but they are much less conspicuous today than they were 120 million years ago.
The resemblance to palms is no indication of their true relationships, because the cycad-like plants were not true flowering plants like palms.
They do, however, have a most extraordinary fructification, a large knob arising from  the centre of the crown, looking something like a corncob, and bearing numerous, very large seeds.
Nowadays botanists divide the cycad-like plants into two major groups which may not be particularly closely related: the Cycadales, which include the living species, and the Bennettitales, an important Mesozoic group of plants which have smaller fructifications scattered among the bases of the leaves.
Marie Stopes, who later became a famous pioneer of birth control started life as a palaeobotanist interested in the cycads.
Some specimens of the trunks of bennettites (see p 107) are among the most spectacular of fossils, and they even attracted the attention of the Etruscans, who included them among their sacred relics more than four thousand years ago!
The amateur collector is most likely to come across the cycad foliage, with its characteristic narrow central rib and flat leaflets.
Their fossils are commonest in Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous rocks.
Reconstruction of a Carboniferous coal swamp, showing large lycopod and cordaite trees, an amphibian, giant dragonfly and millipede
CONIFERS — DIVISION CONIFEROPHYTA
The conifers are as varied and successful a group of plants today as they have ever  been.
But again they are an ancient group with ancestors back in the Carboniferous forest, a melting pot for plant evolution.
Botanists are not fully in accord about how many separate groups of plants there are within the conifers, and they are all lumped together here.
The fir cones of modern species will be familiar to the reader, often littering forests in their thousands, and containing seeds, which may be equipped with wings.
The close, needle foliage of most modern conifers, which seems as much immune to desert heat as arctic cold, was probably derived from lusher leaves in the later Palaeozoic.
In the Carboniferous swamps large trees with leaves, of the genus Cordaites grew to 30 or more metres in height, with long slim trunks terminating in branches that bore strap-shaped leaves up to a metre in length.
The cordaite ‘cone’ was a longer and more complex structure than that of any living conifer.
The leaves of this tree are rather common fossils, striped with longitudinal veins that give it a superficial resemblance to the leaf of an iris.
Most of the steps leading to the modern conifers   seem to have taken place by the end of the Palaeozoic; no other group of organisms of such antiquity has retained such an unbroken hold over vast areas of the earth as the conifers.
Some primitive conifers, like the monkey-puzzle tree Araucaria, have survived with little change since the Triassic.
Large trunk of a bennettite Cycadeoidea , Cretaceous, USA.
These conspicuous fossils are often over half a metre across.
Left Varied shapes of leaves of fossil ginkgos, typically Mesozoic, with photograph of fossil example, natural size (below ).
Right Frond of a cycad,Nilssonia kendalli , Jurassic.
The fossil is preserved on the surface of a fine-grained siltstone.
There are many other fragments of plants in the same block, but the frond is unusually complete.
Cycad leaves have characteristic flattened leaflets arranged in rows on a very slender axis.
There are a number of species of Nilssonia from the Jurassic distinguished on the form of the leaflets.
Related genera include many species with a wide distribution, and there are living representatives occurring in tropical regions today.
This specimen is from the famous plant beds of Yorkshire, England.
Other well-known bennettite localities are the Black Hills of Dakota and from Maryland, USA.
The frond has a length of 15 cm.
The long-leafed plant Glossopteris (Plate 55) is something of a botanical puzzle, but probably belongs within this broad group.
It is common in later Palaeozoic rocks of South Africa, peninsular India, Australia and South America, and is thought to have lived almost exclusively in the cooler areas of the supercontinent Pangaea (p. 32).
The ginkgos are often placed in a separate group.
They are represented today only by the maidenhair tree Ginkgo biloba , one of the obligatory ‘living fossils’ to be found in every botanical garden, and many parks in inner cities.
Ginkgo leaves are particularly beautiful, perfect fans with splayed veins, and specimens of this general type are found in many localities from rocks of Triassic age onwards (see p. 108).
The Mesozoic ginkgos were a varied and numerous group of plants, but unlike the spruces and pines they slowly declined in variety throughout the Tertiary.
FLOWERING PLANTS — DIVISION ANTHOPHYTA (Colour plates 61 64)
The flowering plants dominate the floral world today, except perhaps in the lonely spruce stands of the Arctic.
They are the broad-leaved trees, the grasses, and myriads of tiny creeping plants, as well as the showy flowers which attract man and pollinating insects (p. 91) alike.
Their diversity is truly extraordinary: in tropical forests there are hundreds of species of trees alone.
Yet a good deal of this diversification probably happened in the last 70 million years, during the Tertiary.
However, like the mammals and the birds, the flowering plants certainly originated, and probably did much of their evolutionary groundwork, during the Mesozoic and especially the Cretaceous.
The details of their origins are still not clear.
For one thing, flowers do not readily fossilize — and leaves alone can be misleading.
The flowering plants (angiosperms) appear almost ready-made in the Cretaceous, and many of these fossils can even be placed into living genera.
There is still much to discover of their even earlier history, and we hope that the crucial steps did not all take place in some site where fossils have little chance of preservation.
Whatever their early history, fossils of flowering plants — leaves, seeds and wood — are common in rocks of Tertiary age.
They do not even have to be rocks deposited under fresh water conditions, because wood and seeds are perfectly capable of drifting long distances before becoming waterlogged enough to sink to the bottom of the sea.
Leaves, however, tend to be preserved in the deposits laid down in lakes and the like.
Where the sediments are fine-grained the leaves form fossils of exquisite beauty, preserving even the finest veins, which can be directly compared with the leaves of their living relatives.
Another mode of preservation of Tertiary plants is beneath flows of lava (Oregon and the island of Skye, for example) where whole floras can be preserved in enough detail to reconstruct the detailed botanical ecology of the time.
Fossil plants are of great use in plotting the many shifts of climate that happened during the Tertiary: a humid-tropical flora may be found in what is now an arid region, or a warm-climate flora may be found in an area that is now decidedly cool.
This makes the assumption, of course, that the plants have not changed their habits since they were fossilized.
During the dramatic climatic fluctuations of the last ice age — warm to cold to warm repeated several times — the flowering plants acted as thermometers for the climate, sensitive recorders of the shifts that affected everything from beetles to man.
Oligocene sumac tree,Rhus stellariaefolia .
These leaves are beautifully preserved in a flat-bedded and very highly fissile shale, laid down at the bottom of a fresh water lake.
Long, graceful leaves are divided into about twelve spindle-shaped leaflets with undivided margins, and a terminal leaflet.
Each leaflet carries a prominent vein in the middle.
A few other fossil species of Rhus are known from the Tertiary rocks.
Living sumacs are familiar in temperate regions, their leaves turning a beautiful dark red late in the year.
The specimen shown here is from the renowned Florissant beds of Colorado, USA.
Other fossil Rhus have been recovered from Eocene rocks in Colorado, Utah and California.
The longest leaf here is 12 cm long.
BRINGING FOSSILS BACK TO LIFE
In this chapter some of the ways in which palaeontologists determine the way fossil animals lived are described, reanimating the dead fragments to build up a living creature.
Since popular ideas of life in the past are often founded on vividly coloured reconstructions of ‘The World in the Jurassic Period’ and the like, it is important to remember that these imaginative scenes are all inferences from bones, and similar fragments.
In fact there is nothing fixed about such interpretations, because the way the fossils are understood may change over the years, but it is usually some time before new discoveries percolate into the popular presentations.
Even the most solid-looking dinosaurs may have changed their habits in the last few years!
Many different lines of evidence may be used to flesh out the bare bones of the fossils.
The first of these is the evidence of the rocks from which the remains were recovered.
The sediments themselves reveal much about the environment of deposition, as was shown in Chapter 3.
It is important to establish whether the fossil animal actually lived in the environment which furnished its sedimentary cover, or whether its remains were swept in from some other place.
Fortunately it is usually easy to spot such intruders.
The type of sediment and the associated fossils will show whether the environment was marine, freshwater or terrestrial, providing the basic information into which the ecology of the animal has to be accommodated.
The sediments themselves may have preserved some of the tracks left by the animal (p. 20) to give direct evidence of its past activities.
From the tracks alone it is possible to be certain of the bipedal stance of certain dinosaurs, and to measure their stride.
The character of the rocks, and their setting in the past geography at the time when they accumulated, diagnoses the climatic setting in which the extinct fauna lived, and climate imposes certain restraints on possible modes of life.
Savannah animals differ from those of tropical rain forests, and these again from inhabitants of the tundra at high latitudes.
Looking at the fossil animal itself, the first necessity is to reconstruct it as accurately as possible from its fragmentary remains.
Sometimes this is a very complex business, particularly for vertebrates with numbers of small bones.
To proceed from the reconstruction to an assessment of probable life habits two different but complementary approaches are used.
One method attempts to compare the structures of teeth or limbs or some other feature of the extinct animal with living analogues .
These do not have to be biologically related organisms.
The basic argument is that structures that are closely similar were probably adapted to a similar function.
Sometimes these similarities are quite obvious: the ferocious teeth of a predatory dinosaur are a sure indication of hunting habits, with hardly a glance at the fangs of living mammalian carnivores.
But the structure and functioning of grinding or chewing teeth in other mammals, in which opposing teeth co-operate in action, and which can be matched in extinct, unrelated mammals, is a much more subtle matter, involving detailed studies on the operation of living dental systems to help elucidate the functioning of fossil ones.
The technique of ‘hunt the analogue’ is a favourite one practised by palaeontologists, but it is certainly not a foolproof one, because there are many fossil animals that defy comparison with living organisms, and some analogues do  not stand up to detailed scrutiny.
The second method tries to analyse the structure of the fossil almost as if it were a piece of engineering.
If the fossil is constructed in a certain way, then there are only a limited number of ‘jobs’ that the structure could perform.
The idea here is to decide which of the possibilities is the most likely one.
This assumes that nature only manufactures efficient designs.
For the most part this is a reasonable assumption to make.
Most animals today do seem to have bodies that accord well with the functions they have to carry out to survive: flyers are aerodynamically efficient, active swimmers have suitable streamlining, herbivorous mammals have teeth appropriate for grinding plant food, and so on.
Ideally one could construct a model of the fossil to test out these various functions in experiments, but the number of examples where the analysis has been pursued this far are limited.
Of course it can never be known whether the right answer has been reached (unless somebody dredges up a ‘living fossil’ from the depths of the ocean)— there are only varying degrees of probability.
But the best answers are probably obtained where the functional design of the fossil points to the same life habits as a living analogue, and where both are consistent with the geological circumstances in which the fossil remains occur.
SWIMMING TRILOBITES
There are thousands of different kinds of trilobites.
All of them were marine and all of them are extinct.
Since many kinds of trilobites co-existed at any one time they were probably occupying different ecological niches, behaving in different ways, corresponding with the wide variation in shape that they show.
We can use the methods described above to elucidate some of these occupations, and get a glimpse, albeit an imperfect one, of the trilobite as it lived.
I will take an example where all the methods can be used, and where all point in the same direction, so that the answer is probably correct.
Most trilobites were broadly oval-shaped being rather longer than wide, not greatly convex, and with eyes that occupy perhaps a quarter of the length of the head.
There are a few trilobite species, however, with enormous, globular eyes (see below).
By examining the way these animals were put together it is possible to suggest a likely mode of life.
Giant-eyed Ordovician trilobite, seen from the top and side.
Twice its natural size.
Enlargement shows a section through the lenses to show the direction of the field of view.
We can take the eyes first.
The trilobite eye was of a compound type, and each lens was made up of a calcite crystal.
From the optical properties of this mineral we know that the lens was able to interpret light coming from a direction more or less at right-angles to the lens surface.
So we can deduce what the field of vision of our globular-eyed trilobite was, by looking at the directions in which all the lenses face.
It turns out that our animal was able to see in almost every direction — upwards, downwards, sideways and forwards, and even backwards, because the eyes bulged out beyond the line of the rest of the body.
Most other trilobites have a predominantly lateral field of view.
If the animal lived on the sea bottom, it seems unlikely that it would have eye lenses specialized for looking downwards , and we begin to suspect that the animal habitually dwelt above the sea floor.
Other features of its shape are consistent with this.
At the   edge of the eyes are a pair of long spines, and these point downwards at a steep angle, at very awkward attitude for resting comfortably on the sea floor.
Most ‘normal’ trilobites have a more or less horizontal rim around the forward margin, which may have rested on the sediment surface.
The thorax of the large-eyed trilobite is remarkably long compared with the average trilobite (compare Fig. 33).
The convex, middle part of the thorax contained the musculature that operated the appendages (which, as usual, are not preserved), and the relatively large volume of this region shows that the musculature was powerful.
The construction of this giant-eyed trilobite suggests that it lived an actively swimming life well above the bottom, and possibly in the surface waters of the sea.
Of course because there are no living trilobites we cannot find direct confirmation of this hypothesis, but we can look for other arthropods that have the same modifications of the eyes, for example, in the present day oceans.
The analogy is found in such ocean-going amphipods (a kind of ‘shrimp’) as Cystosoma , which also has enormously expanded eyes, looking like headlamps, compared with its bottom-dwelling relatives (see above).
In fact many of the arthropods that inhabit the water column have large, globular eyes of this kind.
49 Fossil bony fish,Lates gracilis , Eocene.
This fish is preserved in a fine-grained limestone which preserved most of the skeletal details of the fish (but not its colours).
This is a stout-bodied fish, something like a perch in general proportions, with long, low fins on upper and lower rear of the body (fin rays finely divide near their ends).
Head to tail the fish measures 17 cm.
50 Vertebra of the Jurassic pliosaur,Liopleurodon species, Kimmeridge, southern England.
This is only one vertebra of an animal much too bulky to appear in a book of this size!
The original porous bone has been consolidated to become much heavier than it would have been in life.
Diameter of the vertebra is about 10 cm.
51 Fossil frog,Rana species, Miocene, Spain.
This species is preserved in a soft shale, but one which allows for the skeletal anatomy to be preserved in its entirety.
The outline of the soft parts are also clearly displayed, so that the animal has been preserved almost in frozen motion.
Frogs are one of the more numerous of amphibian fossils.
Specimen 12 cm long.
52 Fossil calcareous alga, belonging to the genus Coelosphaeridium , Ordovician, Ringsaker, Norway.
These spherical algae are preserved as internal moulds in a mudstone, the original calcite having disappeared.
Canals within the algae stand out as rods in this kind of preservation, which is common in Ordovician rocks.
There is a central sphere visible on one of the specimens.
Related forms are spread over much of the world in Ordovician and Silurian times.
Individual globes have a diameter of 1½–2 cm.
53 Fossil lycopod bark,Lepidodendron rimosum , Carboniferous, Newcastle, England.
This is a typical ‘coal shale’; shales and silts occurring between productive coal seams often contain impressions of the plants that went to form the coal.
The plant material itself is converted to black carbon.
This fossil bark is typified by its lozenge-shaped leaf scars arranged in spiral rows.
This fragment is 1O cm long.
54 Fossil bark of the lycopod tree,Sigillaria laevigata , Carboniferous.
This specimen lies on a slab of mudstone, the specimen itself having been converted into coal-like material — that is, into carbon.
Sigillaria bark is covered with little horseshoe-shaped scars (leaf cushions).
It is found in North America (Canada and the US), England, Belgium, France, Germany and Russia.
This piece is 9 cm long.
55 Leaves of the enigmatic plant,Glossopteris linearis , Permian.
Many of these long leaves are preserved on the bedding planes of a siltstone.
Glossopteris is characterized by its long strap-shaped leaves, which have a conspicuous midrib, with many fine, smaller veins branching off it to form a network.
Its classification in relation to other plants is still unsolved.
These leaves have a length of 7–8 cm.
56 Fossil root,Stigmaria ficoides , Carboniferous.
This root is preserved as an internal mould, in a tough sandstone.
It has been slightly crushed.
The infilling sandstone is derived from the fossil soil over which the root was growing.
Stigmaria is the name given to roots of the giant lycopod Lepidodendron (this page).
This specimen is 15 cm long, but roots have been found which attain a length of 14 metres!
57 Leaf of a Carboniferous seedfern,Mariopteris muricata , Staffordshire, England.
The specimen is preserved in a hard claystone nodule, which preserved the leaflets in relief.
This is quite a common preservation in coal measures.
Microscopical details are not so well-preserved, and the fossil is, of course, only a fragment of a larger plant.
The leaflets are attached to the axis along their entire base.
6 cm long.
58 Fossil horsetail,Annularia sphenophylloides , Carboniferous.
This specimen is preserved as a carbonaceous compression on a very fine-grained and well-bedded sandstone, a preservation common in Carboniferous rocks.
The little circlets of flat ‘leaves’ born at regular intervals on the jointed stems serve to distinguish this plant from others in the Carboniferous coal-shales. 8 cm long.
59 A ‘prefern’,Archaeopteris hibernica , Devonian, Kilkenny, Ireland.
A fern-like plant, beautifully preserved in a yellow sandstone.
The original material of the axis shows up black against the background of the rock.
The large frond carries many branches, on which there are numbers of leaf-like pinnules — more or less alternating on either side of the branch.
The specimen is 25 cm long.
60 Fossil fern,Sphenopteris laurenti , Carboniferous, Derbyshire, England.
The frond of this fossil fern is preserved as a compression on the surface of a fine-grained, mica-rich siltstone.
Some of the original fine detail on the leaflets is preserved.
Reproductive structures should really be found to distinguish it from other, superficially fern-like plants.
This frond is 9 cm long.
61 Fossil poplar leaf,Populus latior , Miocene.
The leaf is excellently preserved on the flat bedding-plane of a limestone laid down under fresh water.
Poplar leaves have an elegant outline resembling that of an arab minaret.
This species has a finely toothed margin; a large, wide leaf born on a long stem.
This type of tree has a history extending back to the upper Cretaceous.
Length of leaf is 18 cm.
62 Miocene maple seeds,Acer trilobatum .
Seeds of the maple family are typically in pairs, joined at the base, with flat ‘wings’ that help the seeds to disperse.
Seeds of Acer are rare compared with the leaves, which can be found in rocks dating back to the Cretaceous period.
This is from the Oeningen, Switzerland.
Seeds are about 3 cm long.
63 Miocene maple leaf,Acer trilobatum .
This leaf is exquisitely preserved in a fine-grained, flat-bedded marly limestone.
Although much of the fine detail can be seen most of the tissue of the leaf is destroyed.
The leaf is divided into three parts with a broad central lobe (finely toothed) and two flanking lobes.
Simple, distinct veining can also be seen.
The leaf is 10 cm long.
64 Fossil flower,Porana oeningensis , Miocene.
These beautifully preserved flowers are from the Oeningen deposits like the maple leaf and seeds illustrated here.
Fossil flowers are extremely rare because of their delicacy and because they are shortlived.
These flowers have five oval petals, finely veined.
No details of the stamens are present in the fossil state.
Diameter of the flowers is about 2 cm.
Giant-eyed living crustacean (Cystosoma )
If it is correct that our trilobite lived above the sea bottom, actively swimming in the water, there are certain predictions we can make about its geological occurrence which can be tested by looking in the rocks.
Most bottom-dwelling trilobites preferred to live at a particular water depth, or on a particular type of sea bottom (mud, sand or lime).
No such restriction should apply to our large-eyed species; it should be found with all other different kinds of trilobite assemblages without preference.
This has been proved in several places: in some arctic localities it is found with trilobites that lived at great depths in the muds of the Ordovician ocean, while in Canada the same species occurs mixed with the inhabitants of the shallow-water seas, where limestones were accumulating.
By the same token the free-swimming trilobite may be expected to have a very wide geographical distribution, for oceans would be no barrier to it.
And again this proves to be the case: our example is found in Arctic Canada, in the high Arctic  island of Spitsbergen, thousands of miles away in what is now the desert country of Nevada and Utah in the United States, in western Ireland, in Russia, and in northwestern Australia.
So in this case the different sources of evidence all point in the same direction, whether derived from a detailed consideration of the way the trilobite is constructed, or by analogy with living animals with similar adaptations, or from the evidence of the rocks or the distribution of the fossils.
These giant-eyed trilobites of the Ordovician were active swimmers in the surface waters, as near certainly as we can ever know.
There are all kinds of different questions we can ask about the life habits of these trilobites, which are not subject to the same kind of careful scrutiny.
What did they eat, for example?
Because we do not have the legs preserved, it is not possible to see how the mouth appendages functioned in feeding, and neither are the stomach contents preserved.
So here there are only more or less likely speculations.
Active swimmers in the surface waters of the present oceans are likely to feed directly on the plankton, and the trilobites may have had a method of harvesting large quantities of minute food.
Or they may have been hunters after larger prey, in which case when appendages are eventually discovered they may prove to have adaptations for grasping and manipulating larger food.
Puzzles remain, even though we can be certain of the rudiments of the story.
CONTROVERSY AMONG THE GIANT DINOSAURS
The giant sauropod dinosaurs like Brachiosaurus were the largest land animals the world has seen they weighed more than 80 tonnes and present quite different problems in the interpretation of their life habits from the diminutive trilobites.
Such spectacular animals have obviously attracted much attention, and one might suppose that the problem of how they lived would have been satisfactorily solved long ago.
Most of the popular books showing the Mesozoic giants in their natural setting portray them wallowing about in swamps flanked by deep vegetation, their bodies largely under water.
Surely an animal of this bulk, it was argued, must be partly supported by water, and their relatively inconsequential teeth must have been adapted for chewing on the kind of soft, luxuriant vegetation that flourishes in and around swamps.
Because their nasal openings were on the top of their heads they could even continue to breathe if it became necessary (see p. 115) to totally submerge.
Recently the life habits of the giants have been looked at in a way that disproves most of these traditional notions.
Consider the structure of their legs.
The sauropods have relatively long, pillar-like legs, resembling those of the elephant, the largest living land animal, and may have been well adapted for supporting the huge bulk of the animal.
The feet of the sauropod are small (relatively speaking!), with short, stubby toes, yet animals that walk on soft mud tend to have spreading feet to distribute their weight more evenly.
It is difficult to see how the compact feet of the sauropod could avoid becoming stuck fast in the soft, muddy bottom of a lake.
If the dinosaur did, after all, live on dry land, then the long neck could have usefully functioned to allow the animal to browse the high foliage of trees (see p. 116).
It has been suggested that an animal of the size of Brachiosaurus could not have breathed under water because of the pressure on the lungs.
Their fossil remains seem to occur with other animals and plants, which are generally accepted as terrestrial.
There is even some evidence from the tracks they have left behind that Diplodocus and its allies moved about in herds.
They may have been the gigantic reptilian analogue of the elephant, and it may be no coincidence that the elephant also has its nasal openings on top of the skull, with the nostrils in this case sited at the end of the trunk it has been suggested that some sauropods may have had a proboscis of some sort.
The balance of evidence seems to be swinging away from the original idea of swamp-dwelling giant dinosaurs to fully terrestrial habits.
But other aspects of the dinosaur living habits are still more strongly debated.
In the last few years a powerful controversy has arisen over whether the dinosaurs as a whole were cold-blooded, like all living reptiles (and there is no doubt that dinosaurs were reptiles), or warm-blooded, resembling mammals in this respect.
Cold-blooded animals have to ‘warm up’ before they can be fully active; that is why lizards and snakes bask in the sun in temperate climates.
For this reason they cannot cope with climates having greatly extended winters.
Warm-blooded animals have the same body temperatures at all times, and can be more continuously active, but they use far more energy — and hence need more food — than cold-blooded animals of the same size.
The posture of many dinosaurs, and particularly the carnivorous theropod dinosaurs, was fully erect with the legs beneath the body, and unlike the sprawling legs of living reptiles (see p. 116).
The long back legs of such hunters look highly suitable for running, and as they did so the long tail may have been held erect as a kind of counter-balance (see p. 116).
For any kind of prolonged activity, warm-bloodedness would have been a distinct advantage.
Under the microscope even the bone structure of these dinosaurs looks more like that of living mammals than cold-blooded reptiles.
On the other hand it can be argued that the sauropods like Brachiosaurus were so large, and with a relatively small surface area through which to cool compared with their enormous volume, that their cooling rate could have been slow enough to allow them to sustain more continuous activity than smaller, living reptiles.
It has also been argued that the small mouths of the giants simply could not have downed enough food to support a warm-blooded metabolism, particularly plant food that needs a lot of processing before it becomes available as energy.
The armoured or plated dinosaurs include some species that seem too heavily burdened with protective armour to have been very active, but this does not necessarily mean that they had to be cold-blooded.
Protagonists of the warm-blooded theory will show some of the horned dinosaurs charging over the Cretaceous plains like furious reptilian rhinoceroses!
One idea about the life habits of the dinosaur giants, published in Joc and Colette at the Natural History Museum in 1935
The warm-blooded supporters tend to ally themselves with the supporters of a theory about the relationships of the dinosaurs.
This is that the dinosaurs, or a close dinosaur relative, included the ancestors of the living birds.
Some of the smaller, and most certainly highly active dinosaurs were about the size of a chicken, and there is more than a passing similarity between a running ostrich and the kind of reconstruction that shows fleet-footed, running dinosaurs.
The point is that birds themselves are warm-blooded, like mammals, and if birds and dinosaurs are as closely related as now seems likely, then it obviously increases the likelihood  that the dinosaurs themselves may have been warm-blooded.
The pros and cons of this theory are the subject of much contentious debate by experts, but it would probably be correct to say that the greater number of specialists believe that at least the more bipedal of the dinosaurs, including small and large carnivores, were warm-blooded, active animals.
A lot of the argument among the authorities on these animals is about the equivalence or otherwise of certain bones in dinosaurs and bird skeletons (and particularly the Jurassic bird Archaeopteryx ); this makes for rather dry reading for the layman.
But the end-product is the accurate reconstruction of the Jurassic and Cretaceous terrestrial world, over which the dinosaurs were indisputably dominant.
GRAPTOLITES — FLOATING COLONIES
In the 1830s and 40s geologists were beginning to unravel the mysteries of the early Palaeozoic rocks.
The past world recorded in the rocks could not have seemed more alien.
Many of the organisms that left fossil remains were of kinds now extinct, although some, like the trilobites, could obviously be placed into a phylum with many living representatives.
The graptolites, however, were initially completely enigmatic; they were first described as plants!
Their remains were so abundant that they could not be ignored.
Their colonies, looking like so many miniature hacksaw blades, often completely covered bedding planes, and usually they were found in the absence of other kinds of fossils.
It also became apparent that they could be useful in subdividing the intractable stretch of time from Late Cambrian to Silurian; they changed in obvious ways from one rock formation to the next.
Ones with numerous branches seemed to dominate the earlier rocks, ones with fewer branches were later, while in rocks we would now recognize as Silurian and early Devonian, forms with but a single branch (or stipe ) were abundant.
With the discovery of better-preserved material it became apparent that the graptolites consisted of rows of tiny cups which were interconnected by a common canal — they were colonial animals.
As noticed (p. 59) it is now known that the graptolites were an extinct branch of the phylum Hemichordata, an insignificant group today, consisting of a few encrusting colonial organisms.
How did these mysterious organisms live?
In this case it is difficult to apply argument from analogy, because the graptolites  are really rather different from any animals now alive.
The modern hemichordates are all encrusters and virtually all colonial organisms (such as corals or bryozoa) are bottom dwellers in the sea.
On this argument the graptolites should have been bottom dwelling-colonial organisms, living by filtering small particles of food from the water.
Some of the graptolites (dendroid graptolites) were shrubby colonies, looking very much like living hydroids or some bryozoa.
These were equipped with ‘roots’, and an inference of bottom-living habits seems eminently reasonable for them.
But the great majority of the class, including all those with typical saw-blade profiles (graptoloids) which were widely used in the dating of rocks, certainly lacked any kind of rooting structure.
When they were looked at in more detail it was found that the colonies grew from one single tube (sicula) which is often facing in a different direction from the tubes inhabited by the rest of the colony (see below).
A slender rod (nema) usually grows from the top of the sicula.
Since some of the graptoloids are large and robust, this slender rod seemed an inadequate basis for attachment to the sea floor, particularly in any sort of turbulent environment.
Then there were some forms, like Phyllograptus (see p. 118), in which the colony grew over the slender nema to leave no visible means of attachment at all.
It begins to look as if the graptoloids could have been free-floating animals, of a kind without any living counterpart.
Left A modern reconstruction of the life habits of the giant sauropods, which could scarcely be more different from the 1935 version
Centre left The posture of a dinosaur compared with that of a living reptile
Bottom left The active, running posture of a dinosaur in the modern interpretation
Below Growth and budding of a graptolite colony, enlarged about 20 times
Now the geological circumstances in which the most abundant graptolite faunas are found can be introduced into the argument.
The most typical occurrence of these fossils is in dark, often sooty, black shales.
In many localities graptolites are the only fossils to be found, but they occur in abundance.
Sometimes they occur with cherty rocks that contain the remains of indubitably planktonic radiolaria.
Some, at least, of the graptolitic black shales are what we can recognize, with the hindsight of plate tectonic theory, as the deposits laid down of the edge of the continental shelf, in a truly oceanic environment.
These are frequently associated with volcanic rocks of oceanic type.
So there seems little room for doubt that the graptolites were capable of living in an open-ocean environment.
The fact that they occur in shales without other benthic remains makes it very likely that they were free floating, and this is consistent with the way some of the species were constructed.
Dead graptoloids simply drifted down to the bottom where they were preserved by dark muds at a depth at which there was little oxygen in the water to support bottom-dwelling organisms.
A few examples have been found where a number of graptoloids seem to have been associated together attached (by the nema) to a ‘float’.
Other species seem to have the nema extended into a kind of vane.
There may have been some species which were attached to floating seaweed.
Of course, many graptoloids also drifted into shallower water, where they are associated with a more normal kind of fossil assemblage.
Like the pelagic trilobites, individual graptoloid species are very widespread, which is what one would expect of an animal with the wide ocean as its habitat.
It is not surprising to find that the widespread  species have been used extensively to correlate rocks between different continents — they form the standard for the Silurian period, where the graptolite faunas are nearly the same all over the world.
Above Phyllograptus , a graptolite colony with no means of attachment.
About twice natural size.
Above right A sample of the different shapes achieved by the brachiopods: different shapes for differing modes of life
In this case a combination of geological evidence and the evidence of the shape of the animal itself has been used to say something about how the animal lived.
Many problems remain.
Which way up did they float?
Were there species adapted for living at particular depths?
Why did graptoloids have an evolutionary trend from many branches to few branches?
There are plenty of different answers available to these questions, but, like the metabolism of dinosaurs, no  concensus has been reached as yet.
ANIMALS WITH TWO VALVES
Graptolites, trilobites, and dinosaurs are all extinct, and so in the examples we have considered so far there is no direct recourse to the study of living animals to help us bring our fossils back to life.
Any analogies have to be with living creatures that are distantly related in the zoological sense, although there may be reasons to suspect that they have similar life habits to those that the fossil animals once enjoyed.
Some of the fossils with the simplest construction are those with the soft parts encased within two valves, principally the bivalves and the brachiopods.
These two groups of animals are quite unrelated, but both still have living representatives in the oceans, and so it is possible to look at living animals to help with the interpretation of fossil examples.
Of the two, the bivalve molluscs are much the most significant in the sea today.
The brachiopods are still numerous in some environments, but these tend to be rather inaccessible, such as in the deep sea, which inhibits their direct study in the field.
Most brachiopods lead a rather uneventful life, attached by a stalk to a hard surface, like the underside of a rock, or another shell, filtering food from the surrounding sea water.
There is nothing to suggest that the innumerable fossil brachiopods had any other method of feeding.
Yet it is obvious that there are a great variety of shapes (see above) among the fossil forms, many of them unmatched in living species.
There must have been many different ways for brachiopods to exploit their simple mode of life.
For a filter-feeding animal, it is sensible to  separate the  inhalent current, bringing food, from the  exhalent one, which carries away waste products.
Brachiopod feeding is carried out by the lophophore (p. 61), a ciliated band usually carried on a loop, which also creates the currents used in feeding.
Many brachiopods have developed a broadly wavy margin of the valves (see below), with the middle bent downwards.
This form of the shell reflects the separation of the feeding currents from the  exhalent currents.
Currents pass in through the sides of the shell, over the ciliated lophophore where the food is extracted, and then out through the depression in the margin of the valves.
The lophophore is supported in several different ways.
In some species the support is on a spiral made of calcium carbonate (see p. 120).
This increases the length of the lophophore available to extract food from the feeding current, and so increases the efficiency of the process.
Brachiopods begin to seem rather more complex animals than their simple shape suggests.
Many species have a finely folded margin, crumpled like corrugated cardboard.
Since the shell grows at the margins, a ribbed shell is produced, with fine or coarse ribs according to the species.
A ribbed shell of this kind is often stronger than one without ribs (for the same reason that corrugated iron is used for roofing), and it is probably no coincidence that ribs may be developed on bivalves too.
But the wavy margin may serve another function.
For one thing it increases the length of the margin, allowing the animal to admit more food per unit of length.
The wavy margin also prevents the entry of irritating particles of sand, with which the animal cannot cope.
However, there is still a problem at the crests of the corrugations, where the gap between the valves is larger; many brachiopods solve this particular problem by having fine, hair-like spines which cover the crests of the corrugations, and so prevent the intrusion of unwanted particles.
Wavy valve margins in brachiopod.
Note also the ribbing.
Four times life size.
Although most brachiopods were attached to a firm substrate by a stalk which emerges through a hole in the pointed end of the animal, there are some in the fossil record in which there is no opening for such a stalk.
These must have lain freely on the surface of the sediment.
In some of these species one valve is greatly thickened.
This is likely to have been the lower valve, and fossils are sometimes found in ‘life position’, which confirms this.
The other valve sits in the thick one like a lid, and the whole animal is curved so that the margins of the valves were kept clear of the sediment.
The end result is an animal that looks very much like some kinds of oyster, although a glance at the internal feeding structures shows at once that they are brachiopods, unrelated to the bivalves they superficially resemble.
Some species had long spines (anchors?) attached to the lower, thicker valve.
Unlike the brachiopods, many of the modes of life of living bivalve molluscs can be more or less directly matched in fossil   examples.
So by studying how the life habits of living bivalves are reflected in the shapes of the shells we can make deductions about how the fossils lived.
A major difference between brachiopods and bivalves is that the latter are capable of moving freely, using their foot to crawl or dig.
Of course, some bivalves, like mussels and oysters,do remain fixed throughout their adult life, and it is possible that these fill the ecological role today of some of the large brachiopods of the Palaeozoic.
Some of these lived in shallow water sites and were gregarious like mussels.
But since brachiopods were unable to do many of the things that bivalves do very efficiently, it would be unwise to attribute the decline of the brachiopods to diversification of the bivalves.
Above Swimming in bivalves: living Chlamys escaping starfish predators
Right Burrowing bivalve mollusc in life position; the siphons retain contact with the surface
Left Spiral supports for the brachiopod feeding system, preserved inside one of the valves, and etched out with acid
Burrowing bivalves, which are typically found in the soft bottoms of shallow seas today, dig themselves down into the sediment, where they escape the attention of many predators (except birds with long bills!).
Many of them retain contact with the surface of the sediment by means of long siphons (see left), which enable them to breathe and feed on small organic particles.
Most bivalves with siphons develop a gape at one end of the valves, so that they do not close  entirely in the region from which the siphons protrude.
It is easy to recognize such gaping valves in fossils, and there are accompanying changes on the internal structure of the shell which are associated with species with long siphons.
Hence bivalves as old as Palaeozoic can be identified with some confidence as ancient burrowers.
It can be confirmed by discoveries of fossils preserved in their life position.
Often the process of ‘digging in’ is assisted by a characteristic pattern of chevron-shaped ribs on the surface of the shell, which are also obvious features of some fossil shells.
Such V-shaped ribs are not found on brachiopods, which have never developed the capacity for burrowing.
Other kinds of bivalves have used their capacity for free movement to the utmost by becoming efficient swimmers, clapping their valves together like castanets to move through the sea to find new feeding grounds or to escape the threat of predators.
These bivalves have fan-like shells, often strongly ribbed (Chlamys ).
While the bottom-dwelling or burrowing bivalves mostly have a pair of strong muscles to pull the valves together, in the swimming forms the muscles have become modified so that there is one particularly powerful muscle, centrally placed, to produce the powerful clapping movement that propels the animal through the water.
This muscle leaves a conspicuous scar on the inside of the shell, an impression which is easily preserved in the fossil state.
So it is possible to deduce swimming habits in fossil bivalves by comparison with the living forms.
These swimming habits go back into the Palaeozoic, to the Carboniferous or earlier.
There are a few bivalves which are found in rocks deposited in the same sort of black shale environment that was mentioned above in the discussion of graptolite life habits.
Some experts maintain that these molluscs were able to swim in the open ocean, or that they were attached to floating seaweed: some such mechanism has to be invoked to explain how these bivalves came into an environment that lacked bottom-living animals.
I have only selected a few examples of deducing modes of life from these fossils with two valves; the examples could be multiplied many times.
The most important point is that relatively complicated life habits can be inferred from a careful consideration of the anatomy of even the simplest looking animal, particularly when there are related, similarly adapted animals for comparison.
PALAEONTOLOGICAL ENIGMAS
Every now and then the fossil record throws up fossils which are palaeontological puzzles.
They are obviously the remains of some kind of animal, but the problem is to decide what kind.
They tend to be rather rare, preserved in a special way.
And, of course, like so many palaeontological matters, they stir up arguments between specialists who think they have a way of solving the enigmas.
Some of these puzzling fossils are quite small.
A few years ago a minute fossil only about 2 mm long was recovered from limestones of Ordovician age, and christened Janospira .
It looks remarkably like a trumpet.
The ‘mouthpiece’ and the ‘horn’of the trumpet are both open, and a coil hangs down from the middle.
The end of the coil is closed, and it seems reasonable to assume that the animal started growing as a coiled shell.
Then it must have changed its mind, and started to grow in two directions, a narrower tube into the ‘mouthpiece’ and a broader one into the ‘horn’, and there is some evidence that the ‘horn’end continued to get wider and longer.
The problem is that it is hard to equate this kind of growth with that of any known animal group.
It looks like some kind of mollusc, but no mollusc fits easily into this pattern of growth; various people have suggested it might be some kind of snail, or perhaps a monoplacophoran (see p. 76).
It remains a puzzle.
It is found along with fossils of planktonic organisms and it is possible to explain the change in growth between coil and trumpet as a change that happened when the larval shell settled on the bottom.
But since virtually all phyla of animals have planktonic larvae, this is no help in solving the puzzle.
A palaeontological enigma:Janospira , a small Ordovician fossil of unknown relationships
Some larger fossils are even more puzzling.
A number from the famous Middle Cambrian Burgess Shale of western Canada are so strange that they have even been claimed as the representatives of ‘extinct phyla’.
Certainly they are difficult to accommodate comfortably in groups alive today.
One of these,Hallucigenia is shown opposite.
This curious animal has  what was probably a gut and a set of tubules arising from it; below this are curious pointed structures.
What can it be?
One suggestion is that early on in metazoan evolution there were a number of experimental designs which were not to give rise to direct descendants; naturally these do not fit into the pigeon holes based on living animals.
Hallucigenia may have been one of these.
There are problems with designating these as new phyla, not least that nobody can define a phylum objectively, and my own view is that, marvellous though these animals are, we should still try to relate them to other organisms (fossil and living).
Hallucigenia would defy all such attempts at the moment.