

Foxton: Locks and Barge Lift
by Peter Gardner and Frank Foden
Foxton Locks has always been one of the most popular attractions in the Leicestershire countryside.
However, many visitors to the Locks have gone away without realising that it was also the location for one of the more fascinating engineering feats of the canal era, an ‘Inclined Plane’ which lifted boats up the steep Foxton escarpment on the Grand Union Canal, enabling them to avoid the climb through the narrow locks, which was both wasteful of water and time-consuming.
After its closure in 1910, the Inclined Plane became heavily overgrown.
In recent years, the number of visitors to Foxton has increased considerably, as has interest in industrial archaeology.
British Waterways Board, Leicestershire County Council, and the Leicestershire branch of the Council for the Protection of Rural England have therefore co-operated to make the site more readily accessible and understandable to the public.
Recently, the Foxton Inclined Plane Trust has been formed, and is continuing this work.
This booklet tells the story of the Canal at Foxton, the Locks and the ingenious Inclined Plane.
Acknowledgements
This book would hardly have been possible without the help of the long memories of two gentlemen who were children at Foxton during the time of the Lift.
They are Mr Percy J. Durran and the late Mr Alfred Cryer, for whose enthusiastic help we are very grateful.
We also thank many others who have given us material help, including the late Mr T. Saddington; Mr C. Hadlow, the first Curator of Stoke Bruerne Waterways Museum; his successor, Mr R.J. Hutchings; and Mr Philip Stevens, formerly of Leicester Museum, and Mr A.W.
Matts, Foxton Boat Services Ltd, Foxton.
Foxton Locks today.
Foxton and the Grand Union Canal
Foxton, a sizeable attractive village in the heart of the rich agricultural lands of south Leicestershire, two miles off the A6 and four miles north west of Market Harborough, is, according to the Shell Guide, ‘a favourite place for Sunday motorists’.
There are two excellent public houses and a charming hillside parish church, all worth visiting.
But these are not what the motorists come for.
Nor is it the knowledge that Foxton, a haunt of foxes even in Saxon times, is a meeting place among others of one of the great Leicestershire Hunts, the Fernie, however important a cause that may be for assemblies of motorists in the county.
Its chief claim to fame, local, national and even international, is that it focuses very sharply on that other great nostalgia of the motor age, the canals of Britain.
Here near to Foxton are examples of all sorts of things that excite the blood of the canal enthusiast: a delightful cut through the centre of the village taking the boatman to the once prosperous wharves and building yards of Market Harborough; a wonderful hand-operated swingbridge allowing the more adventurous visitors to negotiate Swingbridge Lane on their own; visible and tangible memories of boatmen's inns.
But the most exciting things of all are out of sight of the village itself.
The main street sweeps southward up the hill between the ‘Black Horse’ and St Andrews Church on the way to Gumley; swinging westward it bumps over the bridge crossing the upper pound of the Grand Union Canal, which itself winds away westward and southward to Husbands Bosworth and out of the county.
On the north side of the bridge the Canal widens into a beautiful open stretch, lost on the far bank in a dense growth of reeds and sedges, a grand place for anglers and bird watchers — if the motorists and canal travellers would leave them in peace.
Beyond the solitary canal house on the towpath the canal disappears dramatically down to the steep hillside through the ‘greatest lock staircase in England’, as L.T.C. Rolt puts it.
And as one walks down the precipitous towpath there on the right is the stepping spread of side ponds and beyond that the overgrown remains of ‘one of the many freaks that the mechanical age has produced’, as Rolt describes rather ungraciously the inclined plane that has gained for Foxton an entry in the ‘Encyclopaedia Britannica’.
Below both the flight and the plane is the sort of canal junction complex that brings joy to the heart of any inland water wayfarer.
Some, but not all of this, is familiar to those who know their Leicestershire, and the canals of England.
It remains a mystery to many why Foxton, a country village so far from the turmoil of industrial England, and on a hillside, should have become the site of so much ingenious canal design.
The story is long, complicated and just a part of one of the most controversial and problematic developments in the creation of the English canal system, a story admirably told in Charles Hadfield's The Canals of the East Midlands and more fully still in Philip Stevens' The Leicester Line .
It is no part of this account to repeat the work of these excellent studies.
It has seemed to us for a long time that something special about Foxton Locks and Inclined Plane is called for, and this is an attempt to meet that need.
Foxton Locks
Curiously enough, the Locks at Foxton are much better known than the Inclined Plane.
Both are unique, but there is no doubt that the Plane is the more unexpected of the two features, and this, together with its overgrown obscurity, ensures that ‘Foxton Locks’ come first in any discussion about the place.
The Locks are, indeed, an excellent subject of discussion.
They, like the plane, in later years, represented a special link in the canal line between the East Midlands and London, a line for which there were great hopes both at the time of construction at the beginning of the nineteenth century and of its rehabilitation at the end of the century.
The result was disappointing on each occasion.
Both times the hope was that Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire and Leicestershire coal could be taken to London cheaply and quickly.
Physically the original problem was the connecting of the Soar Navigation system, completed during the early phase of canal development, with the Grand Junction system, the new line between London and Braunston through Buckinghamshire and Northamptonshire, completed in 1914.
The construction of the two lengths of the ‘Leicester Line’, that from Leicester southwards to Debdale near Gumley first of all and then on to Market Harborough, between 1792 and 1809 (the ‘Leicester and Northants Union Canal’) and that from Foxton Junction, just south of Debdale, over the uplands of South Leicestershire and North Northants.
to Norton near Long Buckby on the Grand Junction (the ‘Grand Union’) between 1808 and 1814, is described fully by Philip Stevens in The Leicester Line .
Both developments produced their frustrations, dangers and, for their shareholders, disappointed expectations, and both cost much more than estimated.
Whatever may have been the problems of making the cut from Leicester to Debdale, those of the Grand Union were formidable.
They included gross and shifting uncertainties about money, great division of counsel in the General Assembly of the Company, fundamental differences of opinion between two at least of the engineers called on to survey the route, James Barnes and Thomas Telford, and, above all, the engineering of a very difficult route.
The entire programme spanned the period of the most demanding war ever fought by Britain up to that time, first against the new French Republic and later against Napoleon's Empire.
The building of the Grand Union coincided with the crucial years of struggle of the British armies in Europe.
Barnes was perhaps the last of the great illiterates, one case in the mould of Brindley.
One nineteenth century account of him reads: ‘Strong minded but very illiterate…he made all his calculations by the strength of his memory, and was equally at a loss to explain what he had conceived to any other person, and from being lowly educated he had no means of conveying to paper his designs, yet would cast up the most intricate accounts in his head without difficulty or error.’
However this may be, he recommended in his report of 1802 against the extension of the Leicester and Northants.
Union along the ‘parliamentary line’, that approved in the Act of 1793 for the construction of the Leicester line — the ‘Harborough arm’ had not yet been completed.
Instead of this line, which involved the construction of a tunnel, 48 chains long, under the rising ground near Foxton, into the Welland Valley, Barnes recommended boldly that the canal should be raised up six locks immediately, a sharp climb of 75 feet.
The canal would then drive southwards to Norton near to Long Buckby, keeping to the high ground and passing through tunnels at Husbands Bosworth and Crick, descending to the Grand Junction through five locks.
The Leicester and Northants.
Company were not satisfied with this and commissioned Thomas Telford, the greatest canal builder of all, to survey a route.
He recommended extension more or less as planned to Market Harborough, round the lower contours of the Lias upland blocking Foxton from the Welland Valley.
There was to be great a embankment across the Welland Valley to carry the canal southwards well to the east of Barnes's line but eventually joining the Grand Junction again very near to Long Buckby.
The level of Telford's line was 54 feet lower than Barnes's and, having fewer locks, would not only have used less water, but also more water could have been drained into it.
Telford's plan was accepted by the Company and cutting began but, as the cut approached Market Harborough, shortage of money persuaded them to abandon further extension.
So came into existence the ‘Harborough Arm’ a branch that should have been a main    line.
The Harborough Navigation was triumphantly opened on 13th October 1809.
A pair of boats passing through Foxton Locks in the winter of 1898/1899.
Despite the wonderful emotional quality of the picture, it also shows clearly the hard unromantic nature of canal transport in the late 19th century.
The Grand Junction Canal
The idea of completing the connection between the Leicester and Northants.
Union Canal was renewed almost immediately by the Grand Junction, and Foxton came back into the picture.
Telford, though not sacked, disappeared from the project and Benjamin Bevan, one of the Grand Junction's own engineers, at first nominally in tandem with Telford, became responsible for the later development.
Bevan favoured Barnes's route; it was shorter, cheaper and, despite the lock climbs at each end, less complicated than Telford's.
A factor which evidently weighed with the committees and the ‘General Assembly’ considering the line during the complex negotiations between the newly established ‘Grand Union’(in which the Grand Junction and the Leicester and Northants.
were represented) and the Grand Junction itself was the touchy subject of water.
Whatever route was chosen, water supplies would remain a controversial topic.
Three rivers rise in these uplands, the Nene, Welland and Avon, but none of them carries much water before they drain eastward and westward off the plateau, and the total water supply available for canal development in the area was never adequate.
In his efforts to persuade the Grand Junction in favour of the Foxton-Willoughby (or Norton) route, Barnes made a detailed survey, and apparently satisfied most critics and competing interests, including landowners and farmers, that if properly conserved there was plenty of water for ‘a very ample trade’.
It can hardly be said that his optimism was fully justified, though ironically enough the supply did become more than adequate in most seasons from the middle of the century onwards, when traffic dropped away.
Reservoirs at Sulby and Naseby, both in valleys of feeders to the Avon, were completed as part of the main construction programme in 1914 and 1921 respectively; the head of Naseby was raised in 1934 and ‘New Sulby’, better known as Welford Reservoir, came into use in 1837.
Both fed into the Welford Arm of the Canal opened in 1813.
A further reservoir at Crick had to be abandoned because of a diversion in the authorised line of the Crick Tunnel, forced upon the Company when the builders struck bad strata in 1912.
Plans for Foxton Locks
Considerations of possible water shortage may also have partly influenced the Grand Union into adopting the narrow seven foot gauge for both the Foxton and Watford lock systems, thus constituting a permanent bottleneck for through traffic.
More immediately significant was the knowledge that barges, that is, wide boats, would not be allowed by the Grand Junction to pass through the Blisworth Tunnel above Stoke Bruerne.
The Grand Union people, already very short of money, decided that there was little point at present in going for the wide gauge, especially as it was (conveniently) reported that traders preferred loading into narrow boats.
The Grand Union Act made provision for the widening of the locks when and if the Grand Junction relented on the matter of Blisworth.
This, of course, never happened.
The narrowness of Foxton was at least one of the arguments to come up at the end of the century in favour of the inclined plane.
Just before construction of Foxton began, Bevan decided as a further economy measure, for water, money and time, that the lock system should be built as a staircase and that there should be side-pond drainage.
The Company accepted these alterations.
Thus, almost hand to mouth, were determined the main features of the unique character and aspect of the Foxton Flight.
The location of the flight, up the steep hillside, had indeed been suggested by James Barnes in 1902, but the idea was not taken very seriously and forgotten altogether as the Telford plan developed.
Bevan resuscitated the suggestion in his report of July 1808 to the committee of the Grand Union, and two months later notice was given that an Act of Parliament would be sought for powers to build a canal southwards from Foxton.
What visitors to Foxton now see, either from above or below, is a staircase series of two lock flights, separated half way down by a large passing pond, with intermediate side ponds stepping up the east side of the flight.
This is exactly what Benjamin Bevan constructed between 1810 and 1813, except that some reshaping of the middle and lower side ponds took place in 1898 to make room for the inclined plane embankment, and that some reconditioning of the locks took place between 1908 and 1910 in preparation for re-opening.
Not everyone is familiar with these two interesting variations in lock construction, so that the lucid descriptions in Eric de Mare's excellent little book,The Canals of England are worth quoting, especially as he refers in the book directly to the Grand Union examples.
‘Staircase locks, or  Risers,’ he says, ‘are locks arranged in a flight without intermediate pounds, where the lower gates of one lock act as the upper gates of the next.
Risers are used where the slope of the ground is steep and consume much water when boats are ascending.
Another disadvantage is that boats cannot pass each other during the locking through.’
At Foxton passing is possible in the middle pound so that two boats can be in movement at the same time.
Even so, with water in normal supply, locking at Foxton takes an hour or more; slow working was always something of a disadvantage.
The usual reason for including side-pond was to save water.
However, at Foxton they are side-aligned ‘pounds’ rather than‘ponds’, designed to maintain a water supply to each lock, and contain the water which would normally be in the pound between each lock.
With only one passing pound, between the two middle locks, Foxton has in effect two ‘flights’, where locks are separated only by gates; traffic moves directly from one lock to the next.
Without the pounds, boats in passage might have to wait while the locks above filled with water, before the lock through which it is passing can fill.
At Foxton, the side ponds allow refilling immediately after down traffic has lowered the water level, saving valuable time.
It might perhaps be wondered why, when the locks were being renovated in 1909, the opportunity was not taken to adapt the side-ponds, to combine the need to re-fill the lock quickly with the kind of water economy which would have resulted from the more conventional side-pond system.
The Building of the Locks
Building the Foxton Locks took nearly four years.
Work started in autumn 1810.
Vast numbers of bricks were required and Bevan had the idea of constructing a tramroad alongside the line of the flight to raise bricks fired at Foxton not only for Foxton Locks but also for other constructions such as the Bosworth Tunnel.
There even seems to have been some notion of carrying the plateway along as far as Husbands Bosworth.
The company approved the laying of a tramroad and plates were ordered from the Butterley Company in Derbyshire, the track being laid in January 1811.
Work on the cut beyond the flight went on vigorously and by October 1811 four of the five miles between Foxton and the north end of the Husbands Bosworth Tunnel had been completed.
The first boatload of coal was carried along this section of the canal in June 1912, having been evidently lifted to the cut by the Foxton tramway.
The Bosworth Tunnel was completed in April 1813 and the canal was opened as far as Stanford on the main line and Welford at the end of the branch line on 25th May 1813.
The locks were still not completed so that whatever traffic moved between then and the opening of the Foxton Flight on 1 October 1813 must have involved portage up the tramway.
Curiously the decision to build the necessary lock flight at Watford was not finally taken until October 1813; work began early in 1814.
In the meantime the southern section of the Grand Union was being completed.
There was a setback in the winter of 1814 where there was a fall at one of the shafts of the Crick Tunnel, but the tunnel was finished on 29th July 1814.
At the Foxton end there were finishing touches.
The Grand Union committee tried to persuade the Leicester and Northants.
people to allow the first brick bridge north of the Foxton Junction to be used for cross over in towing.
All that was necessary was the purchase of sufficient land on the west side of the Leicester Canal to make a towpath for access to the Grand Union.
There was disagreement between the two companies as to whose responsibility would be the making of this towpath, so that in the end they built between them a new bridge just beyond the bottom lock.
This is the bridge that still spans the entrance to the Junction.
A toll clerk's house was quickly built near to the bottom lock and a lock keeper's house at the top lock.
The opening
The official opening of the canal was arranged for 9th August 1814.
Philip Stevens tells the story of the first ceremonial convoy through the Grand Junction, travelling north from Norton Junction where the new Canal joined the Grand Junction, up through the Watford Locks, obviously finished in great haste, through the tunnels at Crick and Husbands Bosworth, and down the Foxton Flight into the Leicester and Northants.
Canal:
‘There were three boats, the first of which, fitted up ‘in an elegant style’ and carrying a band and flying the flags of the Grand Union and the Leicester and Northants.
Union, bore deputations from both companies and ‘a large assembly of beauty and fashion’.
The other two were less opulently equipped, and carried ‘such ladies and gentlemen who chose to be of the party’.
These were followed by two of Pickford's Flyboats, on their first commercial run to Leicester.
Even in those early days, before Nature had taken over to make the canal the gem of rural beauty it is today, it must have been a charming trip.
At the junction of the Welford branch, a boat from Welford met them with ample supplies of refreshments to fortify them against  the passage of Bosworth tunnel.
They seem to have got through the far more alarming Crick without hysteria, but at Bosworth, some of the beauty and fashion displayed ‘strong symptoms of fear’.
No harm was done, however: the ladies' fears were allayed by the ‘gallantry and polite attention’ of the lucky gentlemen, so that there was ‘a close package, great hilarity, and good humour’while they were in the darkness of the tunnel, which no doubt reflect great credit on the GU's refreshments.
They arrived at Harborough soon after 7.00 p.m., and after their long day in the fresh air, doubtless tucked into the ‘sumptuous dinner’ provided with relish.
Turtle, venison and turbot are named among the good things — provided mainly, it seems, by Joseph Cradock, who had done the same for the LNU at its opening at Harborough in 1809.
Mrs Cradock presented a banner, somebody recited an ode, there was great gaiety, and ‘the festive board was not departed from until a late hour.’
Pickford's flyboats, however, dourly continued on their way to Leicester, where they arrived next day, returning thence for London the same evening.’
Thus was opened the Grand Union, aptly named, for it forged the last link of the ambitious grand design to connect the East Midlands coalfields to London, a total distance of 168 miles.
The furthest northward extent of the system was Langley Mill at the end of the Erewash Canal.
It is, for canal enthusiasts, a fascinatingly varied and interesting route, all of it still open.
From London the route climbs from the Thames at Brentford, crosses the Chiltern Hills, reaching a height of 380 feet at Tring Summit, then descends into the Ouse Valley.
Crossing the Ouse over the Cosgrove Aqueduct, the  canal climbs to Stoke Bruerne in Northamptonshire, now the home of the National Waterways Museum, through Blisworth Tunnel and more locks; then it leaves the Grand Junction system at Norton, climbing at Watford to the summit level plateau, 413.5 feet above sea level, before dropping suddenly at Foxton.
It descends steadily along the line to Leicester where it joins the Soar Navigation, continuing through Leicester and Loughborough on its way to Trent Junction.
Here it crosses the Trent and into the Erewash Canal and on to Langley Mill.
Figure 2 Map of Foxton Locks and Lift (1904).
It would be nice to think that it was a very prosperous affair.
Indeed, stretches of the system had considerable success, and between 1814 and the 1840's it could be said that the Grand Union justified itself.
the Victoria County History goes so far as to suggest that the early nineteenth century prosperity of Leicester, based partly on the transport of hosiery goods by canal to London was ‘probably due in no small degree to the fact that from 1802 onwards the development of communication had largely been completed.’
The fact that the coal trade did not develop on anything like the scale expected by the promoters of the Leicester and Grand Union Canals, and by the middle of the century what trade there was steadily fell off.
It is all the more remarkable then that at the end of the century it was thought feasible and worthwhile to improve the system by the creation of the inclined plane, that other source of interest and wonder at Foxton.
Aerial photograph, 1969
The Foxton Inclined Plane
Towards the end of the nineteenth century both the Foxton and the Watford lock flights were getting into a series state of disrepair and were leaking badly.
It became evident to the Companies involved — the Grand Junction, together with the Leicester and Northants.
Union (which was taken over by the Grand Junction in 1894)— that if the canal was to survive, extensive repairs were essential.
Obviously it was a time to reconsider the issue of widening both sets of locks.
In the event it was decided against all precedent to bypass the flights by the construction of inclined plane lifts.
These would not only increase the efficiency of transit of boats moving from one level to another; they would also save precious summit water.
Only one of the inclined planes was built, that at Foxton.
Thus Foxton retained its importance as a place of special interest to canal people, and reinforced its reputation by becoming the site for one of the oddest, most technologically ingenious and most spectacular pieces of engineering in the whole canal system.
The Anderton Lift, constructed in 1875 and reconstructed in 1908, on the Weaver Canal was, indeed, most spectacular — and still is — but not one whit more ingenious than the lift at Foxton.
Today the merest vestige of this astonishing contraption is visible, unintelligible to many visitors, but for those with some imagination and a little technical knowledge (well within the scope of almost everybody), a site full of wonder and excitement.
How the Lift Worked
The basic principle of the lift is that of two balancing weights positioned on an inclined plane, and suspended by a connecting rope passing over pulley wheels at the top of the plane (figures 3 and 4 ).
As the gravity effect of one weight is balanced by that of the other, the only power necessary to produce movement is that amount required to overcome friction and the inertia of the moving parts.
In essence, the apparatus consists of two ‘wet docks’ or moving tanks in which the vessels be transferred, the canal boats, are kept water borne.
The tanks are mounted on wheel carriages, adapted to support them horizontally during their run on inclined rail tracks extending from the lower to the upper levels (figure 5 ).
The rails run longitudinally down the plane, transverse to the length of the tanks, which travel broadside up and down the incline.
The main objects of this alignment are to achieve a short wheel base, and a fairly steep gradient.
At each end of the tanks are portcullis gates, which are opened and closed by hydraulic rams.
These gates move in vertical grooves, with suitable means for ensuring a watertight closure.
General view of the incline in use, probably taken in 1904.
Note the evidence of repair to the tracks, and also the definite leakage from the tank end gates.
In order to effect transfer of vessels at either level, the two tanks must not travel on the same plane.
Instead there are two planes, lying in echelon with one another, so that , although extending between the same levels, the planes end in a different alignment.
The channels with which each of the tanks connect at the upper level, and into which they immerse at the lower, lie parallel to one another, but the entrances to each of the upper channels, against which the appropriate tank abuts, are the width of an entire plane apart.
The upper channel entrances are closed off by portcullis gates similar to those on the tanks, set in the ‘standing work’ at the end of the channel.
When a tank is in position at the top of the incline, its end faces exactly on to the end of its matching channel, with the two portcullis gates, one on the tank, the other on the channel, exactly   opposite to one another.
In order to allow the joining of the water in the channel with that in the tank, so that the floating vessel can be transferred, there must be a practically water-tight joint between the end of the tank and the standing work of the channel.
This join is effected by a direct butt joint between suitably faced surfaces of steel and oak timbers along the bottom and sides of the tank end and of the channel end (figure 6 ).
Watertightness is achieved by thrust from hydraulic rams acting on the other end of the tank.
There is just sufficient traverse on the axles to allow the limited motion necessary to produce a water-tight abutment, the pressure being maintained as long as may be necessary for the manoeuvring of the vessels.
Figure 3 The Inclined Plane.
Figure 4 Plan and section of the ‘Thomas’ Lift.
Figure 5 End view of tank.
The lower portions of the inclined planes descend below the level of the water in the tail bays, and as the tanks on the downward run move down into the water until there is parity of level between the water in the tank and that in the bay, dock gates are unnecessary in these lower channels.
The vessel can be transferred when the portcullis gate on the tank (the one at the opposite end to the one used on the upper transfer) has been lifted.
The tanks are directly connected to one another by a balance rope attached to the centre of each tank and passing over pulleys set about the centre of each plane.
A pair of hauling ropes is also fastened to the leading edge of each tank, one rope towards each end of the tank.
The hauling ropes pass, via pulleys, on to a single winding drum in opposite directions, so that when one tank is being raised, the ropes of the other are being paid out to lower it.
Since the full tanks weighing about 240 tons each are in balance, one against the other (by Archimedes' principle, the loading of the vessels into the tank makes no difference to the overall weight of the tank), only a small amount of power is necessary to cause them to move.
The winding drum is powered by a small steam engine, operating through a worm-wheel and gear.
As already explained, the tanks balance one another on the main part of the run, but there is a change when they approach the ends of the run.
As one tank approaches the top of the incline, the other begins to descend into the water at the lower level.
There is an uplift effect exerted by the water in the lower channel on the tank entering it.
This reduces the effective weight of that tank which, if not counteracted, will upset the basic balance of the system.
When fully immersed, the effective weight of the lower tank is only 60 tons; this means that relative to the lower tank, the weight of the upper tank will be 180 tons greater.
Without compensation, a large surge of additional power would be required to complete the travel of the tanks.
This compensation is effected by turning the upper part of the rails over a vertical curve, thus diminishing the gradient of the incline and reducing the gravity effect of the upper tank.
The curve is graduated exactly in proportion to the increasing loss of weight of the lower tank as it enters the water, so that the effective weight loss of the upper tank at the end of its run exactly matches that of the lower one.
The tanks thus continue in balance throughout.
There is, however, one further problem.
If there is just one curve at the top of the incline and the leading and trailing wheels thus continue travelling on the same rail tracks, as the tank comes up over the curve it will tilt forward.
Horizontality is, in fact, preserved by bringing into use an additional pair of wheels under the leading edge of the tank, fitted on the same axle as the main track wheels, one at each end of the axle, and thus outside the main pair, in such a way that they engage with a second, outside, pair of rails laid over the curve (figure 7 ).
The primary and secondary pair of rails are parallel to each other, gradually deviating to equal extends from the normal plane of the incline, but displaced a distance equal to the distance between the leading and trailing wheels.
Thus the leading wheels (the outer pair) begin to move over the curve on the outside rails at the same time as the trailing wheels strike the curve, and the tank remains correctly orientated.
The profile of the vertical curve is so calculated as to correspond with the gradually diminishing hauling effort of the descending tank as it enters the water.
Figure 6 Abutments between tank and upper channel.
The main details of this description are derived from the account of the lift published by Gordon Thomas, the designer of the lift, in a paper to the International Congress on Inland Navigations in 1902, and later in a private publication of 1904 describing the ‘Thomas Lift’ for an exhibition in the U.S.A. Although they are clear general descriptions, they are almost identical and, where applicable, the wording is exactly that of the original patent applications, of 1896/7.
It is unfortunate that these descriptions, published well after the completion of the lift, do not reflect the real experience of the machinery actually working.
Figure 7 Reduction of gradient without tilting tanks.
Some details of the Foxton Lift
The vertical height of the lift was 75ft. 2ins., and there was a gradient of 1 in 4, giving a length of just over 300 feet.
The tanks were 80 feet long by 15 feet wide and 5 feet deep (internal dimensions), and were mainly constructed of steel plates ⅜ins. thick, and angle sections riveted together.
Each tank was carried on four pairs of tracks, making a total of 16 points of support to each vehicle.
At the ends of the tanks were vertical lattice-frameworks to support and lift the end gates — the ‘portcullises’.
A hydraulic ram was used to open these gates by means of chains passing over pulleys on the lintel of the frame, giving a velocity ration of 3 to 1.
Counter-balance weights were used to reduce the necessary lifting force, but leaving sufficient unbalance for the gates to be shut by gravity.
As already mentioned, the joint between the tanks and the gates at the end of the upper channels was by simple abutment between 7 inch wide flat steel surfaces on the tanks.
This was quite different from the detail initially proposed by Thomas and described in the patent application.
This proposal involved rebated surfaces and, in consequence, a much more complicated arrangement than that finally constructed.
The end gates to the upper channels consisted of lattice-frame portcullises, exactly like those on the tanks.
Each of these gates were fitted with a sluice, to enable the space between it and the gate on the tank to be flooded once the join had been made.
This was to allow free movement of the gates when they were lifted.
The conduit carrying the longer outer channel across the head of the forward plane was also constructed of steel plate and was supported on brick piers.
This channel, like the one for the forward plane, was supported and faced at the end with standing brickwork.
The standing work of the forward channel, constructed of hard blue brick, is still to be seen on the site.
There are also some remains of the standing work on the other channel, but little sign of the steel conduit other than some evidence of the bases of the brick piers.
The steam engine to turn the winding drum, located in a wooden engine-house behind the conduit and constructed above a boiler-house rebated into the earthwork supporting the upper part of the planes, was a twin-cylinder high pressure jet condensing type.
The precise rating of the engine is not known, but Thomas had specified about 25 h.p., and it appears to have been of that order.
We know that the speed of traction up the incline was 0.75 feet/second, which for an available power of 25 h.p. gives a tractive effort of about 8.5 tons.
The choice of such an engine is sometimes questioned.
The great advantage of a steam engine lies in its ability to exert its full power at low revolutions, and it does not require a clutch.
It must be remembered that at this time, the turn of the century, steam engines were fully developed  whereas internal combustion engines were in their infancy.
Electric motors were, of course, getting to be well developed, but there could be no question at Foxton of an adequate power supply, except perhaps at an unacceptably high cost.
Certainly, an oil engine and clutch system would not have had the same degree of flexibility as a steam engine, even if a suitable engine had been available.
Great nicety of control was called for, especially as a tank approached the upper position.
There were telegraphs from the cabins of the upper channels to the engine room, in order to control the movement of the tanks.
The boilers to raise the necessary steam were of ‘Lancashire’ type, the characteristics of which enable a small amount of steam to be supplied over long periods with a minimum of attention, which was the type of duty envisaged for this plant.
Although there were two boilers fitted, one only was necessary to provide sufficient steam.
The main guide pulleys at the top of the incline, round which the rope passed before reaching the winding drum, were over 10 feet in diameter, had cast iron hubs and rims, and 24 wrought iron spokes.
The wheels were carried on as cast stands held down by bolts 8 feet long to a plate set in concrete.
There were other, smaller, guide pulleys used in conjunction with these larger wheels.
The wire ropes were 2½ inches in diameter, being made up of wires approximately ⅛ inch diameter.
These hauling and balance ropes were attached to the tanks through ‘cataract’ cylinders which were hydraulically interconnected.
The cylinders were intended to give control over the elastic characteristics of the haulage system.
A tail rope passing round underwater pulleys at the  bottom of the incline was attached to the centres of the trailing edge of the tanks through eye bolts (figures 8 and 9 ).
Figure 8 Hauling system (diagrammatic).
Figure 10 Hydraulic accumulator.
The hydraulic power to work the tank gates, the upper channel gates, and the rams for holding the tanks against the channels; was provided by an accumulator (figure 10 ).
This was a deadweight type with an annular drum loading a nine inch diameter piston with a 12 foot stroke.
This provided a volume of 9,000 cubic inches of water at a pressure of 700 pounds per square inch, which was sufficient to work all the machinery during one operation of the lift.
The accumulator was recharged after use by a pump driven by the steam engine.
The annular tank providing the weight was filled with granite chippings, to make a total of 20 tons.
The rail tracks were bridge rails   screwed to longitudinal timber of Oregon Pine.
This was different from the railway practice of using transverse sleepers.
The rails were light in section considering the load to be carried.
The screws were 0.75 inches in diameter.
One of the hydraulic stand pipes, seen before being enclosed in a cabin.
A connection was made to the stand pipe each time the portcullis end gates were raised.
Positioning the steam engine.
Foxton Church is in the background.
Positioning the wheels to commence tank construction; Gordon Thomas and his wife inspecting progress, summer 1899.
The boiler house and chimney under construction, summer 1899.
One of the tanks under construction, 1899.
The hauling and balance ropes being positioned around the large pulleys.
The building work was essentially complete by this time (summer 1899).
Interior view of the winding house.
The fly wheel, drive worm and wheel are in the foreground.
Behind the stairs, to the right, is the steam engine.
The partially completed winding house, built above the brick boiler house.
The village of Gumley can be seen in the background.
Gordon and Barnabas Thomas inspecting the fixing of the steel rails, 1899.
The story of the Inclined Plane
Origin and Construction
The origin, heyday, disuse and final dismantling of the inclined plane at Foxton occupied at most thirty-four years, eighteen of which belong to the period of disuse.
Its genesis, location, economics and indeed its timing are all something of a puzzle, to which there are for so recent an event, no easy solutions.
The policy decisions which put the whole project into motion, the reporting of the opening in 1900 and all too shortly afterwards the closing in 1910, and above all the accounts, technical and economic, of the lift's operation, are quite incredibly thin.
For so imaginative and radical a technological construction, there is in the available record an astonishing lack of enthusiasm, continuing interest and even basic technical information.
The Foxton Lift seems almost to have come and gone in secret; the remains at Foxton were until recently as mysterious to most people as the Iron Age hill fort at Burrough on the Hill on another side of Leicestershire.
It seems almost wholly to have been the brain child of Gordon Thomas, appointed engineer to the Grand Junction Canal in 1894 and son of Hubert Thomas, general manager and clerk to the Grand Junction.
Plans to improve the whole line were under discussion since the 1880's, and during the 1890's this became increasingly feasible as a result of the purchase of the Grand Junction.
Though the whole line from London to Langley Mill never finally came under one ownership, by 1897 this had become possible by the negotiation of options to purchase the remaining sections north of Leicester.
The section from Norton Junction to Leicester was acquired by the Grand Junction in 1894.
There was thus a clear field for improvements to the route, especially in the sections that most needed it.
The first written evidence of a proposed inclined plane is a memorandum dated 4th December 1894 from a firm of consultants, Thomas and Taylor of Victoria Street, London (see appendix A ).
It was addressed to Gordon Thomas at Marsworth, Tring, the engineering headquarters of the Grand Junction.
It runs to six handwritten pages and described the basic methods of working of inclined planes, pointing out the saving of water, the small amount of power required to work a balanced lift, an it also included an estimate of the cost.
The memorandum also refers to included drawings and details of a lift scheme prepared in 1886 for a canal near Manchester, but not built.
Unfortunately these drawings are no longer extant.
It may be significant that neither the receipt of this memorandum, nor any subsequent action taken, is mentioned in the minutes of the management committee of the Grand Junction.
However, there is a note written on the front cover of the memorandum to say that ‘nothing will be done until an Act is obtained for the acquisition of the Leicester Canals’.
Despite this apparent lack of interest at high level, detail work must have been carried on during the next two years, for Gordon Thomas, together with the signatories of the memorandum, took out two patents relating to the lift.
These were accepted in April and November 1897 (see appendix B ).
Apart from generalities relating to balanced inclined planes, one patent sought to protect details of the lift as a whole; the second sought to protect the device of gradually reducing the gradient of the upper end of the incline to balance the apparent loss in weight of the descending tank as it became immersed at the lower level.
An initial experimental model was constructed early in 1896, which, upon being reported satisfactory by Stone-Wigg, the chairman, was followed by a larger one built at Bulbourne near to Tring.
This was approximately one fifth full size, but was a working mock-up rather than a true scale model.
Thomas himself was satisfied with the performance of his models though, of course, it did not have the refinements of the lift as eventually built, nor did the tanks have a wide track and a short wheel base.
It is difficult to believe that such a mechanism could have predicted the success of a full size lift.
Nevertheless, a firm of mechanical engineers, Hunter and English of Bow, inspected the model and reported favourably on the proposal in March 1897, for which service they were paid 100 guineas.
This was perhaps the final and clinching element of a strenuous programme of persuasion on the part of Gordon Thomas, for shortly after came the committee's decision to go ahead at Foxton.
In July 1897, having already purchased the Union Canals in 1894 and just completed options to purchase the Leicester Navigation, and the Loughborough and Erewash Canals, the committee resolved to purchase the necessary land at Foxton and instructed that tenders for the lift machinery be obtained.
Details of the tender documents no longer exist, but there is a letter dated  12th October 1897 addressed to the chairman and directors of the Grand Junction from Gordon Thomas, explaining his receipt of three tenders (see appendix C ).
The invitation must have been largely in terms of a general specification involving basic designs and performance, for the prices varied greatly, depending on the type of hauling gear and the amount of sophistication of the secondary equipment.
Although the tender of J. and H. Gwynne, an engineering firm from Hammersmith, was accepted, their price was £14,630 as compared with the £9,942 of Glover and Sons of Warwick.
Thomas's letter explains why the Gwynne tender should be accepted:
The working model constructed at Bulbourne near Tring, in 1896.
The water is not part of the Canal; the model was tested in an adjacent field where the topography was convenient.
‘None of the individual specifications appears to embrace the whole of the mechanical conditions to be dealt with, but there were many good points contained in the specifications of Messrs. Glover and Messrs. Gwynne; and it would appear that a combination of certain facets of these two schemes would produce a highly satisfactory machine.
For instance, the hauling of drums proposed by Messrs. Glover are without doubt the best system and these can be applied to the original idea which has been adapted by Messrs Gwynne, viz: one free balance rope and two hauling ropes to each tank.
Then, Messrs. Gwynne's proposal for equalising the strain on each individual rope by means of connected hydraulic rams is most satisfactory, as also is their suggesting for actuating the lift-up gates by means of hydraulic pressure utilising the engine for pumping up the accumulator.’
It is evident from this that the contractors were responsible for many of the details and not a little of the basic design.
In this letter Thomas suggested that the foundations and building work should be carried out by the Canal Company and estimated that the cost would be £12,000.
This made the total cost of erecting the lift to be an estimated £27,000.
On this basis the work on the site at Foxton began in January 1898.
It is apparent that the whole of the work below ground level was completed in 18 months by the summer of 1899, which left 9 months for the erection of the machinery and other work, to be ready for trials in April 1900.
Obviously there would have been some overlap, but this is essentially the time scale of the construction.
The slope of the incline was 1 in 4, but, as the natural ground slope was about 1 in 12, considerable excavation would have been necessary, however the lift was sited.
In the event, the actual amount of excavation was greatly accentuated by orientating the plane more than 45 degrees away from the natural slope of the ground.
It is not quite clear why this is so, especially as such an alignment cut into the side-pond area of the lock flight.
The depth of excavation at the bottom of the slope was 30 feet and there was a similar amount of buildup at the top of the incline.
Thomas himself mentioned a figure of 600,000 cubic yards of earth moved when giving evidence at the inquest on one of his workmen killed on the site.
The ground was largely excavated by hand, and shovelled into small tipping trucks, which were then hauled on rails by horses.4; Excavated material  from the lower level was raised to form the top of the planes and a stretch of embanked canal to connect them with the summit pound.
The subsoil strata are generally Lower Lias deposits, varying in consistency from fairly soft clay to hard shale layers.
This type of subsoil is not difficult of itself to work, but in rainy weather it breaks down easily, and so deep excavations could be very troublesome indeed.
Also, the material when embanked would be liable to settlement and slippage.
The upper levels of the incline were, we believe, supported on foundations deep enough to rest on firm subsoil; while to reduce the danger of slippage on the slopes and particularly on the steeper embankment at the side, amounts of clay baked on site were mixed with the surface material.
The approach to the planes at the upper level was by a specially cut and embanked length of canal, joined to the upper pound some 300 yards from the top of the lock flight; there was a stop lock half way along this cut.
The bottom of the planes dipped into a cut which connected with the Harborough Arm, about 100 yards east from the Foxton Junction, and crossed by a bridge newly constructed to carry the road to Foxton.
During the middle of the contract, when work was in full spate, there were about 140 men employed on the site.
Of these about 40 lived in hutted accommodation adjacent to the works, whilst the remainder lived in lodgings in the surrounding villages.
Some walked the 3½ miles to and from Market Harborough each working day.
Only a few of the workforce were local men.
The rate of pay for a navvy was 6½d per hour, which averaged out at about 28 shillings per week.
A youth who led the horses for hauling was paid about two thirds of this rate.
The earliest photograph of the incline under construction (summer 1899) showing the concrete tracks on which the steel rails were to be fixed.
After their visit to the site in June 1898, the Governing Committee expressed their satisfaction on the progress of work at Foxton.
The minutes also record two accidents on the site, an astonishingly small number for such a large project.
These involved the death of one worker and injury to the finger of another.
The fatal accident occurred on 5th December 1898 when a fall of earth trapped George Robinson against a tipping wagon, breaking his back.
As far as can be ascertained this happened near to the position of the guide pulley sited on the lower embankment.
Witnesses at the inquest describe the excavation as being carried out in benches 5 feet high.
Robinson, working on a lower one, was trapped by a 1½ cwt. lump of shale which fell from the belly of the earth face.
Barnabas Thomas, cousin of Gordon Thomas, who seems to have been resident engineer of the site, explained that the fall was due to the cleavage of the strata and not a general slip of the bench.
It was at this inquest that Gordon Thomas claimed that 60,000 cubic yards of earth had been moved during the excavation.
A verdict of accidental death was recorded.
As the man had no relatives his fellow workmen contributed towards the funeral.
The injuring of the finger occurred in November 1898 and is worthy of mention because the man received a 5 guinea gratuity from the Company, whilst the doctor and the solicitor who represented him received 2 guineas and  1 guinea respectively.7;
The erection of the machinery, which was manufactured in London and transported to the head of the incline by canal, proceeded through the latter part of 1899 to practical completion in April 1900, when trials took place.8; As a result of these trials, Thomas required some modifications to be carried out, after which final acceptance trials took place in May, 9; followed by an Official visit — perhaps the opening — by the Committee on 11th July, 1900.0; The photographs of the boats ‘Marsworth’ and ‘Langley’passing through the lift were probably taken in April of that year.
Ten Years of Working
The introduction of the Lift produced no really significant effect on the working of the canal.
Initially there was an increase in the number of boats passing through Foxton, but this quickly abated, and there was no effective increase in traffic during the whole life of the lift.
It rose to something like 35,000 tons per year but then began to tail off (see appendix D ).
The average number of boats moved per day was about 8, far below the number that the lift was equipped to move.
Anyone looking at the photographs of the lift — and there are quite a lot— cannot fail to be impressed by the engineering work, all the more striking because of its completely rural setting.
Yet, publicly at least, the whole enterprise seems to have caused little excitement.
There is little information about ‘opening day’, if, in fact, there actually was such an occasion.
The local press seems to have been remarkably indifferent to the event.
What is even more surprising is that there was little celebration of the inauguration of this unique technical phenomenon in the engineering press.
The whole thing sometimes appears such an enigma that there might almost have been a conspiracy of silence.
What is know of Gordon Thomas — all to little — makes this unlikely since he was an ambitious man with a strong personality who would certainly have been aware of the advantages of publicity both for himself and the lift.
It is clear that Thomas did his best to gain attention for the lift.
His paper to the Congress on Inland Navigations in 1902 had been mentioned.
The one commercial publication to give an account of the lift was ‘Engineering’ in its issue of 25th January 1901.
Regrettably this consists only of a short description of the mechanical working of the lift, taken from Thomas's own description, giving no assessment of the lift's success in use, despite the fact that it appeared six months after the lift's entry into service.
In his paper to the Congress on Inland Navigations, Thomas wrote that the cost of running the lift was £1 4s 6d a day for coal, oils stores and labour, for a duty of 6,000 tons a day of 12 hours, taking 15 minute intervals for successive operations of the lift.
The figures are wildly optimistic, and could only have been extrapolated from a short trial of about 10 operations.
Certainly, at no time did the lift pass anything like 6,000 tons a day.
If, in fact, traffic had warranted operations through a 12 hour day, then the number of men required to work the system would have been 4 not 3, with some duplication to provide relief, and the total wage bill would have been at least £8 per week, which makes Thomas's figure look ridiculous.
Since there are no authenticated figures showing the costs of running the lift, some idea might be gained from the records of running costs of the Anderton Lift.
According to J.A.Saner, Engineer to the Weaver Navigation, during the period 1875 to 1901 the Anderton Lift averaged £440 per annum for repairs.
At this time the lift was passing about 150,000 tons per annum and, although a vertical lift, it was of roughly the same capacity as that at Foxton, which would therefore require similar maintenance.
Gordon Thomas at the bottom of the incline (1899).
Despite its lack of press interest, from its beginning the lift attracted a regular supply of local visitors at the weekends.
There are quite a lot of photographs left showing jolly parties packed in boats riding up the lift.
There must still be some people alive  who recall going on to a Sunday School outing from Leicester to Foxton; parties would travel to Market Harborough by train and either by boat or cart to Foxton.
Foxton still remains a popular attraction, though obviously chiefly on account of the Locks.
Generally speaking the lift seems to have worked very satisfactorily, but even here there is little information, either in the minute books or in other records of the Company.
It was reported as working satisfactorily in October 1900 and it must have remained so, for the final payment was made to Messrs. Gwynnes in February 1901.2; There are but two further important references in the Committee Minutes before the closure of the lift nine years later.
One of these was in 1905 — a decision to purchase a new set of wheels and axles from Gwynnes for £60.
The reasons for this are not discussed.
The other, in January 1909, was a report from Thomas to the effect that five of the hydraulic cylinders which operated the portcullis gates had been cracked by frost.
This was due to the lack of glycerine anti-freeze in the water, and Thomas was instructed to censure the man concerned and to put up printed instructions about cold weather precautions.
Although there is no written evidence to substantiate this, no major repairs or maintenance were carried out on the machinery, and it is evident that it performed well from the start.
However, the rail tracks were a source of trouble in the early period.
This might have stemmed from inadequate foundations, but what evidence there is suggests otherwise.
There has been no excavation to prove it, but it looks as though the concrete track foundations were carried through to solid ground, as were the main foundations at the upper part of the incline.
This implies a maximum depth of about 30 feet and probably accounts for much of the discrepancy between the original estimate of building costs of £12,000 and the £25,000 actually spent.
Of a certainty, the guide pulley wheel footings are of depth, as witnessed by Mr P. Durran, then the boy of nine years.
He remembers vividly being impressed by their depth, the holes being close-boarded and strutted, the construction taking several weeks to complete.
It would appear that these deep footings were an afterthought not decided upon until the embankment had been completed.
The other evidence of the great depth of foundations is the sectional drawing of the incline in the booklet published in 1904 and a larger scale drawing.
These show dotted outlines below the major structures at the top of the incline extending down to the original ground.
Also, dotted lines showing arch shapes would seem to indicate brick arches placed below the tracks to give direct support from the original ground.
Saner, Engineer to the Weaver Navigation, in his report to the Royal Commission on Inland Navigations in 1906 mentions Foxton Lift and its costly foundations, which might have been greatly reduced had the subsoil been of a nature or had there been available experience such as that gained in the course of the project.
Lower end of the incline nearing completion, 1899
Track trouble seems then to seems then to have been solely connected with rails and timbers.
This manifested itself quite dramatically on a few occasions when, the holding screws having sheared, the rail curled up behind the tank as it moved down the slope.
When this happened the traffic was held up for three of four days whilst the track was repaired.
No special equipment was used for this nor were new rails substituted.
The bent rail was removed and heated in fires before being straightened by means of bars and a jim crow.
The underlying cause for this kind of failure was that of heavy wheel loads on a flexible steel rail supported on timber that was soft.
The theoretical wheel load was about 20 tons, but since the wheels were in pairs, and not suspended on flexible bogeys, unless the rails were level, the wheels on the higher level might be carrying the load for the pair.
The original timber used was Oregon Pine, the inherent softness of which was aggravated by the wet conditions in which it lay.
thus, as the great weight of the tank moved along the rails, they would tend to flex significantly, pulling a the coach screws holding them down until some failed.
Upon repair, the screws were replaced by bolts passing right through the timbers, and many of the pine timbers were replaced by lengths of jarrah wood.
This repair and replacement necessitated breaking away the concrete into which the track had been set.
Photographs taken in 1904 bear witness to the extent of these repairs.
It is significant that, although  it would have cost very little, no wholesale replacement or improvement of the track took place, an indication of the company's attitude to its creation once it had been completed.
Passage of boats ‘Marsworth’ and ‘Langley’through the lift, watched by Committee members, April 1990.
John Cryer, the lock keeper, and Tom Mercer, the engine driver, are at the left of the picture.
Note the sluice in the end gate, which was fitted after completion to flood the space between the gates to enable them to lift more easily.
The Years of Disuse
In fact, enthusiasm for the lift seems to have begun to fade fairly soon.
The failure of the line to attract traffic was doubtless the main reason for the ultimate decision that led to the abandonment of the lift.
There were other problems.
The lift was not usually operated after six in the evening which meant the holding of ‘express traffic’ overnight.
Requests for night passage were occasionally made by Fellows, Morton and Clayton steamers with chemicals and drugs for Boots at Nottingham.
The alternative route down the locks became virtually impassable as the locks were allowed to deteriorate.
According to a report, the second lock up was in fact so narrow that occasionally a boat would be partially gripped, causing it to plunge dangerously.
Whatever the reason, the committee decided in November 1908 to reinstate the locks, ostensibly to pass night traffic but, in the light of events, this was an undeclared anticipation of a decision to discontinue the plane.
A sum of £1,000 was allocated.
The reinstatement was thorough, taking place over two years and costing much more than the original estimate.
It is this programme of reinstatement that explains what, for some people, is the odd repetition of the date ‘1909’ on the stonework at the rims of the some of the locks.
On 26th October 1910 the Company resolved to shut down Foxton lift and use the refurbished locks for all traffic.
Officially the lift ceased to operate in November 1910 and this is also recorded in a traffic return for the period.
It seems possible that it operated fitfully until the spring of 1911.
The story of the lift does not end here, for it was many years before it was finally cut up and sold for scrap.
The three men who had worked the lift continued to be employed at Foxton  until the outbreak of the war in 1914.
The machinery was kept painted and was maintained in working order until this time, but after 1914 no further work was done.
That maintenance was continued so long is probably due to the fact that Gordon Thomas, its instigator, had by this time become General Manager of the Grand Junction Company, and it is understandable that he would have been reluctant to preside over the disintegration of the lift, his most original and spectacular achievement.
Thomas himself left the Company in 1916 and took no further part in the matter.
During the war the government took powers over public transport, and when the Grand Junction sought to take advantage of the good prices then being obtained for scrap metal, dismantling and disposal of the lift was forbidden.
the lift was inspected and instructions given to the Company that matters must be held in abeyance pending enquiries about the possibilities of increased traffic from the Nottingham coalfield to London in the event of the lift being put in order and a lift or wide locks being constructed at Watford.
Nothing further seems to have transpired and the machinery continued to deteriorate, while the incline became overgrown with scrub.
The company refused an offer of £925 in 1924, but in 1928 they accepted £250 for the engine, boilers, steelwork, rope etc. as and where they lay.
The firm involved was Glaze and Wharton of Wellington, Shropshire.
Dismantling and removal took six months and was carried out by three men.
The large items were cut up by oxy-acetylene torch, and explosive was used to separate some of the steelwork from its foundations.
The scrap was loaded into a narrow boat at the bottom of the incline and taken to North Kilworth for transshipment by rail.
Although it took so long finally to dispose of the machinery and tanks, other material was removed from the incline during the 1920's as uses for it were found.
For instance, the chimney was brought down in 1922 to supply bricks for general maintenance work on the canal.
This was a rather spectacular event.
Two men removed courses of bricks for half the distance round the base, at the same time replacing the bricks with timber blocks.
Further timber was then heaped round the base, soaked in paraffin and then set alight.
When the timber blocks replacing the bricks had sufficiently burned away, the chimney collapsed, throwing the stone coping well down the incline.
This exercise took two days.
The jarrah timbers from the tracks were gradually used in the repair of lock gates.
The mooring posts from the tanks and from the lower pounds were set alongside the lock flight, possibly the only parts of the lift still doing duty at Foxton.
In 1927 the boiler house windows and the stone arched lintels were taken to Tring, where the pump house was being enlarged.
They can still be seen there.
Entrance to the top of the life, July 1900.
Life trials, April 1900.
The Foxton Lift was thus no more, and the site became completely overgrown with scrub thorn and ash up to fifteen feet high.
Until a few years ago it was possible to stand on the incline, particularly in summer, without becoming the least aware that here once stood one of the most complex and sophisticated pieces of apparatus ever constructed on English  canals, and the idea of two narrow boats going up while another pair came down would have been quite beyond belief.
In 1970 an agreement was reached between British Waterways Board, Leicestershire County Council, and the Leicestershire Branch of the Council for the Protection of Rural England to make part of the site accessible to the public and, so far as possible, to clear sufficient of the track to enable people to get some idea of how the system had been constructed and how it operated.
By this time part of the site had become private property, so that it was not possible to consider clearing the whole length of the Plane, nor to reveal the lower basin into which the Plane descends.
Thus the portion of the site that was chosen for clearance was the upper half of the southerly track together with the base area of the former engine house.
The end gate of the upper conduit, also showing the winding house and cabin housing one of the hydraulic standpipes.
In 1972, the Leicestershire County Council, as part of its general policy of improving the amenities at places of interest in the countryside, created a car park off the Foxton to Gumley road, on the derelict site of a wartime hospital, and also built a timber-arched footbridge over the canal to give direct pedestrian access to the canal towpath.
It is estimated that more than 100,000 people now visit the Locks and their surroundings annually.
The C.P.R.E., which includes among its objectives, the protection of sites of architectural and archaeological interest, undertook to organise the work of clearance, while the County Council made available funds for the purchase of fencing and other supplies.
Over several years volunteers from schools, colleges, and County Youth Clubs, together with many adult enthusiasts, have worked at cutting and clearing trees and undergrowth, uncovering surface works and piers, cleaning channels and tracks and in constructing a path down and across the site to enable visitors to explore as much of the Plane as possible.
The Department of the Environment designated the site as an Ancient Monument in 1973 thus ensuring that no further dismantling can take place.
However, much work remains to be done.
Weeds and shrubs grow rapidly in the damp soils of the site, and it is quite a problem to keep the growth in check each summer.
Helpers are always welcome, and should get in touch with the Secretary of the Trust, Bottom Lock, Foxton, Market Harborough, Leicestershire.
It is now possible, however, to see the few remains of this enigma more clearly, and perhaps to appreciate more easily the impressive scale of the machinery that once was there.
Foxton Inclined Plane; technological tour de force or fiasco?
Everything about the Foxton Inclined Plane is a bit strange.
How was it that a major piece of canal engineering came to be constructed on one of the least profitable stretches of a minor and dilapidated canal, in the heart of rural England, at a time when the prospects for canals were at their gloomiest?
Why was it built in the way it was and why did the engineering world show so little interest in it?
Why for that matter, was there so little press and public interest in the project generally, either in its coming or its going?
As a failure, if failure it was, the lift was not on its own.
it coincided with a number of other exciting ventures in public transport engineering which were doomed to fail.
The Great Central Railway, from Marylebone to Manchester via Sheffield, opened in 1900, the last great trunk railway construction, limped its way through the century to be finally chopped up into pieces and closed down in 1969.
In 1904 was opened the most remarkably light railway in British light railway history, the Leek and Manifold.
The railway, by then completely absorbed by the L.M.S., was completely dismantled in 1936.
There are others.
They shared with Foxton the misfortune of coming into existence at the beginning of the motor car era, and whatever miscalculations may have been made in the construction, there was for all of them no way of gaining the large amounts of traffic that alone would have made them profitable.
Nevertheless, the Foxton project was mysteriously improbable even if there had been no internal combustion on the way.
Technologically and economically it requires more explaining than is now possible, not least because of the loss or destruction or records, to say nothing of not keeping them at all.
The minute books of the Committee are a model of reticence.
How well, in fact, did the lift work?
It is not possible to answer this question in terms of the technical efficiency of the device; its inherent qualities, however admirable in principle, were directly affected by economic factors.
The amount of traffic on the route (see appendix D ) never increased following the improvements at Foxton, so that in an economic sense the lift from the start was required to perform in a situation where it was not needed.
This must have meant that it was never possible to evaluate the lift in terms of its cost efficiency and that there was a built-in disincentive to spend money on improvement, repair or indeed on all but minimal maintenance.
The fact is that the lift worked for ten years with very little maintenance and little stoppage for repairs, except to the track — and even the track could evidently have been put to permanent rights had the study and expenditure been justified.
There can be little truth in the legend that has grown up that the lift failed because of fundamental weaknesses of the track, a legend thoughtlessly reinforced by L.T.C. Rolt in ‘Narrow Boat’.
All this is wonderful testament to the life's designers and constructors.
There had been many inclined plane lifts before this one, but none having such complex features, and capable of hauling fully loaded barges still afloat in full tanks.
The tanks travelled up and down the incline with a freeboard of about nine inches and little water oscillation.
In winter, when the level in the canal would tend to be some three inches higher, then some water did splash over the sides of the tanks, but never at any time was the water emptied from the tanks to enable hauling to proceed.9; On this basis alone the lift must be judged to have been a technical success.
There are two aspects of the lift to which comment and criticism constantly return and, before leaving the technological issues to the mercy of future critics, we should return to them for a moment.
They are the questions of the alignment of the lift and the power system, to both of which there are now no authoritative answers.
As we have already mentioned, the lift was orientated at something like 50 degrees to the line of the natural slope of the ground.
The natural ground slope is about 12 to 1, whereas the incline has a slope of 4 to 1.
This difference, together  with the obliquity, made it necessary on the one hand to excavate to a considerable depth at the bottom and to add a 30 foot embankment of made ground at the top, involving a vast amount of earth moving that, on the face of it seems hardly to have been necessary.
A slope of 4 to 1 was indeed mentioned in the original memorandum (appendix A ) of Gordon Thomas, but there was nothing exclusive about such a ratio.
A more gentle incline, orientated parallel to the locks, would have greatly reduced the cost of the foundations and earthworks.
It would also have lengthened the plane, but the forces of the hauling system would have been correspondingly less, and an increase of speed could have compensated for the greater distance travelled.
The alignment, among other things, altered the configuration of the lock side-ponds, another avoidable complication.
The mystery remains.
The Lift in use, 1900.
The bottom pound was emptied for repairs in the winter of 1902/1903.
Note the steam pump on the basin side of the stop planks, used because of the lower level could not be drained by gravity.
The second feature, the power system, is not so mysterious.
The choice of a steam engine was, for the time, quite logical and manifestly the best solution to the practical problems posed by operating the lift.
In fact, the early memorandum refers to the possibility of using water power, and no doubt this was considered.
Certainly the lift could have been worked, like the Anderton life, by the simple expedient of having an excess of water, in the descending tank.
The method, however, lacks flexibility, and for an apparatus this size it was essential to have an independent power source so that adjustments could be carried out in the event of failure.
If water power had been used, doubtless a turbine would have been the method.
Even this would have demanded more water than could be afforded.
For a drop of 75 feet, a flow of 100,000 gallons per hour would have been necessary to generate the 25 h.p. required.
This corresponds to about three locks per hour, though not continuously, as the lift would only operate when there was traffic to move.
Nevertheless, the saving of water this system would have produced as compared with normal lockage would have been little more than 50 per cent, a benefit that would hardly justify the installation of the lift if water saving was the main object.
Whatever did they do it for?
The shortcomings of the technical record are sheer lucidity as compared with the lack of any coherent account of the economics of this remarkable enterprise.
Almost all the information that can now be brought to bear is fragmentary and indirect.
So far as the Grand Junction Canal company itself is concerned, it is all a matter of inference and speculation.
perhaps the Company's lack of comment on its own future, which must increasingly have been worrying them at the turn of the century.
The decision to build the lift could not have been taken lightly; it only makes sense as part of a scheme of general improvement.
The annual income of the company at that time was about £100,000 annually, £60,000 from tolls, so an estimated capital  expenditure of £25,000 (in the event £40,000 was spent) would not have been undertaken lightly.
The Victoria County History mentions a quite absurd figure of £250,000.
It seems there must have been, at least for a critical short time, a feeling in the company that there should be a positive effort to create a modernised canal route from London to Langley Mill.
What evidence there is can only be regarded as peripheral.
Fellows, Morton and Clayton, the famous canal carrying company, may have been one of the prime movers in the business.
In 1888 Fellows began buying shares in the old Grand Union and by 1904 had gained a considerable holding.
This could not have been a simple financial investment, as the Grand Junction had manifestly no prospect of making any profit; although its paid up capital was £420,000, it was sold in 1894 for £6,500.
The motives of Fellows must quite clearly have been control of the length for a wider purpose.
This might on the one hand have been positive pressure for improvement; it could equally have been a move to prevent closure.
Fellows seems to have acted in the sale of the Grand Union to the Grand Junction, for in a letter to the Grand Union he pointed out that the price would have to be realistic, bearing in mind that they were not dealing with a willing purchaser.
Then later, in 1896 and 1897, letters were sent by Fellows, Morton and Clayton to the Grand Junction, complaining of the lack of progress in either constructing wide locks or lifts at Foxton and Watford.
Other indirect information can be derived from the report of the formidable Report Commission on Canals and Inland Navigations, appointed in 1906 and taking evidence over three years.
The published evidence, including technical data, information about water supply and proposals for the future, ran to eleven volumes.
The picture these volumes provide about the working of canals and their general state at the beginning of this century is vast and complex.
Gordon Thomas gave much evidence, as well as others who had been associated with the lift.
One of these was Tom Potter, a colliery director from Nottinghamshire, whose evidence seem to contain reference to the seed that grew into Foxton Lift.
He explained that in 1886 he was making enquiries about the possibilities of opening up the canal routes to the south and was put in touch with a syndicate in London which was proposing to improve and develop these navigations.
The expanding Nottinghamshire coalfield was peculiarly landlocked with poor access to the coast and to the large industrial areas and had, perhaps, the least effective links of a major coal producing area with London — the Great Central was not yet built.
In any case rail rates were high and for coal transport the canals seemed a logical proposition, especially at a time of economic recession.
The canals of the area had been allowed to deteriorate over many years and for many months of each year could not carry full loads.
The Nutbrook Canal near to Ilkeston had in fact been closed; the Cromford Canal was owned by the Midland Railway, and with the collapse of the Butterley Tunnel, and important source of water supply was cut off.
The Nottingham Canal, owned by the Great Northern Railway, was also short of water.
Despite the fact that regular maintenance was a statutory requirement and despite some successful legal actions to enforce the statutory provisions, regular dredging and attention to leaks were perfunctory or never carried out at all by canal companies owned by the railways.
Detailed estimates of the costs of improvement of the ‘Leicester Line’, including wide locks at Foxton and Watford appear to have been made in 1888, and these indicated a reasonable prospect of success.
However, the offer made to the colliery owners was not, according to Potter, acceptable, and the matter did not proceed further.
What part any directors of the Grand Junction played in the syndicate is not known, but not withstanding lack of agreement with colliery owners the Grand Junction must eventually have decided to go it alone.
In 1894 the purchase of the Leicester Canals was completed, and as mentioned earlier, agreements and options covering the rest of the route to Langley Mill were later arranged.
For any proposed improvement to be effective, piecemeal additions would be insufficient; instead there would have to be an integrated programme for the whole route.
There were four main features to such a programme:
1.
The widening of the Foxton and Watford locks to enable large barges to pass;
2.
The dredging and deepening of long lengths of the existing canal;
3.
The widening or duplication of tunnels to obviate one way working of wide barges so as to avoid long delays.
There are along the route four long tunnels, each of which would have required attention.
Blisworth alone is 3056 yards (nearly 1¾ miles);
4.
The improving of the water supply.
No canal crossing the constantly  changing contours of the English Midlands ever had enough water, so a significant increase in traffic would only be possible if existing supplies were conserved and more supplies developed.
As we now know, the integrated programme was not pressed forward, but a start was made.
From Gordon Thomas's evidence to the Royal Commission it is obvious that he had carried out much research into an improved canal, including technical planning, estimates of costs and market studies into the expectations of more traffic.
He claimed that with ‘rationalisation’(his word) traffic would increase to 150,000 tons per annum, and with comprehensive improvement for 80 ton barges there would be much more still.
Thomas explained to the Commission how the Grand Junction had started a scheme of improvement to form a through route from Nottinghamshire to Derbyshire to London and that the money expended by 1906 was £86,000.
The Grand Junction, he told them, had entered into minimum toll agreements with the Leicestershire Navigation, the Loughborough Navigation and the Erewash Canal, but there had been insufficient traffic to meet the full amount.
There had been, he explained in answer to questions, a great falling off in traffic.
For example, the amount of coal shipped from Derbyshire via the route had fallen from 125,000 tons in 1850 to 73,000 in 1855, and by 1894 to 4,700 tons.
He blamed this chiefly on to the bad conditions of the canals in the collecting areas which were railway owned.
Nevertheless he was able to show that, despite all this, the Company had, by a great act of faith, begun and carried through to partial completion a programme of overall improvement rather than just piecemeal adjustments.
Dismantling the boiler house.
The cast iron windows and stone-arched lintels were taken to Tring in 1927.
He was questioned about the decision not to build a lift at Watford but instead to renew the narrow locks.
He answered cryptically but not very informatively; ‘It has not been though expedient for the Grand Junction to widen the locks.’
At later hearings he defended this decision quite vigorously, saying that the narrow boat would remain the basic unit on an improved canal as being the most convenient for loading the collecting areas, all served by narrow canals.
When boats were travelling on improved sections they would go in pairs.
In fact, Thomas's evidence became more ambiguous and confusing as the questioning went on, and taken with that of other witnesses, such as Fred Morton of Fellows, Morton and Clayton, it becomes clear that there were no realistic expectations of improvement of canal traffic, either in the form of coal or of other minerals with or without substantial reconstruction of the canal system.
The one inescapable impression left by it all is that the canal system as a whole was so run down and dilapidated that  nothing short of a central canal authority wiling and able to undertake a vast investment programme could have any hope of making the canals profitable again.
Against the gloomy background provided by the Report of the Royal Commission the decision to build the Foxton Lift begins once again to seem quite irrational.
Yet this was the decision.
As part of a complex programme of development the Foxton scheme only makes sense if other parts of the programme were being tackled; few of them were started.
There must have been, for the time being at least, compelling reasons for embarking on the Foxton development.
Perhaps the critical factor in the end was the water problem.
The Royal Commission evidence provides a little support for this view.
The intensity of the water problem has been mentioned several times.
Since the lift as constructed used virtually no water, there was from 1900 onwards no flow northward from Foxton.
The considerable amount of water saved was now, in effect, available southward for the Braunston stretch (itself a summit), where there was a perennial water shortage, for this canal continued to carry a large through traffic from the Birmingham area.
A prime motive in the purchase of the Grand Union by the Grand Junction in 1894 may have been the improved water supply for the main system which it represented.
Hubert Thomas, the father of Gordon Thomas, told the Parliamentary Committee of 1893–4 that he had been advising his Committee to buy the Union for some thirty years.
He considered that the water supplies were ‘very good’— a term that must be regarded as relative only, since the summit was in fact often short of water and there were, in several years, closures, reductions of tolls and tonnage limits imposed on the Watford to Foxton section, all on account of insufficient water to keep the two flights properly fed.
In its Appendices the Royal Commission Report contains much information about water supplies for canals (see appendix E ).
For the Foxton summit the average quantity of water available per month was given as 15,000,000 cubic feet, and the estimated loss through evaporation and percolation was 16,000,000 cubic feet, indicating a basic deficiency of 1,000,000 cubic feet rather than a positive supply.
What is more, these estimates assume a well-maintained canal and do not allow for excessive leakage.
As the volume of water required for lockage of the existing traffic was 1,000,000 cubic feet only, it is obvious that it would have been more effective in the saving of water to reduce leakage rather than to concentrate on reducing the passage of water through locks — and much cheaper.
Thus, if the water argument of doubtful validity.
Perhaps we are left with the conclusion that the main ingredient in the campaign which resulted in the Foxton Inclined Plane was the enthusiastic advocacy of Gordon Thomas himself.
Impractical, quixotic, unsuccessful, are all adjectives that come to mind when considering the strange phenomenon of the Foxton Inclined Plane.
That it was erected, operated for a short while and then reverted to ignominious dereliction are all true.
But it was a considerable enterprise and it must have had some considerable justification.
Did something just go wrong?
Could it have ever succeeded with more capital and drive behind it?
The conclusion must be that it could, only if there had have been genuine prospects that an improved, amalgamated and better managed canal system could make a viable contribution to an efficient transport system of the country.
Various Parliamentary Committees and the Royal Commission of 1906 seem to have believed that this was possible and ought to be encouraged.
The proposition now seems doubtful.
The canals of 1900 had existed for over 100 years and during this time had changed but little.
Constructed for the most part in terms of a technology that was, by comparison with the main technologies of the nineteenth century, primitive and unsystematic, there were few really significant improvements to them through the century and by 1900 they provided no semblance of a genuine transport service.
Compared with the railways they were inflexible, unreliable and far from effectively networked.
It would have taken something of a miracle to attract the capital investment which might have begun to change this state of affairs.
The comparison between the canals and railways was most graphically drawn by Mr W.F. Martin of the Mountsorrel Granite Company, one of the companies that could conceivably have benefited much from an improved canal, when giving evidence to the Royal Commission of 1906.
His statement needs no comment or gloss:
‘One of the main factors against the maintenance or extension of the canal trade is the difficulty of its organisation as compared with despatch by rail.
To quote a price by rail is quite simple and to despatch by rail a matter of plainest routine, but it is not so with canals.
One private carrier will not carry as a matter of certainty for the same money that another will, as the prospect of a return cargo affects the question.
Also even after quoting for certain deliveries, that carrier may not be in a position to do the haulage just when required.
The fact that small consignments are practically ruled out for water carriage operates against the canals for private trade.
It is often a matter of difficulty to find out exactly what will have to be paid for haulage, toll and wharfage, and this fact increases the office labour in sending out tenders.
Then again, in dealing with the bargee himself there is often trouble.
The owner of a couple of narrow boats and his crew are at a great disadvantage when pitted against such competitors as, shall we say, Mr Evans, the Goods Manager of the Midland Railway.
Although I believe they are improved as a class, many of them are rough diamonds; at times they are light-fingered, they are not invariably sober, their education leaves much to be desired and it is impossible to allow them the run of the works after closing hours.
They are not always on the best of terms with the carters with whom they have to deal, and threats of actual violence do not tend to the increase of business.
The tendency of our officials, who naturally wish their work to be done with the least possible friction, is all in favour of the railway method of carriage.’
View of Foxton Bottom Lock and cottages, with the Incline in the background, 1903.
The bottom pound during the winter of 1902/3.
Appendices
Appendix A
Copy of 1894 memorandum from Messrs. Thomas and Taylor, Consultants, to G.C. Thomas, the Grand Junction Canal Co's Engineer, suggesting the construction of a Balance Lift at Foxton and Watford Locks.
Balance Lift for Canals Dec. 4th 1894
Memoranda
1.
The principle of this Lift is shewn in the general plan, section and details prepared in January 1886 and now completed and submitted to you.
2.
The essential principle of this Lift (which is to be used in lieu of a flight of locks) is floating of the barge or vessel into a tank and the conveying of that tank with its floating load broadside up or down a slope or inclined plane to a higher or lower pond of the canal respectively into which it is floated from the tank, which is left ready for another barge going in the opposite direction.
The system does not necessarily include a balance lift that is to say duplicate tanks working up and down duplicate inclines in reverse direction.
It is equally applicable to a single tank and a single incline.
3.
Obviously the balance lift will do twice the work, in the same time, and, beyond this, the power required to operate the lift, although of the same intensity, would be only usable during a small portion of the rise instead of during the whole.
4.
The lift will practically prevent all loss of water by lockage under the present system.
Instead of a ‘Lock’(or 9,000 cu. ft. of water) being lost by the passage of a barge (or barges) through the ordinary wide lock — only about 90 cu. ft. or one — 100th part of a lock, would be passed down the Canal by the passage of one barge down the Canal and another barge up.
5.
Under certain circumstances indeed water would be taken upwards by the lift-for instance, if the bulk of the traffic was downwards and barges loaded to 65 tons, then each barge passing down would squeeze out into the top pond 3.150 cu. ft. (or about ⅓ of a lock) of water This however is an ideal case and the following statement shews the theoretical gain or loss of water which would occur in working out of these lifts.
Total of 9 lifts and 9 falls = Loss 810 cu. ft. = 9/100 lock — that is to say there is no loss, other than that of 9 separate ‘fits’, or one in each case of 90 cubic feet.
In the case where a lift was placed at each end of a summit, and where the traffic was through the summit, there would be no loss or gain of water by the use of the lift other than the loss of 1/100 of a lock each time either lift passed up and down.
6.
Each tank would weight approximately say 72 tons.
The water — or water and barge — 168 tons.
Therefore total weight is 240 tons.
These weights however would be accurately determined when the dimensions and carrying capacity of the largest barge is known.
It will probably be considerably less than this weight.
7.
The incline or slope in the example is taken at 1 in 4 as being that which offers the greatest convenience; but it is not necessarily 1 in 4; and it may be varied without detriment, according to the peculiarities of pits or other pertinent circumstances.
8.
The lift or rise in the example was taken at 50 feet but in this scheme the height of the lift, except for convenience of construction and adaptability to site is relatively immaterial.
9.
The time required to pass a barge up and or barge down in a 50 feet balance lift would be approximately say 15 minutes.
10.
the engine power required to do this would be approximately 21 to 24 h.p.
11.
A preliminary and approximate estimate of the cost of such a balance lift, as is shewn on the drawing, constructed under ordinary circumstances, on a suitable site, with engine and appliances complete, but excluding land and approaches, is about £14,000.
12.
The Watford Locks on the Grand Union Canal are we believe 7 in number with a total rise of 56 feet and the Foxton Locks 10 in number with a total rise of 75 feet.
13.
It is one of the advantages of this balance lift, that an increase of rise is relatively immaterial both as to the time required to make the ascent or descent and as to the cost of the parts.
In the case of the Watford and Foxton Locks, the line of ascent would be longer than in the sample, say, by only 1 min. and 4 minutes respectively: and the cost of the works would be increased only by the cost of increased lengths of slopes or inclines; that is — 24 feet and 100 feet respectively.
14.
Apart altogether from the loss of water which must accrue by the rise of locks, the time saved in passing through the Grand Union Canal must under ordinary circumstances be reduced by not less than say 3 hours.
15.
The saving of water would practically be the saving of all Lockage water on the Grand Union Canal.
16.
At such times as it was expedient to run water from the Grand Union Canal into the Grand Junction Canal the passing of that water down from the top to the bottom pond, that is a fall of 56 feet and at the rate of say 2 locks per hour, would represent a gross force of 32 h.p. and this force could be utilized by means of a turbine or otherwise for providing power to work the lift.
At the Foxton Locks, a corresponding delivery of water to the bottom pond would represent 43 h.p.
Power could be obtained for operating these lifts by means of Oil Engines — which could be started and stopped according to the exigencies of the traffic — without loss or expense of continuous attention and waste of fuel.
17.
There is no doubt that this system of lifts is perfectly practicable.
Whether a single lift costing little more than half the balance lift is advisable or not can only be determined on working out the details of the site where it is required to be constructed and the conditions under which it would have to be worked.
It would not be an expensive or difficult matter to make a working model of the proposed lift to a scale of say ¼ inch to a foot and upon this model the whole arrangement and system of working could be shewn with model barges and proportionate tackle.
18.
All the principal details of the scheme are laid down in the foregoing or in the drawings.
The matter has received our closest and most careful consideration and although the details were worked on in 1886 for another canal in the Manchester district (but not used) they are all to all intents and purposes equally applicable to the Grand Union Canal, when that canal is improved, to be of the same working capacity as the Grand Junction Canal and to carry the same vessels.
Signed Thomas & Taylor
G.C. Thomas, Esq., C.E., Grand Junction Canal, Marsworth — Tring.
Appendix B — Copy of Patent Applications
(1) No. 8501 A.D. 1896
Date of Application — 22nd April 1896.
Accepted — 3rd April 1897.
Provisional Specification — Improved Means of Transferring Barges and Other Vessels from One Level to Another.
We, Barnabas James Thomas and Joseph Jex Taylor both of 1 Victoria Street, Westminster, Civil Engineers, and Gordon Cale Thomas of Marsworth in the County of Bucks., Civil Engineer, do hereby declare the nature of this Invention to be as follows:—
This Invention relates to lifts for transferring barges and other vessels from one level to another on canals and other waterways in lieu of an ordinary lock or flight of locks, the object of the invention being to obviate the loss of water from the higher to the lower level by lockage inseparable from the ordinary system and to provide for the passage of vessels simultaneously in both directions and at a single life and between levels of widely different altitude where by the loss of time incidental to the passage through a flight of locks is in great measure avoided.
The invention consists essentially of a system of lifts each formed by a wet dock wherein the vessel to be transported is waterborne, the dock being mounted on a wheeled carriage adapted to support the dock horizontally and to run on inclined railways extending between the higher and lower water levels, the ways being transverse to the length of the dock which travels broadside on so as to admit of a short length of wheel base and a steep grade.
The dock is provided with end gates which may be opened and closed for admission and egress of the vessel by a rising and falling sliding or pivotal motion in a vertical plane or swung on hinges as ordinary lock gates, suitable grooves or chambers being provided for the gates to work in a suitable means of making a water-tight closure being provided.
The end of the dock when at the upper part of its inclined railway makes a practically water-tight joint with the standing work at the extremity of what may be termed the head bay or pond of which the dock then forms a continuation, there being also a gate or gates at the end of the bay to retain the water when the dock is absent.
The joint between the end of the dock and the standing work of the bay end is preferably a direct butt joint between suitable packed or faced surfaces at the leading following and bottom sides of the dock which close simultaneously by a direct butting, as distinguished from a sliding, motion against corresponding surfaces on the standing work.
The foot of the inclined way descends below the level of what may be termed the tail bay which is open at the end so that the dock and carriage run down into the water in order to bring the dock into alignment with the tail bay to allow of the vessel being hauled in or out of the dock.
Where one such lift is used the dock and load would be balanced by a suspended weight but two such lifts would generally be arranged to work simultaneously in opposite directions so as to balance each other.
For economy of space occupied by the site of the lift the two inclined ways would generally be side by side and although at the same inclination and extending between the same levels they would not be in the same plane but echeloned so that the one extends, so to speak, from the right side of the head bay to the right side of the tail bay whilst the other extends from the left side of the head bay to the left side of the tail bay.
But they may be otherwise arranged as for instance the two ways whether end to end in line, at an angle to one another or otherwise may be oppositely inclined from opposite sides of the head bay and terminate at foot each in its own tail bay connected with the lower pond.
In either case the two lift carriages would be connected by balance rope or other gear and would be actuated by winding or other engines or by rack screw worm or other mechanical means of transmitting motion.
The quantity of water raised from the lower to the higher level will on the average equal that lowered from the higher to the lower level so that there will be practically no loss of water by lockage and as the vessels transported by the lifts are waterborne the weight of the load carried by the dock is always the same whether the vessel be loaded or not and whether the dock contains a vessel or not.
The disturbance of the balance which would  occure by the immersion of the lift in the water at the foot of its inclined way may be automatically compensated by varying the effective diameters of the winding drums of the balance ropes, or by bringing auxiliary power into operation at the required moment.
Dated this 22nd day of April 1896.
A.M. & Wm.
Clark, 53, Chancery Lane, London Chartered Patent Agents
(2) No. 257077 A.D. 1896 Date of Application 14th November 1896.
Accepted 13 November 1897.
Provisional Specification Improved Means of Transferring Barges and Other Vessels from One Level to Another.
We, Barnabas James Thomas and Joseph Jex Taylor, both of 1 Victoria Street, Westminster, Civil Engineers; and Gordon Cale Thomas of Marsworth, in the County of Bucks., Civil Engineer, do hereby declare the nature of this Invention to be as follows:—
Our Invention consists of an improvement on the Invention relating to lifts for transferring barges and other vessels from one level to another on canals and other waterways which forms the subject of a previous application for Letters Patent dated the 22nd April 1896, No. 8501.
The present improvement has for its object to compensate for the disturbance of the balance between the upgoing and downgoing lifts which occurs by the immersion of the latter in the water at the foot of the incline, and the improvement consists in gradually diminishing the gradient at the upper end of the incline so as to avoid the great increase of haulage power which would otherwise be required to raise the ascending lift from about the moment when the descending dock begins to enter the water.
This gradual variation of the gradient is effected without disturbing the horizontality of the lift dock by providing at least at the upper part of the incline two or more sets of rails for each carriage supporting the dock, the said duplicate sets of rails being in different alignment and gradually assuming different levels, the wheels of each carriage being adapted to travel thereon so that on the diminished gradient the leading wheels will travel on rails at a different level from those on which the trailing wheels travel, the duplication of the rails and their difference of level being variously arranged according to circumstances.
Dated this 14th day of November 1896.
A.M. & Wm.
Clark, 53, Chancery Lane, London, Chartered Patent Agents
Appendix C
Copy of handwritten letter from Gordon C. Thomas, Engineer, to the Chairman and Directors of the Grand Junction Canal Company, giving details of the tenders received for the construction of the Foxton Canal Lift.
Bulborne Works, Tring.
Oct. 12th 1897
Foxton Locks Canal Lift Scheme
To the Chairman & Directors of the Grand Junction Canal Co.
Gentlemen
In accordance with your instructions of the 11th August, plans have been prepared and are herewith submitted for your consideration of a Lift or Slide to take the place of the 10 Locks that now serve as the means for passing the Traffic at Foxton Locks.
The total lift or rise from the Lower to the Upper Pond is 75 feet 2 inches.
Three firms of Mechanical Engineers have been asked to tender for the machinery and steelwork under conditions embodied in a Specification of Terms, a copy of which is hereto appended.
The specifications and tenders of the three firms viz:—
Messrs. Hunter & English of Bow £12,390
Messrs. Glover and Sons of Warwick £9,942
Messrs J. & H. Gwynne of Hammersmith £14,130
allow for Exps. 500
£14,630
are hereto attached
There is no individual specification which appears to embrace the whole of the mechanical conditions to be dealt with; but there are many good points contained in the specification of Messrs. Glover and Messrs. Gwynne; and it would appear that a combination of certain parts of these two schemes would produce a highly satisfactory machine.
For instance the hauling drums proposed by Messrs. Glover are without doubt the best system, and these can be applied to the original idea which has been adopted by Messrs. Gwynne viz:— 1 Free Balance Rope and 2 Hauling Ropes to each tank.
Then Messrs. Gwynne's proposal for equalizing the strain on each  inidividual rope by means of connected Hydraulic Rams is most satisfactory, as also is their suggestion for actuating the lift up gates by means of Hydraulic pressure utilising the engine for pumping up the accumulator.
The three firms appear to be consonant with regard to the small steam power required to actuate the lift: viz: about 25 h.p.
Likewise they unanimously advocate the adoption of the tail rope to insure uniformity of motion.
This does not appear to be altogether necessary, having regard to the grade of the inclines, but possibly the condition of the bond has induced them to add this so as to prevent the semblance of a hang to the descending tank.
Hereto is appended an estimate of the cost of the works suggested to be constructed departmently by the Canal Company the total of which may roundly be put at £12,000.
A general plan shewing the proposed position of the Lift and contingent works, accompanies this report together with the drawings which have been submitted by the three firms of Mechanical Engineers who have tendered for the machinery and steelwork.
I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant.
Signed Gordon Thomas
Appendix D
Traffic
The only figures available for the volume of traffic using the Foxton Lift are contained in the returns of the Grand Junction Canal Co. for the period 1905–1929 (held at the Waterways Museum, Stoke Bruerne).
This period unfortunately does not cover the whole of the time during which the Lift was in operation.
Figures are also given for traffic on the Tring Summit, as a comparison with Foxton.
This was a much more heavily used section of the canal.
Appendix E
Water Supply to the Foxton Summit Level
The Foxton summit level is an artificial cut at a height of over 413 feet above sea level, and crosses in its 20 mile length the watersheds of 4 rivers.
These are the Nene, the Avon, the Welland and the Soar.
It is necessary, therefore, that water courses and streams be used to feed the canal and that reservoirs be constructed so that the supply of water can be regulated throughout the year.
From the records available in 1905, the rainfall expected on the summit level was a yearly mean of 27 inches, with a minimum of 18 inches in any year.
The amount of rainfall available from the run-off would be variable, but should be between 30 and 33 per cent of the total.
The percentage would also vary throughout the year from about 10% in the summer to about 50% in the winter.
Not only does the rainfall vary from year to year, the amount of water available varies throughout the year.
In a year of minimum rainfall only 17% of the total falls as rain in the 5 month period June to October.
Similarly, in a year of mean rainfall the water is more evenly spread, 25% of the total becoming available in the same 5 month period.
Quantity of Water required by the Canal
A canal requires the supply of water to allow for the losses caused by:—
1.
Evaporation from the water surface.
2.
Percolation and absorption through the earth banks.
3.
Leakage at the lock gates and sluices.
4.
Traffic at the locks and lifts.
Evaporation is a relatively small loss in this country and may be taken as 0.05 inches per day.
Much information concerning losses is contained in the Report on Water Supply of the Royal Commission on Canals 1906 — Vol.
XI, which implies that it is difficult to separate the loss by percolation from that due to leakage through lock gates and sluices.
The total loss due to these causes will depend not only on the method of construction and the geological formations over which the waterway passes, but also on the level of maintenance afforded.
The results contained in the Report suggest total losses of between 0.8 and 2.0 inches per day over the surface of the canal.
From this evidence, the probable loss at the Foxton Summit Level would be about 1.5 inches per day.
Accepting this figure, the total loss per year is estimated to be:—
The use of side ponds at Foxton and Watford reduces the loss of water due to the passage of a boat to a minimum of one half of a lock full of water.
However, normal irregular traffic is not likely to achieve this low figure, and an average loss of 0.75 of a lock will be assumed in estimating the use of water for the passage of boats over the summit.
From the traffic returns, it appears that the mean load per boat (including empties) is about 15 tons, and so in order to pass 36,000 tons (1906 figure) 2,400 boats will need to ascend and descend.
The size of the lock is 75 feet long by 7.25 feet wide with a drop of 7.5 feet.
Hence total lockage for 36,000 tons would be:
Thus the quantity of water used for traffic is a small proportion of the total required.
Even if 150,000 tons of traffic had been carried as Gordon Thomas hoped, the lockage would have represented only 25% of the total.
It is obvious from the above figures, that in a year of minimum rainfall there is an overall deficiency.
The many occasions over the years when this summit has been short of water were thus inevitable unless the level of leakage could have been reduced to an absolute minimum.
In a year when the annual quantity required (207,461,000 cu. ft.) is balanced by adequate rainfall then the storage must be such as to make up the supply during the relatively dry period.
Assuming the reservoirs to be full at the beginning of June, the absolute minimum capacity required would be the deficiency of 55,937,000 cu. ft.
As the losses would tend to be greater in the summer period this figure is an under estimate.
The actual capacity of the reservoirs is greater than this, being 76,360,000 cu. ft. and would appear to be adequate, but would not be sufficient to cushion a year of minimum rainfall with excess from the previous year.
It is perhaps significant to record that the capacity of Naseby was increased during the 1930's by raising the crest of the outlet weir by 2 feet.
Figure 11 Water supply to Foxton Summit
The Leicestershire Countryside
The Car Park and Picnic Area at Foxton is one of a number of places of interest in rural surroundings, provided by the County Council for public access.
Battlefield of Bosworth — situated four miles north-west of Hinckley and signposted from routes A.5, A.444, A.447 and B.585.
This is the site of the battle in 1485 at which King Richard III was killed, and succeeded by Henry VII.
Car parks and footpaths are open during daylight throughout the year, and the Battlefield Centre at Ambion Hill Farm is open each afternoon during summer months.
Broombriggs — Woodhouse Eaves.
This is a working farm with farm trails and picnic sites, located on B.591 four miles south of Loughborough.
The Beacon — Woodhouse Eaves.
A large area, part wooded and part a rocky summit, situated just north of Broombriggs on B.591, providing a fine viewpoint over a large part of the Midlands.
Bosworth Park — Market Bosworth.
This is an area of open parkland with mature trees with a lake and arboretum containing a collection of young maples and oaks.
There is also a children's play area, and it is just east of Market Bosworth on B.585.
Burrough Hill — near Melton Mowbray is an Iron Age Hill fort of great historical interest in very attractive scenery and with superb views.
It lies between Burrough on the Hill and Somerby, about six miles south of Melton Mowbray.
Bradgate Park and Swithland Woods are in the heart of Charnwood Forest but within easy reach of Leicester.
The Park is a large area of open country with rocky outcrops, ancient buildings and a small river.
There are fine views and much wildlife of interest including deer.
Swithland Woods are ancient deciduous woodlands, and with Bradgate Park are administered by Trustees with financial help from the County and Leicester City Councils.
Rutland Water is a large man-made lake situated just east of Oakham.
The Anglian Water Authority has provided facilities for walking, picnicking and car parking on the margins of the lake, where views of the water and the very fine surroundings landscape can be enjoyed.
Sailing and trout fishing are available for the more active, and opportunities to study the wildlife are being developed.