

Henley Golf Club — the first 80 years
…an illustrated history by Laureen Williamson
Henley Golf Club is located in the village of Harpsden, two miles from the centre of Henley-on-Thames and one mile from the Reading Road (A 4155)
Any opinions expressed in this book are those of the author and not necessarily those of the Club.
All proceeds to the Club funds.
First Annual Report and Balance Sheet, year ending July 12th, 1908 and the Bondholders Account to 31st October, 1908.
Both presented at the Second Annual General Meeting, October 1908.
FOREWORD
Four Score Years — and then?
The question may well be asked as to why Henley Golf Club decided to record its history after 80 years existence, when more appropriate landmarks such as its Jubilee year of 1957 or its Diamond Jubilee could have been utilised.
One could even make a case for delaying it until the Club celebrates its Centenary Year 20 years hence.
The decision stemmed from a suggestion by the Secretary/Manager Brian Lovelock sometime in 1984 during the period immediately following the redemption of the bonds.
it was felt that the happenings of these momentous years of the early eighties would, with the passage of time, become clouded in the memory of those of us who witnessed them.
It was obviously advantageous to record those events and the aftermath as quickly as possible to preserve them for the benefit of those who came after us.
The following pages reveal that a gap, amounting to a complete decade already exists in the history of the Club — an omission which should be avoided in the future.
As a consequence of the suggestion Laureen Williamson was approached and readily agreed to undertake the daunting task.
The idea was enthusiastically received by the General Committee of the time and Laureen was asked to proceed.
One must pay tribute to her dedication, and the gratitude of all connected with the Club, past, present and future is her due for the patient hours she has obviously spent in researching club records, the Henley Standard and personal reminiscences of many people who have been associated with the Club's story.
The end result is an extremely well-written, amusing narrative which I commend to everyone fortunate enough to have known the Club and particularly to those who will know it in the future.
It is my fervent hope that Laureen will be available to write the sequel covering the 20 years up to our Centenary Year in 2007.
BASIL G PEACOCK President .
INTRODUCTION
There were many times when I wondered why I had agreed to research and write this book — it was anything but straightforward — more like doing a jig-saw puzzle without seeing the picture.
But now that it is finished I hope it makes an enjoyable  and enlightening read, and puts the record right in a number of respects.
The warts are all there too for without a few blemishes I think it would be a rather dull story.
It is sure to have its critics exclaiming: ‘She never mentioned so-and-so or said such-and-such.’
Or ‘It wasn't a bit like that!’
But whilst I regret any possible oversights, the information is at best only as good as my sources, and the history is as seen from my viewpoint.
I have kept my opinions to a minimum but I could not resist making observations.
In the main they draw attention to the changes of attitude and behaviour over the years.
I had four principal sources of help — my memory (from c.1966), the Club's records, ‘old’ members' tales, and reports in the Henley Standard .
Although memories were an important source (despite being contradictory on occasions!), they were more anecdotal than factual — and unfortunately were not very ‘historic’.
Of the written words available, the Club's own records, in particular the minutes, were infuriatingly incomplete, largely impossible to read because of the writing, and either terse about something important or long winded about something trivial.
But then they were not written with the likes of me in mind.
Without the frequent and often detailed accounts in the Henley Standard — especially in the early, interesting years — I do not think this book could have been produced.
For one thing, the Club minutes are missing from 1911 to 1920, along with most of the Artisans' records and those of the bondholders' and all the sub-committees!
(Only the Ladies' records are complete, but not surprisingly they lack references to the Club's business affairs and course developments, etc.).
One regret was being unable to interview Mrs. Lorna Bloxam who joined the Club in 1910.
She died in September 1985 within days of my agreeing to do this research.
On balance it has been an enjoyable task and a great privilege to undertake on behalf of the Club necessitating searches through some 4,000 documents, including old copies of the Standard back to 1895.
I thank everyone for their co-operation, especially my husband Eric Smith who was consistently supportive.
The history of Henley Golf Club is not one of great and momentous events.
In fact at one stage I thought this lack of drama might make poor reading, however, as I progressed I realised that the Club's story was a neat piece of social-history entwined with personalities and tested by problems.
These were the meaty ingredients for interest.
The personality thing concerned me a little— for a club is all its members.
But certain individuals clearly played crucial roles and it meant names had to be mentioned.
But for each one so highlighted in this way there are many others just out of sight contributing equally to the Club's welfare and success.
I hope you will feel, as I increasingly felt during the research, that we who play today owe all those before us a great debt of gratitude.
LAUREEN D. WILLIAMSON
Stoke Row, 1986.
Chapter One: 1905 to 1908 — Teeing Off
It is not recorded who said first ‘Let's build a golf course at Henley’ but it was probably one of four men inspired by the opening of Huntercombe course at Nuffield in 1901.
They each had good reason to voice such a suggestion for they were interested in enhancing the town's status and saw the advantages and business potential in golf, at that time a ‘new’ game enjoying a nationwide boom.
Three of the four were partners in Simmons & Sons (now Simmons & Lawrence), the land and estate agents.
They were W. Anker Simmons, his brother C. Franklin Simmons and E. H. (Harry) Dee.
The fourth was town clerk, solicitor J. F. Cooper.
They believed the existence of a course would increase local property values and help sell the many building plots on the market during the early years of this century.
The theme of enhancing Henley is promoted hard during the early years of the Club when backers were eagerly sought — especially from amongst the traders of the town and others in business who were thought most likely to gain from the project.
Whether the quartet actively looked around for a site is not known but in 1905 they formed a syndicate by joining with two other men — J. A. Rawlins and F. E. Theodor — who were already buying and selling land for development in the Shiplake and Harpsden areas and whose earlier purchases included Bolney Court, Lower Bolney Farm and Upper Bolney Farm.
In May 1905 the two agreed to sell 70 acres of Upper Bolney Farm to the newly formed syndicate which registered itself as Bolney Estates Ltd. in 1906.
Messrs. Rawlins and Theodor held 200 of the 400 shares with their wives, and of the remaining 200 shares, 80 were allotted to Anker Simmons, and 40 each to Messrs. Franklin Simmons, Harry Dee and J. F. Cooper.
Alfred Caldecott (deputy town clerk) was company secretary.
Although still two years before the Club was constituted, the land had clearly been earmarked for a golf course, and in 1906 ‘The Syndicate’, as the company was  known locally, agreed to sell this same 70 acres of land to a nucleus of people who were to form the kernel of the Club's future bondholders, but who were then merely interested persons.
To add further confusion, this same six-man syndicate volunteered as individuals to buy in total, 17% of the proposed issuing bonds.
Furthermore, they agreed to buy back the land at the purchase price should the venture fail.
A members' club was obviously and clearly envisaged from conception, rather than a private company club as at Huntercombe.
Left: W. Anker Simmons, Mayor of Henley 1907.
Right: J. F. Cooper, Henley's Town Clerk in 1907.
Apart from Huntercombe, there were only two other local courses until Henley opened.
These were at Peppard Common — a nine-hole course opened in 1894, and Maidenhead — opened in 1898.
The ‘almost’ local course of Goring and Streatley (Berks) was opened in 1890.
Only one 18-hole course existed in Oxfordshire — at Southfield, Oxford — opened in 1875 and the oldest in the Berks, Bucks & Oxon area, which in total had 10 courses in 1907.
At some stage a nine-hole course also existed on Ewelme Common but little is known of it, and other courses are likely to have come and gone.
Today there are 52 courses in the three counties.
Early 20th century golfers in the Southern Counties were largely Londoners ‘coming down’ for a day or weekend to a number of courses encircling London.
And as Henley and Shiplake were stations easily accessible from London, a course in the Harpsden vicinity would be exceptionally well located for train travelling golfers.
(Only a handful of golfers were local, and few people had cars).
The success of Huntercombe — and lack of development prospects at Peppard — almost certainly concentrated local minds on establishing the Henley course.
What emerges from these scantily recorded years is that by the time of the first minuted meeting, in January 1907, and which was probably held in the manager's office at the Henley branch of Reading bankers, J. and C. Simonds, much work towards the Club's formation had already been accomplished.
(This bank was taken over by Barclays Bank before the First War.
Interestingly the original bank brass plate was discovered in 1983 during drainage excavations in Henley.
It is now on display in Barclays Bank, Hart Street).
The first recorded meeting was termed a meeting of ‘bondholders’ although no constitution even agreeing to bondholders as yet existed.
Further, it agreed to form a club and to do so in accordance with a ‘sub-committee’ report on the rules governing bondholders.
Clearly the existence of this sub-committee indicates many other, unminuted, meetings had taken place, and even the architect and contractor already appear to have been briefed, for they were reported to be at work, although the references in the minutes to their activities are unhelpful in pin-pointing what stage they were at.
Similarly other hard information is scant, for instance James Braid who laid out the ‘links’ as they were called for some time, is not mentioned until the sixth meeting on October 29th; that is four months after the first nine holes were opened, and even then the reference is vague.
Yet for all their meanness, we learn from the minutes that by the end of 1907 nine holes were open, as was the clubhouse, and that several men, ladies and boys had been elected as members.
In 1908, when the remaining nine holes were opened, courses also opened at Frilford Heath, North Oxford and Harewood Downs, followed by Temple in 1909, Reading (formerly Caversham and South Oxon) in 1910 and Sonning in 1914.
The novelty of a golf course being built at Henley was interesting material to the proprietor of the Henley Standard , a certain 30-year-old Charles Luker who was to join the Club in about 1909–10, and eventually become both its Captain and  President.
Not surprisingly, he saw the news of the Club and course as a good story and they were given generous coverage for many years.
It is to the Standard that one looks for the first record of all.
In May 1905, when the land was newly acquired by the Syndicate, the Standard , under the heading ‘Rumoured golf Links at Bolney’ said ‘We hear that golf links may very possibly be opened on the Upper Bolney Estate starting from a point near Harpsden Rectory.
It is thought that a sum of about £5,000 will be needed to carry the scheme through successfully and that a membership of 300 would be needed to maintain it on a sound basis.
Mr Willie Park of the Huntercombe Golf Links, looked over the proposed site on Wednesday and expressed the opinion that provided the sum named was forthcoming, together with a membership of 300, such a golf course would be desirable and successful.
So far as situation and facilities go the site is an ideal one and, moreover, it is comparatively close to London and within easy distance of Henley and Shiplake railway stations.
We hope to hear favourably and further of the projected enterprise, feeling sure that it would be the means of attracting still more desirable visitors to Henley.’
Willie Park was well known in golfing circles.
He won the Open in 1887 and 1889 and designed the old Sunningdale course (opened in 1901) and the Huntercombe course, in which he was a major shareholder.
No wonder he qualified his optimism about Henley by speaking of a 300-strong membership because the Huntercombe club was struggling terribly and in fact went into liquidation in 1908.
This was a road Henley avoided but only because its founding capital was provided by bondholders rather than shareholders.
The magic 300, which in the event proved a cannily accurate figure, was achieved briefly in 1912 and again in 1938 but then not until the swinging sixties, a time coincident with the Club's finances  stabilising .
Nothing further is heard of Willie Park in respect of Henley.
Seven months later, on October 6th 1905, the Standard updated the situation revealing en passant that the Cricket Club had recently acquired the field it has today, and in which the Golf Club happily has access for car parking.
The Standard stated ‘New Golf Club for Henley — 18-hole course at Bolney.
We understand it is decided to, at once, construct an 18-hole golf course on land belonging to the Bolney Syndicate.
The first hole and clubhouse will, we are told, be in the Harpsden Valley opposite the land lately purchased by Mr John Hodges and by him converted into a cricket ground.
The course will then follow the line of the valley on the left-hand side of the road, turning at the hill to the left, round Lucy's Copse and back again into the valley near the starting point.
Nearly all the proposed course is at present good grass land and ought to make a capital sporting course.
As the clubhouse and first link will be within a mile of the radio station and a quarter of a mile from the borough boundary, the project ought to do good to Henley and, incidentally, raise the value of the land surrounding the course.
An expert has been entrusted to the work of laying out the course.’
At this stage things seemed well in hand but unseen problems were in the wings, for a year later, on October 19th, 1906, the Standard reported ‘the project to have dragged somewhat, having met with considerable opposition’, although in what way is not revealed.
The report optimistically continues that it was ‘practically certain’ the course would be built and adds with a final flourish of conviction ‘Mr D. Stephenson, now professional to the Princes Golf Club, Sandwich, and formerly in a similar capacity at Huntercombe, has prepared plans of an 18-hole course on that portion of the Bolney estate fringing on the Harpsden road, with a clubhouse to be built almost directly opposite Mr. John Hodges' cricket field.
The ground from a golfer's point of view is everything that can be desired and when finished will provide a first rate course, whose sporting nature will certainly not detract from its attractiveness.
A good golf course is one thing that will bring visitors to Henley in larger numbers, and increase the demand for residential sites in the neighbourhood.
That this is so is borne out by the fact that seaside towns with golf links handy have gone ahead by leaps and bounds.’
The hole distances are then given but bear no resemblance to the course as opened 18 months later.
Although James Braid is correctly credited with the course design, the Sandwich Professional was also involved for both their names appear on the first year's accounts published in July 1908 for ‘laying out, and advising as to links’, their respective fees being £15 6s. 6d. and £5.
In 1908 James Braid was a formidable figure in British Golf ‘well over 6ft. and very gentlemanly’, according to Mr Tom Scott the well known golf journalist and broadcaster who remembered him.
By the time Henley was opened Braid had already won the Open Championship four times and went on to win again in 1910 so becoming the first golfer to win five times.
He was born in Fife in 1870 and apprenticed as a carpenter but spent most of his life in England after leaving Scotland in 1893.
Following a spell in Romford he went to the new Walton Heath course in 1904 where he stayed until his death in 1950, aged 80.
Although one of golf's Great Triumvirate, along with Harry Vardon and J. H. Taylor — which dominated golf for 20 years up to the outbreak of the First World War — James Braid had an outstanding parallel career in golf architecture, although without any professional training.
His first known job was of advising on the course alterations at Pyecombe in Sussex in 1902, but he is better known for designing from scratch some of the country's most stunning courses — Carnoustie, Dalmahoy, Blairgowrie and Royal Blackheath, plus many, many more.
His jewel  being Gleneagles where he is commemorated by a hole called ‘Braid's Brawest’.
Perhaps a name that might be borrowed for Henley should the Club ever go ahead as occasionally discussed to name its holes?
Those who remember him say he had an uncanny knack of being instantly able to visualise a course even over rough ground or farmland.
His declared aim was economy and he endeavoured to make use of the natural contours as effectively as possible.
Travelling home by train after visiting a virgin site, he would write up his notes and sketch out a design while the memory was still fresh.
However, on November 2nd, 1906, all this was in the cloudy future, for at a meeting in the Town Hall a new possibility emerged, bluntly headlined in the Standard as ‘Proposed Municipal Golf Links’.
Clearly, much had been going on behind the scenes, probably accounting for the delay referred to earlier.
Now the opposition to the Members' Club was out in the open.
Anker Simmons, the Mayor of Henley and a member of the Bolney Syndicate, presided over a large gathering of men interested in the formation of a golf club.
The business of the meeting appeared to be the raising of money by way of bonds to the tune of £6,000.
Bolney Estates agreed to take up £1,000 worth and others agreed to buy a further £3,000 worth.
Being so far advanced in this objective, even before  the evening started, it must have come as a great surprise when the meeting was jolted into controversy by an unexpected  suggestion from Councillor B. Watts.
He proposed that the links should ‘be provided by the Corporation, and the Town Council be charged to do it’.
The motion was carried despite a plea by Alfred Caldecott to give ‘private enterprise the chance first’.
The Mayor was obliged to adjourn the meeting pending discussion by the Corporation.
Valentine Fleming, elected the Club's first President in 1908.
A. R. Brakspear, Chairman (1909–1933), Henley Brewery.
There was sufficient steam in the argument for the following correspondence to appear in the Standard five days later: ‘We would suggest that the proposed new golf club should be named after the recent mutiny at Portsmouth and be called the ‘Bow Knee Golf Club’.
A month later the meeting was reconvened and recorded in the Standard , under the enthusiastic headline ‘New Links Assured.
Excellent support for desirable attraction’.
Some  30 named attendees heard a long and detailed speech from the Mayor in which he hinted that ‘for reasons which he need not go into they must give up all idea of the links becoming the property of the town’.
He went on to explain that the construction of the links would cost £2,000 plus, and the purchase price of the land — about 100 acres — another £4,000, and according to the Standard , he thought ‘Some of the tradesmen of Henley would probably be induced to invest £100 in it, because it was not like asking people to make a donation of £100.
It was really a sound investment, a first class mortgage, with very good security.
If the place failed as links the property was a valuable one, and there was no probability in their losing their money and in the meantime they were receiving three per cent which was as good as if the money were invested in Consols.
Further, they would have the satisfaction of investing money in a thing that was calculated to add materially to enhancing the town and district.’
Despite Willie Park's comment about a minimum of 300 members, the meeting thought a minimum of 100 was sufficient and easily secured.
In fact a Mr Boothby  said he knew of 10 prospective members whilst Mr Caldecott said he knew another man who could introduce 25 members!
The Mayor, while not quantifying his optimism added, ‘that there was no doubt they would get a large number of members from Reading and Maidenhead’.
Although listed as present, Councillor B. Watts appears to have been silenced somehow and even the Mayor's declared refusal to explain why the land might not be available to the Council appears to pass without his reaction.
Before the meeting closed, A. R. Brakspear offered a £300 investment on behalf of the Brewery and H. Monk, a well known Henley draper, proposed ‘bonds be of £25 and that a holding of four carried perpetual membership as an option’.
It was seconded by Alfred Caldecott and carried.
It was also agreed that the Committee would be formed of the Bondholders with Alfred Caldecott as Secretary (pro tem) and Mr J. C. Walker, the Manager of the Bank J. & C. Simonds, as Treasurer.
The Standard commentary column enthused again about the benefits that would accrue to the town; ‘people of means and leisure will take up residence in the district; it  has long been said that Henley needed further attractions and the present move is assuredly one in the right direction’.
It concluded ‘that there would be little trouble in finding someone to take up the unassigned bonds when it is known that bonds in Sunningdale and other golf links have increased nearly 50% since their issue’.
This meeting was doubtless a triumph for the Mayor but then he was a man of considerable stamina.
In 1905, at age 48, he walked 200 yards, ran 200 yards, cycled 200 yards, rowed 200 yards and swam 200 yards, all in under a total of eight minutes, and in 1903 he had swum five miles in the Thames (two of them against the tide).
A month later, on January 11th, 1907, the Bondholders met as the Committee, and the first official Minute was made.
W. Anker Simmons presided and the following were present: Messrs A.J. Rawlings, A.R.
Brakspear, B. Boothby, E.H.
Dee, J.C.
Walker, B. Simmons, W. Hamilton, W. Drewe, J. Quain, F.W. Dee, A. Walden, J.M. Fair, A. Caldecott (Secretary) and Mr E.J. Fryer (co-opted).
Mr Fryer and Mr F.W. Dee were Managing Director and Company Secretary at the Brewery respectively and both played golf at Peppard.
Messrs Fryer, Walker, Caldecott and E.H.
Dee were appointed as the ‘working’ committee and, although they probably discussed things together there are no formal records.
It seems likely they met in their respective offices or possibly at the Salisbury Club which was a new, but important, social and business focus in the town.
By now £4,500 was promised and it was formally moved that the venture be proceeded with (the land purchases were already in hand).
About 75 acres came from Bolney Estates Limited and about 30 acres from Mr K.K. McKenzie of Gillotts, this latter being all that part of the course west of a straight line drawn from a point close by the public footpath near the 5th green, through the wood and across the 8th, 9th and 10th fairways to the Belle Hatch road at right angles.
The land was vested in Club Trustees by conveyances dated October 10th, 1907 and November 4th, 1907 — in trust for members.
The same meeting, albeit the first recorded, approved the Constitution mentioned earlier as prepared by the ‘Sub Committee’.
The first paragraph reads —‘The Sub Committee have fully considered the question of the formation of the  Club and are anxious to devise a scheme by which eventually the Links may become the absolute property of the Members of the Golf Club.
With this in view they recommended that the Golf Club be formed in conjunction with the Bondholders under such conditions as are hereinafter provided…
’ Hereafter follows the detail of the original Constitution.
The ‘Scheme’ referred to above was an issue of Bonds of £25 face value to a total of £6,000 ‘to be repaid’.
This rule was later extended to include the power to issue bonds for a further £1,000…a provision made use of straight away as 280 x £25 bonds were registered from the beginning.
No sooner than formally constituted, the Standard reported the links would become a great boom to the town, although before January 1907 was out, a Leader article read as follows,(doubtless written by either Charles Luker or a member of the Club Committee)—‘It is to be hoped that a commencement of the projected new golf links at Henley will not be long delayed.
In fact, if the course is to be ready for the opening of the season a start will have to be made at once.
We understand that the funds are not being subscribed to as freely as is desired and one can hardly blame the executive for holding back until they feel sure it will be safe to venture on the definite undertaking.
There is little doubt that the Golf Club will be successful in the long run.
Nevertheless, it would appear that several local gentlemen are rather shy of investing their money in the three per cent bonds.
If the interest is not ‘outrageous’ the security is pretty good, for there is a guarantee that if the Club did fail the land acquired will be re-purchased by the vendors at the original sale price.
The promoters of the Club would like to see more of the local tradesmen take up bonds, feeling convinced that in doing so they would confer indirect benefit upon themselves.’
It concludes ‘Apart from the river and its natural beauties Henley has nothing to put forward to entice the holiday-maker to give a preference to the town and although the objection to a public promenade might be well-founded there can hardly be any well-grounded opposition to a golf course being laid out.’
Ever enthusiastic, a similar report followed the following week speaking of the untiring energy of the Committee and so on, and including the following paragraph —‘Of course , there have been those pessimistic folk about who have done all in their power to discourage those who have been endeavouring to bring about this deserved end, and have scoffed at the idea of ever raising the amount of money necessary.
Fortunately, their gibes have fallen on deaf ears and all the more credit is due to those gentlemen who, in face of considerable discouragement, have succeeded to such a marked extent.’
The Committee's second meeting on February 15th was chaired by Dr. James Susman, who died in 1954.
He was the longest surviving of the foundation members.
Although Anker Simmons was one of the original quartet and chaired the first meeting, he does not figure greatly in the Club's affairs after the first few months.
Others of his family, notably his son Philip and daughter Lorna Bloxam are much in evidence.
Anker Simmons' main sporting interest was the river and perhaps at 50 he thought himself too old for new tricks.
This second Committee meeting learned that nine holes were to be opened as soon as possible.
Yet oddly, despite the obvious importance of this event, the Committee does not meet again until June 14th, a mere month away from the Opening in July  and which is not even discussed.
Over the intervening months the Standard trickled a few reports including an extract from a glowing assessment made by Messrs. James Carter and Company, the Seedsman.
This firm wrote —‘The land is eminently sited for a golf course as it is nicely undulating and the soil  dry, and with care and attention should be capable of producing a first-class turf.’
Although the Club engaged Carter's in this instance, the business was later transferred to Messrs. Suttons.
This June Meeting asked for the bond balances to be called in so as the final land purchase could go ahead and, for the first of many times, it discussed the question of the use of caddies on a Sunday.
As on other occasions, it was left unresolved until a later date when ‘the Club could decide for itself’.
In the meantime however, no caddies would be provided by the Club on the Sabbath.
This meeting also approved a circular letter which it is to be assumed canvassed for potential members.
The Committee did not meet again until August 30th, a break of almost three months, and when it did, it was without any reference to the course; this seems quite remarkable.
However, the Henley Standard again obliges with information and reports on July 12th that the ‘New Bolney Links open for play tomorrow’.
The subscription is quoted at £3 3s. 0d. for Gentlemen and £2 2s. 0d. for Ladies and urges those wanting to join ‘to do so at once and avail themselves of the present low subscription free of entrance fee’.
This August Committee Meeting accepted the lowest estimates for building the clubhouse and the workshop.
These were £712 from A. Walden for the former and £76 from C. H. Cox & Sons for the latter.
Messrs. A. R. Brakspear, J. C. Walker and J. F. Cooper (the fifth of his family in succession to hold the office of Town Clerk) were appointed as Trustees, their role being a legal necessity which required them to act as designated signatories of the Club in such matters as Land Conveyances, Water Board Agreements, etc.
The same meeting also approved the Conveyances of the land from the Bolney Estate Company and Mr K.K. McKenzie, and the Trustees were authorised to pay over the sums of £3,000 and £1,000 respectively  (this is several weeks after part of the course had been opened for play!), and Mr J. C. Walker, the Treasurer, was asked to draw up some proposals for the Club's bye-laws.
Two weeks later the Standard reported ‘with gratification’ that the erection of the clubhouse, was under way.
It further reported that membership was over 100 and when it reached 150, subscriptions would be increased.
Then with typical enthusiasm it reported, ‘On fine evenings the course is visited by many ladies and gentlemen and the course was in measure responsible for the letting of the Royal Hotel’.
The next Committee a week later, elected 25 members (14 men, 11 ladies) and learned the land conveyances were complete.
Mr. Walker's draft bye-laws were referred to a Sub-Committee — which in the event was elected the following December at the first Annual General Meeting.
In October, a further five men and four ladies joined and this level of interest shown by the ladies continued unabated until January 1908 when the Committee declared a membership maximum of 75 ladies.
The clubhouse plans (of which no copy exists) were discussed, and were revised to include a scullery; the usual offices (presumably the toilets) were to be in a detached, rather than integral, building.
(Luckily a plan of the course at this time has survived and this is reproduced in the centre pages along with the later alterations).
Announcing the Opening Match —Henley Standard .
(Harry Vardon scratched through sickness).
The supply of water to the clubhouse was also discussed and enquiries were put in hand regarding the sinking of a well.
If one was sunk its whereabouts have eluded positive discovery and the outcome of the 1907 Committee's investigations is not recorded.
The Club obviously preferred to have a public supply but this did not seem easy to arrange for the Minutes frequently talk about ‘bringing pressure to bear on the Water Companies’.
This age-old technique must have worked, for in April 1908 Mr. Groves, the Water Board's Secretary, attended a Committee Meeting and with a sub-committee was appointed to settle the details of laying water.
Later, when the Board wanted to supply Upper Bolney Farm by crossing the course, water was conveyed to the greens as part of the wayleave deal at the rate of 10s. 0d. a green or £9 inclusive.
As it happened, the Club paid £10 and in addition had water brought to its tees.
So far as can be judged, the water supply was so poor that by September 1908 a Consulting Engineer was brought in to examine the problem although nothing further is recorded on the subject.
This same meeting was also the Club's first deal with a disciplinary matter.
A certain Mr Tomlinson was in trouble ‘having several times played in the upper part of the links with some gentleman who was not a member of the Club and who had on each occasion omitted to pay his green fee’(at this time 2s. 6d.).
Although Mr Tomlinson was cautioned, it did not deter other members from following suit for soon after several others were similarly warned.
In December 1907, Ernest Fryer, the co-opted non-bondholder (although he acquired bonds several years later), and who was managing the course development, went to Walton Heath,(James Braid's club), to hasten the laying out of the bunkers.
The meeting also elected a further eight members, four ladies and four men, the first time any members had been proposed and seconded.
(A further  five were referred back for lack of such sponsors).
Later in December, three meetings were held in one day — those of the Bondholders', the Club's first Annual General Meeting and the first committee meeting of the constitutionally elected members — Anker Simmons chairing the first two and Dr. J. Susman the third.
There appeared to be satisfaction with the course progress, although there was concern expressed that further bonds might be needed.
The bondholders elected their committee representatives, i.e. eight bondholders to the Club's four ordinary members.
The rules allowed them this 2:1 majority but in the fullness of time it would become unacceptable to members.
At the Annual General Meeting with some 20 members present, Mr. Valentine Fleming (father to writers Peter and Ian) was elected as the Club's first President.
On accepting, he promptly offered a Cup for match play competition — the Club's first trophy!
He remained President until his untimely death in military action, in 1917.
(In 1910 he had been elected as Henley's Member of Parliament).
Mr. J. C. Walker was formally elected Treasurer and retained that role until 1929 and similarly the Pro-tem Secretary, Alfred Caldecott, was confirmed in the post, jointly with R. Lindsay.
A captain was not elected.
This year 1908 is the last year for which there are any Minutes until 1920, and is the year the course was fully opened.
Most of the work for this momentous event was carried out by a sub-committee for which no records exist.
As before, it is the Standard that we turn to and, as a measure of its interest, it devoted 10 column inches to the event in the issue before the opening, and a further 24 inches in the week afterwards!
The first report announced with regret that Harry Vardon, who was due to play in the Opening 36-hole match with James Braid, had caught 'flu and would be replaced by Rowland Jones who had ‘recently and convincingly beaten James Braid at Tooting Bec’.
At this time in golfing history, i.e. before many competitions had been established, the Professionals of the day played competitively in Exhibition Matches, regularly attracting hundreds of supporters and which, through newspaper coverage, made otherwise obscure people into household names.
Like Braid, the name of Vardon would have stirred local followers of the game.
They were probably very disappointed at his non-appearance.
And also like Braid he had won the Open Championship four times by 1908 but he was to win twice more in 1911 and 1914.
This achievement of six wins is still unbeaten.
Rowland Jones, from Wimbledon Park Golf Club, was a promising golfer but never made the grade in comparison with the Great Triumvirate of Vardon, Braid and Taylor.
The celebration started with the Club's President, Valentine Fleming, driving himself in, after which the match commenced.
The Standard's report on the course opening (May 16th, 1908) concentrated on every detail of the  combatants' 36 holes.
Braid won 9 and 8 with ‘approximate’ rounds of 77 and 74.
Jones, who had not even walked the course before playing had a poor start and returned an 80 in the morning.
After lunch he fared better returning a 76, taking only 35 shots on the inward nine.
What's more, each round took only two hours to play.
Rowland Jones in the Opening Match.
James Braid c.1945.
The weather was fine after two days of rain, and over 400 spectators followed the match in the morning and 700 in the afternoon, many of them reaching Harpsden by push-bike.
Anticipating this, the Club provided a bike tent, an important consideration.
(So crucial was the bike in everyday life that throughout the first two years of the Club's existence the Committee discussed the erection of a permanent bike shed more than any other matter).
The players and officials enjoyed a cold buffet lunch in a marquee which also took two hours but included a number of speeches and a Loyal Toast.
The Club's President revealed along the way that he had played his first golf at St Andrew's in 1886, aged 3½, when he had used a wooden putter.
James Braid in the Opening Match.
It was obviously a day of great joy, not least for Mr. Twitchett, the Club's Greensman/Caddie Master, who was photographed with the two great players and Harold Hilton, the referee, who was Open Champion in 1892 and 1897, and Amateur Champion in 1900 and 1901.
Alas, this picture is lost to us.
The afternoon round is recorded hole by hole and seemed to be a battle of Braid's prodigious length and power, against Jones' precise iron play.
On the 18th Braid hit his 2nd shot into the road and he ‘might have damaged the steam roller’ so it is some comfort for us to know that the course's own architect was penalised by his own design.
Jones also chose an approach to the first hole familiar to some of us today.
He drove into the woods — what an Opening Match!
The crowds incidentally, were congratulated on their  demeanour ; ‘the ropes were used seldomly to stop them crowding round the players and interfering with play’.
Reporters from both The Sportsman and Golf Illustrated were present and comprehensive accounts appeared in both publications.
Each publication described the course in some detail, the 3rd hole provoking considerable comment.
The Sportsman said ‘the 3rd hole, one of the longest, is thoroughly sporting in character.
From the tee one drives through a wood and over a large chalkpit.
The carry is not great, but the moral effect is ‘nervy’.
A large deep bunker has to be carried with the second, and there are three more bunkers on the way to the green.’
The 15th was the longest hole at 580 yards, although not so formidable as the 8th where ‘fences are utilised as hazards, and there are several trees stumps’.
Golf Illustrated's lengthy accounts states ‘difficulty after difficulty had to be surmounted, not with ease’ and tells us the course had previously been partly arable, partly waste and that one professional condemned the prospects of the course unless £10,000 were spent on it.’
Braid apparently started work in February 1907.
Some of the greens, sown only in the autumn that year, were described as near perfection less than a year later, although on balance it was accepted the course had to mature, the turf being described as a little scarce in places.
Club member Harry Porter (born 1902) was six when the course opened and he remembers dimly walking the first hole with the crowd.
His father was Superintendent of Police, living with his wife and family over Henley Police Station.
He was on duty that day along with four constables, as requested by the Club.
Harry recalls leaving the course at the 1st green and going back home alone via Drawback Hill.
The late Lorna Bloxam, 11 at the time, is also known to have been there but sadly her detailed memories are not recorded.
In 1908 the Standard was not printing photographs and, although it took up the art form in the 1920's and it is a curiosity to learn that the first photograph it published to do with the Club was in fact of the Opening Match, but 50 years after the event.
This was in 1957 as part of an illustrated article commemorating the Club's Golden Jubilee.
The remaining seven months of Minutes up to January 1909, when the 11 years silence started, give quite a few insights into the growing pains of a new untried enterprise, although some club business has a familiarly contemporary ring!
In February 1908 the decor of the new Clubhouse was debated following an unpopular decision taken by the ‘Furnishing Committee’.
The Minute says ‘The question of the colouring of the Clubhouse was considered.
Mr. Walden (builder) was instructed to alter the same to an amended tone selected by the Committee’.
There is nothing new under the sun.
The second and seventh greens 1908.
The golfers are probably Ernest Fryer and A.R.
(Archie) Brakspear.
Notice the low-level of the 3rd tee.
Golf Illustrated (complete page extract).
Fourth green (under-the-wood) 1908.
the viewing platform, 3rd tee, 1908.
A telephone was installed (local calls 1d.), a ballot box obtained, the first member (a lady) expelled for late payment of her subscription, lockers were built for £56 15s. 6d. and an assistant, Wrighton, was engaged for Twitchett at 18s. 0d. a week.
*
The building works continued in a way we might recognise today, and the architect, Mr. Fair, was given the following list of outstanding jobs to discuss with the builder — raising the chimney, painting the window of the ladies' lavatories, completing the lockers, re-arranging the pipes at the back of the dining room door, fixing the fireplaces and completing the heating apparatus.
The stability of the building was also queried and Mr. Fair ‘absolutely guaranteed it for 200 years!’
He also quoted £45 for building a staircase and balcony on to the ladies' room.
(This is not the present ladies' room but is believed to have been on the first floor of the main clubhouse where it was known to be in the 1940's at least).
Quotes of £37 17s 8d. for the bike shed and £145 15s 0d. for a veranda extension were both thought too expensive, but as the bike shed was Minuted as being urgently needed, the next meeting (three months later) appointed a sub-committee to consider it with the constraint not to spend more than £15!
About this time the Club was given its second trophy and which today is known as the Lovell Bowl.
In 1908 however when Mr. Vernon S. Lovell presented his trophy it comprised two pewter quart pots and two George III candlesticks to be played for in a bogey handicap competition.
By the time the Minutes resume in 1920 the trophy has been changed to the present bowl.
The Bike Sub-Committee was still being urged to proceed, yet a month later the subject was adjourned, only to be urged on again the month following —‘so long as it had a corrugated iron roof’, presumably a financial stringency to keep the cost down to £15.
Bike sheds were as important as car parking today.
Parking bikes in quantity needed special provision — for security, weather protection and holding them upright.
The shed apparently went up, for in August 1908 its floor had to be lowered!
One can but guess what the members said!
When interviewed by the Standard in 1982 for the 75th Anniversary Celebrations, Lorna Bloxam recalled her biking years in about 1910 when she was in her early teens and lived by Henley bridge.
She shared her bike with a friend and they operated what was called a ‘ride and tie’ arrangement.
Lorna rode so far, dismounted and left the bike in a hedge and walked on.
Meanwhile her friend walked as far as the bike, then rode it to the point where he met Lorna, who then rode further while he walked…and so on.
Some members would arrive in personal automobiles but in 1908 this was the exception.
The majority of members travelled by train and then cab, the fares for which were a regular source of comment.
In the Minutes of March 1908, the Committee agreed to a proposal from Mr. Keene, a cab driver.
He was prepared to run a conveyance to the links twice a day at 6d. a head or 1s. 0d. for a single passenger.
And in the suggestion book of 1910 a member sought the Club's influence in getting a better cab price than the 2s. 6d. he was charged.
In its response, the Committee declined to become involved but added the going rate was 1s. 6d.!
* Prior to decimalisation (1971) a British pound comprised 240 pence (d.) or 20 shillings (s.) each of 12 pence.
Train fares, too, were negotiable.
The 1908 Rules point out that the return fare to Henley is available at the price of a ‘single, plus a quarter, on the club member personally presenting his membership card, properly signed, to the booking clerk at a Great Western Railway Station’.
The good old days.
In 1914, a member wrote in the suggestion book that the Professional's shop be left open until after the 6.25 train to Paddington has left, and added that two visitors who had played and left their clubs to be cleaned by the caddies found the Professional's shop closed when they went to collect them.
As they were playing elsewhere next day they had to scratch from their match and return to London leaving their clubs behind.
Courses near stations, such as Maidenhead and Beaconsfield, seemed to prosper better than those less accessible, like Huntercombe which struggled, despite being highly regarded.
But by 1923, however, the first hint of the car parking problem of the future is indicated, for the Committee permitted the parking of cars on the half-moon of grass which then fronted the main road between the present entrance and exit points.
Ironically, it was the motor car which saved Huntercombe — not just as a means of travel but because the wealth of car maker William Morris, later Viscount Nuffield, secured its future when he bought it in 1925.
After the course was fully opened, the minutes not surprisingly, show an increasing involvement with golfing matters.
House, finance, greens and handicapping subcommittees were formed, with considerable time and energy being spent on matters of conduct and etiquette.
Rules of play became a priority and the pit on the 3rd in front of the tee was temporarily classed as a hazard, the player having to drop and lose distance.
Ernest Fryer put up an experimental stretch of netting to the height of a bank proposed as a means of protecting the road.
That bank when built in 1908 became the ladies 3rd tee box.
(The soil cost £5 and was supplied by the old Henley Rural District Council).
Even so, the carry from the men's tee was considered particularly daunting, for it was also lower than at present , and even the new bank in front failed to ease the psychological effects of both hazard, distance and danger.
As a result, the Committee met on the 3rd tee in December and finally decided to raise it a foot all over and to put up a viewing platform on the right hand side.
This seems to have helped for eventually the topic ceases to be discussed.
The 17th hole, a sharp, dog leg right.
(See the earliest drawing), was unsatisfactory, so in September 1908 a trial tee was constructed somewhere near what is now the ladies' winter tee on the 16th, the 17th green being more or less as we know today, although at this time a twin green with the first.
In 1914 the 17th hole was altered again (quite radically) becoming a shorter version (320 yards) of what exists now.
The 16th was also moved from its 1908 place (approximating to the present) to become a longer version (250 yards) of what is played today — i.e. the green being near the present ladies' 17th tee box.
(Several other holes changed again in 1921 and in 1964).
Talk of the 17th prompted the comment in the 1913 suggestion book as to whether the 2nd hole might not become the 17th and the 3rd hole the 2nd, a not uncommon suggestion today.
No satisfactory answer was given.
In October 1908 Mr. Twitchett reported an accident to a caddie on some barbed wire.
Although we are spared the details, it resulted in all the barbed wire on the  course being removed.
Also the boy's 15s. 0d. doctor's bill was paid by the Club, and he was given 9s. 0d. compensation.
A new gated gap in the hedge by the present 11th appears to have been the spin-off.
The monthly medal competition for a silver spoon was fixed for alternate Saturdays and Wednesdays (half day closing!).
However, the first result is not recorded in the Standard until six months later in May 1909 although in the meantime the first bi-monthly bogey competition was played, in October 1908, and won by C. Hubbard (handicap 10).
The club also played its first match in October 1908 (at Henley), against Peppard Golf Club at its suggestion.
Henley fielded the following team, which won by 6 to 2:— Messrs. A.R.
Brakspear, P. Woodgate, W.P. and C. Hubbard, St J.B. Headley, P.G.
Simmons, A. Caldecott and H. Monk.
The reserve was J. Blaker.
Mr. F.W. Dee (Company Secretary at the Brewery and brother to found Harry Dee) had been down to play for Henley but had to withdraw ‘having arranged to play for Peppard’.
The rest of the Peppard team was Messrs. L.P. Palmer, S. Barnett, O. Sewell, F. Adams, A. Godby.
J. Turnbull and Major Cotesworth.
The Peppard club closed in about 1943 for, apart from the War, the golfers were in conflict with other users of the Common and could not enjoy their game any longer.
The business of running the Henley Club included topics familiar today — chasing subscriptions (up to a year late), and trying to work out equitable and profitable catering arrangements.
Mrs. Twitchett, who provided the refreshments must have been unhappy, for within one month the Club changed its policy of taking all the profit to letting her have it ‘if any’ and agreeing to supply her with additional help at weekends and other special occasions.
In July 1908 after its first year of trading, the bar account showed a £45 profit, including stock.
By now a waiting list was opened for ladies, whereas men were still keenly sought, and until the membership was built up, prudent budgeting was needed.
It was agreed that for the 1908–09 financial year, which began in July, the wage bill for eight or nine staff should not exceed £500 in total,(an average of less than £1 each per week).
The recurring problem of caddies on a Sunday continued to plague the Committee, and their use even if personal servants, was  forbidden .
For golfers, wearing the dress of the day,— tailored tweed jackets and trousers, leather boots, and carrying well-made bags of up to 30 heavy-weight clubs (according to former 1920's caddy Charles Robins)— the prospects of coping with certain of Henley's holes must have been daunting without a caddie.
(Ladies wore long skirts, jackets and hats).
Even on weekdays there were problems in booking caddies because members who, say, arrived at lunchtime might discover that all the caddies were out on the course, and there was no way of telling whether they were also booked for the afternoon!
Members were discouraged from bringing along a personal caddie and if they did they still had to pay the caddie master the fee he would have received, irrespective of whether there was a caddie available or not!
In 1908 these fees were First Class Caddies 1s. 0d. (18 holes), 8d. (nine holes); Second Class Caddies 8d. and 5d., plus lunch money of 4d. if engaged for a morning round.
The caddies received only a proportion of this as a caddie master was entitled to the  remainder.
The professional's charges in 1908 were 2s. 6d. (18 holes), 1s. 6d. (nine holes) and 2s. 0d. for a one-hour lesson, 3s. 0d. for two hours.
The caddies, according to the Rules, were ‘not allowed outside their enclosure until engaged’ or on the course, unless caddying, or into the clubhouse ‘under any pretence whatever’.
Neither could they smoke or ‘be guilty of noisy behaviour or bad language on or off the course’.
Caddies also had to replace divots, smooth out bunkers, sell any balls they found to the Professional and clean the golfer's clubs immediately after the game.
(This was a precaution to minimise the risk of rust).
Members were asked to assist in these rules and not to play more than the stated fees!
However, one other rule was that the Committee ‘may allow first-class caddies permission to play over the course occasionally at such times…as the committee may deem advisable’.
And it is just such an occasion, referred to later, which is the oldest living golfing memory of the Henley club.
The 1908 suggestion book already referred to, deals with several matters of concern and irritation, although some members appeared more inclined than others to write in it.
Between November 11th, 1908 and January 25th, 1909, seven out of the eight entries were made by Mr. P. Scott-Crickett.
His suggestions included requests for more towels on Sundays, coconut mats for the worst tees (‘as used on other courses’), for the sand boxes (used for making tee pegs) to have small holes bored in them to let rainwater drain away.
* He also asked for swabs for drying balls and replacement brushes be made at certain tees and that a brushwood boot scraper be provided ‘as the present iron one was ‘impossible’’.
He also asked for a rule change to allow the cleaning of golf balls on the greens — as allowed at some clubs — but apparently not at Henley.
Over the next few years the book saw suggestions for all manner of things—for packet tobaccos to be sold at shop prices, for a device to be put on the smoking room door to stop persistent slamming and a complaint that the bushes on the 5th made the hole a flukey.
(Hereafter followed a barrage of supportive comments such as recommending replacement by gorse for prettiness, or rubber trees for revenue.
(This was presumably a wag's idea).
The slowness and apparent lack of courtesy of 4- and 5-ball matches were also hotly criticised and resulted in their being banned from the 1st tee on Wednesdays, Saturdays and Sundays from 1.15–2.30.
Many personal arguments were played out on the book's pages, sadly trivialising its function.
One suggestion which spoke volumes, was for the erection of close-mesh wire fencing along the boundary hedges to stop balls going out of bounds, and another that a selection of books be provided in the clubhouse so that‘on the wet days there would be some occupation’.
Another aggrieved member wrote ‘the system of caddies, which is bad and rotten, be thoroughly looked into by a competent committee’.
It is probable that  little happened for later, several members collectively complained about ‘one insufferably lazy and inattentive caddie who has no idea how to make a tee!’
*A small mound (roughly ‘T’ -shaped?) of damp sand was made to raise the ball off the ground (if required), for the first shot on every hole and a box of sand for this purpose was located on what was known in the earlier days as the teeing ground, but is now known as the tee, or tee box.
Wooden pegs were introduced in the 1920's, confusingly also known as tees, and are today mostly made of plastic.
Some suggestions were instantly taken up, as in 1925, when five members asked for shorter carries and the committee agreed to reducing them to 120 yards, and also a later suggestion for setting aside some ground for lessons and practice.
The suggestion book also spawned the idea for two divisions, 1–10 and 11–18, and brought about the reduction in the price of a ‘splash’ to 1d. ‘as in the best Henley Hotels’.
(Ten names signed that suggestion!).
The book peters out in 1936.
That eventful first full year of 1908 finished with the second Annual General Meeting in October and the presentation of the First Annual Report and Financial Statement — copies of both have luckily survived, as has the bondholders' account which deals with the course and clubhouse construction.
This covers the whole of the costs up to May 16th, 1908 (the official Opening) and when the officers elected the previous December, formally took over the working of the club and course.
The club's Revenue Account, which shows a profit of £8 4s. 3d., benefits from being credited with all the subscriptions paid since the summer of 1907, against course upkeep, which does not officially begin until May 1908 on ‘hand over’.
This meant the capital needed for furnishing the clubhouse could all be charged to the first year's without deficit.
That Annual General Meeting when 92 member were present, learned there were 173 men members and the maximum 75 ladies.
(Today those numbers are 496 and 145, all categories, respectively).
The election of a Captain was again held over and the office remained vacant for a further year.
The business included the waiving of subscriptions for members joining after June 13th, although this was modified at some later unspecified date.
The problem of Sunday caddies was again aired but not to any effect, the committee believing it had to abide by the ‘banning’ decision made at the earlier bondholders meeting.
The members regarded the course as satisfactory, although at the next month's committee meeting the decision was taken to dig trenches around the back and across the 4th green.
This green was then under the wood approximately where the 5th tees are now, and very prone to dampness.
It was moved to its present position between 1910 and 1912.
Several greens and tees required attention and on Messrs. Carters advice, a ton of charcoal (£7 delivered) was distributed over their surfaces accordingly.
This same meeting also queried, in time-honoured fashion, the builders' account for the clubhouse as ‘several of the prices for extras being thought very high’, the matter to be dealt with — also in time-honoured fashion — by a sub-committee.
The next Minutes, dated January 11th, 1909, are unsigned and are the last available until May 1920; interestingly they record a decision to hold an Extraordinary General Meeting to alter the Sunday Caddie rule.
It is presumed to have taken place and been carried, for by the next Minutes in 1920, caddies were certainly permitted on a Sunday.
Other business in these 1909 Minutes amusingly includes painting ‘Gentlemen's Lavatory’ on the men's door and ‘Ladies Only’on theirs!
Not only does one wonder what embarrassment might have occurred to warrant it but the propriety in  not claiming the Ladies' door and leading to a lavatory in the way the men's clearly does, is a reminder of the delicacy of those times.
1907 Advertisement, found in the Club's papers
One last reference to this precious first minute book must be made.
At a meeting on July 1st, 1908, a letter was read which is fully recorded in the Minutes, from Mr. R.H. Mardon, holder of the first eight bonds and who was an extraordinarily generous benefactor to the Club, later becoming President.
He refers to errors in the generous benefactor to the Club, later becoming President.
He refers to errors in the Golf Illustrated article written in connection with the Opening in May 1908.
Mr. Mardon was concerned that an impression might be gained from it that the Club's origins belonged to Mr. A.R.
Brakspear and Mr. E.J. Fryer.
He wrote: ‘It is just as well for the future historian to know how the Club, which in time may become famous, was really started’.
His foresight in writing this was valuable, for the Golf Illustrated article was likely to have been taken at face value owing to the absence of any information to the contrary!
Even so, he does not give any pointers to the Club's originators.
Mr. Brakspear dissociated himself from the report saying ‘the error in truth having arisen from the fact that they (he and Mr. Fryer) were the only two who went round the links with reporters’.
So be it, at least the course was opened.
Chapter Two: 1909 to 1956 — Hazards Galore
In 1009 the Standard is the only source of information until the Ladies' Minutes commenced at the year end.
By March the Fleming Cup was under way, the eventual winner in June being the ubiquitous Ernest Fryer, the Managing Director of Henley Brewery and who also played at Peppard.
The Club played the first of several matches against Mr. H.R. Blaker's ‘golf-cricketer's team’ which included several staff and minor players of the Kent County Cricket Club.
The Standard published competition results and golf scores in detail throughout the season, quoting names and gross scores without blushing.
The first monthly medal winner was L.C. Smith, one of only nine competitors.
He returned an 84 net (96 — 12).
The best gross was 93, returned by E.M.
Morrison, handicap 5.
The first Spring Meeting attracted over 30 entries, the winner was Treasurer Mr. J.C.
Walker whose score of 84 net (94 — 10) suggests the rest were probably appalling.
The first sub-80 net round, let alone sub-80 gross, is not reported until September 1909 when St John Headley returned a 78 (84 — 6).
Perhaps it is a coincidence but at the Annual General Meeting in November he was elected Captain.
A record gross score is not recorded until 1911 when Philip Simmons returned a 75 ‘beating the record by 2’, but nothing is recorded of the earlier player's 77.
Mostly scores were very high, as at the 1909 Autumn Meeting, when the best net was 97!
That year's Annual General Meeting reported a male membership of 200 and 69 ladies who now had a ceiling of 80.
This was probably raised to support the Cub's call for increased membership so as ‘to start a fund for the redemption of Bonds’, only 18 months after the course opened.
The meeting also approved the establishment of a separate Ladies' Committee.
The quick redemption of bonds seems to have been envisaged from the early days for this kind of comment recurs. that the repayment took over 75 years to accomplish is remarkable, but that it is so is attributable to three things, compounded by other factors such as two World Wars.
First, as until at least the late 1960's the Club was in poor straits financially — mostly, but not entirely, to do with low membership, there was no way in which it could contemplate buying out the bonds either at par or in instalments (of not less than £2 10s. 0d. per bond) as allowed by the rules.
Secondly, the Rules were flawed in so far as they did not seem to anticipate the possibility of problems created by the piecemeal acquisition of bonds either by occasional buying out or by gift.
Over the years the slow accumulation of bonds by the Club (mostly by gift) increasingly concentrated the power of the Club in the hands of those whose bonds were still to be redeemed, i.e. fewer and fewer people.
In fact, when the bonds were redeemed in 1983 the 280 bonds issued in 1907 were in the hands of only 47 people who had the power to elect two-thirds of the committee to run a club with over 600 members!
The risk of an even greater concentration of power, and the attendant risk of its mis-use, was recognised after the Second World War and it meant the pre-war attempts of active buying out were never resumed.
When bonds came on the market after this time they were sold quietly by the Bondholders Committee to members of the Club with a long term, proven interest in its affairs, who had either enquired about bonds or were offered them being regarded as suitable individuals.
This practice ensured as many bondholders as possible were reliable club members.
And thirdly, when buying out looked more likely from the 1960's onwards, as members increasingly voiced dissatisfaction at the Club's management, some existing bondholders played hard to get, clearly reluctant in several instances and for reasons unrecorded, to give us what it had never been intended should be a permanent arrangement or the basis of an elite.
Their right to elect a 2:1 majority of the Club Committee was regarded as undemocratic, and this was exacerbated by their relative numerical ratio to club members being greatly out of scale.
Members also felt the constitution was counter-productive, especially when capital projects called for an injection of cash over which they would have no control, and which was seen as improving someone else's investment.
In 1907, however, the Bondholders had a great deal more at risk than in the 1960's and the 2:1 arrangement gave them some protection and rights over their own investments and the Club's destiny.
Without this control it would have been possible for a Committee with a bondholding minority to make bad decisions to the cost of the Bondholders.
A further ‘flaw’ in the Bond conditions, but  written in in good faith for the security of the Club in its early days, was the option of the Bondholders to receive either 3% interest, or free playing membership if holding a block of 4 x £25 bonds.
As the interest was a lesser figure per £100 block than the £3 0s. 0d. subscription, it encouraged Bondholders to accept membership as representing a better return and certainty.
In doing this, the Club — whilst ‘losing’ 3s. 0d. on each playing bondholder — was paying a small price for securing his £100 ‘loan’, thus decreasing the risk of it being recalled.
This was a critical factory over the ensuing years, when a run on capital was always on the cards, especially in the slump period of the 20's and 30's.
Luckily the rug was never pulled although it came close.
The bonds' conditions also allowed for their assignability which was another aspect of their attractiveness to their original holders.
This right was often exercised and mean that by 1983 many were in the hands of individuals with no interest in golf, but who had inherited bonds by assignment through parents or grandparents.
Although the original bond rules state that transfers ‘must have been first approved by the Club Committee’ this appears never to have happened, although at some stage the rule was amended to apply only to ‘non-member’transferees.
Approvals were made by the Bondholders' Committee, usually as a retrospective notification at their Annual General Meeting.
It is hardly surprising the bonds' redemption was not easy, so clouded in mystique had been their existence.
In many respects the history of the Club's first 80 years is the story of buying them out!
But back in 1909 things were still in their infancy and in November that year, 20 named ladies ‘and others’ met to form their own Club, the first business being election of a chairman and an eight-strong committee.
Mrs. Drummond took the Minutes and felt obliged to record in detail the instructions given to the ladies on how to cast a vote by means of placing a cross against a preferred choice, those ‘with the greatest number of crosses being elected’.
(It must be remembered it was still another nine years before women were franchised to vote in Government Elections, and then had to be over 30).
Mrs. Robert Fleming,(the President's mother), was elected Captain and Lady Esther Smith, President.
Lady Makins became Secretary, followed by Mrs. E.J. Fryer in 1910, who held the post for over 10 years.
The Ladies, calling themselves Harpsden Golf Club, applied to the L.G.U. and Mrs. Fleming gave 12 spoons for the 1910 monthly medals.
Among those present were Mrs.  Roquette and Mrs. Hartley Batt, both donating trophies still played for today.
(The Batt family were stalwart members and are referred to later).
Also present was Mrs. Blair, mother of Eric Blair (1903–1950), alias George Orwell, who also played as a junior, and whose father, a golfer of considerable skill, became Club Secretary in 1912.
Over the years the Ladies' Minutes, whilst complete, give no more than a glimpse of the main Club's activity, but it can be deduced that clubhouse alterations were made in 1914 and again in 1920 at which period the course was also altered.
When consulted on the alterations, the ladies considered that it was wiser to spend on greens and approaches but ‘if on the clubhouse then for the caretaker’— i.e. a larger kitchen and scullery’, although they admitted they would like more basins and another w.c.
But more on the alterations later.
In 1909 they took the par as 84, and agreed that in mixed foursomes, when short of a male partner, ladies could ‘play with other ladies !’
Occasionally they sought changes in the Club and on the course, suggesting moving the 5th tee forward and being provided with at able on which to clean their clubs!
In 1910 the Standard regularly reported the Club's activities including a gross 73 returned in a friendly by the Hon.
J.A.F. Moncreiff.
Mr. J.F. Cooper earned a Report to himself as Town Clerk, when winning the Lovell Trophy out of 34 entries.
The Kent County cricketing team came again, beating Henley 20 — 2 although the Standard bravely reported it ‘not to be as one-sided as it might appear’.
Familiar words.
And the Reverend Armitage was reported to be obliged to leave the 11th green with lumbago while playing for Henley in its first match with Maidenhead.
However, his indisposition was short-lived for in the foursomes later he helped return the lowest gross of 96, being runners-up to the Club's Captain and Miss E. Simmons.
His pattern was a lady of note, 19-year-old Charlotte Cecilia Leitch (known as Cecil), from Silloth in Cumbria, who played off scratch.
She went on to become the British Champion in 1914, 1920, 1921 and 1926 and English Champion in 1914 and 1919.
She was five times French Champion, also the Canadian Champion and an English International from 1910–1928, winning 29 out of 33 matches.
She died in 1977, aged 86.
Henley took quite an interest in her and she was the Ladies' President from 1920–1925.
The Club was clearly swinging.
The first and second holes in one are recorded this year, both on Friday, October 14th, on the same hole!
(The 220 yard ‘lost’ 16th).
In the morning it was achieved by the Professional Fred Rhodes, and after lunch by Mrs. Quain ‘but from the ladies’ tee !’the following year the 16th was holed in one again and earned the Standard's comment as a ‘feat which is seldom heard of’.
Above left: ‘Cecil’ Leitch, the British, French, Canadian and English Ladies' Champion and President of Henley Ladies 1920–25.
Above right: Mrs. Cecil Norton (handicap 22 — became the first Lady Rathcreedan in 1916) seen here beating Mrs. Winston Churchill 2 and 1 and Ranelagh in 1913.
Left: Mrs. Hartley Batt (Connie), donor of the ‘Batt’ Cups (1925).
The 1910 Annual General Meeting is not reported although other events of that year are, in particular those of the ladies who according to the reports had yet to break 100 gross in a medal.
Men's competition entries were low, nine being typical and in the 1911 Spring Meeting the 26 entries were hailed as a record and an event of high quality, even though only one player broke 90 gross.
A £67 surplus was made in 1911, making bond redemption totally out of the question, as capital was much too slow in accumulating.
(Incidentally, the official club year and Annual General Meeting date have shifted several times over the years).
In 1912 golf progressed actively and is the first year when the Captain's Prize is mentioned, as is the Caddies' competition, which was probably as equally impressive in the quality of golf.
The caddies' prizes for the 18 entrants were £1, for the winner down to 2s. 0d., and a club supplied by the Professional for the best behaved caddie.
At the conclusion of their day the Caddie Master Tom Gould, and a John Holton played a three-hole match, presumably on the 1st, 2nd and 18th holes and presumably only for fun, their scores being 38 and 39, quoted as 16–7–15 and 9–12–18.
Afterwards the participants had a substantial tea in the clubhouse.
The first of several, annual Parliamentary ladies' golf matches, between lady relations of Members of the Houses of Lords and Commons, were reported on as Henley had at least two ladies who were eligible to play — Mrs. Kate Fleming, wife of the Club President and Henley's M.P., Mr. Valentine Fleming, and Mrs. Cecil Norton.
Mrs. Norton, whose husband gave the Henley Ladies' Club the trophy still known today as the Norton Cup, was to become the first Lady Rathcreedan in 1916.
Her husband, Captain Cecil Norton was the Radical Liberal Member of Parliament for West Newington and later became Assistant Postmaster General.
Mrs. Norton not only won the Parliamentary competition in 1913 at Walton Heath; she became, in 1937, President of the Henley Golf Club in her own right, the first and only Lady President to date.
In the New Year's Honours of 1916 Cecil Norton was created a Baron, taking the name Rathcreedan after a property in Ireland.
He had been Club Captain from 1914–1916 and was President from 1920–23.
His son, the present Lord Rathcreedan, born 1905, recalls that his parents came to Henley in 1910 specifically for the golf and because it was not far from London.
They first rented property before buying Bellehatch Park.
Today he lives at Fawley.
In 1912, according to the Standard , Henley was a rare record — the longest hole in one!
A.C. Ladd sank his tee shot on the 330-yard 17th — a record held until 1928 when a 340-yard tee shot was holed at Stoneham, Hants.
On May 2nd this same year the ladies had the inconvenient request of asking that the men be prevented from using the ladies' lavatory.
The men it seems, were utterly overwhelmed by the need to be thus entreated and made a response so gallant,(alas, unrecorded) that the ladies in return (on June 26th) offered the ‘Ladies’ Cup’trophy ‘in recognition of the kindnesses received’.
The two separate Minutes may not necessarily be related but it does suggest there may be more in the Cup's name that has hitherto been appreciated.
A pot by any name.
What the men did next is also not disclosed but clearly something impressed the ladies again because before the year was out they spontaneously and bountifully agreed to ‘always let the men through directly they are in any way pressed’, a decision now overtaken by the bye-laws.
At the year end the combined membership reached 308 thus exceeding the magic 300, yet the trading surplus was only £15, with a mere £130 on capital account, although new greens at the 6th and 8th had been laid out at some cost.
The bondholders were becoming wary.
The year 1913 was a bumper year, for the ladies in particular.
They held numerous competitions including Long Driving (116yds. 5ins.); approaching and putting — using four balls from pre-determined spots between the tee and bunker on the 4th —(best score 12!), and a golf week including a special competition for those with handicaps between 30 and 40!
(Some ladies had handicaps up to 48).
The 2-club competition was very popular, the Standard dryly commenting ‘Much better cards were put in than anticipated, the winning ladies finished with scores which would have done them credit with a full bag of clubs!’
Miss Scott-Russell the winner, used a brassie and jigger.
The brassie is equivalent to the No. 2 wood (which had a brass plate on the sole to save wear when used on the fairway), whereas the jigger (a narrow faced club with a little loft) is approximately to the ‘chipper’ enjoying some popularity today.
Five ladies played for the seven-strong county team, and in inter-club matches Henley ladies were, not surprisingly, strong competitors.
News of the men's golf included Mr. H. le Fleming Shepherd's efforts in the Amateur Championship at St Andrew's where he reached the 3rd round.
In 1914 at Sandwich he reached the 2nd round and later he became Secretary at St George's Hill.
At Henley his handicap was +4 as was Phil Simmons', Lorna Bloxam's brother.
In September, the first report appears of a Junior competition.
The winner, Ernest Fryer, returned a 54 (65 — 11), followed by another five boys on net 63 or less, all beating into 6th place L. Dove playing off scratch who returned 65!
One of the five was Guy Blaker, who became Club Captain in 1949–50.
Another was Eric Blair, alias George Orwell.
It was in 1913 that the first reference is made to the Luker family, proprietors of the Henley Standard , when on October 31st, Charles Luker was beaten on the 21st  hole in the Ladies' Cup semi-final.
His family's golfing association continued through his son Tom and grandson John, the present (third) generation, although he only plays occasionally.
Ralf Wastie and Charles Luker stalwarts and fathers respectively to Audrey and Tom Luker.
In the background the decorative Harpsden Barn (1962).
John's mother, Audrey, joined the Club in 1938 and remained a stalwart in the Ladies' Section up to the time of her death in 1984, and his father Tom served the Club in many ways and was very highly regarded.
In 1958 at the Club's Golden Jubilee celebrations, Charles Luker recalled his early years when the rough lived up to its name and when after each game very golf club head was well rubbed down with emery cloth to prevent it rusting.
Finances at the end of 1913 were little different from 1912.
The capital fund remained at £113 and again there had been money spent on the course ‘several new tees; several altered and new bunkers; green treatments and alterations’.
Gas was also laid on to the clubhouse replacing paraffin oil for lighting.
The year 1914 started off well enough, with golfing reports from the Ladies predominating, including the first reference to a course record.
Miss Scott-Russell's 65 (82 — 17) appears to qualify but seems surprisingly high with as much as seven years passing since the course's opening and with so many county players in the Club.
Their secretary, Mrs. Fryer, was presented with ‘a spontaneous gift of a gold watch for her three years as secretary’.
(She went on for another seven!).
Matches and trophies carried on after the outbreak of war in August 1914, although the Autumn Meeting in October was almost cancelled.
However, it was played as a charitable event for the war effort.
That same summer, the Club's Professional Fred Rhodes, enjoyed an impressive three rounds in two days — 70, 70 and 72, and a few weeks earlier he grossed a 65, simultaneously beating every best ball of his three playing partners who in best combination returned a 72.
Although declared as a course record,(he was playing against caddies), it was probably unofficial.
Even so, given the equipment of the time it was good going.
Modern professionals can hope to more than equal Rhodes' achievements — viz. Club Professional Keith Williams, who in three consecutive friendlies in 1983 returned 63, 63 and 67 and then followed these with a ‘professional’ 68.
Even visiting professionals new to the course can score well, such as Brian Barnes and Max Faulkner in 1974 who both returned par cards of 71,(SS 70).
(The present professional, Mark Howell, in 1984).
Tom and Audrey Luker (1976).
In November 1914 at the Annual General Meeting, it became clear the Club had to abort some costly schemes and, although not blaming the war, it must have been the cause.
The membership was down to 298 and existing members were urged to get friends to join.
Water had been brought to several greens at a cost of £91, partly offset by £64 donated by members, thus suggesting the failure of the earlier water supply scheme.
An appeal for more donations, towards a £720 tender to alter the clubhouse, had so poor a response the project was abandoned despite costs already incurred in taking out quantities.
A lesser — £400 — scheme was about to start but was prudently postponed.
The capital account remained below £140 and a surplus of £32 9s. 9d. was shown on the year.
The course work — extensive as was becoming usual — included a new 9th green, a new 16th tee and green, new 17th tees and new ‘hummocks’ around the 18th green.
The 2nd hole, 1915.
Motivated by the belief that an improved course would bring in more members, the plans for 1915 included altering the 5th and 12th greens and ‘if time permits’ enlarging the 1st and 17th (combined) greens.
The report should have said ‘if war permits’ for, by October 1915 when the Annual General Meeting was reported in the Standard it was only the third press account that year and it indicated the Club was in dire straits.
Closure threatened.
Receipts were down from £1,406 to £863 and a net loss of £160 on the year was returned.
Everything was down, subscriptions and bar takings, caddie and green fees.
Staff were made redundant, the Secretary's stipend withdrawn and the Bond interest was first unpaid, then waived.
The capital fund (£140) was deployed to help offset the deficit, and plans made to expect a further £300 deficit in 1916.
Tight control was the key so it was decided that a Management Committee of four men be invited to run the Club during the War.
Entrance fees were waived but a move to increase subscriptions was lost.
Over 60 member were in the Services and four had lost their lives to date!
(This Management team of four (bondholders) survived until November 1921 when at the Annual General Meeting that year the President, Lord Rathcreedan, announced that ‘The provision for Club members on the Committee had  been overlooked’ and two nominations were called for).
Lord Rathcreedan, from 1914–1923, either Captain or President.
The 1915 Annual General Meeting concluded with Mr. R.H. Mardon promising to provide a number of ‘illustrated handbooks for advertising’.
One at least of these has for certain survived and it includes the 1916 drawing of the course reproduced in this publication.
The booklet is the usual hole by hole description with supporting data about the charms of Henley.
Both clubhouse and course are candidly described —‘although not an imposing building the clubhouse is comfortable and contains a lounge, dining room, card room, etc.’ and as to the course the following is typical —‘The 8th green is not particularly easy to putt on, being faster in some parts than the others’.
In regard to the 5th (349 yards), it quotes that twice in one day the Sonning Professional, Abe Mitchell, carried the bushes ‘a clear carry of 305 yards over an obstacle at the end of the carry averaging 5ft. in height.
This was done with a Dunlop 31 ball and is one of the longest recorded clear carries known in golf’.
Although today it is a longer hole and equipment has improved, it is not common to see the bushes carried from the tee but it is done.
R.H. Mardon was a wealthy printer making his fortune from cigarette cards.
He was often generous to the Club and to other causes.
(He built Shiplake Memorial Hall in memory of his son lost in the War).
He surely wasted his money with the leaflet as ‘the War to end Wars’ raged on another three years.
No golf at all was  reported in 1916 and it is probable that next to nothing was played.
The brief Annual General Meeting account is depressing, reporting an overdraft, despite selling hay, manure and timber.
All receipts, other than card money, were down and in total only realised £688.
Wages and horse keep were lowered and although in 1916 the bond interest for 1915 was paid, nothing was paid for 1916 itself.
It is in 1915 that George Piggott, a 13-year-old Harpsden boy, first worked on the course form which he would retire as Head Greenkeeper in 1972.
On leaving school he went as a labourer to Hunts Farm (visible from the 6th green) and it was this work that brought him to the course.
His job was to drive some 50–100 sheep around to crop the fairways and rough and then return them back to Hunts.
This was an additional trimming to the single horse-mowing machines (3ft. –4ft wide) which were daily used on the course by the club's own employees.
(Hand mowers were used on the greens).
In May 1917 the Club's President, Major Valentine Fleming, M.P.
(aged 35) was killed in action and in many senses this was both the low spot and turning point in the Club's war.
Happily by the year end, a match was reported between the Royal Flying Corps and the Club and, although the Corps lost to a Henley scratch team of three ladies and six men, the R.F.C. played a return match the following week.
When it saw what pleasure the servicemen had from the course, the Club was pleased its struggle to keep it open had been successful.
The Annual General Meeting seemed satisfied with the accounts, although no figures are quoted and the members offered hearty congratulations to the Management team.
Sir Robert Hermon-Hodge, later Lord Wyfold of Wyfold Court (now Borocourt), was elected President.
Lord Rathcreedan, who as Captain Cecil Norton had been Club Captain since 1914, continued until 1921, continued until 1921 and Mr. J.C.
Walker, Treasurer since 1907, continued until 1929.
The Secretaryship, possibly joint with Club Stewardship, was in the control of Mr. and Mrs. H.J. Young from 1914 to 1921 at which Annual General Meeting  they were presented with some silver ‘for keeping the club going for the last six years’.
The Clubhouse 1915
Golf during the war was on a shortened course as 20 acres of the top holes were ploughed up.
Competitions were suspended although friendlies were welcome light relief.
The ladies raised money for the ‘Prince of Wales Fund’ and the Queen's ‘Work for Women Fund’, the cards being 2s. 0d. and 2s. 6d.
Since then ‘Charity Golf’ has been a consistent element in the Ladies' calendar.
The 1918 Annual General Meeting is unreported but by 1919 things were perking up.
Membership was up to 220 with a surplus on the year of £23.
Easter that year must have been one of the mixed joy and sadness when many old members returned after the War whilst others did not.
In August, Charlotte (Cecil) Leitch, the English Champion, returned partnering Lady Rathcreedan against Mr. and Mrs. Norman Craig (M.P.), in what was presumably a celebrity match.
Whether Cecil Leitch found the course embarrassingly short is not clear, but Lady Rathcreedan afterwards proposed that during the summer ladies should use the men's tees to lengthen their course although without altering the par!
(She excluded the 4th, 5th, 7th and 16th).
It was not adopted!
Activity was such that the Ladies resumed sending their golf reports to The Times ,Sporting Life and Gentlewoman and the Standard warned of the early re-introduction of the entrance fee.
In 1920 the 20 acres given over to farming to support the war effort, were re-possessed and relaid by Suttons.
The Club took this opportunity to make several course alterations which were opened for play in August 1922.
(There was even talk of constructing a tennis court).
Golf on the short course was very popular and in August 1920 the green fees were the highest so far, although a deficit of £215 was reported on the year, despite selling stones and some 80 tons of horse manure at 10s. 0d. a ton.
This loss was predicted following a conscious decision to upgrade the course and clubhouse, which necessitated raising a further £3,000 worth of bonds, this time at 5%.
Lord Rathcreedan relinquished the Captaincy in 1920 to become President, making way for Commander Bayldon.
In May of 1920, a new Minute Book was started, so complementing the newspaper reports from now on as a source of information.
A new four-strong Committee (a continuation of the war-time practice), was ‘appointed’ and set about appraising the Club's affairs, and supporting the argument of spending into success…
A good clubhouse and course produced members.
They also returned to the now thorny question of redeeming the (devalued) bonds (the new bonds earned two-thirds more interest) and suggested opening a special fund.
But first, they had to replace the Secretary, Steward and Professional who all left in July 1920 for unconnected reasons.
And it might have been worse had not the greenkeeping staff had wage rises from 2 10s. 0d. to £3 0s. 0d. and £2 0s. 0d. to 2 5s. 0d.
A new Professional, Bert Skoyles was engaged and his wife employed as Steward.
Their wage was £1 0s. 0d. each per week, plus food and lodging.
The charge for a lesson was 3s. 0d. a hour or a played round.
The recovery from the war was sluggish and financially hairy.
Not only was profitability poor, bondholders actively sought to have their bonds redeemed.
They were a poor investment now in a period of inflation, even if‘free’ golf was enjoyed.
This was because the £3 3s. 0d. subscription was still the same as in 1907 not having been increased, making the return on the bond if taken as golf still only around the 3% level, clearly the capital could earn better interest elsewhere.
What is more, times were on the hard side and access to the capital were perhaps critical for bondholders many of whom had now retired from playing.
Year after year the crisis never climaxed, perhaps prevented from doing so by the Committee's success in improving the course and keeping the existing members together.
Part of the 1920 appraisal was a thorough look at the course by H. Le Fleming Shepherd.
He drew up a work schedule dedicated ‘to providing holes which would be reachable with two good shots, when the ground is soft and there is little or no run, rather than cater as regards length for the summer conditions’.
He wrote ‘I consider all the second shots will still be interesting whatever the condition of the ground, whilst in winter the player who hits two rather good shots will, with the exception of the 3rd hole, be able to reach all the greens, thus reaping the advantage which all modern golf course architects are beginning to realise is their due’.
He suggested a mixture of alterations and re-routing, only leaving the 3rd as it was, although his recommendation for the 2nd was limited to slightly modifying the ridge on the third level.
Many of his suggestions were taken up, including pushing back the 17th tee boxes and steeply bunkering the green so as to oblige the player to pitch his second ‘enabling him to stay on the green’, already notoriously difficult to stay on once reached.
He also altered the 16th by creating the present men's tee box from the 1907 16th green (which had been abandoned in 1914).
This and the other major changes are seen in the drawings.
Before the new holes were commissioned the best had to be made of the shortened course, such as the 2nd also playing as the 17th.
Socially, the Club became active again and in June 1920 it ran a Ladies v .
Gents match, the Ladies driving from the men's tees but receiving an extra half stroke benefit!
It seems this was insufficient for, ‘despite playing pluckily, they were no match !’
Then in November, the Ladies played ‘The Stage Ladies’, their names reading like a theatre bill — Sari Petras, Auriol Lee, Violet Loraine, Cory Wright, Maud Cressall, Madge Thorpe, Mollie Ramsden and Maisie Evans.
The same month the County Ladies were officially inaugurated at Joyce Grove near Nettlebed, now the Sue Ryder Home, but then the Fleming family home; Huntercombe was selected as County Club.
Henley Ladies have an impressive tradition of county play, some in part already referred to.
The earliest formal County Record of a Henley Lady was in 1937 when Mrs. Spratt served on the Committee, she was followed by Flora Woodburn-Bamberger in 1938 who became County Vice-Captain.
After the War she became Captain from 1948 to 1950 in which final year she won the County Championship.
She later presented a County trophy in her name, and became President from 1951–56.
Since  her day, Henley has followed with an unbroken County involvement at the highest level.
Lorna Bloxam was Captain in 1958–59, Lady Louisa Abrahams in 1962–63, Kiki Kennedy in 1964–65 and Diana Jackson (Delaney) in 1975–76.
Of these redoubtable ladies, Lady Abrahams (a Czechoslovakian by birth) won the County Championship five times in 1952, 1953, 1954, 1955 and 1957; Diana won it in 1968 and 1970.
Diana's golfing history is a lesson to all for she was more or less 40 before swinging a club!
Yet within a few years she won the County Bronze and Silver Championships in two successive seasons, almost certainly a unique feat.
Her Henley card of 72 gross (handicap 4) in 1969, is still the Ladies' record 5.3.5.3.4.4.3.5.4. (36) 4.3.5.3.5.4.3.4.5(36).
In the 17 years since then her handicap dropped from 4 to 3 but is now 5!
The Oxfordshire County Team at Stoke Poges 1921.
(All but Mrs. Bowles and Mrs. Barker playing for Henley).
Left to right, back row: Mrs. Bowles, Lady Rathcreedan; front row: Mrs. Stallwood, Mrs. H.R. Barker, Mrs. Robert Fleming (Captain), Miss L. Simmons and Mrs. Roquette (donor of the Roquette Cup).
Beside these ladies others from Henley have played for the county, such as Betty Turner and today Alyson Dalton (8) and Joan Haley (10).
Joan is Captain of the County 2nd team for the 1987–88 season, and is County Captain elect for 1989–90, so the connection continues.
But back in 1921 the staff situation was still unsettled.
The Professional's wife, acting as Steward, was dismissed for bad language and automatically it cost her husband his job.
However, he later re-engaged, alone, at £1 10s. 0d. a week.
The Captain, Commander Bayldon, went to Portsmouth to interview some Marine Pensioners for the Steward's replacement and was presumably successful as Sergeant Hembury and his wife were employed shortly after at £1 10s. 0d. per week, plus board and lodging.
The 1921 accounts showed a surplus of £16 2s. 2d., made possible by the bondholders again waiving their interest payments.
(They also agreed to  forgo permanently all unpaid interest for 1914–18).
Prudent housekeeping kept purchases down to one horse (£10), a hay mower, some tools, and a box number advertisement in The Times seeking new member and which was moderately successful.
Charles Luker — not a bondholder until 1937 — proposed that entrance fees be used to start a Bond Redemption Fund and although passed, it was a short-lived move.
J.F. Cooper, who played golf almost every day, was elected Captain, and Major Carr was employed at £80 per annum as Secretary, with free lunches and teas.
Alas, his appointment was terminated within months, his resignation being refused.
So long came 1922 and another difficult year.
(In fact Henley's soup kitchen for poor children was still in service although it was soon to close).
It was relieved only by the arrival of Lancelot M. Henly as Secretary.
Lance Henly was destined to become a legend in Club lore and the only Secretary to have his photograph hung in the clubhouse.
He died in 1940 and through his brother left the Club £3,000, in the meantime being very generous in many ways.
Lancelot M. Henly in 1931.
Club Secretary (1922–36) and benefactor.
In 1922 the newly opened Redemption Fund was transferred to the Revenue Account to offset losses.
Donations were appealed for and Arthur Caldecott (now the Town Clerk) spoke at a Committee meeting about many bondholders who were ‘anxious to get rid of their bonds’.
It was thus agreed that redemption, to the sun of £100 only (4 x £25 bonds), be drawn for and should a bondholder so drawn insist on taking his money then the Bolney Syndicate would, if necessary, buy the bonds so saving the Club's strained resources.
So in September, four bonds were drawn and repaid!
Golfwise, we learn the new reclaimed course was opened in August with the Standard's comment ‘tho' not as long as golf courses are now reckoned to be it affords an excellent test’.
The ‘1922 Annual General Meeting (only 13 present) is tersely minuted and not reported in the newspaper.
The mood was plainly depressing for at the 1923 Annual General Meeting 42 resignations were reported.
The officers stated that ‘the Club could not be continued’ and the entrance fee was again to be waived until membership reached 200 men and 100 ladies.
(It currently stood at 141 all told).
This action by implications also froze the Redemption Fund.
To compound things, the Steward and his wife left in April.
Even the Committee felt low, not one of them arrived at the next schedule meeting!
Paradoxically, in this impoverished period, car parking became a serious problem.
And it is still only 1922.
The Professional, Bert Skoyles, and the Caddie Master, Tommy Gould, are both remembered at this time by former caddie, Charles Robins (born 1905), father of present member Maurice.
For a few years in is late teens, when unemployment was commonplace in his trade (building), Charlie was a registered club caddie.
He recalls walking three rounds a day ‘frequently’ at 1s. 3d. a round, plus lunch (in the caddy shop) and a tip when lucky.
He had his regular three or four gentlemen among whom were J.F. Cooper, Sir Gerald Burt and Stanley de Ville.
It seems J.F. Cooper played his daily rounds with only five clubs!
In the one Caddie Competition Charlie played in (1921 or 1922), he was loaned some of Mr. de Ville's clubs and won first prize.
He had a choice of either a club or 15s. 0d.; he chose the latter!
Senior members marked the competitors' cards and the caddies were allowed to practice on the course beforehand!
One item of interest in 1923 was the purchase of a small piece of church land (about treble green size) to widen the approach to the fifth green by bringing into bounds more of the bushes on the right.
This also provided coincidentally, the small reserve of land recently utilized for the tiger tee on the 4th.
By 1924 the club was more at east.
It joined the newly formed Berks, Bucks and Oxon Alliance and Captain Wallis of Rotherfield Court (now part of King James's College), presented it with an oak ‘Cups’ cabinet.
And again, the Club decided to alter the clubhouse.
To finance the Club went ahead with the proposed issue of 15 Second Debenture Bonds (at 5%), each of £100.
Lady Rathcreedan, R.H. Mardon and Club Secretary Lance Henly each bought one, and the Brewery the remaining 12.
Architect Mr. E. Ravenscroft, was instructed to drawn up a £1,000 scheme and Mr. Mardon paid £10 towards his fees.
Out of five tenders Arthur Butler was selected and asked to build as soon as possible.
(his final account included an extra £116 — a bath for the staff!).
In the absence of plans we can only ponder what was done; however, it did include a new lounge and a replacement for the condemned cesspit which today still serves the Club in the absence of main drainage in Harpsden.
Perhaps the highlight of 1924, but not obvious at the time, was the appointment of 31-year-old C.W. (Bill) Pedler of Gerrards Cross as the Club Professional.
His retainer was 25s. 0d. a week, plus 10s. 0d. for work on the course.
Some 36 years later he and his wife — the Club's Stewardess — retired and not surprisingly, in view of their combined years of work over some extraordinarily difficult years, the Club paid special regard to their retirement needs.
(It is said that when playing his ‘interview’ round of golf he did each of the holes from 13–18 inclusive in three).
Club professional Bill Pedler (Micky Watson is in the background) 1958.
The Courses
Horses at work on the 5th c.1915.
The bushes had recently been cut down ‘to about a third of their former dimension’.
In 1924 the Committee had more than its quota of ‘touchy’ problems, including prosecuting four boys for theft on the course, and precipitating the resignation of an  unrepentant member who refused to apologise for ungentlemanly conduct!
(The next such similar resignation was that of a lady several years later for disregarding the rules of golf).
The Club experimented in 1924 by laying tarpaulin under the bunker sand, presumably in the manner of polythene as of late.
It was not successful.
In 1925, Bill Pedler began making his mark for he founded the Artisans Section (Ladies and Gents).
And another not strong in its last years in the 1970's,(it finished in 1981), this section was in its day extremely successful and important to the well-being of the senior club.
Many senior members probably preferred the style, activities and energy of the Artisans but were precluded from joining because they did not qualify, i.e. were not weekly-paid, or a member of the working-with-hands society.
Indeed, some Artisan members had to be ‘invited’ to leave that section and join the senior club.
That happened to Harry Porter in about 1927 when Lance Henly called after him ‘Young Mr. Porter, don't you think as a member of the Bank of England you should not be playing as an Artisan?’
He became a full member almost immediately.
Bill Pedler captained the Artisans and W. (Bill) Steptoe, the greensman, was Secretary.
The caddie house was their bar where they drank bottled beer bought at the club door — but more of the Artisans later.
Although a few years since Sunday Caddies were mentioned, they were still controversial, and in 1925 the Harpsden Parish Church of St Margaret sought to ban them under 14 years of age, so as to improve the chances of their attending Sunday School and Church.
The Club concurred.
The new lounge somehow needed new furniture, so the Club actively sought donations towards it, a practice that established gifts (cash or kind) as a regular method of supplementing the lamentably low income.
Despite a continuous membership drive — including handbills in Henley — the books barely balanced.
When the Furniture Fund reached £170 the lounge floor was found to be damp.
Happily, after rectifying it and laying down coconut matting (!), the year ended with a small surplus, although £100 was owing on the building, and £140 had been spent on the Club's first tractor!
With this purchase came the inevitable decision to ‘get rid of the horses so long as a comfortable place could be found’.
(The horses were stalled at Upper Bolney Farm).
In the event it was 1928 before they finally left the course on loan to a Mr. Parsons so long as he looked after them.
New tractor or not, the 1926 Annual General Meeting heard the call yet again for more members otherwise the Club could not carry on.
A sad event in 1926 was the death of Tommy Gould, the Caddie Master, thoughtfully recorded in the Standard ‘as a man who saw life’.
He had variously been a boot-boy, before ‘graduating into a waiter’.
After work in several London hotels and gambling clubs in the early '80's he bought a pub and when this failed he found himself waiting at Phyllis Court before coming to the Golf Club.
‘Hi knowledge of the world and excellent manners assured him popularity’.
His replacement was no less a man than the Mayor of Henley, Councillor F. (Fred) Butler — a situation recognised as probably unique in past and future time and enough of an oddity for his photograph to feature in a San Francisco newspaper!
When interviewed by Tit-Bits he was called ‘Major of the Links, the Caddie-Master Magistrate’.
Fred was a remarkable man.
He was born in Hambleden, some of a farm labourer.
He worked on the land until joining up in 1914.
He lost a leg at Ypres in 1915 whereafter he earned his living with a miscellany of jobs from being a book illustrator, carpenter, poultry farmer and then caddie-master, and was by his own admission, very dependent on tips.
Along the way he became a Town Councillor and then Major in 1928 aged 37.
He was the first to see the amusing side when golfers asked for a caddie —‘Your Worship’ and mused that both his roles were ones of service.
In his days of better health he had been a crack sportsman, and even managed to play golf to a single figure handicap despite his lost leg.
The Tit-Bits story concludes:—
‘On the occasion the Mayor was driving through the town with another prominent local man when a ‘super sports’ car without warning shot in front of them and scraped their bonnet.
The usual stoppage ensued, and a lofty young man descended from the offending ‘sports’ to survey the damage.
The Mayor rebuked him in warm terms, whereupon the elegant creature said, hotly: ‘Who are you to talk to me like that?’
‘I am the chief Magistrate’, quietly responded Mr. Butler.
The young man scoffed loudly, and turning to the Mayor's companion, jeeringly said: ‘And I suppose you are the Prime Minister?’
‘Not yet’, was the reply: ‘At present I am the Member of Parliament for Henley’!’
The year 1927 was a good year from several viewpoints, although it saw the death of Sir Anker Simmons (knighted in 1920), one of the Club's quartet of founders.
So important a man in Henley he had become that his obituary and funeral warranted 118 inches of space in the Standard .
Morale seemed to be perking up.
The ladies held an ‘At Home’(tea and bridge, paid for by the Club), to encourage more golf, and they secured the men's agreement that a fire be lit in the lounge by noon every cold day.
The Club tried, unsuccessfully, to buy 12 acres of land by the present 12th at £40 an acre, and sold several acres two years later at £50 an acre.
This is the field slope running to the road from behind the 7th tee box and alongside the 6th green.
The Artisans, now a year old, were already flourishing and by December held their first Artisans' Dinner, at the Imperial Hotel.
The maximum of 30 had a  marvellous evening, impeccably reported in the Standard and eagerly supported by the Senior Club's officers, excepting the Artisans' President, A. (Archie) R. Brakspear, who was unwell.
A debt of gratitude to Bill Pedler is mentioned several times for ‘changing the atmosphere of the Club’.
Several toasts were ‘enthusiastically drunk’, the last of these to the Mayor, being made with ‘cheers and musical honours’.
The winner of the President's Cup, as it would be for at least three more years, was Artisan Secretary and Club Greensman, Bill Steptoe.
The Artisan Presidents — only five of them throughout their history — Archie Brakspear, his son A.W.
(Bill) Brakspear, Dr. Alan Hartley, Micky Watson and Jim Daw — all took a great pride and interest in this section, feeling honoured to be involved.
At the year end in 1927, a surplus of £281 was welcomed ‘with gratification’, and attributed in a large measure to the Secretary, Lance Henly, who had introduced some innovations including a Bankers Order for subscriptions.
After the ‘high’ of 1927, the next year was one of consolidation.
A new Professional's shop (with flat over) was built (estimate £944) although present memories cannot recall Bill Pedler using a shop — he sold balls and tees over the bar.
This new building is the detached cottage used by the Ladies since the 1950's and which was previously Mr. and Mrs. Pedler's home.
The Brewery advanced £800 to finance this at 5%, the sale of the land below the 6th (£325) making up the difference.
By now electricity had come to Henley and the Club's generous President, R.H. Mardon, paid for the clubhouse to be wired.
Much more golf was being played and a 72 record entry was achieved for the Captain's Prize.
Bill Pedler won some impressive professional competitions in the South of England and Dorothy Campbell, the Ladies' Champion of Great Britain, France and Canada played an Exhibition at Henley to the great delight of the members.
The social highlight was again a robust Artisans' Dinner (5s. 0d.), this time at the White Hart (decorated with imitation golf balls) and where the non-playing Mayor (Coun. S.J. Holton), made amusing puns about ‘tea-smelling caddies’.
Could this be the J. Holton who played after the Caddies' Match in 1912?
But now 20 years old, the Club was experiencing changes of a sadder kind.
First, two extremely keen golfing founders, J.F. Cooper and Ernest Fryer, both died in 1928.
Mr. J.C.
Walker, the founder Treasurer (nearly 70) resigned and became, in 1929, the Club's first Life Member!
Harry Dee was the longest lived of the quartet, surviving until 1945.
In 1929 an architect was engaged and recommended doing nothing on the clubhouse.
This must be something of a first, although the kitchen was extended in 1931.
In September 1929 the Club hosted 19 Berks, Bucks and Oxon Professionals, the winner over 36 holes returning a 144 (74, 70).
Bill Pedler had earlier achieved a gross 65 in a friendly play and in 1931 secured the official record of 68 + 2 (70).
In his early years Bill was a great competition golfer, fixing and playing in Artisan Matches of up to 18 a side, his opponent being the other Club's Professional.
The favourite matches were those against Flackwell Heath, and the Metropolitan Police.
The third Artisans' Dinner, this time in the Council Chamber of the Town Hall, seemed as jolly as ever and was supported by seven members of the Reading Football Club team.
Records for 1930 and 1931 are scant, but during 1930 Bill achieved his sixth hole-in-one, on the former short 17th, his third at Henley, the others being on the 2nd and 4th.
The usual high-spirited Artisans' Dinner was held with Bill as usual leading the singing with ‘Burlington Bertie’.
His golfing prowess earned him a series of length golfing tuition articles in the Standard .
They read very well, viz:—
‘PITCH AND RUN
This is a real St Andrew's stroke, played with the right hand — firm grip with the fingers of the same hand.
The ball should be played nearer the right foot than in other shots.
Weight, however, is slightly on the left foot, short grasp of club with both wrists at angle to the shaft, the left hand being rather over the shaft (to right); take the club almost straight back from the ball with club head lifted but slightly.
Hit through the ball, keep the left hand going straight through to the end of stroke, and allow the right hand to do the hitting.
There must be no break in the left wrist at the moment of hitting.
The face of the club head is kept closed throughout the stroke.
The position of left hand imparts top spin to ball.
The essence of the shot is really a low back swing with an almost exaggerated follow through.’
What had been happening financially over the last five or six years is unclear but in 1932 the situation was regarded as ‘serious’ and it was to continue so (as with other Clubs in the Depression) until the late 1930's.
And as before, the Club's existence was regarded as seriously threatened.
Its survival depended on the generosity and good nature of the Secretary whose honorarium in 1933 was a year in arrears!
The Club also owned the auditors £400 accumulated over a period.
So critical was the situation in 1933 — income had fallen more than 0% since 1930 — the Club wrote a passionate begging letter to members and sought support for a Derby Draw.
It worked and the club returned a small profit.
In spite of its troubles and struggles the Club was now well known and liked.
The Daily Telegraph and the magazine Tee Topics both wrote ecstatically about the course, the former proclaiming ‘Henley is one of the most delightfully situated courses; variety and holes so laid out you might go round a dozen times and never have to play the same shot in succession, not even on the same hole’.
The course was accepted however as not being in the really big league.
In 1934 it was still a struggle — a fridge was bought on hire purchase over two years — and the Professional missed being ‘laid off’ only by the Chairman's casting vote, on the proposal ‘that the present position of the Club was such he should move on’.
In the event he was there more than 27 years later!
At the Annual General Meeting the accounts were not passed, and an investigating Committee was formed to examine them.
This mechanism paved the way for two ‘Financial Advisers’ to be appointed (‘pro tem’), but who were in fact to run the Club's affairs — along with Barclays Bank as Treasurer — for 10 years.
At the meeting re-convened to pass the accounts, the members were given a thorough, and far-reaching report, which included the recommendation to spend ‘less excessively’ on the clubhouse, but more on the course, and to raise the wages of some staff who had had only a meagre 15s. 0d. a week for years.
John Chalcraft, Managing Director at the Brewery (1928–69) and H.J. Young (who ran the Club during the First War), were then appointed as the first Financial Advisers, in consultation with the Captain.
Furthermore, the Brewery loan repayments were re-negotiated and special discounts arranged on the goods they supplied.
Despite all its problems the Club had a strong will to succeed and was rarely despondent.
Photo: Geo.
Bushell John Chalcraft c.1930 Managing Director, Brakspear's 1928–69, Club President (1956–57) and Captain (1932).
In 1935 Bill Pedler and his wife were appointed as Club Stewards, in addition to Bill being the Professional, and Suttons were engaged to look after the course for a year.
A ‘Social and Propaganda Committee’ was formed — probably to good effect, for some of the Club's present members joined at this time, either as Artisans or Juniors.
As time draws nearer to the present the incidence of today's members joining obviously increases, although by far the vast majority of today's members are of 20 years standing or less.
Also in 1935, the men were given permission to mark cards for the Ladies, but nothing is said of the reverse procedure.
Henley has always been popular with visitors and societies, and in 1935 the British Racing Drivers' Club came, arranged by Henley Member J.A.
Driskell, the winner of the 1934 Monte Carlo Rally.
Other players were Brian Lewis, the 24-hour Le Mans race winner, and John Cobb, who in 1947 gained the official land speed record of 394.2 m.p.h.
Yet financial improvement was slow to come and in 1936 the Financial Advisers set out to ‘ascertain the weight of meat consumed by staff and visitors’.
Their findings are not recorded but in 1938 self-service carving was discontinued.
In December 1936 Lance Henly, the Club's forbearing Secretary for 15 years, resigned through ill-health, and the Brewery settled the £149 debt owing to him for 20 months unpaid expenses.
He was made a Life Member the following year.
An interesting sign of the times was the Ladies' request in 1937 to have a bar-hatch cut into the lounge, at their expense, but despite Mrs. J. Chalcraft and Miss Lorna Simmons attending a main Committee to put the case, their request was lost 7–3, although a referendum on the subject came close to being conducted.
The ladies also sought a more sociable atmosphere.
(No vote was taken on that point).
Membership slumped to 126, the lowest since the Club's inception, although a small surplus was made on the year's trading.
On the course 17-year-old Bruce Booth-Mason (handicap 2, reduced to scratch) returned a gross 67 twice on the same day.
A one-club competition (no putter) was so popular it was spread over two days; most members using a 3 or 4-iron, and several breaking 100 gross.
The next year 1937, followed likewise, and a bumper crop of free anonymous gifts arrived — monogrammed crockery, chain and post fencing ‘for the new putting  green’, fire baskets, lighting, dining room alterations, redecorating (and the bar-hatch!), and so on.
No donor's name is even hinted at but it could easily have been Lance Henly.
(He certainly furnished his own office when Secretary).
It is to be presumed membership reached 200 as the entrance fee was re-imposed for the bond Redemption Fund which then stood at £35 11s. 1d.…enough to redeem 1 x £25 bond.
And accordingly it was drawn.
The residue (£10 11s. 1d.) was put on deposit for future redemptions!
This is the last bond to be actively redeemed until 1957 when a minor flurry of interest in activating redemption might have been responsible for some bond buying-in activity, although the Club waited until 1983 for the total buying-in to take place.
Furthermore, this 1937 reference to bonds is the last on the subject until 1955.
Over all the years, including these nineteen, some bonds were given to the club but the majority were bequeathed to individuals, either to be kept as an investment out of family sentiment, or possibly sold quietly to Club members, selected as previously described.
The next reference in 1955 is to some bonds having been transferred and this is found in the first Bondholders' Minutes written by their new Secretary, J. H. (Harry) Tomalin.
Harry started a 15 year stint in that role in 1954–55 taking over from John Cooper.
(Previous Bondholders' records are not available).
In 1971 Jack Webb became the Bondholders' Secretary, followed by Harold Chambers in 1975 up to 1981, from which date to their winding up Basil Peacock held the reins.
Harry Tomalin was to write (erroneously)‘The Club does not buy bonds and the market is limited’ and he offered to find a buyer at ‘about half face value’.
This reduced price roughly equated to a 6% interest rate, which was passable in the 1960's, and was done on the recorded and explicit understanding that playing bondholders paid the full subscription; although not obliged to do so it was regarded as a ‘moral liberty’.
However, back in 1938 the Club's survival was uppermost and up to that date and beyond, bondholders had had a poor deal, especially those on 3% interest.
The subscriptions at this time were six guineas for Men and £4 14s. 6d. for Ladies.
Membership was declining again, probably owing to talk of the War already being prepared for.
But golf continued, and Bruce Booth-Mason bettered his amateur record returning a gross 65 (not even a 2 on his card), and was to play as an English Schoolboy International in this same year (1937).
(Although it is believed he survived the War, nothing more seems to be known about him).
Suttons of Reading brought 138 greenkeepers to Henley to play after a conference — perhaps their year of looking after the course was done with this in mind.
In March 1938 the Ladies learnt about the new Stableford method of scoring (devised by Dr. Frank Stableford in 1931), although within 18 months the outbreak of the 1939 War caused the suspension of all competitions.
Even so, talk of course alterations continued throughout the jittery months of 1938 but no expenditure was undertaken.
The Club did, however, agree to spend a maximum of 5s 0d. ‘treating’ any hole-in-one-golfer.
This was also the year that the Ancient Order of Druids, Royal Jubilee Lodge, Henley, presented a silver cup donated by Brother George Blackham, to be played for annually between themselves and the Club.
This continued on until 1958 after a    war-time lapse with honours even after 22 contents.
The Druids won on the last occasion and have retained the trophy at their Henley headquarters.
The match fell into abeyance when the Druids had too few golfing Brothers.
Tatler cartoon 1939 and also showing the lost 10th green.
Two well-known present-day members, including the President, joined the Club in 1937–38 — Basil Peacock as a Junior from Peppard and 10-year-old Robin Girdler as an Artisan.
Robin transferred by invitation into the main club at 21 and earned a worthy reputation as a fine golfer (best gross 69).
Like many such people he spent his tender years caddying.
In 1939, as war looked increasingly likely, the clubhouse was designated a First Aid Post and a special three guineas Service subscription was introduced.
In March of this year the Ladies' Captain, Mrs. Spratt, donated the bell by the 6th green and the Superintendent at Henley Police Station, Ralph Wastie,(Audrey Luker's father) donated the Veterans' Cup for golfers of 55 years or more.
Although 39 members resigned in 1939 the year ended with a surplus of £50.
Golf would never been the same again after September 3rd, and many familiar faces were destined not to return.
In 1940 over 40 more members resigned and the dramatic slide continued, again making the prospects of closure inevitable.
At the beginning of 1940 there were 190 male members, yet four years later only 93!
But the lure of golf is such that efforts to save the Club were considerable.
The Artisans volunteered to double their subscription to the Club and senior members were asked for a voluntary 50% increase and also to pay a 1s. 0d. a round or a two-guinea single payment and make other donations!
The playing bondholders were also asked to pay the new extra, voluntary subscription and non-players had to forego their meagre interest.
The auditor, Mr. M. Spencer Ell, waived his fee, the Brewery waived its interest and the Artisans volunteered to work on the course.
This all-time low was worsened by news of Lance Henly's death but the much-loved man had bequeathed his gold watch to the Club which was to be held by the winner of the Lovell Bowl.
(In 1940 there were only four entries so it was cancelled), but presumably this arrangement was unsatisfactory for in 1952 John Chalcraft bought it from the Club for £15.
On his death in 1985 he left two gold watches to his sons.
Michael, Managing Director at the Brewery has one of them but does not know whether it was Lance Henly's, but is delighted to learn that it could have been.
Cuthbert Henly, the late Secretary's brother, gave the Club Lance's microscope and sundry grass and seed specimens.
Clearly, the Club lost a Secretary of unusual dedication.
His successor, for several months only, was Mr. M.C. Davies, a friend and retired bank manager.
He was succeeded by Captain Garner who was shortly afterwards called up!
On the golfing side, the English Ryder Cup team — among whom were Dai Rees and Henry Cotton — played an Exhibition Match.
Although admission was free the public had to purchase Red Cross badge which gave the spectators temporary membership.
Nothing is known of the scores.
In 1941 membership slumped to 120 men, but rather more ladies; and despite the War, advertisements for members appeared and the Club still employed a caddie master, Jim Wetton, whose wage was increased from £1 10s. 0d. to £2 0s. 0d.
This post continued until he retired in early 1952.
Although caddying was in decline after 1950 (the year trolleys are first recorded on the course), the Club considered engaging a new caddie master after his retirement, but it seems did not do so.
In the November 1952 Minutes, Mr. Wetton is thanked for the gift of a Cup to be called  the Wetton trophy.
Nothing is known of its origins but it is engraved ‘Reading 1892’.
That same meeting also accepted from Mr. A.N.
Harding a pastel portrait of Lance Henly.
By now economies were being made in earnest.
The Secretary's office had to double as a bridge room (to save coal), and the subscription to Illustrated Sporting was cancelled, although not yet to The Tatler !’
That cancellation was made in 1942.
War got closer than that…for the clubhouse was made available to the Home guard and also to the Civil Defence as a food store.
Capt. Garner was invalidated out of the Army and resumed his £200 per annum post as Club Secretary (plus 10s. 0d. a month expenses).
This was clearly a luxury and embarrassment to the Club, a situation resolved by the ever-accommodating Brewery.
Brakspear's employed him, with as much time off as was necessary to run the Club, which was charged a mere £5s. 0s. 0d. per annum for his services.
This arrangement continued until Capt. Garner resigned in August 1945.
Interest was waived again on bonds and loans, yet the year ended in deficit.
In 1943 the course was at risk of being farmed when official orders were made to plough up the 9th, 10th, 11th, 12th, 13th and 14th holes.
But luckily for golf this was cancelled when the land was ear-marked for a camp site instead.
It was decided that until the camp arrived Lady Rathcreedan could use it for grazing cattle.
She was extremely grateful and the course saw out the war in this fashion the camp never materialising.
The greens were crudely protected and kept up by the Artisans.
All competitions, bar the President's and Captain's prizes, were abandoned and Bill Pedler was paid £1 0s. 0d. a week for grass mowing the greens.
(He was also a Special Constable).
In addition, the Secretary drove the tractor on sundry duties.
Peppard Golf Club was slowly grinding to a half (blitzed Londoners were housed in the simple wooden clubhouse) and two of its trophies were sent to Henley, a more durable looking Club.
Their splendid, and ancient, silver trophies, were accepted, their return to Peppard promised if the club was ever resuscitated.
It was not to be so; their Taylor Cup became the Autumn Foursomes — sometimes known as Winter Foursomes — and their Palmer Cup became the Medal Winners' Trophy.
Photo:Henley Standard Peppard Golf Club's ‘Taylor Cup’(now Henley's Autumn Foursomes).
Last won at Peppard in 1943 by Alf Smith.
Alf Smith, Henley Artisan, receives the Percy Clayton Cup from Artisan President, Dr. Alan Hartley, about 1954.
In 1953 there was a move to ‘modernise’ the Peppard trophies but nothing appears to have been agreed, for today the old ‘Taylor Cup’is unchanged and clearly dated 1895, its winners listed from that date.
Henley member, 83-year-old Alf Smith (born in 1903), and the late Herman Paddick were its last winners at Peppard in 1943.
Unfortunately, the cup was given to Henley without their names being engraved.
Alf, a well-known all-round sportsman, who still plays socially, was Secretary to the Henley Artisans for some 10 years and had the lucky chance as a man in domestic service, of learning golf on a small private course at Chalkhouse Green.
He is now an Honorary Member in recognition of his considerable service to the Club.
The Financial Advisers (now Charles Luker with John Chalcraft), juggled to keep things afloat but could not prevent a small deficit in 1943.
The best luck of the year was the club receiving a £3,000 windfall (less £300 tax) from Cuthbert Henly's estate, a bequest indirectly made from his previously deceased brother.
It was put on deposit immediately, to be kept for post-war work on the course.
The Club's telegram to Winston Churchill in 1945.
Mr. Churchill's reply.
Many Henley members and relatives were lost in the War but of particular poignancy was the death of the only son of Mr. and Mrs. Pedler.
Another death, but not as a result of the War, was that of Alfred Caldecott, a founder bondholder of some significance, who in 1913 had become Town Clerk after J.F. Cooper and simultaneously also a Partner in Cooper Son & Caldecott.
In 1943 professional fees and interests due were waived again, although as 1944 proceeded a whiff of optimism was felt; so much so, talk was heard of resuming competitions.
In 1945, the subscriptions rose from five to seven guineas (four guineas to five guineas for ladies), close on a 30% increase for the Men and 25% for the Ladies only one of whom had a handicap at the end of the War.
Bill Pedler was made an Honorary Member but was never to be quite the force he was prewar.
R.H. Mardon, so generous to the Club, died in 1946, aged 84.
In this year the course was back to full length and the closure of Peppard helped swell the membership, especially of the Artisans.
Young boys were still available to caddie and a move was made to grade them.
The men were anxious to arrange Mixed Foursomes ‘to re-awaken interest’(in what is not specified), and letters were sent to all previous Lady Members offering them a handicap of L.G.U. plus 6, or a straight 36.
It probably failed for the Mixed Fours were re-introduced as a trial in 1960 and reintroduced yet again in 1974 largely on the initiative of Valerie Wormwald the then Ladies' Captain.
The ladies seemed slower than the men to start post-war golf and it was November 1949 before they played any competition.
Even in 1953 they could not raise six entries for the monthly medals and in 1961 there were still only eight regular players.
A Publicity Committee was formed to attract more members and on New Year's Eve 1946–47 what appears to be the first such Social at the Club was held and included ‘modern dancing to a radiogram’.
Hopefully, the year ended in better spirits than did its finances, for bond and loan interests and fees were waived yet again.
However, the Club continued to spend money on itself, including extensive tree planting, true as ever to its traditional means of acquiring more members through an attractive club and course.
After the initial euphoria of the war ending, the Club started on another six years of intense struggle for survival, despite investment.
The catering was so little used it was decided to suspend it and it was necessary to dig into the precious Henly legacy for repairs, wages, course upkeep and to off-set the catering losses.
In 1946 the much respected greenkeeper ‘Norris’ retired on a Club pension of £1 0s. 0d. a week.
(In 1931 Mr. Norris earned a report in the Standard when he shot off his foot while rabbiting).
In 1948 a certain M. (Micky) K. Watson was elected on to the committee, beginning a special relationship with the Club that was to last some 30 years and prove instrumental in its recovery, simultaneously adding significantly to the quality of both the Club's social and golfing amenities.
This was especially so in the early post-war years.
Luckily, as was the way in those less intense days, Micky Watson was able to use the considerable contracting plant and other facilities of his own business (Aubrey Watson Ltd.), to help pull the Club together.
He also put in much of his own time and appeared to have a way of solving most problems.
Although the Club has had many friends over the years his contribution would be difficult to equal.
In 1949 the first of several quality exhibition matches took place arranged by Frank Francis-Francis, a friend to the Club in general and to the Artisans in particular.
He was a plus 2 handicap golfer, Walker Cup players and a member at Sunningdale; he never joined Henley.
His connection with the Club was through A.H.
(Henry) Wooden, his valet for seven years who on his marriage left his service and came to Henley where he worked at the Brewery for 30 years.
Henry joined the Artisans in 1946 and was Secretary for five years.
The two men maintained contact  and Frank Francis-Francis often visited Henley and provided a seat for the Artisans which was given, in turn, to the Club in 1971.
His first exhibition teams included Gerald Micklem, Sam McCready (Open Amateur Champion), and P.B. (Laddie) Lucas (Walker Cup Captain and a former M.P.).
The splendid Artisans' trophy donated by Frank Francis-Francis, is now a Memorial Cup in his name for 5-day members.
He died on Christmas Eve 1983.
(The other Artisan Cups have either been returned to their donors or await new designations).
By 1950 things were sufficiently improved for the bondholders to be paid their 3% interest (for that year only), although interest on the Brewery loan was not paid.
Plan of the roman Villa (13th hole).
Oxoniensia Vol.
XVI 1951.
In 1951 the course was host to some archaeologists who extended the digging started in 1909 in the garden of Harpsden Wood House (overlooking the carry of the 13th hole).
It was discovered at the earlier date that the remains of an impressive Roman villa straddled the course boundary.
These later, more extensive, excavations brought various new finds to the surface as well as picking out the original flint walls.
Several brick tiles (16″ x 11″ x 1¼″), coloured plaster, gravel footings and coins were found.
Beside the coins (A.D., 287–361), there were nails and pottery, also a flask and other bits and pieces.
Some of these artifacts are to be seen at Henley Town Hall.
The villa location, largely hidden in undergrowth, is marked with a stone tablet erected by the Club.
Throughout the 1950's, the battle for members and greater income, was fought relentlessly and an appeal went out in 1954 for donations and gifts.
In came a typewriter, crested glasses, course shelters and so on, such gifts being regularly made throughout the decade.
In 1953 Mrs. J.P.
(Phoebe) Bradley became the first lady to serve on the Club Committee, an event doubly unique, for although not a bondholder she was elected by their Committee to represent them for a four-year term.
However, after one year she resigned, being replaced by Mrs. B.E.T.
Henderson, who served until 1958.
On her resignation when leaving Henley, the Ladies' Section wrote to the Bondholders Committee suggesting it invite bondholder Mrs. Lorna Bloxam (née Simmons — she married in 1951), to be the replacement.
This was done in March 1959 and Lorna served for 17 years until 1976, her 65th year of membership.
(She joined the Club in 1910, aged 13), she was also Ladies' President for many years and made an Honorary Member in 1965).
In 1954 the Hon.
Secretary, Mr. F.R. Henderson, resigned after nine years to be replaced by two Joint Hon.
Secretaries — Micky Watson, for the Course, and Micky Jones for Administration, although the second Micky had to relinquish his half in 1956 on being posted overseas.
Mr. Charles Vaughan took on the role until 1961 when Micky Watson assumed both halves for a short time until the arrival of Mr. G.T. Edwards as Secretary, on an honorarium of £200 per annum.
At this point Micky Watson was presented with a silver bowl and made a Life Member, although still continuing as Course Secretary.
At last, after almost fifty years of problems, the Club was on the verge of a breakthrough, although at the time did not know it.
Success was at hand.
Micky Watson and Micky Jones.
Chapter Three: 1956 to 1986 — On the Fairway — at last In 1956 the first recorded questioning of the bondholders' status occurs, paradoxically as the interest payments on bonds are resumed.
This is probably more coincident with the postwar revolution of questioning hierarchical structures, especially if seemingly undemocratic, coupled with an influx of new members, rather than an objection to the interest.
Although nothing appears in the Minutes by way of members' complaints, it seems that John Chalcraft (Club President 1956–57) and Guy Blaker (Captain 1949–50) sought to approach bondholders who might be bought out and there was a hope that the price might be negotiated.
The bond's conditions did not allow for this, so even if bought and transferred at less than par between individuals, they had to be redeemed by the Club in full.
However, in 1957 some bonds were redeemed by the Club at less than par, so perhaps the President was successful after all, possibly by inviting bondholders themselves to suggest a lower than par price.
A new tractor was bought in 1957, the first for 30 years, and in the same year the Club lost one of its early members when E.A. (Ted) Batt died.
His ashes were scattered on the course and his bonds given to the Club.
He was Captain in 1939 when his brother, Tom Batt (who died during the war) was elected President, for the second time.
The Batt family had been connected with the Club since 1907 when Tom Batt bought bonds.
He, like his brother Ted, was a vet.
in London and weekended at Shiplake.
His second brother — Hartley Frank — did not play but his wife, Connie, did and, as said earlier, gave the ladies the Batt trophies.
Ted Batt (21 years Tom's junior) also played, as did his children.
One of these is Barbara Waller, the world famous stained glass artist who, coincidentally, lives by the 18th tee.
Her sister, Anne Burge of Shiplake, won her aunt's trophy in 1935.
In 1958 the ubiquitous Micky Watson became President in addition to Hon.
Secretary and spear-headed the drive for new members, still badly needed in what was now the Club's 50th year of existence.
The Club celebrated its first 50 years in style, viz. an extract its first 50 years in style, viz. an extract from the Henley Standard of July 25th, 1958: ‘Weekend of Celebration at Harpsden.
The weather was kind for the Golden Jubilee Celebrations of the Henley Golf Club which were held last weekend and large numbers of members and friends attended and were very appreciative of the arrangements which had been made.
The occasion was marked by special golf competitions, a social on Saturday evening and a prize-giving ceremony on Sunday evening’.
‘For the competitions a number of new challenge trophies were presented including those for the men's scratch championships which the club had not held in the past.
These consisted of, a replica of the Lovell Bowl, presented by Mr. G.H.J. Tomalin, and a beautiful miniature barrel, made and presented by Mr. Frank Wood, the Secretary of the Artisans’ Club.
There was also a Jubilee Challenge Cup for an annual Stableford bogey competition, presented by Mr. C.W. Pedler, the professional at the Club, and various other prizes presented by the Committee.’
‘Large numbers of entries were received for all the competitions, which ran over the two days and were thrown open to the past members of the Club, as well as members of the Ladies and Artisans sections.
The course was in excellent condition after the recent bad weather and some good scores were returned.’
Golden Jubilee 1957…some familiar faces, e.g. seated from left is Basil Peacock.
A social was held on the Saturday night followed by an ‘excellent cold meal served in a marquee on the lawn in front of the clubhouse, and then by country dancing to the ‘Hambleden Hustlers’ who induced many of the company to join them.
The lawn was illuminated by floodlighting and numerous fairy lights, a number of very large coloured umbrellas had been erected and when all was in full swing it made a very animated and enchanting picture.
Later the company joined enthusiastically in general dancing to the music of Fred Lewendon and his Harlequins dance band.’
Charles Luker then gave a speech of reminiscences stressing the need to be grateful for ‘those who had formed the Club and those who had kept it going for its first 50 years’.
The evening terminated with the members singing ‘For he's a jolly good fellow’ to Micky Watson in appreciation of the considerable work he had done for the Club.
Fever for development struck again, this time on the basis of selling a plot of land behind the 17th tee for private use which it was estimated would yield of £1,500–£2,000.
Some thought this a better idea to using the Henly legacy — but it was the legacy that was to be used after all, as opposition to selling land mounted.
An Emergency Meeting agreed on enlarging the clubhouse, including making the ground floor of the cottage into the Ladies' locker room — to be reached by an uncovered, external stairway!
A new (wooden) professional's shop was built nearer the first tee and is still to be seen above the Secretary's office, although now in a poor state of repair and its demolition likely.
By now finances were brightening and whilst still running at a loss, this was entirely because of spending on improvements.
Throughout the 1960's the Club continued to increase its membership and with it came the demand for better facilities backed up with plenty of suggestions!
Proper  planning was held up for a time until the route of the M4 was decided, as an early outline brought it through Harpsden and over Peppard.
Once the route was resolved the Club found itself considering yet again, the prospects of building a new clubhouse at the top of Chalk Hill and serious attempts were made to interest Brewery companies into buying the existing clubhouse for a public house.
But as the Club could not offer even a remote date for vacant possession its sale for such a purpose was impossible to negotiate.
The idea was abandoned in any event on the grounds of prohibitive costs, apart from being unfavourably viewed by the planners and the police.
Happy Days 1959!
Standing at back, Dr. Gerry O'Gorman.
Front, left to right: Micky Jones, his son Michael and Leslie Wise.
The idea re-emerged in 1972 but was again (finally?) dropped, as too expensive, but at least in 1964 the Ladies' exposed stairway was rebuilt with a covered staircase, and a new trolley room constructed under.
The Secretary's office was newly located downstairs, in the area to the left of the Club's entrance hall.
Central heating was again (finally?) dropped, as too expensive, but at least in 1964 the Ladies' exposed stairway was rebuilt with a covered staircase, and a new trolley room constructed under.
The Secretary's office was newly located downstairs, in the area to the left of the Club's entrance hall.
Central heating was demanded and new accommodation was needed for greenkeeping staff.
The end to expenditure was never in sight.
New cottages were envisaged by the fourth tee but the District council planners objected, so a site alongside the 18th fairway was agreed to a building proceeded.
The Club proceeded in the mid-60's with what is its most recent major course alteration, the re-arrangement of four holes.
In essence this meant:(1) lengthening the 10th by re-siting the green to its present position from its earlier one part way down the fairway;(2) shortening the 11th to its present par 3 from its previous 4.
The former 11th tee box, on what is now the 10th fairway, was sufficiently far back from the road for the majority of golfers to carry the road with their second (or third!) shots, although some doughty souls had a go for the green from the tee using the existing oak tree as being to the left of the ideal line;(3) reconstructing the 13th afresh and (4) taking back the 14th tee box considerably as now.
(See illustrations).
To help with the clubhouse improvements the Brewery loaned £7,500 on generous terms.
Although the Club was for Brakspear's an outlet for their products without many responsibility of property up-keep, their generosity was far in excess of what might be expected on strictly commercial terms and doubtless when their relationship and arrangements were terminated in 1983, the Club's former President, John Chalcraft, also the Brewery's retired Managing Director, must have felt some regret.
Golf's popularity was putting pressure on the course because more local people played, and earlier in the day than previously, so the Artisans' starting time was brought forward to ‘no later than 8.30 a.m.’(30 years before it was 9.30 a.m.).
The Men's membership was now 180 and the Ladies a mere 33 (of whom only 16 played), and a Joint Membership of another 40 couples.
Even so, this was less overall than the previous bests of 1914 and 1939.
In 1960 the Club had its best financial year (pound for pound) since 1931, unquestionably helped by the installation of ‘fruit machines’ which were instantly popular with a section of members and a good source of income.
The year also saw the telegraph wires, which straddled the 3rd and 11th being put underground, thus removing a hazard which penalised the local ‘phone subscribers more than the golfers for it, if the wires were hit dynamically, their ‘phones were cut off!
The Club bought several felled poles for £2 16s. 7d. and cut them up for course seats, a by the 8th tee today.
It was at this time that the Club first negotiated to use the cricket field for ‘tuition’ and it became an overflow car park in 1966.
Photo: Suttons Looking down the 15th hole in the early 1970's.
Note how the young trees look now.
The clubhouse 1970.
On the right, the nut serving variously a the Professional's shop and Secretary's office.
The same year 1960, saw the Pedler's retire to live in the flat over the Ladies' room, although Bill still involved himself helping his replacement — Derek Craik — who came as Assistant shortly before Bill's retirement (replacing Keith Mercer, an earlier assistant brought in on the crest of the membership boom).
Today's professional has two assistants, reflecting an increased amount of teaching, shop sales, professional tournaments and playing requests.
Being resident, Bill was a familiar sight in the bar for many years, occupying a settle which now sits forlornly outside the Ladies' locker room entrance.
In 1973 the Ladies' Committee concerned itself with this seat reporting ‘It was a pity to leave it in the wet even if only there for the time being’.
In 1980 (seven years later)‘Pedler's pew’ was inspected and pronounced in need of some care (and love?).
Major Ian Kennedy repaired it, ‘sufficiently to sit on’, although, alas, it mostly supports bags of clubs and a miscellany of paraphernalia.
It surely deserves better.
Also living on the Club's premises was Frank Wood, the last cooper at the Brewery (who also made the Scratch Barrel Trophy) and now a Club employee.
His sons, Bernard and Derek, played in the Junior Section, started into life in the late 1950's by Freda Goldstein and Leslie Wise.
Among their group was the ‘young’ Frank Gilbride, now the Professional at Exeter Golf Club.
After Freda and Leslie retired from active Junior encouragement, Henley's youngsters went quiet for a time, until revitalised more recently and most effectively, by Malcolm White.
In 1961 the Club was developing a more commercial approach to itself, in no small measure owing to Jack Webb who worked for the Club's accountant, Spencer Ell.
He became, first Treasurer, and later President — in 1974, although this lasted for barely three months owing to his untimely death.
As usual, there was discussion on improving the Club's premises and included laying a woodblock floor.
(In later improvements this was hidden away under the carpet).
In 1961, Arnold Claisse became President, a post he held most successfully for 10 years, during which the niggles about the bondholding autocracy increased and first surfaced formally at the 1970 Annual General Meeting.
He was followed by Tom Liker (1971–73), Jack Webb (1974) and then Jim Daw (1975–1977).
The 1960's was a successful decade, although the future and the past came together with the passing of many early members.
Not least among these was Charles Luker, aged 91, who died in 1968.
Spencer Ell, who had done the audit nobly for many years, died the same year, leaving the Club a generous legacy which funded the building of the present Professional's shop and the Secretary's office adjoining.
(The latter is a later adaptation of a little used part of the former).
Although not quoted as a reference over recent years, the Henley Standard continued its reporting of the Club's fixtures and competitions, as it had from the beginning.
But the Club was no longer‘news’ in the way it was 60 years earlier.
However, the golf reports took on a new look when supplied by Jack Webb in the two or three years before his death.
He wrote under the pen-name ‘Jayemdoubleyou’ and his reports were something to look forward to every Friday.
His first, April 19th 1968, was about Lewis Cowan's course record.
After giving due praise for the ‘truly magnificent score o 68 gross’(not an official record as a temporary green was in use), Jack goes on to write, with sensitive appreciation, ‘Spare a thought if you will for Fred Willson who had handed in a card of 43 points   in the same competition, a Stableford round, which in ordinary circumstances surely would have entitled anyone to anticipate receiving the most acceptable prize from the Captain.
As it was, he will have to be content with a worthy second prize from the Captain.
As it was, he will have to be content with a worthy second prize and undoubted attention from that pernicious body of men, who seem to be hovering forever around the competition results waiting to strike — the handicapping committee!’
Arnold Claisse, President 1961–71.
Robert Naish, President 1978–83.
The Artisan Section presents the Francis-Francis seat to the Club 1971.
Left to right: R. Palmer, Ted Harris, Tom Luker, David Osborne, John Chalcraft, Alf Smith, Henry Wooden and R. Goodchild.
And again, when reporting on the A & B Foursomes in January 1969, he started as follows: ‘There must be an increased number of wives who are convinced that there is a special weather dispensation for Harpsden, or it may be, of course, that many of them are only too glad to get the old man out of the house for a few hours on a wet Sunday.’
All his reports had a sparkle!
This was the affluent, ‘never-had-it-so-good’ era.
Revenue was up, expenditure too and some young trees, notably 30 birches and limes were planted between the 12th and 14th, also the ‘plantation’(now a copse) between the 14th and 15th, and the bushes behind the 2nd, plus many others.
Then, in late 1966/early 1967, the membership was closed and a part-time Assistant for the Secretary engaged, and at last, a decision was made to repay the Brewery £500 of its loan!
The good times had arrived.
The ‘Ladies Golf Club’ changed its name to ‘Henley Golf Club — Ladies' Section’, but, in contrast, the Artisans were a reducing force, there being ‘only 20 true members’.
(Four who were not ‘true’ members were given notice, but would be permitted to join the main Club, ‘if elected’).
The fruit machines were proving fruitful and the Club improved the changing rooms, bought new dining room furniture and tarmacadamed the car park, although a small part of it was sold to the S.E.B. for £75 for use as a sub-station.
In 1967 (‘the best year ever’), a Five Year Plan was conceived but seemed to die a death.
In 1968, the diamond Jubilee came and went without celebration for fear of a financial loss!
This was the year after the Drink/Driving Law with its fearsome ‘breathalyser’ was introduced.
It had an immediate effect, causing a long term, and dramatic drop in the Club's profits.
However, things recovered somewhat and in 1970 the Club was back into a sound bar profit.
At the 1970 Annual General Meeting as said above, rumblings of discontent about the relative rights and status of bondholders were formally voiced for the first time.
But the status quo was defended on the basis of history having proved it effective.
In the 1970's and early ‘80's the Club saw more changes than in the whole of its earlier history, so much so that in 1976 former President Tom Luker said of the course shortly before his death (1977), ‘It has been modified so many times it has gone full circle’.
And in the clubhouse, while there was no movement to revert ‘forward’ to gas lighting, there was a feeling that alterations were always being made.
Although ‘change’ perhaps suggests dynamism and enthusiasm — in keeping with a successful Club — the energy did not always stretch to the players on the course, for here complaints of slow play were regularly made, doubtless aggravated by televised golf tournaments in which players spent many minutes lining up putts.
The Henley committee thought 30 seconds was sufficient for this particular stroke.
Besides Tom Luker's death several other old friends were lost to the Club at this period.
Bill and Mrs. Pedler died within weeks of one another in 1970, Arnold Claisse in 1972, Jack Webb in 1974 and Micky Watson in 1978.
John Chalcraft resigned after 40 years, surviving until 1985.
After Tom Luker's death in 1977 his family gave the Club his putter which is now mounted as a trophy on display in the Club.
Stanley Felstead, Secretary from 1964 until his retirement in 1970, was followed by Harold Chambers as an Honorary stand-in until Jack Walters arrived.
He was succeeded quite quickly by Geoffrey Ayres who remained until he retired in 1970.
George Piggott retired in 1972 aged 70, although he still works part-time on the course today and produces the attractive borders and tubs by the clubhouse.
He also knows a thing or two about golf.
In May 1978 at the British Golf Greenkeepers' Association Spring Tournament held at Beaconsfield golf Club, he won the Wills Cup with rounds of net 73 and 77 playing off 12.
His son Peter and grandson Brian also won prizes at the same meeting.
Peter is also on Henley's greenkeeping staff whilst his son Brian, is Head Greenkeeper at Buckingham Golf Club.
These wins by three generations of greenkeeping Piggotts is generally regarded as a unique treble!
Then, at Moor Allerton Golf Club in August 1978, George, with a net 73, won the Maxwell Hart Trophy for Greenkeepers over 60 for the third successive year!
A big loss was suffered on the course in 1975 when 40 elm trees were felled at a cost of £1,400 owing to Dutch Elm Disease.
Disturbance on the course was minimal and the contractors did an excellent job.
Many of the elms have been replaced by Cupressus, notably the 18th fairway boundary hedge which has quickly become an effective screen and pleasing to look at.
On the greens, the battle was against fusarium patch (a mould) and thatch (roots surfacing).
In a sense both these events typify what was to follow — the agronomical revolution!
Gone were the days of scattering the Brewery's waste sawdust on the greens.
Treatment was now a measured science of ‘high tech’, quality and cost.
Discussions on such things in the minutes were the most discussed topics ever until displayed by the later stages of the bond redemption issue.
The course machinery was also increasingly sophisticated, and was supposedly superior, and the Club was obliged to keep up with the latest ideas, as both members and staff expected it.
Photo:Henley Standard George Piggott 1978, aged 76, who remembers the course in 1915.
The new, expensive, equipment required secure and sound cover, thus the Club had to build suitably good sheds; these are by the 3rd fairway.
Still in a spending mood it extensively refurbished the bar, extending it into what was then the major part of the lounge, which had itself been refurbished in 1974.
In line with this general movement came talk of installing an automatic watering scheme for greens and tees — and not just spurred on by the drought summers of 1975 and 1976 — but by the costs and difficulties of staffing a manual system and by the increasing use of such systems elsewhere!
After a successful demonstration of a ‘pop-up’ system on the putting green, it was felt the Club should go ahead with it on the course.
The estimated cost of £22,000 provoked considerable discussion on how it should be financed, for many members felt increasingly perturbed about personally improving an investment which belonged to others, namely the bondholders.
In the event, members settled for a subscription levy of £11 over each of seven years (commuted to give) or £55 single payment.
Although opposition to the bondholders' position was voiced loudly at the 1978 Annual General Meeting — when R.C.E. (Robert) Naish (a non-bondholder with a penchant for quoting Shakespeare) became President — it at least caused the bondholders to consider the question of their status.
They agreed to do nothing; self-winding up was inconceivable.
Desmond Barker was however, appointed to look afresh at the Constitution in general.
His examination, reported 10 months later, suggested no change.
In the meantime a slight democratising was considered, but not pursued, that of allowing the members to choose which bondholders might serve on the Committee by selecting the requisite number from a list supplied by the bondholders.
Even two years later, at the 1980 Annual General Meeting, the President said he felt the Constitution to be ‘ideal for its needs’.
Subscriptions increased rapidly throughout the inflation-sick 1970's, so much so that in 1970 the men's subscription had been only £28 but by 1980 was £126.50 + V.A.T. (In 1960 it was £14 and today (1986) is £165 + V.A.T.).
Two other aspects of the 1970's deserve to be recorded.
First is the clear emergence of the Club as a business — despite the cumbersome nature of its management structure and the predilection of successive Committees to achieve something instantly, rather than to consolidate.
And secondly there is the need for the Club, like other employers, to operate within an ever-increasing straight-jacket of legislation and to a high criticality of skilled accounting.
Employment law, pensions, taxation, licensing regulations, Landlord and Tenant, V.A.T. Data Protection and so on— the Club has to deal with all of these and recent Minutes show an increase in the amount of business in these areas.
The role of Treasurer over the years has grown from overseeing simple book-keeping to an extensive involvement and the contributions of Leslie Wise, A.J. Chapman, Albert (Bert) Ford and currently Jim Grey, have been valuable indeed and it is not surprising that Arthur Chapman felt the work was too demanding for an Honorary Treasurer, although what each does might vary depending on what bias the secretary brings to his post.
At the 1979 Annual General Meeting the members were again vocal about bondholders, this time with particular reference to the frequent incidence of bondholders being elected by the members at large, and usually without their bondholding being known, a situation not precluded by the Rules.
Whilst fundamentally of no consequence, in that all Committee members were motivated by the Club's well being, it was now a somewhat discordant situation in a period desirous of change.
In fact it was sufficiently sensitive for A.T.
(Alan) Henderson, to decline the offer of a bond in 1981 when as a newly elected Committee member, he believed he  needed to respect ‘the (contra) attitude (to bondholders) of the members who voted him in’, and quoted the discussions at the 1979 Annual General Meeting.
Almost the last act of the decade was the decision to wind up the Artisans, originally planned to be by December 1984; although in 1980 it was brought forward to 1981.
A sad day!
One other decision (June 1979) of passing interest was not to buy a wine bottle cooler because ‘not enough wine is served to warrant it’…
How quickly things change…so much is drunk now, it is on draught!
The 1970's cannot be concluded without a reference to some of the societies who have enjoyed a special relationship with Henley and which started in this decade.
One such association was with R.A.F. Medmenham, the origins of which perhaps date to the early part of the last War when Danesfield House at Medmenham was taken over by the R.A.F. as its photographic unit, although the first reference in the Minutes is October 1953.
R.A.F. golfers were able to play at Henley on generous terms and at some unknown date an annual match between the Club and Medmenham was started, with the Club and the R.A.F. arranging hospitality alternately.
The heyday was probably during Air Vice Marshall (Dave) Durkin's posting from 1971–1973.
As a Group Captain, Dave Durkin was first at Medmenham from 1964–66 and no trophy existed for the match, but as a piece of ‘superfluous’ R.A.F. silver was to hand, it was re-dedicated as The Danesfield Cup expressly for this annual combat.
The cup went absent without leave in 1971 but later re-appeared.
In 1974 the R.A.F. sold Danesfield House, and the Signals Unit in occupation was transferred to R.A.F. Benson whose golfing attachments are to Huntercombe.
Since Medmenham's closure, Dave Durkin arranged for the match (and Cup) to be an official R.A.F. Golfing Society fixture against the Henley Club.
The innocently named Pilgrims Golfing Society dates to about 1969, its name concealing the fact that its members are Senior Officers of the Metropolitan Police!
Although the Club's earlier match history included Met.
Police fixtures, the Pilgrim Society was started without knowledge of this and is thus something of an odd coincidence.
Commander Reg Davies of the Met.
was seconded to the Thames Valley force at Reading and established the Pilgrim's matches at Henley for his colleagues at the Met.
This has now developed to include Henley members and has become an official club fixture, the winners rewarded with the Jayemdoubleyou Cup which the late Jack Webb presented and which cup had in fact been his father's rowing trophy!
Another golfing society with an unusually warm connection with the Club is the curiously named Worple Society.
This was started in 1966 by a group of Irishmen  domiciled in the London area who met occasionally for social reasons.
They had an interest in playing golf together so specifically formed a society giving it the name of the road they happened to be in at the time — Worple Way, Harrow.
Begorrah!
They are registered with the English Golf Union and play regular fixtures at Mill Hill and Highgate in addition to Henley where they feel particularly welcomed and privileged by being permitted to play on a Sunday.
Acknowledging this they presented the Club with an engraved silver rose bowl in 1984 in appreciation of some 15 years of play at Henley which they had chosen from the Daily Telegraph Book on Golf Courses!
These three original watercolours by American A.B.
Frost, regarded in his time as the ‘finest comic artist in the U.S.’ were given to the Club in 1972 by Mr. R.S. Green.
Arthur Burdett Frost (1851–1928) was famed for his draughtsmanship, accuracy and humour and in 1880 lived in The Strand for a short time.
He exhibited at the Paris Exhibition, the Royal Hibernian Academy and illustrated numerous books.
In 1985 a match was played between the Society and the Club for the first time.
In 1986 this was formalised as an annual fixture playing for a Cup, generously presented by the Worple Society.
A much older golfing society with affinity for Henley is the One-Armed Golfing Society.
This was formed in 1934 by two Scotsmen and now has over 100 members.
One meeting of all members is arranged annually in the autumn alternating between the four home Countries.
In addition an annual match against the Oxford and Cambridge Golfing Society has been played at Henley in May each year since 1977.
Photo: Evening Post The One-Armed Golfing Society 1970's.
Stephen Bertram, third from right.
This was set up by a Henley member, the late Stephen Bertram, who lost his left arm in the Second War and who joined the Society in 1955.
His widow Rita remembers that many of the Society's golfers have single figure handicaps and some members have been known to drive over 300 yards!
Mention has been made of M. Spencer Ell the auditor, who gave generously of his services and bequeathed the Club a substantial legacy.
He too is remembered for his prowess as a disabled golfer having lost his left arm, and part of his right arm below the elbow — probably in the First World War.
Basil Peacock recalls him having a specially made iron club which fixed into his partial right arm, and was adjustable for loft by manipulation between his feet.
Basil also remembers he smoked a pipe which he managed to fill and light with matches, entirely unaided.
The January 1980 Annual General Meeting was a portent for the next three years, leading to the Bondholders buyout.
The Minutes record ‘There followed a long discussion about the merits of bondholders and Dr. G. O'Gorman forcibly made the point that their position and relative control was undemocratic and that their strength was out of balance with their numbers.’
Dr. O'Gorman has succinctly pin-pointed the real flaw, i.e. playing bondholders were getting fewer relative to the membership in general, thus while 2:1 might be undemocratic in any event, it was especially so now.
Power was concentrating in fewer hands and would do so increasingly.
It is a curious turn around from the days when bondholders pleased to be bought out and were driving to drawing lots!
THE CAPTAINS SINCE 1970 (P. indicates an additional term as President).
SOME MEMBERS HAVING FUN IN THE 1970's
Golf away-days were popular even in the 1930's.
Here is one group that hired a mini-bus to St Pierre (Chepstow) in the mid-1970's.
When Diana Jackson left Henley in 1975 her Club friends enjoyed a party.
From this Annual General Meeting, to the Extraordinary General Meeting in May 1983 when the green light for change was given, other things of interest happened!
In January 1980 R.M. (Bob) Hodson was appointed Secretary/Manager and Mr. E. (Mike) Mogridge elected Captain, a particularly socially-minded duo.
Not surprisingly a new, much needed vitality became apparent in the Club, the inheritance of which is still being enjoyed, and expertly pursued by Mike Herriot in particular and his social committee.
This undoubtedly cushioned the Club during a difficult period.
This is not to underestimate the Club's previous social calendar which for many years included successful dinner dances and club socials.
It is probably as much to do with an influx of younger golfers and a falling away of the old guard.
In particular, the introduction by Mike Mogridge of a sponsored Pro-Am Tournament in 1980 is of special significance, raising over the next seven years over £20,000 for charity and bringing many interesting people to the Club — Ian Botham, David Lloyd, Ray Reardon, to mention a few.
The Charities were: 1980 Cheshire Handicapped Children's Fund; 1983 Multiple Sclerosis; 1984 Arthritis and Rheumatism Research Council; 1985 Save the Children; 1986 Guide Dogs for the Blind.
It was at the 1984 event that Badgemore Park's Professional, Mark Howell, returned his 66, his card being 4-2-3-3-4-4-3-5-5-(33) and 4-3-4-3-5-3-2-4-5-(33), playing on the present (and newly lengthened) course.
This score bettered the 71 set both by Brian Barnes and Max Faulkner in 1974 when, along with Bernard Gallagher, Clive Clark and Carl Mason, they played the course in aid of the Lilian Board Cancer fund.
The amateur record of 68 was set in the Monthly Medal of May 1986 when Club member Michael Orris broke the Club and his own previous record of 69 set in October 1983.
This new record was equalled in September 1986 by Nigel Farmar who similarly broke his previous record of 69 which he achieved in August 1984.
Nigel was playing as a member of a Club team competing in a qualifying round of the B.B. & O. Club Championship.
Michael (County Champion in 1984) was also a member of this team along with Simon Barrington, Chris Maxted and Dale Thomas (Reserve: Guy Phillips), which went on to win the B.B. & O. County Championship in October 1986 and who will compete in the All England Club Championship in 1987.
This achievement shows a superb standard of golf and the finals match is fitting competition for the Club's 80th year.
It is often pondered as to who was or is Henley's ‘best’ golfer, assuming it is not the record holder.
Notwithstanding the course changes and equipment improvements, the Honours Boards are indicators of consistency — that most elusive of golfing ingredients.
And in recent years it is impossible not to see that  Dale Thomas' name occurs more than others, including being five times the Club Champion — winning on one occasion after a 60-hole match!
The loser then was Ray Laccohee who might well have been more than a match for Dale overall had he played more competition golf.
The records of yesteryear and some older memories suggest Colin Booth was also a quite exceptional golfer.
Another charitable event of recent years is the ‘Shot Gun Start’ which was stared in 1982 to support the South Atlantic Fund established to help victims of the Falklands Campaign.
Since then its profits have been pooled with those of the Pro-Am Charity.
Ever year on the Saturday nearest the longest day some 72 golfers (four on each tee) commence a round of golf started by a shotgun fired at 5 a.m. (5.30 in 1986).
Playing a Stableford of the three best individual scores, they finish about 3½ hours later and sit down to a breakfast provided by the ladies.
To help the long trek to some of the tees, the Committee allow cars to be driven over the course to suitable parking lots.
In 1981 things started to come together towards bond redemption.
First, an Open Forum in October called for significantly better club facilities — notably the men's changing rooms, and a Development Sub-Committee was constituted to look at the suggestion and ways of financing it.
When it reported in April 1982, the Club had other difficulties to deal with as the Secretary, Bob Hodson, the Professional, Ian Evans, and the Steward all resigned within a short period.
The Professional's replacement, Keith Williams, who himself left in April 1986, was appointed quite quickly.
But permanent replacements for the other posts took longer to fill.
Mr. E.J.W. (Benny) Goodman came as Secretary in July 1982 and saw out the year, being replaced by the present Secretary/Manager Brian Lovelock, first in an ‘acting’ capacity, but made permanent a year later.
New Stewards came in early 1983 but have since moved on and Tony and Cheryl Wright started in December 1985.
The Committee met on April 27th, 1982, to receive the Development Sub-Committee's report — a detailed and thorough document — introduced by its Chairman, Robert Naish, the Club President.
He and his members — Messrs. Harold Fishwick, Roy Davies, Alan Henderson (Captain) and Alec Stevens (Vice-Captain)— dealt with (1) a substantial building and refurbishing programme,(2) ways to finance it, which included buying out the bondholders and (3) Committee eligibility.
In presenting it that night, Robert Naish would most certainly have expected it to be rejected by the weight of bondholders already known to oppose redemption.
Even so, it was necessary that a recommendation to buy them out was written into the report as part of the financial arrangement for Club improvements, otherwise without this clause members would not support any ventures calling for capital.
Conscious that, if this buying-out aspect of the report was to be approved by the Committee the Club would, in losing its bondholders, also lose the long-term continuity and stability on its Committee previously created by their existence, Robert Naish's Sub-Committee incorporated a contentious recommendation (in which it fervently believed) so as to ensure a measure of long-term Committee continuity.
This was achieved by automatically including on every Committee any two past Captains of the Club, plus the present Captain, his Vice and the immediate past Captain — five in all.
Instead of his Report being vigorously opposed at that Committee (remember the Committee's constitution was of 2:1 bondholders in the majority), it was accepted 9:2!
Robert Naish was surely surprised at the apparent ease with which he not only achieved support but in so doing effectively acquired the Committee's crucial agreement to buy out the bondholders!
After 75 years the founders' aim was on the verge of realisation.
This unexpected success was more to do with the low turn-out of bondholders at the meeting rather than any change of attitude.
Once at the Committee, the President would not be unaware that by a strange chance only six of the 11 bondholders on the 17-strong Committee were present: the other five has sent genuine apologies.
Of those six present one was on his Sub-Committee and known to be in favour.
As the full, six-strong complement of the member's Committee representatives were present, and obviously in support, he would quickly realise the arithmetic of it and press on to a vote.
The worst result discounting his vote, would be 6:5 in favour, in the event it was carried 9:2!
In all four of the six Bondholders' Committee representatives supported the proposal.
Although thus easy so far — albeit unexpectedly — he could hardly have guessed at the difficulties ahead.
In the meantime, news of the vote needed explaining to a specially convened bondholders' meeting on May 16th when 19 of their total number of 47 were present to hear the Report explained.
Although a vote was not taken — it not having any constitutional value — the mood of the meeting was judged an even split for buying out.
Even so, it is recorded that the President was considered to have been at best somewhat opportunistic in ‘taking advantage of the favourable atmosphere’ of the April 27th meeting!
Robert Naish must have been disappointed at the members' Extraordinary General Meeting on June 5th when his three-part motion failed to get the necessary 2:1 majority (For 125, Against 103).
But in a sense it failed through the same sort of determination that gained him the earlier success on April 27th.
As then, he dealt with the motion as a three-part whole rather than as separate clauses and refused to incorporate an amendment (carried 2:1) which sought to modify the proposed Committee revision in respect of the Captains, which many members considered was a continuation of the sort of privileges previously enjoyed by bondholders.
The first two parts of the proposal were acceptable as offered, but the motion failed in total because of the President's unwillingness to make any accommodation of any kind on the third clause despite the amendments.
In the event, it was May 1983, a year later, before the issue was again put to the members and then in an appropriately revised form which took account of the above amendment, but also revised the overall approach to the issue, and which was probably the better for it.
At the 1982 Open Forum, shortly after the unsuccessful Extraordinary General Meeting, members repeated their demand for clubhouse alterations and a change in the constitution to eliminate bondholders.
The ‘Development and Constitution Sub-Committee’ was reconvened and produced further recommendations in February 1983.
Also, at the 1982 Annual General Meeting the members rejected with increasing self-assertiveness the demand for increased subscriptions — perhaps less because of the cost but more to demonstrate their new confidence.
The new two-part report in February 1983 avoided direct reference to the Committee constitution that had so bedevilled the 1982 Extraordinary General Meeting, and it restricted its recommendation to clubhouse alterations, and to raising finance by a new bond issue which simultaneously meant redeeming the foundation bonds.
As a result the Rules would need complete revision and accordingly at that time take into account the Committee constitution as a somewhat separate issue.
The revised proposal was debated at the Extraordinary General Meeting on May 20th, 1983, with a separate discussion on the question of the Committee constitution also taking place; this new proposal was a virtual mirror image of the 1982 amendment which had been disregarded by the President at the Extraordinary General Meeting of that year!
For the record, the Sub-Committee's proposal was (1) to proceed to alter the clubhouse (as per plans shown at the meeting) in the sum of £50,000; and (2) finance this by overdraft and loan arrangements (some £35,000) and by a £50 Bond Issue mandatory on all adult members (£31,000).
This last part, invalidated the foundation bonds and made redemption compulsory.
It cost the members £13,000 and was carried 187:1!
Perhaps surprisingly, with so much hassle behind it, the President introduced the motion with a classical understatement —‘Your Committee has encountered difficulties and obscurities during their efforts on Constitutional Reform!’
But at least in introducing the 1983 Annual Report a few months later he announced with pride ‘Your Committee has brought out the Bondholders!’
One final aspect on the redemption was the slow realisation that bondholders could still to enjoy perpetual free membership after redemption and assign it in accordance with the rules.
This unforeseen element was not properly appreciated until late in the debate by which time members disregarded its implications, if aware of them.
The attitude of some bondholders previously willing to surrender their bonds modified on learning of this privilege which they were previously and largely unaware of in connection with redemption, so much so that of the 47 bonds bought out, 24 holders elected to enjoy perpetual membership.
Most make a voluntary donation to the Club to the value (less V.A.T.) of the annual subscription.
Looking back as an ordinary member, it is clear the buying out episode must have been irksome in the extreme and very wearing for a group of unwitting members who volunteered at this point in time to serve the Club and whose prime interest was a round of golf!
Despite the considerable input from the firm's solicitors, Colins, Dryland and Thorogood, the rough and tumble of the changeover fell to the President, Robert Naish, the 1983 Captain, Alec Stevens, and his predecessor, Alan Henderson.
Everyone involved at this period put in time and effort far beyond what might have been predicted.
However, it was now all systems go for the future.
Arthur Butler (Builders) Ltd. commenced the alterations revised and newly estimated at £69,000.
The redemption was completed in the autumn and the membership elected its first lady to the main committee, the able Joan Haley, handicap 10 and a County player.
What's more, she was on top of the Poll, and had obviously been supported by many men members.
On the proposal of Harold Fishwick, the Ladies' Captain's photograph — at that time Shirley Stevens — was hung in the lounge alongside that of the Club Captain, and a great deal prettier it was too!
In a period of change not everyone wins, and as the Club entered into a financial loan/supply of goods arrangement with Courage (Central), Henley Brewery lost its unique relationship with the Club, although its beer is still the most popular one on sale.
After 75 years of its bonds and loans were repaid, but basically without proper regard to the full indebtedness that the Club had to who was probably its best friend.
John Chalcraft saw this happen and must have wondered a thing or two after 50 years personal involvement.
The still somewhat restless Club had one more change to make — to replace its President, who never quite regained his reputation after the Extraordinary General Meeting of 1982.
This is a pity for his achievement in securing the crucial Committee vote deserves the members' recognition for his astuteness.
It was not an automatic procedure.
At the 1983 Annual General Meeting Robert Naish lost his role by a substantial margin to Basil Peacock, who joined the Club as a Junior before the War, and was Secretary to the Bondholders at the time of redemption.
Robert had won the battle, Basil had to win the peace (and seems to have done so).
Basil had first been asked to stand as President in 1982 but declined, however he was asked to reconsider this in 1983.
Recognising there appeared to be substantial support for this move he approached Robert Naish privately with a view to easing the inevitable changeover.
However, an election was fought, and there could only be one winner.
Ironically, Robert Naish was already unwell and sadly died in February 1985 but not before he and his wife were made Life Members and he had opened the new extension (a larger lounge and a new men's changing block) on August 27th, the previous year.
His contribution to the Club had been enormous and momentous.
The Rules Sub-Committee, set up after the Extraordinary General Meeting in 1983, and comprising Basil Peacock, Jim McDonald (Captain), Alec Stevens and ‘the Club's solicitor as needs be’, produced two draft sets of rules, the crucial difference between them being the definition of ‘member with full voting rights’, i.e. seven-day male only? or all other categories?(e.g. social, ladies and five-day).
Paul Hillyer the Club solicitor pointed out, and confirmed an earlier concern, that the Wine Sub-Committee (established in 1962 to comply with the Licensing Act 1961) might be unconstitutional if voting for its members was not open to all membership categories.
Furthermore all members (excepting Juniors) are eligible to serve on this Sub-Committee.
With this is mind the Committee voted in favour (7:6) for the draft rules which classed all members other than Juniors as having full bondholding voting rights and responsibilities.
It was clearly bitterly divided and strongly polarised in its conflicting views, mostly revolving around the rights that would follow allowing the ladies to serve on the Main Committee.
(One member even admitted his chauvinism).
When put to the members as a whole (Extraordinary General Meeting, November 1984), the proposal was lost, failing to secure the 2:1 majority.
Many seven-day members disapproved of members in other categories, such as social having full voting rights.
In consequence of this vote consideration of the constitutional changes continued into 1985 when happily, they were resolved on July 26th — at a General Meeting called for the purpose.
The rule had been amended so that nominations for the Committee were restricted to full male or female members of five years standing, and where ladies are concerned, were not to exceed in number the direct ratio to the numerical strength of their respective section.
The men, on the other hand, suffer no similar restriction.
The Wine Committee (three to six members strong) was to be elected by all categories of membership, so as not to be in contravention of the law.
The Club now had a new, more democratic constitution, achieved by much hard, tedious and thankless work on the part of some, and aided by a robust, vocal membership in general.
But not all was stress in this period.
The Club's day-to-day affairs and social events carried on side by side.
In 1983 the Club celebrated its 75th birthday with an Anniversary Ball at Phyllis Court.
The course was lengthened by pushing back some tees so as to comply with the Regulations on Handicapping, resulting in the Club having four recognised S.S. courses: White (70), Yellow (69), Green (68) and the L.G.U. Red (72).
A new beer store, some kitchen improvements a new central heating system and considerable redecorations were completed in 1982 and to cope with the new handicapping scheme along came an Apple computer at a cost of £3,000 (1985), its importance being such that the by-laws published in March 1986 included the rule that every male competitor's computer number was to be written on his card!
(The computer is eventual also to deal with the finance and other Club matters).
Photo: Henley Standard The Staff, Henley G.C., September 1986
There are new people too — Mike Openshaw was appointed Head Greenkeeper in May 1985.
He came to Henley from Datchet and was schooled in course maintenance dependent significantly on chemical technology and machines, although a ‘green fingers’ instinct and physical strength are still important.
John Cook, the new Professional, joined in April 1986 coming from South Africa where he partnered Gary Player at the Sun City Golf Club.
No stranger to Henley, he won his first golfing event here, the B.B. and O. Junior Competition at the age of 11, in 1961, just a year after starting to play golf at Goring and Streatley.
Before turning professional in 1970 he won both the British Youth and English Amateur Championships.
Among other notable wins are the Nigerian Open and the Southern Professionals.
He has also been Club Professional at East Berks.
His Senior Assistant is 24-year old Max Taylor from Southport, who turned professional at 18 after winning the Junior Championship at Bootle Golf Club (Liverpool).
Max has earned an enviable reputation as a teacher and Club specialists, learning his craft at the prestigious Southport and Ainsdale Golf Club.
Completing the professional trio is the first lady professional in the district — 22-year old Sally Rippon from Stinchcombe Hill who started playing at 16 and within three years was down to handicap 4.
(She is now, like the men, off scratch).
Before turning professional in 1985 she started a Sport Science degree which she still hopes to complete.
As this story of Henley Golf Club's history draws to a close, it is fitting to refer to today's Juniors who will inherit this particular tract of hallowed earth.
Malcolm White, who retired as Headmaster at Gillott's School in 1980, has revitalised the Junior section in recent years, so much so it has 55 members under 18 (53 boys and 2 girls).
The talent he has encouraged and given much time and effort to, includes the 1986 Club Champion, 20-year-old Simon Barrington who was twice Junior Champion; Michael Orris, the Joint Course record holder and County Alliance player; Guy Phillips, still 17, the Junior Champion and Captain (handicap 5) and who whilst competing in the Daily Express Ford qualifying round at Royal Mid-Surrey in 1986 played to level par and went on to play in the finals in Spain); Henry  Bareham, also handicap 5, who played for English Schools and Graham Booth, the Thames Valley League Junior Champion.
Photo: Henley Standard Seventeen-year-old Henry Bareham (handicap 5), English Schools' Team Member.
Photo: Daily Express Seventeen-year-old Guy Phillips (handicap 5) Junior Captain and Champion.
Also showing particular promise according to Malcolm are three 13-year-olds — Peter Rosser, Alex Terris and Fraser Mogridge.
And there are many more up and coming in the wings — thankfully.
Whilst writing this throughout 1986, it was clear that the Club had found a new style and confidence, although, just as in 1907 (and on occasions since), the new furnishing is not universally popular.
But, doubtless, that gives some future Committee something to work on!
At least the Club has more to offer than ever before.
So in a sense, in 80 years nothing has changed — yet clearly everything has.
In the meantime, Henley had become a successful club recognised everywhere as one of the friendliest — where a chap can be assured of a game at weekends by simply turning up looking for one; a Club with a pretty, well kept, interesting course; a 19th hole where there is good refreshment and some comfortable chairs; an excellent Professional's shop and a social and golfing calendar second to none and the envy of most.
Most importantly it is a place members recognise as a privilege to belong to.
It is a far cry from that first press report in 1905…
‘Rumoured Golf Links at Bolney’ and one wonders what the next 80 years will bring.
For certain there will be changes, but it is doubtful if there will ever be such a long line of devoted, generous and hardworking people as those who served the Club so enthusiastically in immensely difficult times, and saved it from certain closure for the likes of ourselves to enjoy.
Without these individuals — some named and many not — there would be no Henley Golf Club and we would all be the poorer.
It seems fitting to close this story — which to some degree has been the tale of redeeming the bonds, and a modest emancipation of the Ladies — with Robert Naish's final, official words at the end of 1983 — the most auspicious year in all 80 of the Club's history —‘the future is bright: let us go forward with good will and good fellowship, and enjoy it.’
…FORE!…
‘Good words are better than bad strokes’— William Shakespeare 
TROPHIES AND COMPETITIONS
This history of the Club's competitions and trophies is rather fluid and imprecise, and the following list is the best that can be arrived at.
Some competitions have been and gone, others altered, some dropped and re-instated, whilst yet others have become inter-linked with other competitions, some with superb prizes but no trophies!
Artisans' Cup:
First mentioned in 1946.
The present cup was presented by the Artisans to the Club in 1958.
The Cavill (Edward Cavill Memorial Challenge Statuette):
Originally an Artisans' trophy but extended to the senior club at the former's invitation in 1951.
The Fleming:
Presented by Mr. Valentine Fleming in 1907.
Floate Cup:
Presented by F.H.
Floate in 1957.
Garnham Memorial Challenge Cup:
Presented by friends in memory of Mr. W. Garnham in 1921.
Replaced by a new cup in 1953.
Gray Cup:
Presented by G.B. and E.N.
Gray in 1946.
Jubilee Cup:
Presented in 1935, replaced by a cup presented by C.W. Pedler in 1958.
Ladies Cup:
Presented by the Ladies in 1912.
Lovell Bowl Trophy:
 Presented in 1908 by Mr. Vernon S. Lovell.
Originally two pewter pots and two George III candlesticks, but replaced sometime before 1920 by present bowl.
Charles T. Luker Cup:
Presented in 1968 by Mr. C.T.
Luker.
Tom Luker Putter:
Presented by the late Mr. Tom Luker's family.
Pedler Cup:
Presented by Mr. C.W. Pedler.
Scratch Barrel:
Made and presented by Mr. F. Wood in 1958 when Secretary of Artisan's Club.
Veterans' Cup:
Presented by ‘a member’ in 1939.
(Quite possibly Mr. Lance Henly).
Wetton Trophy:
Presented by former Caddie Master Jim Wetton in 1952 (although is engraved Reading 1892).
Ferris Trophy:
 Presented by the widow of Mr. F. Ferris in 1975.
Francis-Francis Memorial Cup:
Presented by Mr. Frank Francis-Francis to the Artisans, later transferred to the senior club for 5-day members only.
Reed Cups:
Two silver bowls presented in 1959 by Dr. A.S.
Reed and his sister Miss B.C. Reed for a one-day foursomes competition.
Natural History on the Course
Many golfers remark about the attractiveness and variety of plant and animal life seen on the course, so to establish exactly what was there, representatives of B.B.O.N.T. (Berks, Bucks and Oxon Naturalists Trust) were invited to conduct an all-seasons survey.
Mrs. Vera Paul, O.B.E. and Mr. Nigel Phillips, Manager and Warden of the Nature reserve at Bix Bottom, walked the course in July 1986 and Mrs. Paul reported as follows.
(Their complete records will be available in due course from the Secretary/Manager).
‘This brief account of the Natural History of the golf course is the result of two visits made by Nigel Phillips and me in July 1986.
It is incomplete, but will, I hope, give you, the reader, a feeling of gratitude for these beautiful surroundings.
The fairway of a golf course must, of necessity, be a closely mown sward, but the borders can be treated in a variety of ways.
Starting from the clubhouse on the first day and walking along the edge of the wood we came to a piece of natural grassland studded with patches of purpose tufted vetch and orchids growing among the unmown grass.
At the end of this was an old chalk pit where cowslips had bloomed in the spring but now common spotted orchids and ox-eye daisies caught the eye.
Ground nesting birds such as willow warblers and chiff chaffs must find these areas ideal.
As we walked to the top of the hill to holes 11–14 we noticed a change in the vegetation.
Gorse and sheep's sorrel indicated an acid soil.
There is usually less colour in this type of habitat.
Walking back down the hill by hole 17 the pockets of rough grass left by the edge had common spotted and pyramidal orchids together with yellow rattle, quaking grass and other chalk grassland flowers.
We were happy to see bushes of buck thorn, which is the food plant of the yellow brimstone butterfly, left to flourish.
It is important to realise that shrubs such as blackthorn, privet and field maple are food plants of some of our rare butterflies and moths.
The countryside would be poor indeed without the movements of these insects.
The second outing was from the car park on Chalk Hill.
Along the edge of Lucy's Copse patches of yellow lady's bedstraw attracted the eye.
Inside the wood there was a carpet of the delicate wood melick grass and patches of the whorled leaves of woodruff.
There had been bluebells here in the spring.
Below the copse a track was bordered with grassland rich in flowering plants.
Six-spotted burnet moths were sitting, newly hatched, on the grass stems.
A silver-washed fritillary butterfly dipped between the tufts of grass to find the violet leaves on which she lays her eggs.
Woodland birds benefit from the copse and we recorded the green and great spotted woodpeckers, nuthatches , treecreepers and goldcrests.
The larger, bolder birds such as magpies, crows and jackdaws were searching for food on the fairways — on one occasion a golf ball landed near to a crow who nonchalantly moved to one side to avoid the missile.
Thirty-six different species of birds were recorded — a reflection of the varying habitats offered by the course.
Only 16 butterflies were seen but these are seasonal insects and this represents a very satisfactory result for one month's search.
The hedges bordering the roads are valuable from a conservation standpoint.
Birds like the two-way escape route which a hedge provides and many of the shrubs are food plants for insects.
The small bank at the bottom of Chalk Hill, over which hole 3 is sited, had harebells, clustered bellflowers and small scabious — all delightful blue flowers which were not seen elsewhere on the course.
The chalk pit itself is potentially a valuable habitat and adds yet one more facet to this lovely stretch of land.
Nigel and I were, above all, struck by the sympathetic treatment of an area which could so easily be spoiled.
Altogether we recorded 202 different flowering plants — this number is an indication of the richness of the flora.
Thank you for inviting us to do this survey.’
Vera N. Paul, O.B.E.