

THE PLAYERS
Virtually every country in the world has some sort of intelligence agency.
Most have at least two, one to look after security within the country (usually called counter-intelligence) and the other to engage in spying abroad.
In addition there are often separate intelligence-gathering sections in each armed service.
The general rule is that the efficiency of a country's intelligence operations is in inverse proportion to the number of agencies it operates.
This is because each agency has to fight for its share of the overall intelligence budget and in the process exaggerates and distorts its reports so as to pander to the whims of those who hold the purse-strings.
Large intelligence organisations are very hierarchically structured, affording plenty of opportunity for individual empire-building and internecine jealousies, all of which waste an enormous amount of time and effort, sow the seeds of discontent and distrust and frequently obscure and distort the important issues.
In recent years the lifestyle of the intelligence officer has acquired a glamorous image thanks to the literary world and the screen.
Though most people recognise that this is only fiction there nevertheless remains a feeling that the work is rather exciting, possibly because it lacks any clearly defined morality.
In truth it is not.
Nor, despite its supposed importance in terms of national security, is it very well paid.
The obvious attraction is job security, since the world of intelligence never suffers from lay-offs.
One source of recruitment has always been the armed services, not only because their staff have already been security vetted, but also because they are used to carrying out dull repetitive chores and filling out the endless paperwork that forms the major part of any intelligence operation.
University graduates are another obvious source and in Britain are headhunted, initially under another government department's name, to sound out their loyalty and motivation.
Some countries are less coy about recruiting.
In America and Australia, for example, advertisements appear quite regularly for intelligence staff.
Those for the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (ASIO), which is the equivalent of Britain's MI5, offer ‘a unique opportunity to make an important contribution to Australia's security’.
One recent  advertisment carried a photograph of a rather seedy individual in a large hat and dirty raincoat which it stressed was precisely the type of applicant not required.
Aside from employing field officers who go out on to the streets, intelligence agencies gobble up an incredible amount of technically skilled manpower, simply to run their huge banks of computers, and large numbers of foreign-speaking translators.
In Britain there are three main intelligence organisations: Military Intelligence, Department Five (MI5), responsible for counter-intelligence within Britain; Military Intelligence, Department Six (MI6), often referred to as the Secret Intelligence Service, responsible for espionage abroad; and the Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), which is responsible for the security of the British government's own communications and intercepting those of other countries.
MI5 began life in 1909.
It came about as the result of a committee set up under the chairmanship of that impeccable Liberal, Lord Haldane, to consider ‘The Question of Foreign Espionage in the United Kingdom’.
Although officially named as a branch of the military, MI5 was placed under the control of the Foreign Office.
MI5's initial task was to counter alleged German plans to secretly invade Britain by infiltrating thousands of spies.
This proved a difficult task as the story was completely false.
Its first real test came during World War I when 30 genuine German spies were arrested between 1914–18.
After the war MI5 turned its attention to the growing menace of Bolshevism which the government feared would soon engulf the country.
Its greatest achievements came during World War II when it caught every one of Hitler's spies sent to England.
This was not a particularly difficult task since they were all pathetically trained and equipped and stood out conspicuously as they wandered around the countryside asking stupid and suspicious questions in foreign accents.
Many of these spies subsequently agreed to work for MI5.
The alternative was to be hanged, so there was a powerful incentive.
Through the Double Cross Committee, usually known as the XX Committee, these turned spies sent back to Germany a steady stream of fictitious information garnished with sufficient truth to give it credibility, which the Germans apparently accepted without question.
Whether the Germans were quite as easily fooled as history would have us believe is open to some question.
Since the war there has been a remarkable lack of comment on this issue from the German side.
This may  be because no one likes to admit they have been fooled or because many German records relating to their intelligence operations against Britain were amongst the captured archives not returned to Bonn in 1956.
But it probably does not matter much anyway.
As the war progressed Hitler tended to listen only to advice that agreed with his own views and no one was willing to disagree with him.
After the war there was a complete review of Britain's security services and in 1952 MI5 came under the control of the Home Office.
It moved back to London from its wartime headquarters at Blenheim Palace in Oxfordshire and established its headquarters at Leconfield House in Curzon Street.
In the late I970s MI5 moved again to its present address, still in Curzon Street.
It also has another office which houses K Section (counter-espionage), and the liaison section that works with MI6.
Back in 1952 the then Home Secretary, Sir David Maxwell Fyfe, laid down specific guidelines to the Director-General of MI5 as to how it should operate in the future.
It is worth looking at these in detail:
1
In your appointment as Director-General of the Security Service you will be responsible personally to the Home Secretary.
The Security Service is not, however, a part of the Home Office.
On appropriate occasion you will have right of direct access to the Prime Minister.
2
The Security Service is part of the Defence Forces of the country.
Its task is the Defence of the Realm as a whole, from external and internal dangers arising from attempts of espionage and sabotage, or from actions of persons and organisations whether directed from within or without the country, which may be judged to be subversive of the State.
3
You will take special care to see that the work of the Security Service is strictly limited to what is necessary for the task.
4
It is essential that the Security Service should be kept absolutely free from political bias or influence and nothing should be done that might lend colour to any suggestion that it is concerned with the interests of any particular section of the community, or with any other matter than the Defence of the Realm as a whole.
5
No inquiry is to be carried out on behalf of any government department unless you are satisfied that an important public interest bearing on the Defence of the Realm, as defined in Paragraph 2, is at stake.
6
You and your staff will maintain the well-established convention whereby ministers do not concern themselves with the detailed information which may be obtained by the Security Service in particular cases, but are furnished with such information only as may be necessary for the determination of any issue on which guidance is sought.
One can readily deduce from this directive that Maxwell Fyfe was a civil servant, a member of the legal profession and an optimist.
As Sir Robert Armstrong, former Cabinet Secretary, pointed out in a recent court case, economy of truth and interpretation plays an important part in how the behaviour of MI5 is determined.
For this reason the directive deserves careful study in three specific areas.
First, though MI5 is notionally under the control of the Home Secretary he will be told nothing about its day-to-day operations.
Second, MI5 alone determines who and which organisations are judged to be subversive.
And third, ministers will not be given any detailed information about MI5's work.
The fundamental flaw in Maxwell Fyfe's directive is that, though it is admirable in theory, there is no supervisory machinery to ensure that it is carried out.
Those members of MI5 who have written or spoken publicly about their work say quite clearly that the directive is consistently and deliberately ignored.
The absence of any system of accountability is not a mistake.
Maxwell Fyfe's guidelines were never meant to be taken seriously but were merely a piece of bureaucratic window-dressing.
In post-war years MI5 has been remarkably unsuccessful at catching spies and traitors in our midst, going right back to Guy Burgess and Donald Maclean who in the summer of 1951 defected under the noses of MI5 despite supposedly being under surveillance.
Following them was Kim Philby, who escaped to Moscow just ahead of MI5 in 1962, and Anthony Blunt, who finally confessed in 1964 to being a long-time and important Russian spy only after having been granted immunity from prosecution.
Since then a succession of tawdry traitors have been unmasked as the result of information passed to the intelligence services by a defector.
Some of the more important include George Blake, who worked for MI6 (see Chapter 2); John Cairncross, who betrayed Ultra secrets from the Government Code & Cipher School (GCCS) at Bletchley Park during the war to the Russians; John Vassall, a sad homosexual who gave away naval secrets while working at the Admiralty; Frank Bossard, who gave the Russians details of British and American guided weapons systems (which must have amused them greatly as the Russians were far ahead of the West at the time); and William Marshall, who had worked as a cipher clerk at the British Embassy in Moscow.
Then there was the famous Portland spy ring comprising Peter and Helen Kroger and ‘Gordon Lonsdale’, whose real name was Konon Molody, all of whom were professional Russian spies living in England with false identities.
The British end of the network consisted of Harry Houghton and Ethel Gee who passed on secrets of sonar and submarine development.
More recently there was Geoffrey Prime, who worked in the very heart of GCHQ (see Chapter 4), and Michael Bettaney, an MI5 officer whose drunken and strange behaviour was in many ways reminiscent of Guy Burgess's yet similarly went undetected until reported by a defector (see Chapter 4).
The common factor in all these cases is that they were not discovered by MI5.
Why is MI5 so useless at finding spies and traitors?
Some argue that the reason is that MI5 has been penetrated by Russian intelligence so deeply that even its own Director General, Sir Roger Hollis, was a Russian mole and therefore every investigation has been frustrated.
This lacks credibility for two reasons: first, there is no evidence to prove Hollis was a Russian mole, and second, no investigations were ever planned that would have tracked down any of these spies, despite the fact that they all displayed behaviour patterns that were highly suspicious, until a defector alerted MI5.
Vassall was recognised at once by the Russians in Moscow as a homosexual and blackmailed.
He later lived in an expensive flat surrounded by antique furniture far beyond his official income.
Prime was recognised as a paedophile by East German intelligence and blackmailed, yet passed six positive vetting checks.
He gave up a well-paid senior post at GCHQ in order to become a taxi driver but no one thought it strange.
Houghton's wife reported him to naval security for being in possession of large sums of cash.
No one took any notice.
Burgess was a drunken homosexual yet no one seemed concerned.
The reason for MI5's inefficiency is that it wastes far too much time and resources chasing after the wrong sort of people who it believes to be subversive, while real enemies of the state are able to go on spying undetected for decades.
This is the result of allowing a counter-intelligence agency to become politicised.
MI5 maintains a large registry of files on individuals and organisations it considers of ‘interest’.
Peter Wright recalls that when he joined MI5 in 1953 there were some two million files held on individuals.
During the l960s and 1970s, when there was much student and industrial militancy in Britain, the numbers of personal dossiers rose dramatically.
In recent years the entire MI5 registry has been transferred on to a computer at a Ministry of Defence office in Mount Row, Mayfair.
The original system used a £25 million ICL 2960 computer with 100 on-line EDS-200 disc stores capable of holding 30 million separate dossiers but in 1984 (an apt year indeed) two ICL 2980 computers were ordered which provide enough capacity to store a 1,000-word report on every adult in Britain.
As it is hard to believe that even MI5 thinks there are that many  subversives, spies and traitors in the country, it must keep a lot of files on innocent people.
Here is a straightforward example of how the Maxwell Fyfe directive is ignored.
Special Branch, which works closely with MI5, has its own computer system which keeps records on many millions of people none of whom have committed any offence (if they had they would be on the Police National Computer) split into 27 different groups such as‘interesting’, ‘controversial’ and ‘subversive’.
Cathy Massiter made it very clear in her television interview that MI5 and Special Branch alone decide who merits a dossier and which group they belong to and can open a file on any person or group of people or organisation they please, put into it anything they like, be it only gossip or hearsay, and once opened the file remains there indefinitely.
Furthermore, Miss Massiter explained that information gathered by MI5 was shared with other government departments for political purposes and gave examples of how trade-union leaders had their telephones tapped by MI5 during wage negotiations with government departments.
Since no minister would authorise a warrant for such tapping it must have been done illegally.
All this is in clear breach of the 1952 directive.
In addition MI5 has representatives permanently stationed at the central registry of the Department of Social Security (DSS) at Newcastle, which maintains records — which the DSS claim are confidential — on every adult in the country.
MI5 is able to extract any information it wants about individuals, which is often useful when it is smearing someone's character.
This registry is in the process of being transferred, at a cost of £1.6 billion, on to what will become the country's single largest computer system with terminals at every DSS office throughout Britain.
The man chosen to run this is 51-year-old Dr. John Spackman who previously held the rank of brigadier in the British Army running its computers.
It will be easy to interface the new DSS computer with those of MI5 and Special Branch.
MI5 taps large numbers of telephones, sometimes with the authority of a signed warrant but more frequently without.
Hotels where visiting politicians regularly stay and conference headquarters like Lancaster House are permanently bugged.
MI5 and Special Branch also open mail illegally and break into so many properties that they have one section that does nothing else.
Turning to the final point of the 1952 directive, it is noteworthy that ministers are to be given only the information MI5 decides they need.
In other words, if a minister does not know the right question to ask MI5 about a particular operation or allegation then MI5 will not volunteer any information on its own.
This leaves MI5 in the enviable position of being accountable to no one nor having to explain anything it does or is alleged to have done.
If MI5 had obeyed the 1952 Maxwell Fyfe guidelines then there would  have been little cause for complaint about its activities over the past 35 years.
But MI5 deliberately ignored them as and when it suited because it believed no prime minister or Home Secretary would interfere nor would any member of the service break ranks and tell the truth about what really went on inside MI5.
By 1988 the number of leaks about MI5's illegal activities, from people like Peter Wright and Cathy Massiter who had first-hand experience, had reached such proportions that they could no longer be ignored, even though the government made every attempt to denigrate the motives and character of such people.
As a result in December 1988 the government was forced to introduce the Security Service Bill to replace the Maxwell Fyfe guidelines and clearly identify MI5's role, providing legal safeguards against improper behaviour.
Amongst the proposals is one requiring MI5 to seek the Home Secretary's authority before premises are burgled.
As is explained later in the book, despite the high-sounding words with which the Bill was presented to Parliament it is a complete sham.
MI5 will remain as unaccountable as it always has been and since it blatantly ignored the 1952 directive for over three decades without once being publicly called to account there is no reason to believe that MI5 will be any more law-abiding now.
MI6, the Secret Intelligence Service (SIS), began life in 1911 under the control of the Foreign Office, which had been spying on other countries for over 400 years.
After World War I its activities were severely limited by lack of funds and its inability to recruit good personnel.
It seemed to have the knack of attracting some of the most bizarre characters who spent a great deal of the inter-war years building up little empires for themselves with scant regard for any overall espionage policy.
As a result, by the time war was declared in 1939 MI6 had failed to establish any worthwhile network of agents in Europe and those it had were of very dubious quality, some even dishonest and fraudulent.
MI6 never appreciated the amount of opposition that existed within Germany to Hitler and the Nazi party in its early days and as a result failed to exploit the very considerable amount of information that was offered to it by well-placed anti-Nazi groups.
In 1939 MI6 received the famous Oslo Report, a package of technical information delivered to the British Legation in Oslo, containing a wealth of priceless data about secret weapon developments in Germany including rocket design at a then unheard of location called Peenemünde.
Because MI6 possessed no one with any technical qualifications to analyse the Oslo Report it was rejected as worthless and ignored.
It turned out to be accurate in every respect.
MI6 also had advance warning of the German plan to invade the Low Countries in May 1940 but decided the maps it had been shown were forgeries and again ignored the information.
The main problem with MI6 at  the time was that all the senior people were amateurs who had joined MI6 only because they had gone to the right school, wore the right sort of tie and dined at the right clubs.
They in turn recruited their friends in the belief that together they would make a jolly good team.
This view lingered on for a long time and probably still exists to this day.
During World War II MI6 produced few worthwhile results, largely because it had no agents in place before Hitler occupied the whole of Europe.
MI6 was greatly upset by Churchill's decision to create Special Operations Executive (SOE), which it saw as infringing upon its sacred duties.
But to no avail.
Churchill wanted action of a dramatic kind and had little use for MI6.
MI6 accepted his decision with ill-grace and throughout the rest of the war did all it could to hinder the work of SOE.
On at least one occasion it infiltrated a double agent of its own into SOE who betrayed some 400 British and French agents to the Germans.
MI6's wartime reputation also suffered from the fact that several of its senior members were Soviet agents so that, as with MI5, it required some drastic reorganisation after the war.
MI6 remains to this day a secret organisation that does not officially exist despite the fact that in recent years there have been numerous books written about its activities.
There is a childlike belief at the Foreign Office that if it does not admit to the existence of MI6, foreign governments will believe Britain does not spy on them.
At the Spycatcher trial in Sydney in 1987 Sir Robert Armstrong, then the Cabinet Secretary, said he could not confirm the existence of MI6.
Had Armstrong bothered to look in the government's own internal telephone directory (the Government Telecommunications Network), he would have found that MI6 is listed with four addresses.
Since the telephone directory is circulated to all government offices throughout the country one must assume that by now the Russians have managed to see a copy.
Over 600 people work for MI6 in its main office.
In 1988 the head of MI6, known as ‘C’, was Sir Christopher Curwen.
Official letters to MI6 are addressed to a mythical person called Mr G. H. Merrick.
MI6 cooperates with MI5 through a liaison office in London.
MI6 is still controlled by the Foreign Office but the Foreign Secretary neither admits to this publicly nor asks any questions about how MI6 goes about its daily business.
MI6 is supposed to operate only outside Britain although it does occasionally get involved in projects within Britain such as the Crabb affair of 1956 (see Chapter 3), which was bungled from start to finish.
Some years ago MI6 became involved against the IRA in Northern Ireland, much to the annoyance of MI5.
The result of the two intelligence services, army intelligence, the Royal Ulster Constabulary's Special Branch, and various odd freelancers all having a go at the same time was, not surprisingly, a total disaster.
It is hard to judge how effective MI6 is today because on the only recent  occasion it was needed, to warn us of the Argentinian invasion of the Falkland Islands in 1982, it either failed completely or the Foreign Office deliberately presented MI6's information to the government in a way that precluded it being taken seriously.
If the Foreign Office cannot agree with MI6 as to who are Britain's enemies, the effectiveness of MI6 is at risk of being submerged by political expediency, calling into question the whole point of having such an organisation in the first place.
From time to time fringe elements in MI6 dream up hare-brained schemes like the plot to assassinate President Nasser of Egypt, or sending midget submarines into the Russian naval base at Leningrad.
Much of its time is now spent targeting potential defectors amongst other foreign diplomatic staff.
In this respect MI6 has had a number of successes although it is difficult to know how useful defectors really are (see Chapter 2).
MI6 makes considerable use of freelancers, such as businessmen, who can openly visit sensitive parts of the world without arousing suspicion, but the overall value of the information such people can produce is very limited.
To a large extent technology has eroded much of MI6's original style of work while modern communications make it difficult for political decisions to remain secret for very long even behind the Iron Curtain.
While there will always be a place for human intelligence (Humint), past experience suggests that MI6 is unable to produce anything that remotely justifies its annual cost.
Britain's third intelligence service is the Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), located at Cheltenham in Gloucestershire and employing some 12,000 staff with a secret budget of around £500 million a year.
It is part of MI6 and thus controlled by the Foreign Office.
Like MI6, for many years GCHQ did not officially exist despite the fact that it was listed in several yearbooks.
GCHQ began in 1919 as the Government Code and Cipher School (GCCS), picking up the few remaining members of the army and naval teams of codebreakers who had operated in Britain during World War I. A very small team was formed, working on a tiny annual budget in MI6's offices at 56 Broadway, in London.
The public function of GCCS was: ‘To advise as to the security of codes and ciphers used by all government departments and to assist in their provision.’
The secret function of GCCS was: ‘To study the methods of cipher communication used by foreign powers.’
As more money became available and the number of codebreakers could be increased GCCS managed to penetrate all the really important codes of Britain's friends and foes alike during the inter-war years.
Additionally, it read all cable traffic entering and leaving Britain.
At first this was arranged on a private basis.
At the time there were only three cable  companies operating in Britain: Cable & Wireless, which was owned by the British government so presented no problem, and the two American cable companies, the Commercial Cable Postal Telegraph Company and Western Union, who did not acquiesce so easily.
The tacit threat of having their operating licences removed was required before they agreed to cooperate with GCCS and let it see their messages each day.
In December 1920, during a US Senate Sub-Committee hearing in Washington, one of the cable companies publicly revealed the duress under which it had been placed by the British Government.
Acutely embarrassed by this unexpected disclosure, the British government hastily added a clause to the 1911 Official Secrets Act giving it the right to see copies of all cables if an emergency existed.
In 1919 a single warrant was signed alleging such an emergency (the excuse being the threat of Bolshevism) and interceptions have continued on this basis, with the exception of wartime censorship from 1939–45, to this day without debate or approval by Parliament.
As the years passed, telephone, telex, facsimile and computer data traffic all came under this original warrant, so that not a single communication enters or leaves Britain without being subject to interception by GCCS's successor, GCHQ.
GCCS made particularly good progress breaking the Japanese naval attaché cipher traffic, both in London and elsewhere in Europe, since many foreign cable companies routed their signals through repeater stations in places like Malta where GCCS could acquire all interesting traffic without having to go through the charade of obtaining a warrant.
The naval attaché's telephone in London was also intercepted.
Eventually GCCS in London and Singapore was in a position to read all Japanese naval signals, right up to the attack on Pearl Harbor, although Churchill carefully kept this information from the Americans.
Progress against German cipher traffic was less successful because Britain ignored developments in machine cryptography so that by 1939 GCCS was unable to read the German Enigma cryptograph.
Many years after the war the story of how the Enigma code was eventually broken was told and, as is often the case with officially approved histories, it was implied that the success was entirely that of GCCS.
In truth Enigma was broken by Polish intelligence with the help of the French and although Britain was invited to join in the work before the war, it declined to do so.
Only when Polish intelligence made a gift of its work to GCCS in August 1939 was it able to break its first German messages.
How much effect this had on the final outcome of the war is hard to say.
Claims that it shortened the war by several years cannot be proved one way or the other.
Intelligence, even codebreaking, is at best only a fragmented adjunct to strategic planning.
Nevertheless the breaking of the German Enigma codes, which became known as the Ultra secret, played a vital role in winning the war and was the only good thing to come out of MI6.
With  apparent benevolence Britain and America later sold off to many smaller countries reconditioned Enigmas at extremely cheap prices, urging them to adopt the system for their most secret traffic.
As a result for many years their messages were read with ease.
At the end of World War II, GCHQ, as GCCS had become, moved from its wartime headquarters at Bletchley Park, north of London, to Cheltenham, where it swiftly sprawled over two large sites — Oakley and Benhall.
Its tasks remained much the same.
Only the technology was different.
The first would be to protect Britain's own secrets by developing the necessary cipher machines, codes and operating procedures.
This is the work of the Communications Security Department (Comsec).
The second task was the interception of everyone else's messages around the world and, where possible, decoding them.
This work is concealed under the cover-title of the Composite Signals Organisation (CSO).
The cost of all this was too large for a war-weary, bankrupt Britain.
As a result in 1947 an agreement was signed with the Americans, known as the UK-USA Treaty, whereby the world would be split up into different areas of operation and GCHQ and its American counterpart the National Security Agency (NSA), would share out the intelligence work on the most economical basis.
In some parts, where Britain still had old colonial links, GCHQ would run the eavesdropping stations.
In others where American money had more influence the NSA would operate.
All the information gathered would be shared freely between GCHQ in Cheltenham and the NSA at Fort Meade in Virginia.
The work of GCHQ's CSO is straightforward eavesdropping.
Around the world GCHQ and the NSA have a series of powerful listening stations that scoop up every transmission that ventures into the ether.
No matter how faint or how brief each transmission may be it can be snatched out of the air and analysed.
In 1986 the leader of the Labour Party, Neil Kinnock, telephoned Malcolm Turnbull, the lawyer representing Peter Wright during the Spycatcher trial in Australia which was causing the British government and the security services endless embarrassment.
As Turnbull's number was pressed-out in London the group of numbers, converted into digital pulses, sped on their way to Sydney via Mondial House, the British Telecom international switching centre in London, to the Post Office tower and west across Britain via the main microwave link down to the earth satellite station at Goonhilly in Cornwall.
As the first group of pulses were directed to the satellite high above the Indian Ocean, mixed up with all the other transmissions going out to the Far East, they were snatched out of the ether by the NSA's giant aerials at Morwenstow 60 miles up the coast to the east of Goonhilly, and compared with the watch lists of ‘interesting’ numbers on their computer memories.
As 
Turnbull's calls were of great interest to the government at the time any calls to him from Britain would be separated from the surrounding chaff and monitored.
Within seconds of Kinnock completing the call a full recording of his conversation was on its way back to Fort Meade and, from there, back to GCHQ in Cheltenham.
By allowing the NSA to tap the call in Britain GCHQ had not been involved and, since the presence of the NSA in Britain is not officially admitted, the government could claim the interception never happened.
Millions of calls are intercepted like this every day in Britain.
In fact there are so many that without the use of sophisticated computers it would be impossible to monitor them all.
At the British Telecom satellite station at Goonhilly in Cornwall at any given time there are more than 30,000 separate circuits in use while the new fibre-optical cable laid across the Atlantic in December 1988 can handle up to 40,000 separate conversations.
The simplest way to program the NSA's computers at Morwenstow and Menwith Hill is to have them watch for specific names, addresses, telephone and telex numbers, as in the case of Kinnock's call to Turnbull.
Exactly how many calls are monitored in this manner is not easy to discover.
Naturally neither the NSA nor GCHQ will discuss the subject since such telephone tapping is illegal but in 1976 the NSA's Harvest computer system intercepted 75 million individual telephone conversations alone around the world, of which 1.8 million were considered sufficiently interesting to require further human analysis, although what happened to the information the NSA had collected and how it was shared and used remains a mystery.
But as we know that MI5 taps telephones and keeps files on people simply to pass on political information to the government, one can assume that Kinnock's call to Turnbull is not the only piece of politicised telephone tapping that goes on.
In London itself GCHQ operated the Joint Technical Language Service (JTLS), sometimes called the London Processing Group (LPG).
Both these titles were cover-names for the department responsible for eavesdropping on foreign embassies and trade missions in London.
Monitoring was done from offices at 4–9 St Dunstans Hill, in the City of London, and the upper floors of the Empress State Building in Earls' Court.
It is, of course, no secret that all diplomatic missions not only operate a massive communications system using local telephone and telex lines but are also in direct radio contact with their foreign ministry.
The roofs of every embassy and legation in London are draped with aerials of every size and shape.
Equally, the embassies know perfectly well that all their signals traffic is monitored.
Day after day reels of tape slowly turn, recording every word uttered along these lines of communication.
This produces pages of transcription which are carefully scanned in the hope that for one brief second some minor  indiscretion may have taken place.
Not surprisingly the other side does its best to complicate matters by deliberately holding meaningless conversations that defy analysis.
This is all part of the game.
But the range of ground surveillance systems, no matter how sophisticated, is inevitably restricted by the curvature of the earth's surface.
To overcome this America's intelligence services began to think up other ways of delving right into the heart of Russia and China.
Over a period of 30 years a number of surveillance systems were produced: first the U-2 Spy aircraft, followed by the incredibly fast SR-71 (both of which are still in service today), and then a whole generation of satellites culminating in Rhyolite (see page 28).
America was a late starter in the intelligence game, but today it boasts the most powerful and expensive agencies in the world.
The four most important are the CIA, which handles overseas espionage and is therefore similar to Britain's MI6; the NSA which, like GCHQ, handles Sigint, Elint (Electronic Intelligence), and codebreaking; the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), which controls the surveillance satellites launched into space; and the Defence Intelligence Agency (DIA), which coordinates the intelligence operations of the US Army, Navy, and Air Force.
Counter-intelligence operations within America are handled by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).
The American intelligence agencies (excluding the FBI) are funded from two secret budgets.
One is called the National Foreign Intelligence Program and contains about $12 billion and the other, controlled by the Secretary of Defense, is called the Tactical Intelligence and Related Activities Budget and contains a further $12 billion.
So there is some $24 billion available for intelligence operations which cover a vast spectrum of activities ranging from the covert and illegal to the overt and legal.
None of these funds are subject to any scrutiny or accountability by Congress.
Both the US Navy and Army had run their own intelligence departments since the early 1880s while the FBI had been in existence since 1910 and had been responsible for collating foreign intelligence.
When World War II began in 1939 America had no proper espionage organisation operating abroad.
In a rather haphazard fashion, and greatly encouraged by the British, Roosevelt finally agreed in 1942 to set up the Office of Strategic Services (OSS) under the command of Colonel William Donovan.
With unlimited enthusiasm for cloak-and-dagger activities and equally unlimited funds, OSS had many remarkable successes throughout the war.
One reason for this was that its officers were not bound by past conventions or the class structure that so dominated MI6.
At the end of the war OSS naturally expected it would be allowed to continue in some peacetime role but the FBI, which was jealous of the way OSS had taken over its role of supplying the president with foreign intelligence, pressured President Truman into terminating OSS's activities, which he did in 1945.
Although OSS was no more, the idea of having some form of intelligence agency to operate abroad had taken root and only a few months later Truman changed his mind.
On 22 January 1946 he agreed to the formation of the Central Intelligence Group (CIG), which was to be a small organisation simply collating all forms of foreign intelligence and reporting back to the president through the National Intelligence Authority (NIA).
Nothing of the sort happened.
No sooner had the CIG started work than it began to chafe at its restrictions and sought authority to start operating espionage networks abroad.
In 1947 the National Security Act was passed creating the Central Intelligence Agency.
From that moment onwards America was in the intelligence game.
A great deal of CIA activity has been concentrated in Britain where America has a huge investment in military and intelligence establishments.
Since the war the CIA has been very alarmed at some of the left-wing British governments, many of whose politicians it regards as friends of Moscow.
Because British intelligence has been reluctant to spy on a legitimately elected government and has also been forbidden from keeping ministers under surveillance, MI5 has welcomed the CIA's intervention and given it a free rein in its British operations, always provided that it can share the resulting information.
Despite the vast amount of money it has squandered the CIA has been remarkably unsuccessful in warning America about genuinely important hostile acts by Russia and her allies.
It failed to warn of Russia's ability to build an atomic, and later a nuclear, bomb.
This omission the CIA conveniently blamed on a handful of spies.
It failed to anticipate the Korean war.
The 1968 Russian invasion of Czechoslovakia came as a surprise.
So too did the Russian invasion of Afghanistan.
And yet the CIA has consistently overestimated Russia's military strength and fighting capabilities simply to enhance its reputation and to frighten politicians.
Looking at the world, and in particular Europe, today it is hard to see how anything the CIA has done in the past 40 years has significantly affected the map of freedom.
The great post-war stabilising factor in war-torn Europe was not covert intelligence but the sensible use of economic aid via the Marshall Plan.
Bribing corrupt politicians and propping up rotten governments has not enhanced America's reputation amongst the world's poorer people and nations.
Quite the reverse.
The name CIA is now synonymous with everything that is corrupt and has certainly turned more people towards Communism than would have been the case had American foreign policy been more open and honest.
If ever there was an example of counterproductive intelligence the CIA is it.
One of the most worrying aspects of the CIA's morality is the special brand of patriotism it bestows upon itself.
During the 1987 Iran/Contra hearings in Washington the most frightening witness was Colonel Oliver North, who, though not a direct employee of the CIA, had been inextricably associated with it in this sordid affair.
There he stood before the official inquiry in his crisp, bemedalled marine uniform, his voice breaking with emotion as he lectured the assembled politicians on what was in the nation's interests as if he himself had just invented patriotism.
North, the zealous visionary, besotted by his lone struggle against Communism, was so blinded by right-wing hubris that he saw nothing wrong in breaking the laws of the country he so devoutly wished to defend.
The tale he told was incredible.
A mere colonel on the White House staff, he had involved himself in forgery, false testimony, the illegal shredding of incriminating documents, the illegal shipment of arms to America's enemies, the opening and operation of secret numbered bank accounts in Switzerland involving tens of millions of dollars, shady illegal deals with dishonest arms dealers, and the use of secret funds to support terrorist operations in Central America in direct contravention of Congress.
What was even more alarming was that the American president believed North to be some sort of hero.
On 25 March 1988, after North had been charged with a number of criminal acts, Reagan said:
I still think Ollie North is a hero.
I just have to believe [he's]going to be found innocent because I don't think [he was]guilty of any lawbreaking or any crime.
I've got to take a second to tell you the whole so-called Iran scandal, I think hard to think of as a scandal.
I have no idea who got that extra money or where it came from.
As North's tawdry tale unfolded one was reminded of the 1962 novel Seven Days in May — which tells how a group of disaffected American generals plan to overthrow what they see as a weak and ineffective president by a military coup.
To support their plan the generals secretly subvent large sums from the Chiefs of Staff's contingency fund in order to build a secret airbase in the Texas desert from which they will launch their coup.
The plot is frustrated, ironically, by a colonel in the US Marine Corps who alerts the president and his advisers just in time.
In the book the generals see themselves as the heroes anxious to save America.
Perhaps North is not alone in this curious twisted world of loyalties.
From time to time, following a particularly embarrassing CIA fiasco, the American president plucks up enough courage to clip its wings.
What then follows is usually a change of director and various public pronouncements about the CIA's future activities.
After a quiet period the CIA begins to peddle new scenarios, warning of terrible impending disasters facing America if the agency is not allowed to restart its clandestine operations.
The National Security Agency was founded on 4 November 1952.
The terms under which Truman created the NSA and what it was meant to do are still supposed to be secret even today.
At present, the NSA employs over 20,000 people, with a secret budget of anything up to $4 billion a year.
It is far larger than the CIA but much less well known.
The NSA came about as a direct result of the Allied wartime successes in breaking the coded messages of both the Germans and the Japanese.
After the war Truman very wisely saw the value of continuing this Anglo/American cooperation with the signing of the UK-USA Treaty in 1947.
Because of the NSA's vast budget, which makes GCHQ look like toytown, it is the senior partner by far.
Like GCHQ the NSA has two functions.
First, it looks after the security of America's signals traffic by developing new cryptographs and operating procedures.
Second, it intercepts every communication it can, from friend or foe, and tries to decrypt it.
The NSA is not officially allowed to operate within America.
Nor is it supposed to intercept communications entering and leaving America.
But it does so all the same.
The NSA has a huge operation in Britain which it regards as one of its most important listening posts, being strategically placed to eavesdrop not only on East Europe but West Europe as well.
GCHQ allows NSA to operate in Britain for two reasons.
First, the Americans pay for the construction and running costs of Sigint stations such as Menwith Hill and Morwenstow, saving GCHQ a lot of money.
Secondly, as we have seen, by allowing the NSA to eavesdrop on British communications (as it does from the Morwenstow station in Cornwall which scoops up everything passing in and out of British Telecom's ground station at Goonhilly), it allows British ministers to claim that GCHQ does not monitor calls within Britain.
Likewise the NSA station at Menwith Hill monitors the major domestic trunk networks of the British telephone system.
The Menwith Hill station employs over 1,200 staff, most of them Americans.
A recent article in the New Statesman & Society listed some of the current operations at Menwith Hill, including those that involve eavesdropping on Russian and West European telephone calls.
Evidently Menwith Hill's operations have been so successful that a $26 million expansion programme has been approved as part of the Project P415 programme.
Already teams from GCHQ have been out to America to be trained in the use of the new equipment.
All this confirms that the NSA and GCHQ are again becoming bolder and starting to blatantly ignore supposed guidelines, intercepting any transmission they wish.
Both the American and British governments are cloaking these new operations in a shroud of secrecy though it is unlikely any politician has the slightest idea what the two agencies are planning to do or that they even care if laws are broken as they have been in the past.
In 1969 the NSA began Operation Minaret.
The plan was to monitor communications of American organisations and individuals who in the eyes of the NSA wanted to foment civil disturbance or otherwise undermine the security of the United States.
Specifically mentioned were those connected with anti-war movements, especially those demonstrating against American involvement in Vietnam.
Included in this domestic surveillance programme were well-known names such as Jane Fonda, Joan Baez, Dr Benjamin Spock, Dr Martin Luther King and many others who, at the time, had been outspoken critics about matters like civil rights and the Vietnam war.
Associated with Minaret was another programme called Shamrock.
This was a joint Anglo/American affair whereby GCHQ would make available to the NSA all its intercepts of British communications, particularly those with America.
The NSA had naturally taken enormous trouble to keep Minaret and Shamrock secret since they were quite illegal even though they had the tacit approval of President Nixon, another Henry II Syndrome casualty (see Chapter 3).
Unfortunately, on 7 June 1973, the New York Times revealed details of what the NSA was doing and, faced with the possibility of having to admit to an illegal act in open court, the NSA swiftly terminated the operations.
It now seems that it and GCHQ are about to restart them.
The NSA operates many other satellite stations around the world.
Typical is the Pine Gap installation near Alice Springs in Australia, a huge project that sucks up communications in the Far East and Pacific.
It is a controversial establishment because it is entirely staffed by NSA personnel and there has been much local discussion as to whether the station operates in the interests of Australia or only America.
To try to make sense out of the vast amount of raw material intercepted each day the NSA uses computers that are programmed to search for key ‘trigger’ words, names, and numbers amongst the hundreds of thousands of circuits being continuously analysed.
In theory this should sort out the wheat from the chaff but the definition of wheat in the intelligence world is so wide that even with the best filter the net volume of material is of such staggering proportions that it is beyond any useful human assessment.
Once again one comes back to the fundamental question of how much use all this is and whether the NSA really provides good value for money.
Statistically the NSA is very impressive.
But statistics do not necessarily make for good intelligence.
All experience shows that the best intelligence comes from small, well-run agencies, not huge sprawling empires.
The NSA is now so large, so complex, and so secret that no one in America, least of all the president or Congress, has any idea what it is doing or how sensibly the taxpayers' money is being spent.
Any attempt to impose some sort of external watchdog that might apply a degree of accountability is rejected as compromising its secrecy.
Effectively the NSA is defeating itself and its original purpose by its size.
This endless chase for super-technology and an almost reverential reliance on its findings is an extremely dangerous foundation for a nation's intelligence operations.
The idea that huge computers can by themselves produce all the necessary facts and warn when danger is near is an extremely fallacious thesis straight out of Hollywood.
During the last war intelligence experts came to rely upon Ultra so heavily that if Ultra intercepts told them nothing they automatically assumed the Germans were doing nothing.
This resulted in several disasters.
Like every other intelligence agency the NSA is very good at giving politicians what they want to hear in peacetime but it has no wartime experience at all.
There is no substitute for good, sound interpretation based on personal knowledge of the facts.
It will take a second Pearl Harbor for the Americans to realise how inefficient the NSA really is, just as it took the Falklands War of 1982 to reveal the deficiencies at GCHQ.
The National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) is responsible for America's intelligence space programme.
Founded on 25 August 1960, it does not officially exist.
Its headquarters are in Department 4C-956 in the Pentagon, Washington DC, where it is known only as the Office of Space Systems.
Although a virtually unknown organisation, its $6 billion a year budget is actually larger than that of either the CIA or NSA.
In the last ten years it is estimated that the NRO has spent more than $50 billion, none of it accountable.
Over this period the NRO has put into orbit over Russia and other countries a wide variety of satellites designed to bring back all kinds of visual and electronic intelligence.
As technology has improved so the scope and quality of material recovered has increased dramatically.
One of NRO's most advanced projects was the Rhyolite satellite programme.
The codename was chosen because rhyolite is a volcanic rock containing colourful pieces of quartz set in a mass of crystals.
First launched in complete secrecy on 19 June 1970, the programme placed in geostationary orbit 22,300 miles above the equator an eavesdropping satellite developed by the TRW Corporation of California for the NSA.
It could listen continuously to every type of Russian and Chinese signal including telephone conversations on their domestic microwave network.
On 6 March 1973 another Rhyolite satellite was launched.
This, incidentally, is officially referred to as the first launch of the programme although it was the second.
A third was launched on 23 May 1977.
Information from these satellites was brought back to earth at the NSA stations at Menwith Hill in Britain and Pine Gap in Australia.
Unfortunately all this marvellous technology was wasted because not long afterwards Boyce and Lee at TRW and Prime at GCHQ gave all the details to the Russians (see Chapter 4) who, as happened with the 1955 Berlin Tunnel (see Chapter 2), proceeded to spoof Western intelligence for several years with false information.
But because so much money and technical faith had been invested in the  project no one thought to check the information elsewhere or suspect that the system might be fallible.
So once again technology had taken over from old-fashioned human intelligence.
After Rhyolite came the Argus and later the Keyhole series of satellites.
The Keyhole KH-11 I, which has vastly improved visual sensors, is said to have the ability to see objects only six inches long on the ground and to be able to read number plates on cars driving along Russian streets or identify one mullah from another in Iran by measuring the size of their beards.
It would be nice to think that all this is true.
But the intelligence fraternity has a long track record of trying to fool others and in the process usually ends up fooling itself.
It would also be wise to assume that by now the Russians know all about this technology and can, when necessary, not only match it but confuse it.
The Defence Intelligence Agency (DIA), has to get along with an annual budget of only $1 billion.
Its task is to coordinate the intelligence efforts of the US Army, Navy and Air Force, mainly in assessing the armed strength and fighting capabilities of other countries.
Not surprisingly the DIA and CIA frequently cannot agree.
This is because both agencies are fighting for a larger share of the available budget and seek to create a good impression by producing the most frightening scenario.
As a result most forecasts made by the DIA about the Russians are wildly inaccurate.
Much of America's apparent lead in intelligence technology and the vast sums it spends each year on these organisations has been negated by the large number of spies and traitors continually found within them.
Although from the way the Americans complain one would imagine such treachery is solely a British disease, more than 30 American citizens have been recently convicted of serious espionage offences.
Aside from Boyce and Lee, these include Edward Howard, a CIA employee who finally defected to Moscow taking with him a hoard of secret information about his work; the Walker trio who for 17 years handed over details of US Navy cryptograhic equipment to the Russians in exchange for $750,000; Bruce Ott, a USAF airman who tried to sell the Russians a copy of the SR-71 spy plane operating manual; Robert Miller, an FBI agent who passed on secret documents to the Russians; Ronald Pelton, a communications expert with the NSA who for five years gave the Russians details of his work; Clyde Conrad, a retired US Army sergeant who for five years is alleged to have handed over top army contingency plans to the East; and Jonathan Pollard, a US Navy counter-intelligence analyst who was paid $50,000 by Israeli intelligence for top naval information, a particularly embarrassing incident.
There are surely more yet to be exposed.
As so often happens, Russia's intelligence agencies have changed names several times.
At the end of World War II Lavrenti Beria ruled over two separate  organisations.
One was called the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs,Narodnyi Kommissariat Vnutrennikh Del ,(NKVD), and the other the People's Commissariat of State Security,Narodnyi Kommissariat Gosudarstvennoi Bezonasnosti (NKGB).
In 1946 these were renamed the MVD and MGB and later changed yet again to their present titles of the Komitet Gosudarstvennoi Bezopastnosti (KGB), and the Glavnoye Razvedyvatelnoye Upravleniye (GRU).
The headquarters of the KGB is 2 Dzerzhinsky Square in the heart of Moscow, close to the Kremlin, and incorporates the site of the notorious Lubyanka prison where so many opponents of the Russian regime have been tortured and murdered.
The Square is named after one of the original Bolshevik revolutionaries, Felix Dzerzhinsky, who founded Russia's first secret police force called the Cheka.
The KGB has three main tasks: maintaining state security within the country, guarding Russia's borders and conducting foreign espionage operations.
It is therefore a mixture of MI5, Special Branch and MI6.
The KGB is a vast organisation with at least 100,000 staff officers, 350,000 border guards, 100,000 clerical workers, diplomatic guard, and special troops.
But some experts believe the KGB's true total workforce is nearer two million and includes any Russian visiting or working abroad such as journalists, airline personnel and trade representatives, since every Russian is expected to spy for his country and upon other Russians too.
The KGB is certainly the largest intelligence organisation in the world and is divided into five separate directorates.
Three of these deal with internal security, one with overseas espionage and the fifth with Russian dissidents.
It is so large and bureaucratic that like all such hierarchies it defeats itself.
The KGB is answerable to no one and does not even need to attempt to justify what it does or how it does it, therefore there is no incentive for it to become more efficient.
Unfortunately some people in the West, notably the intelligence community, deliberately bestow upon the KGB an incredible reputation for efficiency and prowess.
Hopefully the Russians believe this.
In truth the KGB spends most of its time and resources, rather like the NSA, scooping up large amounts of trivia that it evidently believes are extremely valuable.
As a result it is overwhelmed by a mass of material that defies useful analysis and, to make matters worse, unlike the West does not have access to unlimited computer capacity.
A job with the KGB is much sought-after by young Russians because it pays well, offers many special privileges such as housing and foreign goods denied to the ordinary citizen, and also gives the chance of foreign travel.
Bearing in mind the size of the KGB's foreign operations it would be surprising if it did not have some successes.
But if it was as clever and efficient as we in the West say it is, then one might expect it to have achieved much more.
It is hard to think of many foreign governments the KGB has overthrown  as, for example, the CIA did in Chile.
Nor has the KGB conducted many privately organised invasions as the CIA did against Cuba at the Bay of Pigs.
Certainly Russia has openly intervened with military force to control its satellites like Hungary and Czechoslovakia when it thought they were stepping out of line and also supported the introduction of martial law in Poland to curb industrial unrest.
But these were not covert intelligence operations.
Overall the KGB has achieved little in international terms.
As to the political secrets that the KGB has gathered by the basketful over the last 40 years, few seem to have made much impact on the monolithic structure of Russia's political machine.
It is hard to think of many instances where Russia has been able to outsmart the West politically as the result of its intelligence operations.
The fiasco at the Gorbachev/Reagan summit at Reykjavik seems more likely due to a lack of understanding on the part of Reagan and his advisers and the fear they might go too fast for their NATO partners.
In the future the KGB will face two serious challenges, both from within Russia.
First are demands for more autonomy by the minority ethnic groups and quelling the inevitable unrest that these demonstrations bring.
Throughout 1988 there were reports of growing unrest in Armenia which eventually erupted into major dashes, with tales of large-scale rioting and murder with tanks and troops on the streets.
The other is coming to terms with a more liberal society where dissent and public protest are no longer automatically met with assault and arrest.
Assuming Gorbachev can continue with his reforms the KGB will be in the same position as would MI5 were a Labour anti-nuclear government suddenly returned to power.
It will be fascinating to see how the KGB copes with this sudden reversal of the old traditions.
The GRU is the military counterpart of the KGB.
It operates through military attaches at overseas diplomatic missions and also runs its own network of spies such as, for example , the Portland spy ring, which are quite separate from the KGB.
Because it is far smaller than the KGB with a staff of around 6,000 the GRU is more efficient.
Inevitably there is considerable friction between the two agencies but in the past defence needs in Russia had sufficient priority to give the GRU a lead over the KGB.
Once again changes are in the wind.
Gorbachev has already taken the West by surprise by agreeing to a reduction of intermediate nuclear weapons and then suggesting further reductions in long-range missile systems.
In December 1988 Gorbachev took the United Nations by storm and wrongfooted the American administration, then impotent during the hand-over of power from Reagan to President-elect George Bush, by announcing a unilateral reduction of 10 per cent in Russia's conventional forces.
Plainly Gorbachev is hoping to achieve several different things by these radical plans.
First he wants to wind down Russia's huge military spending in favour of diverting resources to create a competitive domestic economy where private enterprise will compete with state industries.
That is easier said than done.
At the moment Russia's economy is quite incapable of producing the goods that ordinary people want and falling oil revenues preclude any large-scale purchases of foreign expertise.
As a result Gorbachev is in danger of raising people's expectations beyond anything that can be achieved.
Military conscription has always been a useful way of soaking up young people and even though Russia is suffering from a decline in the birthrate the sudden release of a large number of men on to the civilian labour market might be difficult to absorb at a time when Gorbachev is trying to raise productivity.
On the diplomatic front Gorbachev is hoping to persuade European countries that Russia is no longer a threat.
This comes at a time when some Western governments are questioning the standard hard-line attitude always taken by British and American leaders and certainly in West Germany there is a growing feeling towards more direct contact with Moscow and less reliance on America's nuclear stockpile.
It all adds up to some very big changes, not only in direction but also in the whole philosophy of Russia's attitude to the West.
Certainly neither the KGB nor the GRU are going to stop spying, for that would leave them as exposed to criticism as if the CIA suddenly stopped spying on Russia.
As a result both agencies have to continue claiming that Russia is facing terrible threats from the West and therefore that their existence is essential despite the fact that Gorbachev is busily telling the Russian people that co-existence is not only possible but desirable as are many aspects of capitalist society.
At the moment Gorbachev is like a juggler with a lot of balls in the air at once.
Provided he is not forced to drop them it may be that Gorbachev, ironically, could be the first world leader to actually reduce a country's intelligence agencies on the grounds that there is less for them to do.
Both the KGB and GRU spend a lot of time and energy seeking the West's technical secrets.
Much of this is done quite legally and openly because the information is freely available.
East European military attaches and trade missions spend much of their time buying up every sort of book and technical journal and visiting every trade fair around Europe and America.
Russian scientists attend every relevant international meeting and seminar at which there is inevitably a continuous exchange of views and opinions.
As a result it is hard to think of any technical innovations, whether in the military or civilian field, that Russia does not know about.
This does not necessarily mean, however, that all Russia's technical achievements are the product of espionage, although Western intelligence would have us believe this.
It is claimed, for example, that Russia's ability to produce an atomic and later a nuclear bomb was entirely a result of information given by British  spies.
By the same token Russia's nuclear submarines are the direct product of information obtained from spies in Britain and America.
Even the new silent propulsion system seen on some new Russian submarines was not their own invention but came from Toshiba of Japan.
All this creates convenient mythology.
One story told against the KGB is that it tried to steal the design secrets of the Anglo-French supersonic aircraft Concorde.
The KGB managed to infiltrate an agent into the British factory who was discovered by MI5 (a rare achievement indeed).
It arranged with the manufacturers that he would be allowed to see technical data that had been carefully doctored to include major errors.
This information was passed back to Russia, and incorporated into their own copy of Concorde, the TU-I44.
As a result the aircraft proved a failure and following a spectacular crash at the Paris air show in 1964 was withdrawn from service altogether.
It certainly is a good story but it is hard to believe that a designer as experienced as Tupolev would casually use such information without first carefully checking it out, particularly if one considers the history of the Russian aircraft industry which over the years has sprung many surprises upon the West and will doubtless do so again in the future.
Russian designers have certainly taken advantage of anything they could learn from the West.
In 1947 the president of the Board of Trade in Attlee's Labour government, a young and aspiring politician called Harold Wilson, agreed to grant special export licences to Russia for two Rolls Royce jet engines, the Nene and the Derwent.
At the time these were two of the world's most advanced designs and the subject of much secrecy within Britain.
The Air Ministry's intelligence staff strongly objected to this arrangement yet it went ahead.
There was certainly no question of any spying here.
Why the Russians were allowed to buy the engines is another matter.
Russia's space programme has matched, and more recently eclipsed, that of America.
And Russia's post-war naval building programme produced some startling new warships for a country that had little previous maritime experience.
The Russian tank industry has a record of producing some formidable designs over the years.
As there is no public debate about Russia's defence spending no one in the West knows what sort of value it gets for its money.
When one considers the huge cost overruns the West has on each new fighter, tank and warship, it is hard to believe that the same does not happen in Russia.
And Russia must also have its share of design disasters where equipment fails to perform properly in service.
Nor do we hear much about Russian military equipment that cannot be used due to a shortage of spares.
Many people in the West fondly believe that if Russia is denied high technology its future political activities will somehow be constrained.
In fact, quite the reverse is true.
The more high technology the Russians acquire the greater are the production difficulties and delivery backlogs.
It must be  very galling for the KGB and GRU, having secured some seemingly important technical secret from the West as the result of a long, complex, covert operation, to see it wasted simply because Russian industry is quite incapable of utilising it.
Back in the early 1970s the KGB was busy stealing the secrets of the IBM 360/S and 370/S computers.
With the help of the East German Robotron computer factory in Dresden the Russians produced a copy called Ryad-I But 20 years later this computer is still not fully in use simply because Russia cannot produce enough electrical cable and connectors to link the equipment.
The more Gorbachev tries to switch Russia's economy away from the military to the production of domestic goods, the greater will be his peoples' expectations, resulting in ever-increasing technical problems from Russia's outdated industry.
France's two intelligence organisations are the Direction Général de Sécurité Extérieur (DGSE), which, like MI6 and the CIA, is responsible for espionage operations abroad, and the Direction de la Surveillance du Territoire (DST), which looks after counter-intelligence at home like MI5.
Given the very complex nature of France's post-war politics, especially with regard to Algeria in the late 1950s it is hardly surprising that the SDECE, as the DGSE was then known, has found itself embroiled in numerous scandals.
Having survived these and further political turmoil at home today's DGSE has emerged remarkably unscathed.
It is greatly helped by a pragmatic government who, as it showed over the Rainbow Warrior affair, is quite prepared openly to back its security services even when they have been caught red-handed in a straightforward act of overt terrorism.
Within France the DST has been reasonably successful in countering Russian and other East European intelligence operations although, as in Britain, spies have been discovered in the highest levels of government.
One advantage the DST has is that most French people accept a far greater degree of personal documentation and registration of their whereabouts than would be acceptable in Britain or America.
As a result the DST is able to operate a huge computerised identity-card system associated with equally large and efficient telephone-tapping centres which the French appear to tolerate without concern about their civil liberties.
In recent years the DST has had to cope with a conflicting number of loyalties amongst those political refugees France has allowed to enter its country, especially from the Middle East.
Pragmatism has also played a part here and when convenient the DST has been willing to do deals with other countries trading off information it has obtained from opposing factions in the Middle East.
It has also been willing to bargain over the release of French hostages held by Arab groups in the Lebanon even though the government pays lip-service to the official declarations that no such deals should be made.
The Iran/Contra scandal gave the French much cause for amusement.
Israel occupies an unique place in the world of intelligence.
It has two organisations,Mossad Le Aliyah Beth (Institution of Intelligence and Special Services), responsible for external espionage, and Shin Beth (the Security and Counter Espionage service), which looks after internal security.
Israel's uniqueness stems from the fact that it considers itself to be in a perpetual state of war with its Arab neighbours which, together with the Nazi barbarities of the last war, is somehow supposed to make the rest of the world feel permanently sorry for Israel and give it the right to carry out any intelligence operations it likes.
As a result Mossad involves itself in any type of operation that it feels helps Israel or at least deters its enemies.
Henry II has never been heard of in Israel (see chapter 3).
If something needs to be done, like a murder or a retaliatory bomb outrage, those in charge do not conceal their wishes behind fine phrases.
Morality and accountability are conspicuously absent.
In 1973 a Mossad hit squad went to Norway and murdered an innocent Moroccan mistaking him for an alleged Arab terrorist.
The world was shocked but did nothing.
Mossad agents stole the plans of the French Mirage fighter from Switzerland.
A West German ship with a cargo of uranium concentrate bound from Antwerp to Genoa disappeared and its cargo later turned up in Israel.
An Israeli nuclear technician, Mordechai  Vananu , who came to London and gave away details of Israel's nuclear weapon plant at Dimona in the Negev desert, was lured from London to Rome by an attractive Mossad agent, then kidnapped, brought back to Israel and put on trial.
In 1986 when Shin Beth murdered two Arab terrorist suspects they had taken into custody there was some local outcry but in the end the agency was protected by the government.
In December 1988 controversy ensued when Yassir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organisation, was refused a visa to go to America and address the United Nations in New York.
The American State Department argued that because Arafat represented an organisation that used terrorism he should not be allowed to enter America.
If one was to draw up a balance sheet of terrorism and murder involving innocent people it is likely that Mossad, the Israeli government and the CIA would easily exceed Arafat's record depending, of course, upon how you choose to define terrorism.
To a family in the Lebanon whose house has been bombed by Israeli jet aircraft or destroyed by a CIA-backed bomb the definition probably does not matter much.
The fact remains that while Mossad is the honoured guest of the American government in Washington, especially at election time, the entire UN General Assembly had to be air-lifted to Geneva to hear what Arafat had to say.
Western agencies are very envious of Mossad because it relies not on huge arrays of computerised technology but on a small group of efficient and dedicated men and women who are not bothered by any form of morality so long as Israel benefits.
It is considered justifiable to let off bombs in Britain  and kill innocent people, blaming Arab countries, if that helps Israel.
Furthermore, Mossad has the advantage that Jews the world over, rich or poor, owe an ethnic loyalty to Israel that enables them to be called upon to help even in quite minor ways.
No other country enjoys such a network of unofficial agents.
Despite the fact that over the years America has been Israel's guardian, both politically and militarily, and continues to give Israel $3 billion-worth of aid annually, that does not stop it from falling victim to Mossad's activities.
In 1985 Jonathan Pollard, a US Navy analyst, was paid $30,000 by Mossad in return for handing over thousands of pages of top-secret material.
As part of the same operation Mossad is credited with the theft of enough uranium from a plant in  Pennsylvannia to make six nuclear weapons.
The ease with which this theft was carried out and the incompetent way in which it was investigated makes one wonder if America is not secretly pleased that Israel has become a nuclear power in the Middle East so that it can act as tripwire in any conflict.
In order to placate Washington Israel officially claimed this was all an unauthorised operation but in the intelligence world an unauthorised operation is simply one that is too hazardous to handle by normal channels in case something goes wrong.
Because it is so efficient Mossad is courted by other agencies who are anxious to trade off information, particularly about Arab terrorism that affects their own countries.
Mossad is always willing to cooperate provided it will benefit.
Mossad also makes available to the West various examples of Russian and East European military equipment captured in various Middle East wars.
One way and another Mossad has a lot to offer and makes certain that it gets the best of the bargain.
Following the Sowan affair the Foreign Office expelled the five-man team of Mossad agents that Britain had permitted to work unofficially in London.
But in a few weeks they were allowed to return because Mossad had threatened to stop giving MI6 any more information about Arab terrorism.
So the Foreign Office, which with so much contrived anger and publicity expelled Cuban diplomats in September 1988 for firing a gun in a British street, is quite willing to have in Britain an intelligence organisation that was planning bomb outrages.
Considering the long anti-semitic history of the Foreign Office which always shares the Arab viewpoint this demonstrates a curious pragmatism.
There are, of course, many other players in the game.
As one might expect, West Germany has inherited the ability to maintain vast dossiers on people within its borders and, bearing in mind that some 8,000 spies working for East Germany and Russia are said to be operating in West Germany, there is certainly plenty for them to do.
The problem is that since West Germany also  spies on its neighbour, a great deal of time is taken up with swopping convicted spies back and forth across the border.
Middle-aged women working in the West German government have also been a favourite target for East German spies and several have passed over supposedly valuable information for a number of years before being caught.
Whether any of this espionage achieves much is a matter of opinion but West Germany is never slow to publicise the capture of a few spies as being a serious breach of national security.
In the end a nation tends to get the intelligence organisation it deserves.
Americans like their billion-dollar computerised organisation, believing that big is beautiful, and now these monoliths are out of control.
The British stumble after the Americans trying to copy their technology but waste their limited resources because their agencies are run by an amateurish elite who are too highly politicised and target the wrong enemies, allowing the real spies to go free.
The Russians are so bureaucratic that any gems of intelligence they might cull are lost in a mass of trivial dross.
The French are pragmatic to the point of openness over their illegal activities but in the end it is the smallest and most immoral of them all, Mossad, which is the most efficient.
Whether any intelligence does much good or actually enhances a country's security is doubtful.
After all, despite the success of Mossad, Israel still lives in a perpetual state of fear and terrorism.
But the intelligence game is now an international affair where winning and point-scoring is the most important thing.
No one dares ask whether any of it is worthwhile or could be done far more cheaply.
The king must not be seen without his clothes.
= THE WASTELAND OF TRUTH
Listening to your enemy illicitly is one of the fundamental functions of intelligence.
Indeed, it is probably the single most important source of information.
Eavesdropping takes many forms.
For over 400 years, for example, the British Foreign Office has been opening people's mail, reading their telegrams and, more recently, listening to their telephone calls.
It is easy to do this in your own country.
Listening to your enemies is more difficult.
Certainly anything they send by radio or by microwave circuit within their country can be intercepted.
But what every intelligence chief longs to do is somehow to tap into the very heart of the opponent's communication system and listen to his most secret messages without him being aware.
Bearing in mind the geographical locations of the superpowers, this is easier to contemplate than achieve.
At the end of World War II, Europe lay divided under the control of the four Allied powers — America, Russia, Britain and France.
The divisions were arbitrary, mainly depending upon who happened to be where when the fighting stopped.
The city of Vienna ended up under the control of all four occupying powers.
The city was not actually physically divided, as is Berlin today with a wall, and therefore all the city's utility services operated throughout the four zones.
Vienna at this time has been immortalised in Carol Reed's brilliant 1949 film The Third Man based on Graham Greene's novel in which a drug trafficker, played by Orson Welles, manages to elude the police by crossing from one zone of the city to another via the network of underground sewers.
Perhaps the film caused someone in MI6 to do a little thinking as to whether drugs were not the only thing that crossed the zonal boundaries.
The Vienna telephone system, which had not been greatly damaged in the war, most certainly did and each of the four occupying powers used it.
In 1950 the Russians had their headquarters in what had been the Imperial Hotel, a fine baroque building which the Russians had quickly turned into a slum as they found it hard to understand the intricacies of a modern plumbing and toilet system which few of them had ever seen before.
In order to communicate with military headquarters in Moscow Russian engineers had simply diverted some of the multicore trunk circuits from the main Vienna exchange so that they terminated in the Imperial Hotel.
By Russian standards the availability of such circuitry seemed remarkable and since their traffic was being sent eastward they saw no reason to suspect interception.
MI6 had discovered that the trunk cable from the Imperial Hotel passed along a main road and it acquired a shop from which a tunnel was dug towards the cable duct and the trunk circuits were then tapped one by one.
The project was a complete success in that the Russians never suspected that their Moscow traffic was being read.
Exactly what it told us that has made any marked difference to Europe, or even Austria, as we see it today is another matter.
But it was an intelligence coup that certainly fired the imagination of both MI6 and its partners in the CIA.
Not surprisingly, everyone looked around for a similar opportunity.
This was not hard to find.
An even more bizarrely divided city was Berlin.
Here the four powers had carved themselves out oddly shaped zones amongst the rubble and devastation left by the Allied bombing.
The Berlin intelligence scene was dominated by one of the most charismatic figures in post-war espionage — General Reinhard Gehlen.
Gehlen's army career had begun in the late 1920s and as a staunch Nazi supporter he had enjoyed rapid promotion until he became military intelligence chief of Hitler's  Wehrmacht  Foreign Armies East.
Gehlen knew more about Russian intelligence than anyone else in Germany and on several occasions had outwitted Russian intelligence completely.
He had turned captured Russian officers and allowed them to ‘escape’ and make their way back to Russia where they became his agents.
Gehlen had even managed to plant an agent in Stalin's war council and in Marshal Zhukov's headquarters.
As Nazi Germany started to crumble into dust during the final battles of 1945 Gehlen realised that it was time to change sides.
He had no intention of staying by Hitler's side in his Berlin bunker and instead set off for his own headquarters.
Here Gehlen collected up the thousands of spools of microfilm that over the years he had painstakingly amassed as part of his record of Russian intelligence.
Then, with a small group of his best experts, Gehlen set off for Bavaria to await the arrival of the Americans.
After some initial difficulties Gehlen was able to explain who he was and what he had to offer.
He was taken to see General Rush Patterson, the US 7th Army's intelligence chief who, without any fuss, took Gehlen to see General Eisenhower.
Then Gehlen, together with his vast hoard of microfilms, was  flown to America.
It did not require much effort on Gehlen's part to convince the Americans that the real enemy was Russia and with his help they could have a ready-made intelligence organisation.
In return the Americans quietly overlooked Gehlen's record with the Nazis.
Thus re-established Gehlen returned to Germany on the winning side to head up the CIA's new Cold War against Russia.
Initially all Gehlen's funding came from the CIA but later, in 1954 when the German Federal Republic was established as a sovereign state, Gehlen took over the running of the Federal German Intelligence Service.
When the CIA and MI6 approached Gehlen with the idea of tapping into Russian communications in Berlin he responded warmly and at once started to prepare a list of suitable sites where the zones ran close together, and offering opportunities for driving tunnels from one to another.
The first attempts in 1953 were not very successful.
One of Gehlen's assistants, Major Werner Haase, who was a wartime electronics expert with the German Army, volunteered to take a cable across the Heidenkamp Canal on the night of 13 November 1953.
As soon as Haase reached the other side of the canal he was arrested by East German police.
Although sentenced to death by the Supreme Court of East Germany his sentence was commuted to one of life imprisonment, but he has never been heard of again.
Another attempt by a Gehlen agent called Christopher Komarek to lay a similar cable across the Jungfern Lake also ended in failure.
He too was arrested and later convicted of treason and executed.
It transpired that both had been betrayed by a Russian agent, Hans Geyer, who using the alias ‘Henry Toll’ had infiltrated Gehlen's organisation and passed on all the details of his plans to Moscow.
Despite these setbacks MI6 and the CIA were still anxious to tunnel into the Russian sector and Gehlen was keen to assist.
After much research of possible sites Gehlen suggested that a tunnel could be driven into the Russian sector from the suburb of Rudow in the American sector.
The area was deserted and still devastated from the wartime bombing and seemed an ideal starting point.
The plan was sent to London for consideration by MI6 and the CIA in December 1953.
The secretary of the planning committee that examined the project was an MI6 officer called George Blake who had recently returned to England after a long spell of captivity in Korea.
Operation Gold , as it was called by the CIA, was approved and the first task was to establish a suitable cover story.
The US Military Commandant in the American sector notified his Russian counterpart that the US Air Force intended building a new radar station at Rudow to control flight movements in and out of the American airfield at Buckow.
This work went ahead, although rather slowly, and allowed the tunnelling to begin at the same time.
It was a massive operation with the tunnel 24 feet below ground level stretching 1,800 feet into the Alt Glienicke area of East Berlin.
The tunnel  was seven feet in diameter and made up of cast-iron segments with its own air-conditioning plant, lighting and heating.
The entire operation cost around $25 million.
The tunnel ended at the Schoenfelder Autobahn alongside which ran the trunk telephone cables connecting the main East German government offices, the Russian intelligence (KGB) headquarters at Karlshorst and the Russian Army headquarters with Warsaw and Moscow.
The tapping equipment was supplied by Britain.
Most of the basic equipment came from the British General Post Office, then responsible for Britain's telephone system.
Its equipment, though somewhat antiquated, was strong and designed to withstand heavy use under harsh working conditions with minimum maintenance.
This was particularly important because the Americans wanted as few people as possible working in the tunnel in case it was suddenly discovered.
The tape recorders were supplied by the British Ferrograph Company of South Shields, who made an extremely high-quality and tough recorder capable of operating for long periods without attention.
The final connections into the East German telephone cables were made by John Wyke, MI6's top technical expert, who had to carefully splice in the connections so that the East German operators would not notice any change in line quality or impedance.
All this was done with great success and without any suspicions being aroused.
On 25 April 1955 the recorders began to turn.
And turn they did.
The volume of material they produced was staggering.
Reel after reel of voice recordings and intercepted teleprinter messages were recovered daily.
The voice recordings were shipped to London where MI6 had to set up a totally new department of 250 specially recruited Russian-speaking experts to slowly work their way through the material.
Even then it piled up far faster than they could analyse it.
Other raw material was flown back daily to the CIA in America and here too a special department had to be set up to cope with the volume.
Each day the fear was that a perfectly normal fault might develop in one of the trunk circuits that would require physical inspection by an East German repairman who might notice the MI6 taps.
But this never happened.
On the morning of 15 April 1956 watchers on duty at the Rudow watchtower saw a group of East German engineers begin digging alongside the autobahn near where the tunnel ended.
At first it looked like a perfectly routine maintenance operation but as a precaution those in the tunnel were evacuated and the heavy steel doors at the eastern end barred and locked.
Then East German police began to arrive and shortly afterwards they burst into the tunnel.
From that moment onwards Operation Gold was at an end.
The East Germans and Russians were furious at the discovery.
Their innermost secrets had been at the mercy of the West for a year.
During the next few weeks over 15,000 East Germans visited the tunnel to see what the ‘capitalist warmongers’ were up to.
Though naturally disappointed MI6 and the CIA were not downhearted.
They had had a good run for their money and there were still thousands of reels of tape to be analysed and matched against other intelligence sources.
They could well imagine the panic that would now ensue at Russian military headquarters once it was realised that all their previous secrets had been lost.
George Blake, the MI6 officer who had been secretary of the committee that had planned Operation Gold in 1953 had joined MI6 shortly after the war.
Blake was not in fact English by birth nor was Blake his original name.’
Born in 1922 of Dutch parents in Rotterdam, Blake began life as George Behar.
He grew up in Holland until at the age of I3 he was sent to live with his uncle, Henri Curiel, in Egypt, where he studied at the English school.
His uncle was a leading member of the Egyptian Communist Party.
Blake, or Behar, returned to Holland at the start of the war in 1939 and played a minor part in the Dutch resistance.
In 1943 he managed to leave Holland and travelled across France to Spain and thence to England.
On arrival, like all refugees, he was taken to the Patriotic School at Wandsworth where he was interrogated and his background checked.
Fortunately, his work with the Dutch resistance, though relatively unimportant, was enough to prove his loyalty and he was released.
Then he had the good fortune to meet Commander D. W. Child RN who had been an intelligence officer in Holland and who Blake had met there.
It was Child who suggested that Behar volunteer for the Royal Navy which he did in November 1943 having first changed his name to Blake.
Because of his knowledge of languages Blake was recommended for a commission and was sent on to an officers' training course at HMS King Alfred which in the spring of 1944 he passed and was appointed a sub-lieutenant in the RNVR.
For a while he was seconded to work with the Dutch Section of SOE but in May 1944 during the preparations for the Normandy landings, Blake was posted to naval headquarters at Portsmouth as an interpreter with Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF).
The end of the war found Blake in Hamburg on the naval intelligence staff of HMS Albert where he was attempting to collate as much technical information as possible about the defeated German Navy.
Additionally, Blake was involved in checking Communist infiltration into the British sector and as part of these duties he began to learn Russian and had some officially approved contact with the Russians as part of a plan to see whether any of them could be persuaded to become British agents.
Exactly when Blake became a Russian spy is hard to determine.
He may have been influenced by his early days as a teenager in Cairo with his uncle or during his time in Hamburg.
Blake left the navy in 1947 with an excellent report on his work, a copy of which was sent to General Gerald Templer, Director of Military Intelligence  at the War Office.
Nothing much came of this until he was summoned to an interview at the Foreign Office with Kenneth Cohen, an MI6 officer he had known in Hamburg.
It was arranged that on leaving the navy he would go to Cambridge University to study Russian.
Blake arrived there in October 1947.
By all accounts Blake was a very quiet person who did not join in any of the usual university activities and spent most of his time reading about Russia and its people.
He evidently studied hard and by Easter 1948 had completed his course and joined MI6.
Blake was then posted as an MI6 officer to the British Legation in Seoul, Korea where in 1950 he and other members of the legation staff were captured by the North Koreans and held prisoner until the spring of 1953.
Exactly what took place, as far as Blake was concerned, during his period of captivity is unclear, but certainly none of his colleagues ever voiced any suspicion that Blake was in any way pro-Communist at the time or afterwards.
Indeed, the Minister of the Legation, Captain (later Sir) Vyvyan Holt, was later to say that he would not have survived one of their many forced marches in intense cold had it not been for Blake's courage and help.
During their captivity, in late 1951, a member of the KGB called Gregory Kuzmitch arrived at their internment camp and attempted to convert them to Communism.
By a curious twist of fate Kuzmitch later defected to the CIA by which time Blake had been convicted of spying, one of the charges being that he contravened the Official Secrets Act in November 1951 while still in captivity.
But Kuzmitch alleged that Blake told him nothing about his work for MI6 nor did he give any indication that he was ardently pro-Communist.
Kuzmitch did mention that Blake had been unimpressed by the American and British intervention in South Korea but so too were a lot of other people.
Either Kuzmitch was lying (and defectors often do), or Blake was a very clever spy who, despite the temptation to confide in Kuzmitch and thus get better treatment, maintained his role as a long-term sleeper agent.
Blake returned to London a hero in the eyes of MI6 but the secret nature of his work precluded any official recognition.
For a couple of years he worked in London with MI6, mainly bugging diplomatic premises and illegally opening diplomatic mail.
Blake's own description of his work matches that given many years later by Peter Wright in his book Spycatcher ).
Blake also took part in the joint planning meetings that were held between the CIA and MI6 during one of which, in December 1953, the Berlin tunnel operation was approved.
During all this time Blake was passing back to Moscow full details of his work, including Operation Gold, so the Russians knew all about the plan two years before the tunnel was actually finished.
On 23 September 1954 Blake married his secretary Gillian Allan and on 14 April 1955 he was posted to West Berlin, just about the time that the Berlin tunnel became operational.
When the tunnel was ‘discovered’ by the  Russians in 1956 an inquiry was held within MI6 and also the Gehlen organisation to determine if there had been a leak to warn the Russians.
The results were inconclusive but Blake's name did not feature in the report.
Blake's work for MI6 included not only gathering intelligence from the Russians but tracking down and watching Communist spies sent over into the West.
In the autumn of 1955, some six months after he had been in Berlin, Blake approached his superiors with the suggestion that he should pretend to become an agent working for the Russians.
Double agents are quite commonplace in the world of espionage.
The idea is that they feed the other side with what appears to be genuine material so as to establish their credibility and then the other side asks them to do things for them on their own home ground.
One of the great arts of intelligence work is to find out how the other side thinks and what interests it.
A double agent is, therefore, well placed to achieve this.
But running doubles is a tricky business.
Obviously the Russians are not fools.
And when someone indicates his willingness to work for them they naturally suspect he is a plant.
In Blake's case there was a further complication in that Blake was already a Russian agent.
What Blake did was to set up a very clever cover story which would pre-empt any subsequent accusations that he was in touch with the Russians.
He could now say that this was with the approval of his superiors.
Effectively, therefore, Blake became a triple agent.
Blake told his superiors at MI6 that in order to win the confidence of the Russians he would need to give them enough genuine information to convince them of his sincerity.
MI6 agreed and produced numerous impressive documents for Blake to pass over which, although largely faked, did contain enough facts to confirm their authenticity.
The Russians played along with this charade and gave Blake similar information with which to impress his superiors so that the arrangement appeared to be working in favour of MI6.
The Russians even sacrificed a few of their less important informers in the West so that Blake could claim further success.
Between 1955 and 1959 Blake betrayed numerous agents in the East.
What is unclear is how many of these betrayals were the work of Blake's original direct links with the Russians and how many were part of the officially authorised game of double bluff.
As we saw in World War II when SOE agents in France were deliberately sacrificed in order to plant deception schemes upon the Germans,'! espionage is a very brutal-game in which human lives are of no more significance than pieces on a chess board.
The Blake case is still extremely sensitive because Blake was authorised to do some very terrible things in the East-West espionage war without MI6 being aware that all the time he was one of Russia's most important agents.
In April 1959 Blake and his family returned to London.
By this time he was regarded by MI6 as one of its most trusted officers who was very adept at  handling the most complex and dangerous operations.
For the next 16 months Blake commuted daily between his house in Bickley, Kent and MI6's headquarters in London.
During this period he remained in regular touch with his Russian controller, giving him details of all the work he handled.
In September 1960 Blake and his family arrived in Beirut where MI6 had enrolled him at the language school known as the Middle East Centre for Arab Studies.
Since leaving Berlin Blake had had one or two scares when various West Germans had been arrested for spying and made allegations about him.
Fortunately, because of his seemingly impeccable record with MI6, they were not believed.
In December 1960 Blake's luck ran out.
A high-ranking Polish military intelligence officer, Colonel Michael Goleniewski, who had been in charge of Polish military intelligence in East Berlin, defected to the CIA in West Berlin.
Goleniewski had been in touch with the CIA since 1958 during which time he had passed on to them a considerable amount of information that had led to the arrest of several important spies.
In late 1959 Goleniewski had given MI5 enough information to identify Harry Houghton, who worked at the Admiralty's underwater research laboratory at Portland, which eventually led to the exposure of the Portland spy ring.
Goleniewski was immediately flown to America, and taken to a CIA safe house called Ashford Farm in the heart of Talbot County, in Maryland.
Here he was carefully debriefed and given the codename Sniper, while MI5 codenamed him Lavinia.
Goleniewski had left behind in Warsaw copies of some 300 important intelligence documents which were retrieved by the CIA and brought to America.
Amongst the information they contained was a vital piece of evidence that a senior MI6 officer in Berlin was, in reality, a Russian agent and had betrayed numerous MI6 agents behind the Iron Curtain.
Goleniewski then came to London and was carefully interviewed by MI6 about his evidence.
Very reluctantly MI6 was obliged to accept the terrible fact that Blake was a long-time Russian spy.
It was decided to recall Blake to London in a manner that would not arouse his suspicions so a message was sent to Nicholas Elliott, chief of MI6 in Beirut, who got in touch with Blake and said that London would like to discuss a chance of promotion and a new job with him.
Blake flew to London on 3 April 1961.
He was not immediately arrested at the airport but kept under close surveillance.
The next morning he reported to Sir Dick White, then head of MI6 (having taken over from Sir John Sinclair after the Crabb fiasco — see Chapter 3).
Blake was then confronted with the allegation that he was a Russian spy and eventually he confessed, was arrested, formally charged and appeared for trial at the Old Bailey in London on 3 May 1961.
Blake pleaded guilty to the five charges against him under the Official Secrets Act which referred to him having passed on information since November 1951.
The British public was not allowed to know what Blake had  actually done.
The Russians knew.
The East Germans knew.
The CIA knew.
But when it came to the British people, who it was claimed he had so dreadfully harmed, the court went into secret session.
Why?
Plainly national security cannot have been at stake since that had already been damaged.
Knowledge of the details could do no further harm.
What was at stake was acute government embarrassment.
What it did not want the public to know was that Blake had been authorised to do shady deals with Russian intelligence, including the betrayal of MI6 agents in East Germany, and the whole plan had backfired because he was a spy already.
The other embarrassing fact was that MI6 never suspected for one moment that Blake was a spy.
Had it not been for Goleniewski's information, which the court could not be told about, Blake would never have been caught and because Goleniewski could not have given evidence without Blake's confession he could not have been brought to trial.
Blake was told by his MI6 interrogators that if he cooperated this would be taken into account when sentence was passed.
The purpose was to encourage other spies to confess since obtaining proof of spying without compromising sources of information is almost impossible.
But the Lord Chief Justice, Lord Parker, evidently had other ideas.
After intoning the usual statements about the harm done to the nation's security, the judge sentenced Blake to a total of 42 years' imprisonment.
He did this by making three of the sentences, each for 14 years, run consecutively instead of concurrently.
The sentence was the longest ever passed in modern British criminal history.
Blake collapsed with shock and was taken to the Wormwood Scrubs prison hospital.
The public was bewildered as to what Blake had done to deserve such a draconian sentence.
The press could provide little enlightenment because all newspapers had received a D-Notice asking them not to print any details about the background to the case.
Nor was parliament any better served.
The prime minister, Harold Macmillan, took refuge behind the usual claim that he could say nothing for fear of damaging national security.
Then, under pressure, Macmillan offered to brief the leader of the opposition, Hugh Gaitskell, and a group of Privy Councillors on a confidential basis, provided nothing was disclosed in the House of Commons.
It later transpired that Macmillan claimed that he had deliberately delayed answering questions in the Commons in order to give time to withdraw MI6 agents from East Europe.
This was obviously untrue since Blake's-arrest had been known to the Russians for several weeks.
Speculation continued until Blake's appeal was heard on 19 June 1961 and was rejected.
By this time MI6 and the government had got their act together and decided to leak a false version of events to the public.
The vehicle used, as on many occasions in the past, was Chapman Pincher, the defence correspondent of the Daily Express who on 19 June entertained George  Brown, the ebullient and unpredictable Labour politician, to lunch at the Ecu de France restaurant.
Brown was one of the Labour opposition Privy Councillors who had attended a confidential briefing by Sir Norman Brook, the Cabinet Secretary, at which Macmillan was present.
Brown proceeded to tell Pincher the government's version of events including the allegation that Blake had betrayed over 40 British agents, hence the claim was born that Blake was sentenced to one year in prison for every agent.
But Brown did not tell Pincher that some of those agents had been betrayed with the knowledge and authority of MI6, as part of Blake's supposed role as a double agent, because the government had suppressed that part of the story just as it had Blake's part in the Berlin tunnel affair.
Even Pincher was surprised at the nature of this scoop and when he got back to his office telephoned Admiral Thomson, the secretary of the D-Notice Committee, in case Brown had become over-tired during lunch.
But despite the fact that Brown had passed on Privy Councillors' information, Thomson assured Pincher there was nothing to stop publication.
As a result the following day, 20 June 1961, the Daily Express carried the government's story in full on its front page, giving the impression that Blake had betrayed all these agents on his own.
It was a very neatly packaged piece of disinformation planted on Pincher that carried added credibility since it did not come from a government source but from an opposition Privy Councillor.
While the press and public contemplated the truth about Blake, at MI6 and the CIA there was total dismay.
Since 1955 both had been swamped with material from Operation Gold and even six years later MI6 was still transcribing voice tapes from the tunnel operation.
All of a sudden they realised they had been tricked from the very beginning.
The East Germans and Russians had known all along that the tunnel was going to be built.
They knew that the story of the radar station at Rudow was a blind.
They had probably listened to the sound of the tunnel being carefully pushed into their zone.
And they knew perfectly well when the connections had been made.
From that time onwards they simply diverted their genuine traffic through other circuits and then arranged to send carefully prepared disinformation over the tapped lines.
No wonder MI6 and the CIA had been swamped with material.
That was exactly what the Russians intended.
The entire operation had been a waste of time.
All the carefully prepared summaries and analyses were not worth the paper they were printed on.
And then there was Blake's complex double-agent operation in Berlin.
Now that too turned out to be fake.
The Russians had known all along that the information Blake was officially giving them was fake.
The real information was coming direct from Blake anyway.
And what about the agents Blake had been allowed to betray in order to prove his sincerity?
They too had been wasted.
No wonder MI6, the government and the court had tried every means to suppress the facts of the story.
But although the case, and particularly the sentence, shocked the public at the time it was soon forgotten.
After all, despite what the judge had said Britain still went on much the same, Berlin was still a divided city (and was later to become even more so) and Russia seemed no more or less secure.
If there were any winners or losers in Blake's games with MI6 they were not readily apparent.
Blake began his sentence in Wormwood Scrubs prison in West London.
Although he was a first offender and there was no suggestion he might try to escape, because of the nature of his offence the governor, Thomas Hayes, decided that Blake should be placed on the escape list.’
This meant that Blake was allocated a special cell which was changed at irregular intervals, that had to be examined every day, and Blake and the cell completely searched at least once a fortnight.
At night a light had to be on all the time and Blake's prison clothes had to be placed outside his cell while, during the day, the clothes he wore had distinctive patches of coloured cloth on them to show that he was on the escape list.
Five months later, on 3 October 1961, Hayes removed Blake from the escape list, allowing him a more normal life although some minor restrictions still applied.
During these initial months Blake was intensively interrogated by MI6 and when they had finished in November 1961 the question arose as to where Blake was to serve his sentence.
The 1966 official report into his subsequent escape has some incredibly tedious and unconvincing arguments as to why Blake was not moved to a high, or at least a higher, security prison such as Birmingham.
One excuse given was that the authorities did not want Blake to associate with another spy which would have happened if he had been transferred to Birmingham prison.
Another equally banal excuse was that it would be a hardship for Blake's wife to visit him if he was moved away from London.
None of this makes any sense because one of Blake's fellow prisoners in D block of Wormwood Scrubs was the Russian spy Gordon Lonsdale (whose real name was Konon Molody), a key figure in the Portland spy ring who, ironically, had also been exposed by the defector Goleniewski.
He had been sentenced to 25 years' imprisonment in March 1961.
On 20 April 1964 Lonsdale was exchanged for a British businessman, Greville Wynne, who had become involved in espionage and been imprisoned in Russia.
Plainly on his return to Moscow Lonsdale was able to brief the KGB on security at Wormwood Scrubs.
Why two such important Russian spies should have been placed in the same cell block so that they could freely meet and talk together is a mystery.
So too is the reason why, when the matter of their being able to meet was raised in parliament (after an article about it had appeared in the Sunday Times in May 1964) the Home Secretary, Henry Brooke, denied that the pair had ever met which was plainly untrue.
The most generous excuse one can make is that Brooke was deliberately  misled by his advisers.
The official report avoids the whole issue of how and why Blake and Lonsdale were able to meet so easily and relies entirely on what it was told by MI5.
As MI5 had already misinformed the Home Secretary there is no reason why Lord Mountbatten's inquiry was treated any better.
During 1964–65, Hayes received a number of reports that attempts would be made to free Blake.
All these were investigated by MI5, Special Branch and Scotland Yard.
Some of the stories were pretty fanciful and involved helicopters and mercenaries but at least one claimed that Blake would be helped to escape by another prisoner and once free would go to East Germany and thence to Russia.
MI5 claimed to have carefully investigated each of the stories and told the inquiry that no evidence to support them was ever found.
In each case, MI5 alleged that those who had reported such stories were either mentally unbalanced, or seeking publicity, which was a convenient way of denigrating them and the tales.
Towards the end of 1965 special high-security accommodation had been built at Durham, Leicester and Parkhurst, prisons.
In early 1966 Hayes was asked to nominate any prisoners he felt should be transferred to these new secure prisons.
Hayes submitted three names one of which, not surprisingly, was Blake.
But Blake was not moved.
Instead a child murderer was transferred to Parkhurst.
The 1966 inquiry plodded its way through an incredible number of excuses as to why Blake had not also been transferred and concluded that if Blake had been moved, and the child murderer left at Wormwood Scrubs had then escaped (rather than Blake), there would have been great public criticism.
In fact there was plenty of room for both at Parkhurst.
Although Blake may have given the impression to the prison authorities that he had accepted his sentence and settled down to serve it (it would surely have been odd had he done otherwise), in reality neither he nor the KGB had any intention of him remaining in prison a day longer than necessary.
Blake had been a very good agent and the KGB always looks after its own.
Quite apart from enhancing its reputation, it also reassures other agents that they will not be forgotten.
Ideally, the KGB would have liked to have swopped Blake.
But Blake was British, unlike Lonsdale and the Krogers, the other couple caught in the Portland spy ring.
If Blake could not be exchanged the only alternative was to get him out of prison.
Between 1964 and 1966 Blake, together with the KGB, made plans to escape from Wormwood Scrubs.
Unless Blake chooses to make the details public they will never be known for certain.
In the meantime all we have is the popular version that Blake was befriended by a 32-year-old Irishman, Sean Bourke, who at the time was coming to the end of a seven-year sentence and was living in the prison hostel just inside the perimeter wall of the prison but allowed to go out to work each day on parole.
With the aid of £700, a  few friends, some two-way radios, a car jack and a ladder made out of knitting needles, Bourke got Blake out of prison, over the wall and across the Channel to East Germany.
Bourke, who died in 1982, was a colourful person who over the years gave a number of different versions of how he helped Blake escape, progressively embroidering each one with more fanciful figments of his imagination.
That Bourke was involved there is no doubt.
But it is impossible to accept that he acted alone in such an amateurish manner.
There are a great number of anomalies in the accounts he gave.
Blake and Bourke are supposed to have talked together each evening via two-way radios with Blake in his ground-floor cell and Bourke outside the walls.
Apart from whether the weak transmissions from a pair of £25-sets operating on the American Citizens' Band FM frequency could have penetrated the thick walls of Blake's cell, which were reinforced with cast-iron segments, with no external aerial and close to the 17 feet-high perimeter wall, there is also the question of how Blake managed to keep a radio in his cell without it once being noticed over six months during which he and his cell were regularly searched.
Furthermore, if Blake had this two-way radio which he used nightly, how did he manage to obtain a supply of batteries to power it?
Bourke also claims that another prisoner in the same wing picked up part of their nightly conversations on his radio.
But prison regulations then (and now) permit prisoners to have only radios that operate on the medium and long waves.
Sets with FM bands are not allowed.
It is perfectly true that Blake did have a battery-operated radio in his cell which worked on medium and long waves only.
Blake left this behind after he escaped and it was examined by experts.
They found it had not been modified in any way and could not operate on the 27–28 MHz frequency (the FM Citizens' Band).
They told the inquiry that if a particularly strong FM transmission was made very near the radio it might be possible for it to pick up the sub-harmonic at around 14 MHz but that such a signal could not have emanated from a low-powered, hand-held type of two-way radio.
One can only conclude that the story about the two-way radios is entirely false.
There are in existence some brief audio recordings of alleged two-way radio conversations between Blake and Bourke which are said to have been made in October 1966.
Bourke had been discharged from prison on 4 July 1966 and was living in rented accommodation in Perryn Road about a-mile away from the prison.
From this distance Bourke says he was unable to contact Blake by radio and therefore he would drive to Old Oak Common Lane, park his car and then walk across Old Oak Common with his radio to a point dose to the north side of the prison from where he could re-establish contact, lying down in the grass so that he would not be seen.
Bourke had to do this every time he spoke with Blake up to the time of the escape in October.
If Bourke recorded some of these conversations with Blake in October he would have had to take a battery-operated audio recorder with him across the common, as well as the two-way radio, and link the two together while lying in the grass talking to Blake.
This is certainly not impossible — battery-operated recorders existed in 1966 — but it does seem an unnecessary complication to add to an already hazardous operation.
Bourke claimed that Blake brought his two-way radio with him when he escaped and both radios were left at Bourke's flat in Highlever Road where they must have been found by the police when they raided the flat on I January 1967.
But no mention of two-way radios appears anywhere in the official report, so either the police concealed the details from the inquiry or they never existed.
Then take the matter of the car jack which, according to Bourke, he smuggled in to Blake who used it to prise away the window bars in order to make his escape from D block.
How did Blake manage to keep this in his cell undetected for so many months?
The official facts surrounding Blake's escape are as follows.
On the evening of Saturday, 22 October l966, there was a period of free association between 5 p.m. and 7 p.m. in D hall.
Of the total number of 317 inmates, 21O had gone to watch a film in another part of the prison.
Blake was not one of these.
Most of the remaining inmates were watching wrestling on television.
There were only two warders on duty.
At about 5.30 p.m.
Blake spoke to one of the warders, which is the last time anyone can remember seeing him.
Blake then went up to the second floor of the block and along to the main window.
This had small panes of glass set in a large cast-iron frame.
Blake apparently broke one of the cast-iron sections of the frame, creating a space through which he could crawl, and then dropped down to the ground below, a distance of 22 feet, which was broken by the roof of a covered passageway.
The official report states that the broken piece of window bar was later found to have adhesive tape wrapped around each end, suggesting that it had been severed beforehand.
Blake was then only 60 feet from the prison wall.
It was raining heavily and visibility was poor.
Although this section of the wall was under constant surveillance by two warders, one of whom had to patrol the perimeter wall on foot taking about eight minutes, Blake was able to reach the foot of the wall unobserved where he found Bourke's ladder, with which he made his escape, hanging over the wall.
The fact that Blake was missing was not discovered until 7.20 p.m. and the first call to the police did not occur until 7.43 p.m. so Blake had roughly two hours' start.
There then followed a long period of muddle and confusion not helped by the fact that no one had a recent photograph of Blake and that it was a Saturday evening.
As Blake jumped down from the wall he fell heavily and broke his wrist.
Bourke says that he then drove Blake to new accommodation that he had rented a few days earlier at Highlever Road in north Kensington.
Bourke  found a doctor who came and put Blake's wrist in plaster.
During the next few weeks Bourke and Blake moved to several different apartments in London owned by friends who Bourke claimed were members of CND and named as Michael Reynolds and Pat Porter.
However, on 4 October 1987, Barrie Penrose, a very experienced journalist with the Sunday Times, identified these two as Michael Randle and Pat Pottle, members of the left-wing radical group, the Committee of 100, not CND, and in February 1962 both were sent to prison for 18 months for offences under the Official Secrets Act.
Penrose also claimed that most of the money needed for Blake's escape had not (as Bourke had claimed) come from Blake's mother.
The same article also claimed that the late Tom Driberg, who worked at various times for both MI5 and the KGB, was also involved in getting Blake out of prison and back to Russia.
This is much more credible than Bourke's story and suggests that in reality Bourke was no more than a go-between because he had been in prison with Blake.
Most of the final parts of this story cannot be independently verified but events appear to have run as follows.
In late November 1966 Bourke and his friends bought a second-hand Dormobile camper and converted it so that there was a hidden compartment under the bed where Blake was to lie concealed.
On 17 December ‘Reynolds’ and his wife ‘Anne’, with Blake safely hidden away, left Britain on the Dover ferry to Ostend, drove across Belgium to West Germany and thence to a border crossing-point with East Germany where they arrived on 19 December.
Here Blake left them, identified himself to the surprised border guards and a few days later was flown to  Mosow for a triumphant reunion with the KGB.
Travelling on a false passport made out in the name of James Richardson, Bourke travelled by train from London to Paris (apparently without encountering any problems with the police who were searching for him), and thence by air to Berlin where he crossed into the eastern sector and shortly afterwards was flown to Moscow to be reunited with Blake.
Bourke did not enjoy his time in Russia and on 23 October 1968 returned to his native Ireland.
The British government attempted to extradite Bourke for his part in helping Blake escape but after a long legal wrangle this was rejected by the Irish courts.
Thereafter, Bourke enjoyed the notoriety of his escapades and even wrote a book about them.
On 26 January 1982, at the age of 49, Bourke collapsed in the street and died.
Blake, now aged 67, has been well looked after by the KGB and lives in considerable comfort with his second wife Ida and their son Mischa.
The more one studies the facts of Blake's escape the more questions remain unanswered.
Mountbatten's report makes it plain that MI5 and MI6 believed that the KGB would attempt to keep in contact with Blake.
A large section of the report is devoted to explaining how Blake's mail, visits and his Arabic  correspondence course were all carefully vetted by MI5 in case they contained coded messages from the Russians.
If the security services were so concerned about this then it clearly suggests that they had good reason to believe that Blake had not been forgotten by the Russians.
What the report does not mention is whether MI6 received any overtures from the KGB to exchange Blake, nor does it consider the possibility that the KGB might want to free an agent who served it so well.
But evidently the idea that Blake might escape from prison with the help of the KGB was very much in the minds of MI5 and MI6.
It is, therefore, surprising that all the reports that plans were afoot to free Blake were so quickly denigrated by the police and MI5.
Even more puzzling is why, throughout the five and a half years Blake was in Wormwood Scrubs, no action was taken to move him to a more secure establishment.
The explanations in the official report are so naive that they cannot be taken seriously.
What is particularly interesting is that the report implies that it was MI5 who endlessly delayed any decision rather than the prison authorities.
It seems as if MI5 wanted Blake to remain in London.
All this suggests that Blake's escape was the result of a deal between MI6 and the KGB.
MI6 was very shocked at the severity of Blake's 42-year sentence.
They saw it as a betrayal of their promise that by making a full confession Blake would be more leniently treated and felt that such a heavy sentence would deter any future traitors from confessing.
There was also another reason.
The KGB wanted Blake safely home in Moscow.
If the KGB released those agents Blake had betrayed then in return MI6 and MI5 would unofficially assist in aiding Blake's escape.
Lonsdale was allowed to remain with Blake despite all the assurances to the contrary given to the Home Secretary.
Special Branch would look the other way.
Reports of escape plans were denigrated by MI5.
What form other help took will never be known but there was certainly no need for two-way radios or car jacks.
In December 1987 Kim Philby, the Russian agent who defected to Russia in 1963, agreed to be interviewed by the journalist and author Phillip Knightley at his flat in Moscow.
Knightley asked Philby how Blake escaped from Wormwood Scrubs.
Philby refused to give any details claiming it involved ‘operational matters’.
When Knightley further asked if Blake was helped by the KGB, IRA, or activists in the Committee of 100, Philby interrupted to suggest that SIS (MI6) may have been involved.
Obviously, one cannot accept anything that Philby says since he would have a vested interest in causing mischief amongst the British security services, but it is interesting that he did volunteer the suggestion that MI6 was involved.
If one accepts the idea that there was a deal between MI6 and the KGB then at the end of the day everyone was satisfied.
Blake was back in Moscow where he could do no more harm.
Presumably the KGB kept its side of the bargain and freed the agents he had betrayed.
The KGB owed MI6 a favour which might come in handy one day.
Deals of this nature are not uncommon  because, for example, the CIA and KGB give each other the right to approve the appointment of their station heads and can use their veto if the opposition proposes someone unacceptable.
The draconian 42-year sentence had been negated.
A sort of honour had been restored.
But disasters like Blake and the Berlin tunnel do immense damage to the morale of intelligence agencies.
Inevitably doubts begin.
If that was false what else was?
And if he was a traitor who else was and still is?
Like a chain reaction, such suspicions quickly breed upon themselves and in the convoluted world of intelligence find ready ears because there is always someone willing to denigrate another person's opinions.
One of the most fascinating aspects of Spycatcher is how Wright describes the enormous amount of time wasted on petty departmental quarrels and jealousies with each person guarding his little private empire.
Those who work in intelligence live in a very bizarre world totally removed from normality and very often morality too.
Most of what they do and others do to them is illegal, deceitful and untruthful.
The intelligence game is a mixture of doubt, hope, elation, disappointment and despair.
There are a hundred different ways of evaluating every piece of intelligence gathered so it is not hard to come to the wrong conclusions.
Working in the secret world of espionage places enormous mental strains on individuals, often leading to delusions of grandeur, paranoia, and personal obsessions, over specific objectives that are either non-existent or unattainable.
This leads to senior officers and their departments becoming increasingly secretive about their work and refusing to discuss it with others who might offer a better sense of judgement.
In turn, this creates even more secret cabals which go off on their own and carry out unauthorised operations, firmly believing that their plan is the only way to make progress.
One of the most frightening aspects of all intelligence agencies is the manner in which they create a totally false brand of patriotism in order to further a particular cause on the spurious grounds that only they understand what needs to be done and should not be asked to account or explain for any of their actions which must remain secret for all time.
It is often said that anyone who works in intelligence for more than ten years becomes slightly crazy.
Nowhere is this paranoia more evident than over the question of defectors.
Every intelligence agency believes that their defector is the best.
And equally every defector wants to be the best.
In truth defectors are far more trouble than they are worth.
Of course some are useful in identifying spies who would have otherwise gone on undetected but often this is not all it seems, as the Russians may have decided to expose one or two spies who have served their purpose in order to protect a more important one still at work.
Nor is the exposure of a hitherto unknown spy by a defector well received because it shows that the counter-intelligence section responsible has not done its job  properly and gives those who are controlling the defector the opportunity to boast about their success.
It also throws up endless suspicions about anyone who was friendly with the spy and about those in charge who recommended his promotion.
The exposure of long-term spies like Blake, Vassall and Prime had a terrible effect on morale amongst staff in MI5 and MI6, who were made to look like fools.
The Royal Canadian Mounted Police were equally upset by Igor Gouzenko's revelations that a large Russian spy ring existed right under their noses about which they knew nothing.
Governments have an ambivalent attitude towards defectors because although they recognise their information is of value, even though it may prove highly embarrassing, they dislike having to deal with traitors.
But the main problem with defectors is that they quickly run out of crown jewels and then inevitably resort to inventing what they think their new-found paymasters want to hear in order to extend their usefulness and avoid being discarded to end their days washing dishes in a Hungarian restaurant in downtown Washington.
One of the earliest defectors to the West was the Russian Igor Gouzenko who with considerable difficulty sought asylum with the Canadian authorities in September 1945, bringing with him a vast amount of information about Russian espionage activities in North America.
It has been said that Gouzenko's defection was the start of the Cold War in that it convinced people that Russia was not benign and friendly but busily spying on its wartime allies by any means at its disposal.
Gouzenko's defection alerted the West to these dangers and caused certain countries, particularly Canada, to tighten up their own security and counter-intelligence procedures.
As the direct result of Gouzenko's information 21 people were charged with various offences of whom 11 were convicted, two had charges withdrawn, and eight were acquitted.
Unfortunately his value to the West went to Gouzenko's head and he quickly became paranoid, demanding endless attention and claiming to have saved Canada and indeed the West from disaster.
He started living lavishly and tried to extort more and more money from the government who were paying him a tax-free pension of $1,050 a month.
Eventually Gouzenko ran up debts of $153,000 which were partly settled by the sale of his book and film rights.
He also engaged in endless litigation against the media which he considered was misrepresenting him.
By April 1954 Gouzenko had become a ‘problem child partly because of his insatiable desire far publicity and remuneration from papers and partly because he has been ready to exploit present hysteria among the new administration in the United States’.
Gouzenko's involvement in the allegations against Sir Roger Hollis was the result of statements he made during the lengthy debriefing following his defection when he claimed there were two Russian spies both with the codename Elli.
The first was quickly identified as a Kay Willsher.
But all  Gouzenko could say about the other Elli was that he was in ‘department five of Military intelligence’ and had been told this by a colleague called Lubimov, or possibly Liubimov, who had worked with him in the GRU code room in Moscow.
Over the years Gouzenko's story about the second Elli varied considerably.
One theory advanced was that Gouzenko had misunderstood his colleague and the other Elli was really an acronym for Guy Liddell who had run MI5's ‘B’ Division in World War II and some people believed had also been a spy for the GRU.
The main problem was that everyone seemed to assume that Gouzenko was an expert on every facet of Russian intelligence operations.
In truth Gouzenko's knowledge was extremely limited but no one appreciated that until Gouzenko had become part of the folklore of intelligence mythology.
Gouzenko had obvious reasons for perpetuating this myth and was always astute enough to embroider his story with whatever facts the listener wanted to hear, eventually becoming so vain that even he did not know what was truth or fiction.
Towards the end of his life Gouzenko went blind but the news was kept so secret that in 173 MI5 sent an agent to show him some photographs in the hope that he could recognise Hollis.
Another pair of defectors who caused endless headaches were the Petrovs who changed sides amidst bizarre publicity in Australia in 1954.
Although the Petrovs did not bring quite as many gifts as Gouzenko they were very useful in showing the extent of Russian penetration in Australia.
Mrs Petrov had been a senior Russian agent in Sweden and after her defection Swedish intelligence visited Australia and obtained much useful information from her about the networks she had established in their country..
But once the Petrovs had given up all their secrets they became difficult to please, claiming that their true value was not being appreciated.
Defection is, of course, a two-way trade but there is no reason to think that those who go from the West to the East are any more valuable or enjoy a rewarding lifestyle.
The original defections of Burgess and Maclean in 1951 naturally came as a great shock to the British establishment and were embarrassing because of the inept way MI5 handled the matter.
Although it was a great coup for the KGB, once the pair got to Moscow it is hard to see what they could have told the Russians that was not already known or made any great difference to East-West relations.
Life in Russia for Western defectors is a severe cultural shock, although for George Blake it was better than 30 years in a British prison.
At one time Prime considered defecting to Russia where he had been promised a KGB colonel's pension for life.
Even for a paedophile, life in Russia might be better than a cell in Long Lartin prison.
The Russians provide good accommodation (by their standards), a car, chauffeur, and access to special food stores where Western goods can be bought.
But once the defector has been squeezed dry of all useful information  he will end up sitting in a bare office in Dzerzhinsky Square, the KGB headquarters, with nothing to do but sift through material from his country.
Before long he will be so out of touch with technical matters that he has nothing new to contribute.
To the Russians he will always be a traitor and therefore suspect and under surveillance in case he tries to re-defect so he cannot leave Russia, his letters will be censored, and telephone calls bugged.
Donald Maclean's wife Melinda joined her husband in Moscow but soon found life bleak and dismal.
They parted and Melinda married Philby briefly but this did not work either and she eventually returned to America.
Guy Burgess had an even worse time.
His homosexuality made him an outcast, he had no job to do, very little money to live on, and ended his days in an alcoholic haze clinging desperately to his Old Etonian tie as the last link with his sordid past.
According to Phillip Knightley, Philby had done rather better and was enjoying the comfortable lifestyle of a retired KGB general with his wife Rufa, had built up a library of 12,000 books, saw Western newspapers regularly and was able to maintain contact with his family in the West.
But despite these comforts and the fact that he was fully accepted by the Russians as a patriot, it seems doubtful that he found life very rewarding.
The more senior the defector the greater the difficulties.
Oleg Gordievsky, who defected in 15 after several years as an in-place MI6 agent, was head of the KGB mission in London and as such enjoyed a very privileged lifestyle both abroad and in Russia.
Although the money MI6 has provided has given him access to Western luxuries, they cannot compensate for the fact that he will never see his motherland again.
Initially Gordievsky was treated as a very important person and briefed Mrs Thatcher before her first meeting with Gorbachev.He was also flown to Washington to see Reagan before his meeting with the Russian leader in Geneva.
However as Gorbachev managed to outsmart Reagan at every meeting it does not seem that Gordievsky's advice was particularly useful and Reagan would probably have got on better without him.
At best Gordievsky was tolerated by the authorities but still regarded as a traitor and untrustworthy.
Once his immediate knowledge had been used up his value, particularly after the Cyprus spy fiasco, was a fast-diminishing asset.
He is now a forgotten man who will while away his twilight years alone and insecure in an alien land, longing to return to Russia.The KGB has not been slow to remind its senior intelligence personnel of the isolated lifestyle that awaits them in the West should they be tempted to defect, pointing out the benefits of enjoying a relatively luxurious and secure existence in Russia.
It has also sent the West numerous doubtful and bogus defectors to muddy the waters.
One of the earliest was Oleg Penkovsky, a lieutenant-colonel in the GRU, who approached MI6 in 1960 with offers of information after having been twice rebuffed by the CIA.
A businessman called Greville Wynne was asked to act as a freelance MI6 contact and for the  next two years Penkovsky provided an incredible wealth of intimate detail about the Russians' innermost plans including the period of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis.
So perfect was his information that it enabled President Kennedy to call Khrushchev's bluff over the Cuban affair.
Despite giving Wynne this nonstop array of almost magical material it was not until late 1962, after the Cuban crisis was over, that both Penkovsky and Wynne were arrested by the KGB.
At a four-day show trial in May 1963 Wynne received an eight-year prison sentence but in April 1964 was conveniently exchanged for Konon Molody, or ‘Gordon Lonsdale’, the professional KGB spy and member of the Portland spy ring who had been in prison with George Blake.
Penkovsky was sentenced to death with enormous publicity about his espionage activities.
But other reports say he lived happily in retirement on a generous KGB pension.
In the years that followed endless analyses were made to try and determine whether Penkovsky had really been what he seemed.
One school of thought argued that he was too good to be true and his information was deliberately fed to the West by a faction within the Kremlin who opposed Khrushchev's plan to send missiles to Cuba.
Another bogus defector was code-named Fedora, possibly in reality Viktor Lessiovski, who used his work at the United Nations as a cover.
For 12 years from 1962 he successfully fed Edgar Hoover at the FBI a mixture of tantalising bits of fact and rubbish, including false information about Russia's space-rocket programme which led the Americans to think they were ahead of the Russians.
In order to enhance his credibility Fedora was allowed to expose John Vassall who by then had outlived his usefulness.
Fedora returned to Russia in 1974.
Another fake defector operating at the same time was Top Hat (whose real name remains unknown), who also planted a lot of false information on the West through the Americans but did in 1965 expose the spy Frank Bossard, who worked in the Missile Guidance Branch at the Air Ministry and had been selling secrets to the GRU for some while.
Bossard was sentenced to 21 years' imprisonment and once again it seems that the Russians were willing to sacrifice an agent, probably because Bossard had given them all the details he could of the American rocket-guidance systems, in order to enhance the credibility of Top Hat so that he could continue peddling disinformation.
In 1969 Josef Frolik of the Czechoslovakian intelligence service defected to the CIA with his wife and proceeded to give some startling information about numerous British Labour Party politicians and trade union officials who he claimed were working for the KGB.
Frolik certainly did expose some real spies including Nicholas Praeger, who had given the Czechs details of the RAF's electronic counter-measures equipment codenamed Blue Diver and Red Steer.
As a result Praeger was sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment in June 1971.
But the rest of Frolik's information was not particularly valuable  except in that it convinced the CIA that Britain's Labour Party was riddled with Communist sympathisers and thus untrustworthy, and helped lead to the suspicions against Prime Minister Harold Wilson.
It is now generally accepted that Frolik was a plant designed to waste MI5's resources while important spies remained undetected and to sow seeds of distrust between MI5 and the CIA.
In 1971 Oleg Lyalin, a KGB officer working at the Russian trade mission in London, defected to MI6 and gave enough information about Russian espionage activities to justify the prime minister, Edward Heath, expelling an unprecedented 105 Russian diplomats from Britain.
Lyalin also gave MI6 bizarre details of what he claimed were Russian plans to sabotage military establishments in Britain prior to the outbreak of World War III.
Lyalin said his personal task was to destroy the early-warning radar station at Fylingdales while other agents would flood the London underground system.
He also alleged that the KGB had recruited hundreds of British traitors who were only waiting for the signal from Moscow to begin destroying Britain's communication system and military establishments around the country.
Like most defectors, Lyalin was suffering from delusions of grandeur and it was hard to judge whether he had been reading too much of Pincher's material or books by Le Queux dating from the turn of the century.
But because he told MI5 and MI6 what they wanted to hear he was automatically believed and suitably rewarded.
It must sometimes puzzle the Russians how easy it is to plant such nonsense on British intelligence but what they do not appreciate is that if defectors did not invent such silly tales MI5 and MI6 would do so themselves anyway.
Two more recent bogus defectors were Oleg Bitov and Vitali Yurchenko.
Bitov went to Venice in 1983 for the KGB, using as cover his work for the Literary Gazette , and then approached the British asking for asylum.
He spent a year in Britain during which time he was commissioned to write numerous articles criticising Russia which earned him a considerable amount of money, some of which he spent on a very comfortable lifestyle.
Then quite suddenly he disappeared and turned up in Moscow at a news conference, claiming that he had been kidnapped by MI5 in Italy, drugged, and taken to Britain and held in captivity until he managed to escape.
Bitov said that he had been interrogated by Lieutenant-Colonel James Westoll at Flat 4, 34 Redcliffe Square, Earls Court, London, and 118 Sheen Court, Richmond.
Other members of MI5 that looked after him included Colonel George Hartland, Michael Wilmont, Peter Haylor, Captain Charles MacNott, and a clerk, Rose Prince.
He was given two telephone numbers to contact MI5, 01–222 5471 and 01–637 7319.
Not surprisingly, after Bitov's news conference both numbers were not answering.
Yurchenko contacted the American Embassy in Rome in August 1985, having already worked for them as an agent in place.
He was flown to  America and during his debriefing exposed two Russian spies, Edward Howard, who worked for the CIA, and Ronald Pelton, who had worked for the NSA.
Both had given away vast amounts of top-secret material without their employers being aware.
Howard evaded the FBI and managed to escape to Russia but Pelton was arrested and sentenced to life imprisonment in 1986.
Everything seemed to be going well and Yurchenko was about to provide more useful information when, on 2 November 1985, he eluded his CIA colleagues at a restaurant in Washington and made his way back to the Russian Embassy and thence to Moscow.
Once there he held a much-publicised news conference during which he ridiculed American intelligence and claimed he had been held in captivity by the CIA.
Nothing happened to either Bitov or Yurchenko on their return to Russia so obviously both were planted in the West to cause confusion and also to show their colleagues back home how badly they were treated by the Americans and British.
But without doubt the most contentious defector to reach the West was Anatoli Golitsin, who arrived at the office of the CIA's station chief in Helsinki in Finland in December 1911 and asked for asylum for himself, his wife and daughter.
From the moment he arrived Golitsin split the Western intelligence fraternity into two camps.
At first he exposed a number of Russian agents and thus established his credentials.
But then he embarked on his main thesis, which was that the entire Western intelligence system in Britain, France, Germany and America had been deeply penetrated by the KGB and systematically manipulated with clever disinformation put out by Moscow.
According to Golitsin everything the West believed about Russia was wrong and they needed to start all over again with his help and interpretation of the truth.
It was a grandiose theme so radical and ridiculous that it naturally appealed to many intelligence officers living in their secret world of fantasies who saw it as a convenient excuse for all their previous problems and disasters.
Others rejected it as nonsense.
One of those who became a Golitsin addict was James Angleton, head of counter-intelligence operations at the CIA, whose conversion unfortunately spread across the Atlantic to some members of MI5, including Peter Wright, with disastrous results as a hunt began for this highly placed mole that Golitsin was so sure existed.
By carefully selecting pieces of so-called evidence, in reality negative evidence, these Golitsin disciples were able to construct cases against all manner of people including, of course, Sir Roger Hollis.
As with other defectors, the glory went to Golitsin's head and he was soon proposing that he be allowed to establish a world-wide intelligence research organisation with unlimited funds so that he could play out his fantasies against the KGB.
Whether Golitsin was a KGB plant or simply a fraud is irrelevant.
Either way he successfully wrecked the morale of Western intelligence by encouraging ludicrous molehunts and sowing seeds of discontent  and suspicion that remain to this day.
Everything Golitsin claimed could be proved or disproved according to which set of arguments one wishes to accept.
It has even been suggested that some of Golitsin's claims were based on CIA files that Angleton had allowed him to inspect.
If this is true then it would be the supreme irony that the CIA were being fed with their own information.
But in the crazy world of intelligence that would not be out of place.
If defectors stayed at home the intelligence world would be much better off as a result.
Perhaps there ought to be an intelligence extradition agreement that all defectors are immediately put on the first aircraft back home.
The stories of Blake and the various defectors show how easily the intelligence fraternity fools itself.
Living in such a cloistered world such operations are never looked at objectively but simply as a means of gaining personal kudos for one small group within an agency.
Time and again intelligence organisations chase after these grandiose projects only to find themselves lost in the wasteland of truth created by their own stupidity.
= HENRY THE SECOND
One of the greatest dilemmas facing intelligence agencies in the West is the Henry II syndrome.
This occurs when a politician, perhaps so senior that he is notionally responsible for the agency itself, makes it known that he would be very pleased if some particularly sensitive and hazardous intelligence coup could be attained, usually in order to enhance domestic political popularity.
Such wishes are carefully expressed in a manner that neither leaves a permanent record for posterity nor gives the impression that illegality was ever suggested.
For many years the East had no such problems.
The KGB and GRU were so powerful that there was no need for them to behave in such an opaque manner.
If the head of the KGB wanted something done then he simply demanded action.
If an operation went wrong and resulted in a scandal because one of their agents had been caught in the act there was no one in Russia who would criticise.
Not for them the worries of an investigative Panorama or Insight team of reporters.
No question of civil rights or legal experts poking amongst the debris of the fiasco.
‘Who will rid me of this turbulent priest?’ asked Henry II.
His knights took him at his word.
The problem for any intelligence agency, East or West, is whether to take a politician at his word when he is publicly declaring a desire for greater friendship and understanding with the very same people against whom the covert operation is intended.
Politicians have to be all things to all people.
On the home front they need to seek domestic popularity as election time comes round and talk the way the nation expects to hear them.
Abroad they must be seen as great statesmen anxious to build peacemaking bridges between East and West.
Both President Reagan and Mrs Thatcher came to power on a platform of military rhetoric with Reagan calling Russia an evil empire and Mrs Thatcher  earning herself the title of the Iron Lady.
Yet during their tenure of office both have had to deal with a Russia now run by an apparently liberally minded head of government who has come to the conference table willing to reduce arms at a rate that the West sometimes finds embarrassing.
Reagan and Mrs Thatcher claim that their tough stances have forced the Russians into this compromising attitude.
But others would claim with equal sincerity that Mr Gorbachev is a pragmatic leader who is giving the reconstruction of the Russian economy a greater degree of priority than have his predecessors.
For the intelligence agencies a dilemma emerges.
Is the Cold War still on, despite the sudden benevolent behaviour of the superpowers?
Will the CIA and MI6 suspend operations against the East?
Are the KGB and GRU likely to emulate Gorbachev's friendly approach?
It is not a new problem.
During a naval review off Portsmouth in October 1955, British naval intelligence had their first sight of the new, post-war Russian Navy when the heavy cruiser Sverdlov arrived to take part.
Considering that Russia had not engaged in naval warfare for some 50 years and that its industrial economy had been almost totally destroyed during the war, it came as a considerable shock to discover that it was capable of building such a strikingly graceful, and powerful, class of warship.
The Sverdlov-class of cruiser, of which 22 were to be built, was an extremely versatile type of warship.
Its loaded displacement was 19,200 tons, with a length of nearly 700 feet.
Each was equipped with twelve six-inch guns, in four triple turrets, twelve 3.9 inch guns in twin mountings, and over 30 37-mm anti-aircraft guns.
There were also ten 21-inch torpedo tubes, and it possessed the ability to lay up to 240 mines.
The vessels were remarkably fast, and on sea trials had reached a speed of over 34 knots.
The crew numbered 1,050, and the ships' operating range was more than 5,000 miles.
Clearly, the Sverdlov posed a new and totally unexpected threat to the sea defences of Europe.
Naval intelligence, with the help of MI6, immediately mounted a major operation against the Sverdlov and sent frogmen to inspect her hull in order to try to find out as much as possible about her underwater design, the shape of her propellers and any sonar equipment.
Later, MI6 arranged that a wartime midget submarine, known as an X-Craft, would attempt to penetrate the Russian naval base at Leningrad.
These vessels were fitted with a ‘wet chamber’ through which a diver could leave the submarine and, it was hoped, make an underwater inspection of the Russian ships in the harbour.
But the operation was not a success, because security at the naval base was far too good and, rather than risk being caught in the act, the plan was dropped.
By 1956, East-West tensions had reached breaking point.
Both sides were spying on each other quite openly in the course of which many aggressive situations had occurred with loss of spy aircraft and their crews.
The new British prime minister, Sir Anthony Eden, who had finally managed to take  over the reins of power from Churchill only in 1955, was determined to try to moderate the hostility between Britain and her former wartime ally after the death of Joseph Stalin in 1953.
Accordingly, in 1956, Eden invited the Russian leaders — Communist Party Secretary Nikita Khrushchev and Prime Minister Marshal Nikolai Bulganin — to make a goodwill visit to Britain.
The invitation was accepted and, on 18 April 1956, the two Russian leaders arrived at Portsmouth in the cruiser Ordzhonikidze (sister ship of the Sverdlov ), accompanied by the destroyer Smotryashcy .
Both vessels moored alongside the main jetty in the Royal Navy dockyard, and Eden was there to greet his guests on what he hoped would be an historic visit.
Having been Foreign Secretary for so long, Eden was well aware of the likely activities MI5 and MI6 would deploy against their Russian visitors.
He therefore issued a written directive to both MI5 and MI6, and the three armed services, banning any intelligence operations against the Russians.
It is hard to know now whether Eden was really being serious, or merely protecting himself for posterity.
Certainly the intelligence services did not take him seriously.
For a start Claridges Hotel, in London's Mayfair, where the Russians would be staying, was fully bugged by MI5 on a permanent basis (because so many ‘interesting’ foreign guests stayed there) and it was certainly not going to miss the opportunity of eavesdropping on the two leaders.
In fact MI5 was wasting its time because Khrushchev and Bulganin were well aware of this and spent much of the time in their suite holding nonsensical conversations that appeared to include tantalising references to important matters but were in reality pure rubbish.
Doubtless MI5 translators wasted hours pondering over these supposed gems of intelligence.
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Rear Admiral John Inglis, was particularly anxious to know more about the Ordzhonikidze 's propeller design since the ship was able to travel much faster than British naval experts had calculated.
The Naval Intelligence Division (NID) contacted Nicholas Elliott, who was then head of MI6's special naval section (known as the Merchant Navy section), with offices in London's Vauxhall Bridge Road.
Elliott was a long-serving and extremely experienced MI6 officer.
Before the war he had been stationed in Holland, during the war he had served with MI6 in Turkey and, in mid-1944, had been appointed head of MI6's operations in Berne, in Switzerland.
After the war, Elliott had been responsible for the interrogation of the Russian spy Kim Philby before he defected.
Elliott agreed to mount the operation and, as is often the custom with intelligence agencies when engaged in hazardous operations, decided to use a freelance agent so that, if anything went wrong, MI6 could distance itself from the affair and deny any knowledge of it.
To make this very difficult underwater inspection, MI6 approached one of the Royal Navy's most  experienced wartime frogmen — Commander Lionel ‘Buster’ Crabb GM OBE RNVR.
Crabb had served with distinction as an expert in the newly developed art of underwater warfare in the RNVR.
In post-war years, Crabb had taken part in the salvage operation following the loss of the submarines HMS Affray and HMS Truculent .
He had retired from the Royal Navy in April 1955 at the age of 46, but had maintained informal contacts with the intelligence fraternity.
However, despite his undoubted experience, Crabb's health was not good, and he had become a heavy smoker and drinker.
Nevertheless, when approached by M16 to carry out an underwater inspection of the Ordzhonikidze , he agreed without hesitation.
During the planning stages of this operation MI6 approached MI5 for some peripheral help, and a meeting was arranged between John Henry, MI6's Technical Officer, and the Deputy Director of MI5, Roger (later Sir Roger) Hollis.
MI5 agreed to give what help was necessary so it is fairly obvious that none of the security services took Eden's directive seriously.
On 17 April 1956 Crabb travelled by train to Portsmouth with his fiancee, Mrs Patricia Rose.
Mrs Rose left him at the station and returned alone to London.
Evidently, during the journey, Crabb told Mrs Rose something about his mission and appeared to have some misgivings about the whole affair.
At Portsmouth, Crabb was met by a local MI6 officer, using the cover name ‘Bernard Smith’, and together they booked in at the Sallyport Hotel where ‘Smith’ gave his address as ‘c/o Foreign Office, London’.
Crabb used his real name.
Once in the hotel, Crabb and ‘Smith’ were joined by another MI6 officer, Edward Davies.
Crabb then made his way to HMS Vernon , the Royal Navy's diving establishment, where, together with NID officers, he put together all his equipment and tested it.
Unlike civilian frogmen, who use compressed air, Crabb was using the naval closed-circuit oxygen diving equipment which leaves no trail of tell-tale bubbles to disclose a diver's presence.
Crabb was also going to wear a black rubber one-piece diving suit made by the Avon Rubber Company.
The next day, 18 April, saw the arrival of the two Russian ships and their distinguished guests and, from a convenient vantage point, Crabb, ‘Smith’ and Davies watched the official ceremony.
The following morning, 19 April, at about 7.30 a.m., Crabb and ‘Smith’ made their way to the dockyard where Crabb changed into his diving gear and, with the aid of some officers from NID, entered the water near the south-west jetty.
After a few minutes Crabb returned to the jetty for some extra weights to overcome his buoyancy and, having fitted these to his satisfaction, set off for the Russian cruiser.
Crabb was never seen alive again.
When he failed to return, NID made a search of the dockyard area in case he had been forced to come ashore else-where.
When this proved negative it seemed obvious that Crabb had drowned.
‘Smith’ returned to the Sallyport Hotel, paid both their bills, and collected Crabb's belongings.
Davies, the other MI6 officer, had, unfortunately, suffered a mild heart attack that morning, but he insisted on giving ‘Smith’ a hand to clear up any traces of Crabb's visit.
MI5 was then advised that Crabb had presumably drowned and was asked to help provide a suitable cover story.
However, before any of this could happen, Rear-Admiral Kotov, from the Ordzhonikidze , went to see Rear-Admiral Philip Burnett, Chief of Staff of the Portsmouth naval base, complaining that his sailors had seen a frogman near his ships that morning, and demanding an explanation.
As Burnett had been told nothing about the MI6 operation, he simply rejected Kotov's complaint as a typical piece of Russian propaganda.
However, later that evening, the First Lord of the Admiralty, James Thomas, was entertaining some Russian officials including the captain of the Ordzhonikidze , who casually asked Thomas what the frogman had been doing near his ship that morning.
Thomas, who also knew nothing about the affair, was highly embarrassed and could only say that he would make enquiries.
It later transpired that the Russians knew perfectly well what had happened, but were obviously enjoying the confusion their seemingly naive questions were provoking.
Matters were further complicated when MI5 decided to take it in hand.
Through Special Branch it arranged for Inspector Lamport, of the Portsmouth CID, to visit the Sallyport Hotel two days later, on 21 April, where, in front of the astonished manager, Edward Richman, Lamport tore out from the hotel register the pages bearing the signatures of Crabb and ‘Smith’, and threatened Richman with prosecution under the Official Secrets Act if he told anybody anything about the affair.
At this point the whole incident could, perhaps, have been kept from public view, but plainly the Russians had no intention of abiding by normal protocol and were determined to alert the British press.
This Nikita Krushchev did at his press conference at Central Hall on 27 April when, in his usual ebullient style, he started making references to ‘underwater rocks’ hazarding the goodwill of his visit.
It didn't take journalists long to catch the drift of Krushchev's remarks and reports started to circulate that a British frogman had tried to spy on the Russian ships.
Two days later, on 29 April, in a vain attempt to deflect speculation, MI5, MI6 and NID persuaded the Admiralty to issue a seemingly casual press statement to the effect that Commander Crabb was missing, presumed dead, ‘having failed to return from a test dive in connection with trials of certain underwater apparatus in Stokes Bay’.
Not only was this untrue but it was a very foolish piece of disinformation, since Stokes Bay is a good three miles away from where Crabb was last seen alive.
Far from stemming speculation, it did quite the reverse, and the press soon descended on the Sallyport Hotel to inspect the hotel register with its missing pages.
The Russians watched all this with much amusement, and then sent an official protest note (which the Foreign Office managed to lose for five days) demanding an explanation.
Very belatedly the Foreign Secretary was forced to admit that the frogman seen by the Russians had been Crabb and, as a result, on 1O May the subject was aired in parliament.
Eden took refuge behind the usual claim that it would not be in the national interest to disclose how Crabb had drowned.
What he really meant was that it was not in his interest or that of the intelligence services involved.
National interest did not come into it at all.
The opposition leader Hugh Gaitskell pressed the point and eventually, on 14 May, Eden was forced to admit that an underwater spying operation had been carried out against the Russian ships by Crabb but that it had been done without official approval.
MI6's mistake was not to have a convincing cover story ready as soon as Crabb failed to return.
The sensible thing would have been to say that Crabb had been diving in the area to test out equipment and had got into difficulties, surfaced near the Russian ships and then drowned.
This would have preempted any Russian protest.
But the fear that nagged MI6's mind was that the Russians had captured Crabb alive and might produce him to tell the full story.
Having obliged Eden to make an embarrassing statement in parliament the Russians lost interest in the affair.
In fact they had known all about Crabb's venture before they arrived at Portsmouth and their frogmen were waiting for him as he approached the cruiser.
Exactly what happened is not known for certain, but the most likely scenario is that Crabb was intercepted by Russian frogmen and taken on board the Ordzhonikidze through a ‘wet chamber’.
Many years later Harry Houghton, one of the members of the Portland spy ring sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment in 1961, claimed that his Russian controller (who was, incidentally, somehow tipped off about the impending arrest of the spy ring and never caught), told him during a meeting at the Crown Inn, at Punknoll in Dorset (not far from the underwater research laboratory where Houghton worked), that the Russians had been warned of Crabb's plan.
According to Houghton's controller, Crabb had been brought on board the cruiser in a state of collapse from oxygen poisoning and later died in the sick-bay.
A similar tale was also told by the Russian defector Anatoli Golitsin who arrived in the West in late 1961.
One of his main claims was that MI5 had been fully penetrated by Russian intelligence which led to the allegations that Roger Hollis was himself a Russian mole.
Hollis had been present during the planning of the Crabb operation.
On 15 May Patricia Rose left London to escape the attention of reporters and went to stay with her brother and sister-in-law at Biot, in France.
While there, it is alleged, a neighbour called Kessler told her that a photograph of her and Crabb had appeared in an East German newspaper.
When shown a copy of this Mrs Rose is said to have identified the photograph as being one of  her, Crabb and her sister-in-law, of which only three copies existed.
Two of these Mrs Rose could trace but the third had been with Crabb when they said goodbye and was not amongst his personal possessions returned to Crabb's mother by ‘Smith’.
About two weeks later, while still at Biot, Mrs Rose began receiving strange messages by telephone purporting to come from Crabb which were according to Mrs Rose supposed to have contained personal phrases and nicknames which only the two of them knew.
Mrs Rose was clearly given to understand that Crabb was still alive.
Since Mrs Rose is dead these stories cannot be verified.
Then, just over a year later, the story was back in the headlines again.
On 9 June 1957 a fisherman found a body, with the head and hands missing, clad in a black rubber suit, floating off Pilsey Island at the mouth of Chichester Harbour.
Crabb's ex-wife saw the body at Bognor mortuary but was unable to confirm that it was that of her husband.
Another naval diver and a close friend of Crabb who knew him well, Sidney James Knowles BEM, also saw the body and was quite definite that it was not Crabb.
Crabb had had hammer toes and this body did not.
Knowles claimed that he was interviewed by two security officers who asked him to change his story on ‘patriotic grounds’ and say the body was Crabb's.
Knowles alleged that one of the officials told him: ‘I know it's not Crabb's body, but you must swear to me if you're asked in court if it's the body, you're to say it is — for Queen and country.’
Knowles reluctantly agreed and on 26 June 1957 the Chichester coroner, Mr Bridgman, recorded an open verdict as to the cause of death, but said he was quite satisfied the body was that of Crabb.
On 5 July the body, whether it was Crabb's or not, was finally laid to rest in Portsmouth cemetery.
Although the body may have been buried, the story was not.
The verdict satisfied no one, particularly as it was obvious that the authorities were keen to prove the body was Crabb's when, plainly, the evidence was not there.
The body was badly decomposed and had been in the water for a long time.
Tidal experts agreed that the body could not have been off Pilsey Island for more than 24 hours.
Furthermore, a body lost in Portsmouth Harbour a year previously would have washed out to sea long ago and, in any case, would be unlikely to have turned up in Chichester Harbour.
However, another fisherman later claimed that he had dredged up the same body a few months earlier and, in the process of trying to recover it, the head had come off in his hands.
The fisherman was so shocked that he let the body slip back into the water and, though he reported it to the police, no action was taken by them.
It is impossible to know if this story is true since the police have no record of the event.
Who put the corpse into the water in Chichester Harbour so that it could be so conveniently found?
Had the Russians dumped Crabb's body into the sea off the mouth of the harbour as they steamed past, suitably weighted with  ropes that would rot in due course?
Or did British intelligence produce an unidentifiable corpse simply to bring the whole affair to an end?
On 1 June 1981, Mrs Rose received a letter which read:
For what it's worth, I was a schoolboy visiting the [Russian]cruiser that afternoon after school, and was on the main deck looking over the side next to the quay, when I saw a diver (with full deep-diving headgear) being pulled beneath the surface by two frogmen.
At the same time a klaxon sounded and Russian sailors cleared the deck.
The problem with this letter, apart from the fact that the only copy available is unsigned, is that it does not agree with the timescale of events.
We know that Crabb entered the water before 8 a.m.
The writer talks about being on board the cruiser after school in the afternoon or, say, around 4 p.m.
Obviously, Crabb would have been caught, and was probably dead, by 10 a.m.
Therefore the letter is either a fake, or the diver the writer saw was a Russian still inspecting the ship for other British frogmen.
Either way it is irrelevant.
The legend that Crabb was taken back to Russia alive continued to circulate for several years and indeed still does, helped by a number of books claiming to be based on secret information from the East.
One of the tales was that Crabb had agreed to join the Russian Navy where he became Lieutenant Korablov, and a very poor-quality photograph was even produced supposedly showing Crabb in Russian naval uniform.
Many interviews were quoted with contacts in East Europe, all of whom claimed to have proof that Crabb was still alive, but not a shred of evidence was ever produced to support any of these bizarre allegations.
At best it was either a publicity stunt designed help sell third-rate books or a neat piece of disinformation put out by the Russians in order to sow confusion amongst the West's intelligence agencies.
The real truth about Crabb will never be known, but it does seem that he was expected by the Russians, was caught and either died of a heart attack or was murdered, and his body dumped over the side as the ships left Portsmouth.
The body later found in Chichester Harbour was almost certainly not that of Crabb.
Whatever the facts may be the Crabb affair, even after more than 30 years, remains intensely embarrassing and many important documents relating to the incident are still withheld from public scrutiny.
It was one of those rare occasions when a covert operation could be examined in the full glare of publicity and it showed what a foolhardy idea it was from the start for, even if Crabb had returned safely, it is unlikely he could have brought back enough information to have justified the risk in the first place.
It is an excellent example of the pointlessness of so much intelligence work, often conceived in  the looking-glass world of make-believe where no one seems to be in touch with the real world outside, or to even consider the consequences of their ludicrous ideas.
The most important point to come out of the Crabb affair was that it showed that the intelligence services were prepared to carry out operations contrary to the direct orders of the prime minister who was in charge of them.
In order to try to distance themselves from this operation they employed a freelance, just as they tap telephones illegally or burgle property by using freelances.
The Crabb incident is a salutary reminder that one should never believe anything a government says about an incident involving intelligence.
Nothing is impossible and the more unlikely the allegation the more likely it is to be true.
The outcome of the Crabb affair was equally bizarre.
Eden was so angry at having been made a fool of that the Director General of MI6, Sir John ‘Sinbad’ Sinclair, was obliged to retire prematurely and was replaced by the head of MI5, Sir Dick White.
Ironically, White's successor at MI5 was Roger Hollis, so if Hollis was a long-term Russian spy as has since been alleged (but never proved), then his command of MI5 came about because someone leaked details of a MI6 mission to the Russians that led to the downfall of the head of MI6.
Was that someone Hollis?
If you believe that Hollis was a Russian agent then the Crabb affair fits neatly into the jigsaw but, as so often happens in the intelligence world, the same set of facts can be tinkered and tailored with so as to fit any preconceived belief.
But the Crabb affair is of interest for another reason.
Had the Russians not decided to make the facts public the truth would still be hidden.
If some investigative journalist had claimed that Crabb died while making an unauthorised underwater inspection of the Russian cruiser he would have been ridiculed on the grounds that he had no proof.
If that journalist had attempted to inspect any files relating to Crabb's ‘accident’ he would either be told that no such files existed or, if they did, were classified in the interests of national security.
We can also see how the press were deliberately misled by the official statement put out by the Admiralty which was a pack of lies.
Even if Crabb's next-of-kin had been dissatisfied with the official explanation and had made such a fuss that the government was forced to hold some sort of inquiry the truth would still not have been told.
Some learned judge would have been appointed to head it and his only access to the facts would be to ask the Cabinet Secretary, the Admiralty, the Director General of MI5 and MI6 what they knew.
The Cabinet Secretary would have said that the prime minister had issued a specific directive that no intelligence operations were to be mounted against the Russians during their visit.
The Director General of MI5 could truthfully  say that he knew nothing.
And because the Crabb operation was unauthorised the Director General of MI6 could also honestly tell the inquiry that he too knew nothing about such a plan.
The Admiralty would probably say something to the effect that Crabb was testing highly secret equipment that could not be discussed in detail and had unfortunately drowned.
Anything Crabb's fiancée, Mrs Rose, might claim would be quietly denigrated by a smear campaign alleging she was hysterical, mentally disturbed, or anxious to make money out of the affair by selling her story to the press.
In the end a brief report would be published.
Most of it would be devoted to Crabb's bravery and service to his country during the war, the fact that he was an underwater expert and that he was always willing to test the latest equipment, some of which work was inevitably hazardous.
On this occasion Crabb was carrying out experiments in which the Admiralty had a peripheral interest, but it would not be in the national interest to detail them, and unfortunately he drowned and his body was swept out to sea.
The report would conclude that there was no evidence that the intelligence services were involved.
On any future occasion when the subject was raised the government of the day would always quote this report as the fountain of truth.
It is not hard to see why official inquiries concerning matters like spies or telephone tapping very rarely tell the truth.
From every point of view, therefore, the Crabb affair was a classic example of how not to carry out a dangerous covert operation.
The French handle such operations rather differently.
At 11.38 p.m. on the night of 10 July 1985, agents of the French General Directorate for External Security, DGSE, the equivalent of Britain's MI6 and America's CIA, blew up and sank the Greenpeace ship Rainbow Warrior in Auckland harbour in New Zealand with two limpet mines, killing a member of the crew, a Portuguese photographer called Fernando Pereira.
This was no unauthorised operation carried out by a bunch of freelance hotheads.
It was a carefully planned attack by France's secret service with the full backing of President Francois  Mitterand .
The reason for the attack was very simple.
France was a nuclear power and, more important, a proudly independent one.
For several years France had been carrying out nuclear weapons tests on the remote Pacific island of Moruroa in the Pacific.
During these years there had been routine protests in places like the United Nations, which France ignored, and around the island of Moruroa itself involving the Greenpeace organisation.
In 1981 and 1982 the group had visited the test site with their ship the Vega and on the last occasion had been attacked and arrested by the French Navy as they attempted to enter the 12-mile territorial limit.
Quite apart from the publicity such incidents provided, they also tied up a lot of ships and manpower.
By 1985 Greenpeace was better organised and French intelligence had learned that it was planning to send out to Moruroa its larger 42-ton Rainbow Warrior , together with the Vega , and then to launch a number of small boats in which its members would try to elude the French Navy and penetrate the test area.
The whole plan greatly alarmed the French for the small boats would be impossible to detect on radar and if any of the occupants were affected by radioactivity after a test they would automatically become worldwide martyrs.
The French Navy passed the problem to the DGSE who at first suggested that the simplest course of action was to tow the Rainbow Warrior out to the test area.
But this pleased neither the defence ministry nor the navy who pointed out that it would merely sail back again.
The DGSE then decided that the only other option was to destroy it.
The simplest method would have been for a French submarine to wait for the Rainbow Warrior somewhere on the high seas and sink it with a torpedo but that posed the problem of what to do with any survivors.
Even the DGSE might have baulked at letting them drown or shooting them in cold blood.
Funding an operation of this kind required the authorisation of the office of France's prime minister, Laurent Fabius, and he was certainly not going to give that without the president's approval.
 Mitterand was a proud man who agreed with Fabius and his defence chiefs that no boatload of lunatics, probably under Russia's influence, was going to stop France's nuclear programme.
‘Who will rid me of this troublesome boat?’ he asked.
DGSE had the answer.
 Mitterand was too clever a politician to put anything in writing but nevertheless his seal of approval was clearly on the operation.
To find out more about the Greenpeace operation the DGSE infiltrated a 34-year-old agent, Christine Cabon, into their New Zealand office.
Using the alias Frederique Bonlieu, Cabon wrote to Greenpeace claiming she shared their views, and when she arrived in Auckland on 3 April 1985 offered to work for the organisation without salary.
Although neither very efficient nor popular with the other staff, Cabon made herself useful and soon had the run of the office and was able to look at all the files, amongst which she found one relating to the proposed voyage of the Rainbow Warrior into the nuclear test area.
On 24 May Cabon told Greenpeace she had to leave and returned to Paris where she was able to report fully on its plans.
On 29 May 1985 Petty Officer Gerald Andries of the DGSE flew to London and bought a French-made Zodiac inflatable dinghy and outboard motor for £1,400 from the Barnet Marine  Center in North London, paying in cash.
This action was very strange because Andries not only attracted a lot of attention to himself by the manner of his purchase but also the dinghy had a serial number on it which made it instantly traceable.
One possibility is that  the DGSE somehow hoped that by buying the dinghy in London blame for the operation would be placed on MI6, although in this case it would have made more sense to buy one made in Britain.
Alternatively, the DGSE may have unofficially told MI6 what it planned to do in New Zealand.
The idea of destroying the Rainbow Warrior would have pleased both MI6 and the British government since they dislike organisations like CND and Greenpeace who hold very vocal anti-nuclear views, and already had their members listed on MI5 files and regularly tapped their telephones.
By the last week in June the DGSE had arrived in New Zealand — Major Alain Mafart and Captain Dominique Prieur, posing as honeymoon couple Alain and Sophie Turenge, using false Swiss passports, who arrived at Auckland airport on the Air New Zealand flight from London.
They had booked a Toyota camper van and told the hire company they intended spending the next three weeks touring New Zealand.
Three DGSE frogmen, Roland Verge, Gerald Andries and Jean-Michel Bartelo, had arrived off the northern New Zealand coast in the French yacht Ouvéa using false names and passports.
They pretended to be the crew of Dr Xavier Maniguet, who was playing the part of a rich playboy who had chartered the vessel from a French travel agency for a winter cruise in the Pacific.
The Ouvéa made its way south, eventually arriving at Whangarei on 28 June.
Exactly what happened between this date and 10 July is not known precisely and it is possible that in addition to the group of six already identified there were other DGSE agents involved.
The Ouvéa sailed from Whangarei on the morning of 9 July, 36 hours before the Rainbow Warrior was blown up, arriving in Norfolk Island 625 miles to the north on 13 July, thus providing Maniguet and his ‘crew’ with a seemingly perfect alibi.
In fact, after leaving Whangarei, the yacht turned south and made landfall under cover of darkness on 10 July somewhere north of Auckland where it was met by Mafart and Prieur.
They loaded the Zodiac dinghy, outboard motor, and the limpet mines into the camper and drove south, reaching Auckland around 7.30 p.m. where witnesses living at Stanley Point on the northern shore of Auckland Harbour saw two men take an inflatable dinghy out of a camper van and carry it down to the water's edge.
The two bombs were attached to the hull of the Rainbow Warrior , berthed at Marsden Wharf, at around 8.30 p.m. and at about 9.30 p.m. a man wearing a red woollen hat was seen abandoning a Zodiac dinghy near the Outboard Boating Club in Hobson's Bay and then climbing up the embankment to Tamaki Drive where he was picked up and driven off in a camper van.
Because there had been a recent spate of thefts from boats in the area the Club had formed its own teams of vigilantes who patrolled the moorings and by chance one of these noted down the camper's registration number.
The  identity of the person who abandoned the Zodiac dinghy and therefore presumably planted the bombs has never been discovered but from the descriptions it seems fairly certain it was Bartelo from the Ouvéa , while the man who helped him get the dinghy into the water was Mafart.
The following morning, after the attack, the police were told about the abandoned Zodiac dinghy and also given the number of the camper van.
They discovered it had been hired by a Swiss honeymoon couple and they put out an alert for them.
Quite unexpectedly, at 9.00 a.m. on 12 July, the couple turned up at Auckland airport and told the hire company's office there that they had to return early to Europe and were planning to catch the 11.30 a.m.
Air New Zealand flight to London.
Had Mafart and Prieur simply abandoned the camper and boarded the flight they would have left the country undetected because at the time the police believed they were still driving around the country.
Instead they asked the company for a refund on their hire agreement and when the airport office checked with the Auckland office they discovered the pair were wanted by the police.
The couple were taken to police headquarters for questioning where they admitted they had picked up a man on the night of 10 July by the harbour but did not know him and had only given him a lift into town.
The police soon traced the couple's movements and found they had made a number of telephone calls to Paris.
The French police said the number they had called did not exist but in fact it was a special number allocated to the DGSE.
Finally the New Zealand police established through Interpol that the two Swiss passports were forgeries and were able to arrest Mafart and Prieur.
The police were also told about the yacht Ouvéa and its four-man French crew and on 15 July officers flew to Norfolk Island to interrogate them, although Maniguet had left the island for Australia that morning.
The police questioned the three ‘crew’, who were far too well trained to give anything away, and although forensic samples were taken from the Ouvéa it was impossible to examine them on the spot.
At 8.00 p.m. on 16 July the trio were allowed to sail for the French island of New Caledonia.
They never arrived.
Somewhere en route the Ouvéa met up with the French nuclear submarine Rubis and after the trio of DGSE agents had boarded her the yacht was sunk.
Maniguet was questioned by the police on his arrival in Sydney but again they were frustrated by lack of evidence that would have allowed them to detain him.
Reluctantly Maniguet was allowed to leave for Paris.
For a while the French government maintained a stony silence about the affair, claiming it was beneath its dignity to comment on allegations that the DGSE had been involved.
But as the French press produced one embarrassing revelation after another, including leaks from the DGSE itself, it was decided that 65-year-old civil servant Bernard Tricot should carry out a rigorous investigation and that the French government would cooperate fully  with the New Zealand police.
Tricot had investigated intelligence  fiascoes before including the kidnapping by French intelligence agents in 1965 of Ben Barka, an Algerian left-winger, who was never seen again and was presumably murdered by them.
Tricot delivered a report of stunning mediocrity similar to those so often produced by pompous security commissions in Britain investigating spies, traitors, and telephone tapping.
In fact the report was so useless that it did more damage than had  Mitterand kept silent.
While the story rumbled on in France, the New Zealand police prepared to place Mafart and Prieur on trial facing a charge of murder.
But if the French government had been inefficient in Paris it had certainly been busy in New Zealand.
France made it clear to New Zealand that it would allow more imports of lamb and dairy products into France if New Zealand reduced the charge against the couple to manslaughter and then deported them.
Quite apart from blackmail the New Zealand police had no proof that either Mafart or Prieur had planted the bombs so when the two appeared in court in Auckland on 4 November 1985 the prosecution announced that they had accepted a plea of manslaughter.
Three weeks later they were sentenced to ten years' imprisonment.
This was plainly not part of the agreement and not only was the French government furious but it used the sentence as an excuse to generate public support for Mafart and Prieur on the grounds that they were being unfairly treated by the New Zealand government.
Suddenly all the political quarrels were forgotten and the French people decided that France's honour was at stake and the two agents were not terrorists but national heroes.
Ironically this change in public opinion came at a time when Arab terrorists were letting off bombs in Paris, which French people thought quite terrible.
It evidently did not occur to them that the people of Auckland felt the same.
Encouraged by this sudden surge of perverted patriotism, the French government blocked the import of New Zealand agricultural products into the Common Market, including its EEC daily import quota to Britain, over the next two years by a protracted series of legal wrangles.
Throughout this period both Britain and America remained strangely silent.
New Zealand was an old ally of Britain, a member of the Commonwealth, who had been attacked by terrorists using bombs.
Both Mrs Thatcher and President Reagan were constantly reminding people that the world must stick together to fight the threat from such attacks.
Yet not a word was said condemning France or defending New Zealand against France's blackmail at the EEC.
The reason was not hard to find.
Both Britain and America, being nuclear powers, supported France in its attack on the Rainbow Warrior , particularly as Greenpeace had been active around the shores of Britain drawing unwelcome attention to the discharge of radioactive waste from nuclear power-stations.
Furthermore the New Zealand prime minister, David Lange, was a Labour politician.
So while it was wrong for the IRA to let off bombs in  Northern Ireland it was quite all right for the DGSE to let them off in New Zealand.
The dispute was only resolved in July 1986 when Senor Perez de Cuellar, Secretary General of the United Nations, arranged a package deal whereby France paid the New Zealand government £4.5 million in addition to what it had privately paid to Pereira's family and the £5 million it also had to pay Greenpeace in October 1987.
In return Mafart and Prieur had their sentences commuted to three years which were to be served in exile at the French military base on the Pacific island of Hao.
By now the French government had become quite brazen about the whole affair and the new French prime minister, Jacques Chirac, publicly stated that France had good reason to be proud of what Mafart and Prieur had achieved, a view that was evidently shared by most people in France.
In December 1987 Mafart was allowed to return to France in defiance of the agreement because it was alleged he was ill, although the French government refused to allow a New Zealand doctor to examine him.
A few months later Prieur became pregnant and she too returned to France.
Mafart's illness cannot have been very serious because he was well enough to sit the entrance examination to France's elite School of War where he won a place in March 1988.
Like the Crabb affair, this fiasco teaches quite a few lessons.
First, the operation was pointless because the destruction of the ship did not affect Greenpeace's continued opposition to the tests.
Second, it was badly planned and not enough thought was given to how the team would make their escape from a remote island like New Zealand.
Third, it would have been better to use freelances whose connection with the DGSE could have been denied, whereas both Mafart and Prieur made telephone calls to DGSE numbers in France when first arrested.
And fourth, having been caught out it would have been wiser to brazen it out immediately, as do the Israelis, rather than go through the tedium of Tricot's inquiry.
Although the project was a disaster, costing France £10 million, and counter-productive in giving Greenpeace much-needed publicity about France's nuclear tests, it at least gave the DGSE some confidence that if in the future it accepted another Henry II-type command it would have the backing of its politicians.
But not every intelligence agency is as fortunate as was the DGSE.
In America all presidents are acutely afflicted by the Henry II syndrome because so much American foreign policy is controlled by their intelligence organisations.
As a result, many actions that presidents allow to happen are covert and frequently illegal, usually concealed under a cover of wanting to help another country defeat Communism.
Even President Jimmy Carter, who came to office in a house-cleansing operation after the shambles of Richard Nixon's resignation, indulged in a variety of covert operations around the  world, including the supply of weapons by the CIA from America and other sources to Afghan rebel forces fighting against the Russians.
By the time President Reagan came to office on 20 January 1981 he had plenty of reasons for wishing to emulate Henry II.
Carter's presidency had ended disastrously.
In November 1979 the Iranians had taken over the American Embassy in Teheran and held the staff hostage for 444 days, only releasing them 30 minutes after Carter had left office.
During the long drawn out hostage crisis the American people had watched impotently, wondering how it was that a nation with the supposed military capability to wipe Russia off the map at the push of a button could do nothing.
Then in the spring of 1980 came the disaster of the rescue mission, with agonising pictures of wrecked helicopters and charred bodies across the pages of every newspaper and on every television channel.
One of the first things Reagan did upon becoming president was to name Iran as an enemy of America and to ensure that no trade of any kind went on between the two countries, either directly or indirectly, imposing draconian penalties for anyone caught doing so.
On the face of it such legislation seemed unnecessary; after all, who in America would want to trade with a country like Iran?
Although Reagan's knowledge of foreign affairs was non-existent, to the point where if he was not prompted he often had no idea which country he was talking about, he needed little convincing by the American intelligence agencies that now was the time for America to start waging a secret war against its enemies.
To Reagan there were only three sorts of enemies: Communists, Libyans and Iranians.
This made things much simpler for his advisers because they knew exactly the sort of information Reagan wanted to hear.
Within three months of taking office he had authorised secret funding for moderate Christian Democrats and military officers in El Salvador.
By the end of l981 Reagan had authorised the covert supply of weapons and other military equipment through the CIA to help the Contras overthrow the Sandinista government of Nicaragua.
In theory this action was to stop arms shipments from the Sandinistas being sent to El Salvador to support the left wing rebels there.
In practice it was a straightforward piece of CIA terrorism designed to overthrow by force a legitimately elected government that America did not like.
The person in charge of coordinating these covert activities between the White House and the intelligence agencies was Colonel Oliver North of the US Marine Corps.
Those working around Reagan soon discovered that he was a very lazy president.
He could not be bothered to read anything longer than a single sheet of paper, and even that with great difficulty, and got so bored when any detail was explained to him that he often fell asleep.
Like any actor who has to play many different parts, all Reagan wanted were a few good lines written for him on cue cards that he could quote without having to tax his own  abilities.
Reagan was therefore a perfect example of an elderly Henry II.
He wanted things done but was neither interested in nor concerned with the way they were achieved.
Although the American Embassy hostage crisis in Iran had been settled, the situation in the Middle East grew steadily worse.
Aside from the stalemated Iran-Iraq war, Lebanon continued to tear itself apart in continuous internecine struggles.
On 6 June 1982 Israel invaded Lebanon in order to drive out Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO) terrorists from the southern part of the country, who they claimed had also attempted to murder the Israeli ambassador in London three days earlier.
In fact the ambassador had been attacked by members of the Abu Nidal faction, who had long severed connections with the PLO, but a small detail like that was not enough to deter the Israelis.
While the world criticised Israel, America made only its usual token gestures of condemnation because it was supporting the CIA-backed Phalangist leader Bashir Gemayel to the tune of more than $4 million.
Gemayel was also a good friend of Israel and the CIA was hoping to get him elected as president of Lebanon.
Gemayel had been in the pay of the CIA like King Hussein of Jordan who had been on the CIA's payroll for 20 years.
Gemayel became president of war-torn Lebanon on 23 August 1982, while the Israeli army were still occupying large parts of the country right up to the outskirts of Beirut.
On 14 September 1982 Gemayel planned to meet with a group of Mossad officers, but was killed when a bomb planted by Syrian intelligence exploded in the local Phalangist party offices where he was speaking.
Once again the American's plans for the Middle East were in disarray and then the Israelis allowed Phalangist units to enter the Palestinian refugee camps at Sabra and Shatilla and massacre everyone within reach.
Reagan responded by sending in 1,200 US Marines on a peace-keeping mission which, although it sounded all right and looked good on television, had no particular purpose.
On I8 April 1983 the American Embassy in Beirut was car-bombed and collapsed like a pack of cards, sixty-three employees, including a team of senior CIA agents holding a meeting at the time were killed.
By I7 October 1983 six marines had been killed by snipers but Reagan claimed that their presence in the Lebanon was ‘vitally important to the security of the United States and the Western world’.
On 23 October a truck containing 12,000 pounds of explosives was driven into the US Marine's barrack compound and detonated with the driver still at the wheel, killing 241 servicemen.
Both these attacks were attributed to Iranian terrorists.
A stunned nation watched the coffins brought home and wondered what had been achieved.
While all this was going on a number of Americans, including the head of CIA operations in Beirut, William Buckley, were kidnapped by Islamic Jihad and other terrorist organisations which had tenuous links with Iran.
Then on 14 June 1985 TWA Flight 847 was hijacked and forced to land at Beirut  where, before the world's television cameras, it was held for 17 days.
During this time an American sailor, Robert Stethem, was murdered but all the remaining passengers, including 39 Americans, were released unhurt.
By now public anger in America was mounting and there were demands for Reagan to turn his cosy rhetoric into action.
The problem was that although Iran was identified as the villain there was no way of selectively pinpointing any particular group or location that could be attacked without causing enormous innocent civilian casualties.
For Reagan it was a frustrating time.
The problems mounted whichever way he turned.
Yet despite being the most powerful man in the world, in command of some of the most deadly and sophisticated weaponry ever designed, there seemed to be nothing he could do.
Not only did he quite genuinely want to ease the distress of the hostages' relatives but Reagan was well aware of the damaging analogy to his own political fortunes when comparing this hostage crisis to that suffered by Carter.
To try to rejuvenate his fading presidency Reagan wanted to be seen on prime-time network television across America greeting each hostage in turn as they stepped safely back on to American soil.
This is what presidents, particularly ex-Hollywood actors, dream about.
Ideally Reagan would have liked a more dramatic scenario whereby his armed forces, especially the US Marines, stormed the hostages' hideout, killed their kidnappers and returned in glory with the stars and stripes held high.
Common sense and logistics ruled this out.
Whether Reagan actually said: ‘Who will rid me of this turbulent problem?’ is irrelevant.
Those around him anxious to please and do his bidding were in no doubt as to what he wanted and desperately sought a solution at any price that would satisfy their commander-in-chief.
According to Ali Akbar Rafsanjani, the powerful speaker of the Iranian parliament, ‘The Americans started contacting us through scores of channels begging us to help them in the Lebanon; through Japan, our neighbouring countries like Pakistan, our embassies, the United Nations and numerous arms brokers.’
The first positive response came, not surprisingly, from the Middle East's most efficient intelligence agency, Mossad.
It was an open secret that following the overthrow of the Shah and throughout the Iran-Iraq war Israel had supplied Iran with weapons to the value of more than $500 million, mainly paid for in oil.
Another supplier was South Africa whose huge Armscor factory in Johannesburg had supplied Iran with all the 120-mm guns that it fruitlessly fired across the desert in this never-ending conflict, and much else besides.
They too had been paid in oil to get round the world trade boycott.
Everyone knew this was going on but the vast profits involved generated a convenient blanket of economic hypocrisy.
Israel's plan was actually that of an American businessman now under arrest in the United States charged with trading with Iran.
He claimed that Iran badly needed TOW anti-tank missiles and in return for them would get  the American hostages being held in Beirut released.
Mossad proposed that to conceal the plan they would send TOW missiles to Iran from their own stocks and America would ship them replenishments.
In this way, if anything leaked out about the deal, the Americans could claim they were not supplying Iran directly.
The person selected to control this illegal operation was Oliver North, the ubiquitous US Marine colonel so closely involved in the Central American covert actions.
He was provided with a false passport in the name of William Goode.
To complicate matters further Israel was using an intermediary, an Iranian businessman called Manucher Ghorbanifar, who was already well known to American intelligence for having fabricated tales.
In 1981 he had told the CIA that Colonel Gadaffi, Reagan's pet enemy, had sent assassination squads to America to kill the president.
This story had been used extensively by the Americans to drum up support against Gadaffi in the tame sections of the Western media even though they knew it was untrue.
Ghorbanifar had also offered to provide the CIA with intelligence about Iran in return for being allowed to smuggle drugs.
It is an indication of the panic induced by the Henry II syndrome that those advising the president could even consider having contact with a person like Ghorbanifar, let alone do business with him.
Since Iran refused to pay for the TOW missiles until they were delivered a Saudi Arabian middleman called Adnan Khashoggi, whose social lifestyle and divorce proceedings help fill the pages of the tabloid press, put up a bridging loan of $5 million.
Iran received 508 TOW missiles for that price and the Reverend Benjamin Weir, one of the American hostages, was released on 15 September 1985.
Reagan was ecstatic and Weir was paraded before the media at the White House to demonstrate how the president's firm Middle East policies were paying off.
It is impossible that Reagan was unaware that Weir had been released only because the American government had sold 508 TOW missiles to Iran for $5 million.
The deal was so simple that even Reagan could understand it.
The Russians had also had some problems in Beirut when four of their diplomats were abducted by the radical Hizbollah movement.
One of the four was murdered so the KGB sent a hit squad to Beirut who kidnapped a relative of those holding the three remaining hostages, castrated and killed him.
They dumped his body outside the Hizbollah's offices with a note saying that the rest of them would die in a similar fashion if the three diplomats were not released.
Two days later the hostages were freed unharmed.
On this occasion at least the KGB were more efficient than the CIA.
By now North, flushed with success at the release of Weir in exchange for the TOW missiles, was getting into his stride.
He established a dummy Swiss company, Lake Resources Inc, through which he laundered vast sums of  cash from shady middlemen and arms dealers, right-wing American bigots, and the enormous profits out of the arms' shipments to the Iranians, who had paid twice the going rate for what they bought.
In November 1985 North shipped out of America two Boeing 707-loads of Hawk anti-aircraft missiles, ostensibly for Israel although by now the pretence was wearing thin and they were simply transferred to Israeli cargo aircraft and flown straight on to Iran.
By the beginning of 1986 two major problems faced Reagan: further arms sales to Iran and a preemptive strike against Libya following several terrorist incidents the Americans believed were Libyan-backed.
The first was a continuation of the earlier sales because Iran had now promised that within about two months it would be able to arrange the release of the remaining five American hostages.
This idea was proposed by Admiral John Poindexter, the president's national security adviser, at a meeting at the White House on 6 January attended by Reagan, Vice-President George Bush, Secretary of State George Shultz, Defence Secretary Caspar Weinberger, head of the CIA William Casey, the White House chief-of-staff Donald Regan, and Edwin Meese, the president's legal adviser.
How much the meeting was told about the previous shipments to Iran is unclear but it is hard to believe that those present were not aware of them.
Shultz and Weinberger opposed Poindexter's plan, pointing out that it undermined America's much-stated policy, usually made in conjunction with Mrs Thatcher, that no deals must be made with terrorists and that there could be no question of bargaining to get hostages released since this would inevitably lead to more abductions.
Poindexter and Casey claimed they were in touch with moderate elements within Iran that America should exploit, otherwise the Russians would.
In fact neither Poindexter nor Casey had any evidence of this other than some vague promises made to Poindexter's predecessor, Robert McFarlane, who had met Iran's foreign minister, Ibrahim Yazdi, in Washington.
Exactly what Reagan said remains a mystery, but the very fact that he did not dismiss the idea out of hand as quite contrary to all his public statements about Iran certainly left those u the meeting in no doubt that he wanted the deal to go ahead.
In February North arranged a further shipment of 1,000 TOW missiles directly to Iran using Ghorbanifar as intermediary and without bothering to use the Israelis.
No hostage was released, the excuse given by Ghorbanifar being that Iran did not really need the TOW missiles so they were not counted in the exchange deal.
Meanwhile Reagan's other major concern, the plan to attack Libya, was gathering momentum.
On 22 March an armada of 45 US Navy warships,Operation Prairie Fire , complete with aircraft carriers, 200 aircraft, and nuclear submarines, appeared off the Libyan coast in the Gulf of Sidra and deliberately trailed their coats until the Libyans reacted by firing two SA-5 missiles at the American aircraft.
In retaliation the US Navy sent in A-7  attack aircraft launching stand-off Harm missiles which neatly homed in on the Libyan radar stations and destroyed them, killing over 70 Libyans.
A month later, on 14 April 1986, F-111 bombers from bases in England attacked Tripoli and Benghazi, dropping 32 laser-guided 2,000 pound bombs.
Two F-111S were lost and there were considerable civilian casualties among the Libyans.
The Libyan attack occupied both the minds of Reagan and the public around the world, although from very different viewpoints as to the morality of the action.
Reagan continued to assert that direct action was the only way to deal with terrorist countries like Libya and Iran and that he would not countenance any other approach.
But meanwhile North had discovered that the secret shipments of arms to Iran were generating upwards of $15 million which he proposed diverting to fund the American-backed Contra forces fighting in Nicaragua for whom Congress had refused to provide any further financial aid on the grounds that Reagan was involving America in an operation to overthrow by force another country's legitimate government.
That a mere colonel in the White House would have taken it upon himself to engage in such duplicitous and totally illegal operations without the president's knowledge and authority is quite impossible to believe.
Throughout 1985–86 North continued shipments of arms to Iran in a series of complex deals involving sleazy arms dealers, shady middlemen, Swiss numbered bank accounts, suitcases stuffed with dollar bills, and all the trappings of dishonest behaviour one would associate with drug smugglers and the Mafia rather than a member of the White House staff.
On 26 July 1986 Father Lawrence Jenco was released after being held hostage for 18 months.
But during this period the CIA began noticing that North's sales of weapons and monies received from Iran did not add up.
A sum of $3.5 million had gone missing from the first shipment of TOW missiles in 1985 and a further $24 million could not be accounted for from one of North's Swiss bank accounts.
The more the CIA tried to investigate the more inconsistencies they turned up.
Eventually the CIA stumbled on the fact that North was privately diverting these missing millions to the Contras.
To add to the confusion North had started dealing directly with the Iranians cutting out Ghorbanifar, who was threatening to sue the American government in the courts for breach of contract.
In September 1986 the Iranians paid $7 million direct into one of North's three Swiss bank accounts and North drew out $2 million to pay for 500 TOW missiles that were flown direct from America to Iran (which shows the true price of TOW missiles compared to what Iran was being charged).
At the same time two giant Lockheed C-5A Galaxy transport aircraft flew from Clarke air-force base in the Philippines to Teheran with spare parts for Iran's F-4, F-5 and F-I4 aircraft and some much needed radar equipment.
Both deliveries reached  Iran at the end of October when North was in Cyprus with large sums of cash, at the same time as the Archbishop of Canterbury's envoy Terry Waite was on the island.
These two arms shipments to Iran resulted in the much publicised release of David Jacobsen to Terry Waite on 2 November 1986 which at the time was said to have been made on humanitarian grounds following Waite's appeal to the Iranians.
It is now dear that Waite's involvement was peripheral and that he was used by North as a cover to conceal the true reason for Jacobsen's release.
When asked how his release had been arranged Jacobsen and Waite both charged reporters with being irresponsible and endangering the lives of the remaining hostages.
In Iran Rafsanjani had come under strong attack from Khomeini supporters who accused him of siding with America by accepting arms from the Great Satan and helping to get some of their hostages released.
In order to extricate himself Rafsanjani gave details of the entire American arms-supply operation to the Lebanese magazine Al-Shiraa which published them on 3 November, the day after Jacobsen's release.
Jacobsen flew back to Washington for the ritual photocall with the president at the White House on 7 November and when reporters asked Reagan about the arms deal story the president said it had ‘no foundation’.
But it was too late.
At a White House meeting on 10 November Reagan argued that he had not been dealing with terrorists in Iran but only moderates.
It was only then that George Shultz, Reagan's secretary of state, learned the president had actually signed an order authorising the arms shipments on 17 January and that he had not been consulted or told.
A week later, on 17 November, Reagan told the American people on network television that ‘We did not — repeat, did not — trade weapons or anything else for hostages.
Nor will we.’
The president claimed that only defensive weapons had been supplied to Iran and that it had all been legal.
Reagan said nothing about the diversion of money from these sales to the Contras.
Although the American people had long realised that Reagan's administration was one of the most corrupt in the nation's history, even the most hardened supporter was amazed by these revelations.
But across the Atlantic the news stunned the British government.
Reagan was their great friend and ally, with whom they had this supposed special relationship and who shared Mrs Thatcher's much-publicised belief that no deals of any kind should be made with terrorists or governments that supported terrorism.
Indeed, Mrs Thatcher had risked her personal reputation by allowing American F-111 aircraft to attack Libya from British bases in April 1986.
(Though in reality she had had no choice.
It was repayment of the long-standing debt she owed the Americans from the 1982 Falklands War).
In its usual puppet-like manner the British government went along with the White House, initially ridiculing the suggestion that America would have supplied arms to Iran.
When the details began to trickle out it was reluctantly conceded that perhaps  two Boeing 707 shipments might have been made.
As the rest of the tawdry tale emerged the Foreign Office and Downing Street lapsed into embarrassed silence.
The French and Germans watched the whole affair with much amusement.
During the same period both countries had done deals with Iran and paid ransoms to terrorist groups to get their hostages released and had been strongly criticised by Mrs Thatcher and President Reagan for breaking Western unity.
As the revelations gathered pace in America strenuous efforts were made to distance the president from the facts, while North busied himself with his office shredder.
The stories came out one by one until eventually the diversion of funds to the Contras became known.
Finally Americans and the rest of the world witnessed on television unbelievable scenes as a US Marine colonel and a US admiral both invoked the Fifth Amendment so that they need not tell the truth about their dishonest dealings.
It was the first time in American history that serving officers did not dare say what their commander-in-chief had told them to do.
The inevitable scapegoats were found.
Casey of the CIA died, taking his secrets to the grave; Poindexter resigned; and North went into a bizarre media limbo reserved for bogus patriots.
Of all the participants Reagan came out best of all.
With his junior staff loyally taking the blame and trying to pretend he knew nothing about it (despite his signature on the 17 January presidential order), Reagan began to believe he had known nothing about it and it is possible that he did not know what he was signing.
But it is hard for an old actor to separate fact from fantasy.
When Robert McFarlane was charged with withholding information from Congress about diverting arms sale funds to the Contras, Reagan openly joked that he had done the same and withheld information from Congress.
When North was charged with a number of very serious offences Reagan publicly announced that North was innocent and a hero.
It will be interesting to see how President Bush deals with the continuing hostage/Contra problem, particularly as he was once head of the CIA.
That Reagan managed to escape public disgrace was probably only because Americans found it very hard so soon after Nixon to see another president fall from grace, since the presidency is the last moral totem pole the nation possesses.
To many observers Reagan had long ceased to be a president and become a king-like figure who communicated with his people in platitudinous homilies.
Reagan may well have been the reincarnation of Henry II.