

Parental rights and responsibilities
INTRODUCTION: PARENTS; CHILDREN AND THE STATE
The concept of parental rights in education could be said to be concerned with the ability of parents to extend the control they are able to exert within the family to their child's formal education, thus protecting their ‘interest’ in the child.
But the concept of parental rights is not an unlimited one.
The exercise of parental autonomy is constrained by various factors.
One arises out of the need for state provision of education to be efficient and economical, which means that policy considerations might outweigh individual parental preference.
This has been well illustrated by section 76 of the Education Act 1944, which provides that ‘children are to be educated in accordance with the wishes of their parents’, provided that this would be ‘compatible with the provision of efficient instruction and training and the avoidance of unreasonable public expenditure’.
The courts have made clear on several occasions that section 76 lays down a ‘general principle’ of parental choice which is only one of a number of factors to which an LEA could or should have regard when exercising their functions.
Nevertheless, despite a similar provision in section 6(3) of the Education Act 1980 (enabling, until the ERA 1988 restricted its effect to schools which are not yet subject to LMS, parental preference to be denied formally on economic efficiency grounds) considerable extensions of parental rights have occurred, as shown below.
These have produced a conflict between state and parents' interests, whilst failing to advance the independent rights of children.
In another field, that of child care law, the relationship between parents', children's and state interests and rights has been affected by an increasing emphasis on the paramountcy of the child's welfare.
It has been pointed out that the legal protection of children's welfare is not the same as the conferment of rights on children, since it presupposes that welfare agencies, judges and even parents would have the right to take decisions on the child's behalf.
The law might be seen to seek a balance between paternalism and liberation, accepting that whilst advancement of the autonomy interests of children to make their own decisions in respect of their own lives is an appropriate aim of the law, some restrictions are necessary to enable  children to progress safely to maturity.
There is, of course, room for disagreement about how much independence to grant children at different stages of their development.
In any event, the real debate has focused on the question of how the ‘paternalistic’ or protective role should be shared between parents and state.
The law governing school attendance, which is discussed below, provides a good illustration of how the interests of state, parent and child interrelate.
Put simply, LEAs have a duty to intervene when children are not being educated.
Action is taken against parents, for it is they who carry the burden of ensuring that the child attends school.
If the child is absent, parents will be in breach of the law unless they can, for example, demonstrate that an efficient education is being provided to their child outside the school system.
Here it is assumed that the child's right to education is a correlative of the parent's duty to send the child to school.
Despite the fact that the state system of education is over 100 years old, it is still regarded as a fundamental duty of parenthood to educate one's child.
In his Commentaries on the Laws of England published over half a century before the 1870 Education Act, Blackstone wrote that ‘it is not easy to imagine or allow that a parent has conferred any considerable benefit on his child by bringing him into the world, if he afterwards entirely neglects his culture and education, and suffers him to grow up like a mere beast, to lead a life useless to others and shameful to himself’.
The distribution of legal responsibility for the education of children is such that parents have, in effect, a duty to send their children to school, and the state has a duty to educate them when they get there.
The state is, in effect, assuming a parental responsibility, although the role of the state in the education of children goes much further than that, of course.
In every society, the education system is fostering social reproduction through its inculcation of the values and ideas of the majority or dominant culture.
It is not surprising then that areas such as sex education, religious education and the establishment of voluntary schools have proved contentious in view of the centrality of these matters to parents' own cultural values.
Like the question of corporal punishment and school uniform, they lie at the heart of the parent–state conflict which flows from a disharmony between individual parental choice and the collectivist focus of the state.
Among the manifestations of this conflict are cases where parents have challenged the content of their child's education by withdrawing him/her from school.
The case of RE S (A Minor)was concerned essentially with the opposition of the parents of one child to comprehensive schools; they kept the boy, aged 11, away from school for 18 months before the Court of Appeal confirmed that the child should be taken into care so that he could be educated.
It is a striking fact that although the court in this case clearly adopted its paternalistic role in deciding how the child's welfare would best be promoted, the chief emphasis was on the competing rights and responsibilities of  parent and local authority rather than those of the child.
This is emphasised by the fact that the parent claimed to be asserting a ‘right not to be dictated to’— at the expense of his/her child's right to education.
But how far have the changes in child care law embodied in the Children Act 1989, with its focus on the paramountcy of the child's welfare (as a means to the child's better protection), and the increasing emphasis which has been placed on parental responsibility rather than rights by the courts in recent years, been mirrored by changes in the balance of power between parent, child and state in education?
The concept of parental rights may be in serious general decline —‘it has become increasingly difficult to reconcile its existence with the predominant emphasis which the law now places on the welfare of children’.
But in the sphere of education, the concept would appear still to be flourishing, even if in a somewhat limited form, as stated above.
Even if the rights being asserted are in reality a reflection of parental responsibility to ensure that children receive a suitable education (although there is inevitably dispute between parent and state about the meaning of ‘suitable’ in this context), such responsibility gives rise to a considerable amount of power and authority.
So far as state education is concerned, increasingly free rein is being given to this power.
As this happens, the level of conflict between parents and state rises.
In the course of this conflict it is shown that whilst much of the relevant legislation — for example, on school admissions — may emphasise individual parents' rights, in practice it is not always easy to accommodate them.
With the exception of the courts, those determining the issue will frequently take a policy-orientated approach in which individual claims are subjugated to the LEA's overall administrative goal.
The dispute between parents and LEA in Dewsbury in 1987–88 exemplified this struggle between parent and state agencies over what is essentially the exercise of the paternalistic role concerning the formal education of a child.
A group of white parents, each of whose children had been allocated places at a school (Headfield) where 83 per cent of the pupils were of Asian origin, challenged the LEA's decisions both individually, through separate appeals (some of which were successful), and subsequently through collective action.
The parents of 26 children refused to send them to the designated school and instead made arrangements for tuition to be given to them by,inter alios , a volunteer retired teacher, in rooms above a public house.
The parents argued that their action was not racially motivated, but rather reflected their concern that their children should be educated in a school with a prevailing Christian ethos, which they claimed would not be the case at the school designated by the LEA.
But it seems that, regardless of the wider implications of the dispute (it has been bracketed with refusals of voluntary aided status in its impact on religious and cultural autonomy), the issue was essentially one of  parental choice rather than religion per se .
The LEA refused to concede, even when the parents made application for judicial review; but when the application to the court was amended to focus on the legality of the LEA's admissions procedures and their operation, the authority finally backed down and found places for the children at two schools where non-white pupils were firmly in the minority (Overthorpe and Thornhill).
The outcome of the dispute was hailed by the parents and their supporters as a victory for the rights of parents.
One parent is reported as saying: ‘All we wanted was parental choice.’
The parents' solicitor said that the Dewsbury parents' action had ‘shown the tremendous value of parents fighting for their rights’.
Of course, it would be tempting to suggest that the independent rights of children are being forgotten in all of this.
However, it has been suggested that often ‘parents may legitimately be regarded as the child's representatives in what is a conflict between the family and the state’.
Thus, primarily whose interests or rights have been secured when parents such as those in Dewsbury succeed with their action is not at all clear.
Despite the widespread feeling that there had been a victory for parental rights, many of the Dewsbury parents claimed to have been acting for the sake of their children.
The Dewsbury case also focused attention on the difficulties of accommodating the preferences of parents drawn from groups with diverse cultural and religious differences, especially where these interests conflict with the ‘rights’ of the state to promote a policy of multicultural education in the interests of racial harmony and integration.
In contrast to the increasing emphasis in child welfare on parental responsibility rather than rights, the Conservatives' policy since 1980 of making the education system far more responsive to parental demands has involved an extension of parental rights.
In part, the new element of consumerism is reflective of a wider policy to bring market forces to bear in the field of state provision (for example , in the health service and public transport).
In education, the best illustration of this policy, but also of the practical limitations to the concept of parental rights, is in the area of school admissions, and discussion of this occurs next.
But a more complete understanding of the operation of and limits to parental rights in education requires a wider examination, of how the law deals with other areas where the interests of children, parents and the state are all in particularly sharp focus.
Two further areas will, therefore, be considered: the legal enforcement of school attendance, and the law governing special education.
SCHOOL ADMISSIONS AND PARENTAL CHOICE
The ‘parents' charter’
The Conservative governments of the 1980s saw school admissions as a key area in which to put into practice some of the New Right ideas about introducing free market principles into the education system, whilst at the same time deriving political capital from giving some legal recognition to parents' ‘moral right’ to choose how their children are educated.
There can be little doubt about the lack of parental rights over choice of school prior to 1980.
We have already seen how section 76 of the 1944 Act proved to be ineffective at forcing compliance by LEAs to parental wishes.
The Plowden Report on Children and their Primary Schools (1967) recommended no change to section 76, but said that parents should be given some choice whenever this was possible.
Giving parents a measure of choice would, it was argued, be more likely to secure their involvement in the school and in their child's schooling: ‘They are more likely to support a school they have freely chosen and to give it the loyalty which is so essential if their children are to do the same.’
The Report also noted, somewhat prophetically in the light of the present government's ‘open enrolment’ policy under the ERA 1988 — which is designed inter alia to identify bad schools by their lack of popularity with parents — that ‘whenever a school is unpopular that should be an indication to the authority to find out why and make it better’.
By the 1970s the demand for an extension of parental choice was growing.
The Labour Party supported the idea of greater parental involvement.
The Conservatives' education spokesperson of the mid-1970s, Norman St John-Stevas, argued in favour of a ‘parents' charter’; he called for clearer obligations on LEAs and the state to comply with parental wishes.
This ‘charter’ was put in place shortly after the Conservatives were returned to power.
An absolute guarantee of choice of school was always going to be impossible.
For one thing, many LEAs had, during the late 1960s, turned their secondary schools into comprehensives.
This policy, along with the policy of some LEAs to establish neighbourhood schools, had already reduced the element of choice available to parents.
Many parents wanted to send their children to grammar schools, but these were ceasing to be available.
Several of the unsuccessful court actions brought during this decade arose out of opposition to LEA plans for the introduction of comprehensive schools.
Although the Education Act 1979 removed the duty of LEAs to reorganise secondary schools along comprehensive lines (a duty imposed by Labour's Education Act 1976), the policy was not going to be easily reversible.
Moreover, popular schools would seldom be able to accommodate as pupils the  children of all parents who wanted to send them there.
Parental choice was, therefore, always going to be ‘a very limited concept’.
The impossibility of guaranteeing adherence to parental wishes was acknowledged by the government in the provisions of the 1980 Education Act.
Section 6 stated that although parents should be allowed to state a preference for a school, compliance with that preference was not required if it would ‘prejudice the provision of efficient education or the efficient use of resources’.
In the case of admission to voluntary aided or special agreement schools, or to selective schools, choice could also be denied on religious or ability grounds.
The courts have held that an LEA cannot, however, refuse to admit a child simply because s/he lives outside their district.
Prior to the 1980 Act it had been observed that the law had been ‘heavily weighed in favour of the local education authorities and schools with parents having few rights (although many duties) and little say in the decision-making process’.
On the face of it section 6 of the 1980 Act has added little in the way of parental rights to section 76 of the 1944 Act.
However, the 1980 Act requires parental preference to be granted unless one of the exceptions applies.
Moreover, at the heart of the ‘parents' charter’ is the appeals system, to which parents have a right (under section 7 of the Act) to refer their claim.
Appeals are to be heard by an appeals committee, constituted in accordance with Schedule 2 of the Act.
LEA-appointed members may outnumber by one the other members (persons with experience in education or knowledge of local educational conditions, or parents of pupils — but not of pupils at the school which is the subject of the appeal).
Teachers are the only LEA employees entitled to serve as appeal committee members, but not in respect of appeals to their school.
The appeal committee's decision is binding on the LEA.
Like the LEA, the committee must seek to grant parental preference, but subject to the exceptions contained in section 6 in so far as these have not been dis-applied by the 1988 Act (see below).
The procedure for lodging an appeal, and various other procedural matters, are laid down in the Schedule, but the manner of conducting the appeal hearing is left to the committee itself.
Nevertheless, there is a Code of Practice prepared by the Council on Tribunals for committees to follow.
The Code reminds appeal committees of the apprehension and anxiety which many parents might feel when attending a hearing and of the need to adopt a welcoming and helpful approach, whilst remaining impartial.
The legality of an appeal committee's decision would be open to legal challenge if there was a failure to comply with natural justice — for example, not giving an appellant an adequate opportunity to state his/her case.
One recent case provides a good example of unlawful appeal procedure.
An LEA adopted the practice of hearing all secondary school admissions appeals before making any decisions on individual cases.
This practice was held to be lawful in an earlier case, in which Lord Justice Woolf referred to;
‘the advantage of adopting this course if it is practical because children whose appeals are heard last could otherwise be prejudiced because of decisions which had been reached already by an appeal committee to send children to a particular school’.
In the later case a three-member panel had considered the applicants' appeal and had adjourned to hear the remaining appeals.
One of the three members had been unable to attend the meeting at which these appeals were heard and a decision made on all the appeals.
Nolan J said that the committee had to consist of the same people throughout.
(Note that administrative errors could lead to an investigation by the Local Ombudsman.)
There have been complaints about the lack of independence of appeal committees (the majority of whose members are appointed by the LEA) and of legal deficiencies in the way that appeals are heard.
There have also been suggestions that appeal committee hearings require closer monitoring.
But, so far as two-thirds of appellants are concerned, the most dissatisfying aspect of the appeal process lies in a discovery that the appeal has been unsuccessful.
For them, parental choice may be somewhat illusory.
As Buck states, ‘there is, in reality, a lot of difference between the expression of a preference and a choice and it seems that some parents who have heard of the new rights sometimes confuse these two concepts.’
For LEAs, the appeals system has created administrative difficulties, such as delay in establishing school rolls (but see below).
It was predicted that it might also ‘destroy well conceived and equitable admission policies’.
On the plus side, the appeals system has undoubtedly caused many LEAs to tighten up their procedures.
The appeals committees themselves have been faced with a difficult task.
Like LEAs they have the problem of indivisibility in allocating school places.
As there are too few places, comparison between competing claims is necessary.
There will be the LEA's published admissions criteria to follow, of course.
The DES has advised LEAs (or governors in the case of voluntary aided and special agreement schools) that they may apply ‘any reasonable criteria’.
Common practice is to consider: the presence of siblings at the school; distance of home from school; attendance at a ‘feeder’ school; medical or other domestic factors.
Various orders of priority are given to these factors.
But in the High Court, Parker LJ has stated that whilst the creation of an admissions policy is a matter of discretion for the LEA itself, that policy must enable consideration to be given to exceptional cases and therefore should not be too rigid.
These admissions criteria will be part of the LEA's overall policy on admissions to its schools, which in the past may have reflected targets for enrolment.
LEAs have tended to set targets which, when reached, cannot be exceeded in the year in question.
The purpose of this practice is to ensure a more even distribution of pupils around the  LEA's schools.
Schools would not, therefore, be allowed to become too small in terms of their pupil numbers: ‘LEAs see it as necessary to balance allowance for parental choice against the consequences of choice for schools generally.’
This general policy could always be justified on the grounds of efficiency and cost-effectiveness, enabling parental choice to be denied under section 6(3) (a)(compliance would prejudice ‘efficient education or…efficient use of resources’).
However, the case of R v South Glamorgan Appeals Committee ex parte Evans (1984) showed that when looking at individual claims for a school place, it was necessary for an appeal committee to determine first whether the admission of one further child would prejudice efficient education at the school (with the onus on the LEA to show that it would): if they concluded that it would not, they would have to allow the appeal.
If they decided the question in the affirmative, they then had to decide whether the prejudice was sufficient to outweigh the ‘parental factors’.
In Evans the school place had been denied because there were already 36 pupils in the class and the LEA's limit was 30.
In the event it proved impossible for the appeal committee which re-heard the case after the court's ruling to find prejudice.
Despite this, evidence shows that appeal committees have tended not to question LEA admission limits.
Thus, whatever success individual parents may have achieved via the 1980 Act's appeal system, it seemed, by 1986, that ‘rights of school choice do not appear to make much difference to the outcomes of school admissions or to the LEAs' management of school rolls’.
‘Open enrolment’
At various points in the early 1980s consideration was given by the Conservatives to the idea of introducing a ‘voucher’ system, designed to enable parents to exercise their choice by ‘buying’a place at a particular school.
Once doubts about the feasibility of such a system finally caused it to be shelved indefinitely, the government sought other ways of extending parental choice, once it had introduced reforms to school government to increase opportunities for parental involvement at school level (see Chapter 3).
The policy adopted was ‘open enrolment’— described by the government as ‘a significant enhancement of the ability of parents to secure the admission of their children to the school they prefer’.
LEAs would not he able to restrict admissions to schools by using artificial admissions limits.
The government said that these limits had not only inhibited and delayed necessary rationalisation of schools provision but also had ‘acted as a barrier to the exercise of effective parental choice’.
Under the new system (laid down in sections 26–32 of the ERA 1988) schools would be able to admit pupils until they were physically full — a stage reached when no additional pupils could  be accommodated without the school being in breach of the law governing the use of school premises (see below).
In this way popular schools could be allowed to ‘expand’ by increasing their pupil numbers, whilst unpopular schools would be allowed to contract — and in some cases would cease to be viable.
With formula funding under LMS based on, amongst other things, pupil numbers at the school, it was clearly anticipated that there could be intense competition between schools to attract pupils.
With allocation of places based ever more firmly around the notion of parental choice, it was expected that schools would be forced to raise their standards to meet the qualitative expectations of parents.
In some cases the school's survival would depend on it, especially schools which were already threatened by falling rolls due to demographic factors.
The requirements on schools to publish information about pupils' aggregated results of national curriculum testing (see Chapter 5), and the decision in 1983 to publish HMI reports on individual schools, are clearly intended to enable parents to evaluate schools' performance through a comparison of their academic achievements.
Parents may also look at factors such as equipment levels, the state of decor and the perceived standard of discipline, and so on, as well as the attitude of staff, in forming such judgements.
Because of formula funding, the state of school premises and the amount and quality of equipment will tend to be dependent on pupil numbers.
Thus schools which are having difficulty attracting pupils over a couple of years may find that they are powerless to avoid progressive deterioration in their position.
The law on open enrolment refers to a school's ‘standard number’.
This is an important concept, because the 1988 Act states that total admissions in any school year must not be restricted to a number below the school's standard number.
Admissions in excess of the standard number are, however, possible, provided the appropriate legal requirements have been met (see below).
The existing standard number, determined under section 15 of the Education Act 1980 and generally set at the intake of pupils to the school in 1979–80 (a peak year), will be the new standard number — unless in 1989–90, the year before the law changed, admissions exceeded the 1980 Act standard number.
If the 1989–90 actual intake is higher than the 1980 Act standard number,it will represent the standard number.
It is relatively easy for an admissions authority to admit in excess of the standard number, provided various conditions are met — of which the most important is that the school buildings are adequate to accommodate the new number.
In some cases approval of the Secretary of State is required.
Such approval is always required if the admissions authority seeks a reduction in the admissions limit, and thus a new standard number.
Such reduction would have to be necessary because of a reduction in the school's capacity to accommodate pupils.
For example, it may be that admitting pupils up to the standard number would mean the school taking in more than it  can accommodate by virtue of the Education (School Premises) Regulations 1981.
Schools will be able to calculate their physical capacity using a form set out in Annex A to DES Circular 11/88.
There are various procedural requirements applicable to a reduction in the standard number, including a duty of the proposer to publish details of the proposals and to refer the proposals to the Secretary of State if objections to them are raised by 10 or more local government electors or by the LEA or governors (whichever of them is not the admissions authority).
The admissions authority is, in any event, required to keep the standard number under review.
One important aspect of the new admissions regime concerns primary schools, to which open enrolment will not apply until the school year beginning in September 1992 (Education Reform Act 1988 (Commencement No. 9) Order 1991 SI 1991 No. 409).
For the first time children aged under 5 years (other than those admitted for nursery education and those moving to a reception class from a nursery class in the same school) will be included in the standard number and parents of such children will have admission appeal rights above.
The significance of these comparatively simple provisions on open enrolment should not be overlooked.
On the face of it they may appear to do little more than give effect to the government's consistent promise to maximise the opportunities for parental choice in the education system.
But they are clearly intended to form, in combination with formula funding under LMS, a system which will make schools subject to market forces in a direct and dramatic fashion.
The message to schools is stark and simple: if you cannot persuade sufficient parents to exercise their freer choice by selecting your school, your allocation of resources will be less than your competitors'.
As noted earlier, ‘unsuccessful’ schools could face terminal decline.
Many head teachers are embarking on marketing courses, in the hope that they can learn the skills required to ‘sell’ their schools to parents, or are persuading governing bodies to co-opt persons with this area of expertise.
Some schools may come to consider that the hard sell offers the only feasible way of gaining a firm position in the ‘market-place’, because it would be naïve to hold to the unrealistic idea that most schools can respond to the new spirit of competition by quickly raising standards to improve their school's popularity.
Meanwhile, it is argued that LEAs' capacity for rational planning of educational provision is being replaced by ‘the unpredictability of parental demand’.
So far as new teachers are concerned, the implications of the new market ethos created by open enrolment and LMS are considerable.
At a time of teacher shortages, the new spirit of competitiveness will almost certainly be reflected in the recruitment practices of schools and LEAs.
Many teachers will have noticed the increasing efforts to sell an area or particular school to the potential recruit.
New entrants to the profession and those seeking a new appointment will, though, have to be astute, in the same way that parents exercising parental preference are being encouraged to be.
A bad choice could lead to an uncertain future.
Sex and race discrimination
To conclude this section on parental choice of school we must consider the question of sex and race discrimination.
To discriminate on the grounds of sex or race, either directly or indirectly, in relation to the admission of a pupil or group of pupils to a school is unlawful under the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 and Race Relations Act 1976.
Both Acts contain provisions specifically concerned with education, of which those concerned with school admissions form part.
(For provisions concerned with curricular provision, see Chapter 6.)
Direct discrimination involves treating someone less favourably on the grounds of their sex or marital status (the 1975 Act) or colour, race, ethnic or national origins or nationality (the 1976 Act).
Often discrimination in education is unintentional, although this is no excuse in law, and usually indirect .
Indirect sex discrimination occurs when a person applies to a woman:
a requirement or condition which he applies or would apply equally to a man but —(i) which is such that the proportion of women who can comply with it is considerably smaller thin the proportion of men who can comply with it, and (ii) which he cannot show to be justifiable irrespective of the sex of the person to whom it is applied, and (iii) which is to her detriment because she cannot comply with it.
An equivalent definition of indirect race discrimination occurs in the Race Relations Act 1976.
So, for example, when the head teacher of a school refused to allow a Sikh boy to school because the boy wore a turban in contravention of the school rules on uniformity of dress, this was unjustifiable race discrimination.
The court held that for the application of the rule to have been lawful it would have had to be justifiable irrespective of race or ethnic or national origins.
It would also be discrimination contrary to the Act if an LEA adopted an admissions policy of dispersing ethnic minority children.
In such a case the discrimination would be direct .
Discrimination and parental choice have come to be linked over a number of issues of current importance.
One of these is the provision of single-sex schools.
Many parents prefer to send their children to such schools if they are available.
This is particularly true of certain ethnic and religious groups.
The provision of single-sex schools is not unlawful; nor is it unlawful to discriminate on the grounds of sex in relation to admission to a single-sex school.
Equally, parents have no right to insist on the provision of single-sex schooling, nor to payment by the local authority of fees for educating the child in a single-sex school in the private sector.
Nevertheless, there would he unlawful sex discrimination by an LEA if,in toto , there were more places available in its single-sex schools for boys than for girls and vice versa.
In one case it was held that because such disparity would  result from the closure by an LEA of the only two single-sex boys' schools in its area, whilst the authority permitted its two girls' schools to remain, there was unlawful sex discrimination.
Clearly there was not a deliberate act of discrimination here; nor was the LEA's decision taken without due regard for educational considerations.
At a time of falling rolls and severe financial constraints as a result of central government policy of curbing spending by local authorities, LEAs are having to rationalise provision.
But in doing so they must not restrict the opportunities for one gender or racial group.
One case of particular importance in this field was brought by the Equal Opportunities Commission which, in addition to its formal powers of investigation has legal authority to pursue cases in the courts.
The case concerned the provision of single-sex voluntary aided grammar schools in Birmingham.
There were 540 places for boys in such schools in the city, but only 360 for girls.
This meant that on average a girl would have to obtain higher examination marks than a boy to secure a place at such a school.
The LEA, which had an equal opportunities policy for its education service, was not the admissions authority.
The schools' governors were responsible for admissions, and they favoured selection by ability.
The House of Lords, to which the LEA appealed after defeat in both the High Court and Court of Appeal, held that the denial of selective single-sex education to a higher proportion of girls than boys was unlawful sex discrimination.
Lord Goff said that it was the denial of choice that was the critical factor, rather than the denial of a form of education that may or may not be available in other of the authority's schools.
In order to comply with the court ruling the authority was faced with a number of equally problematic options.
The difficulty arose because for the most part the single-sex grammar schools did not want to become co-educational, in spite of the court's ruling.
The authority has considered turning two of the boys' schools into co-educational schools.
The governors of one school said they might invoke opting-out procedure to avoid the school's becoming co-educational.
After single-sex schools, the most contentious issue has been the admission of pupils to racially mixed schools.
The best known dispute, in Dewsbury, was discussed earlier.
As stated above, this is an issue over which parental feelings tend to run extremely high.
Many of the parents who object to their child's attending a school at which a place has been allocated by the LEA claim to be opposed simply on religious or educational grounds.
But there are clear racial overtones, which the press has been quick to highlight.
The latest cause célèbre arose in Middlesbrough in early 1990.
Mrs C asked her LEA if her daughter could change school, because at her school, where 40 per cent of the pupils were of Asian origin, the child was, in Mrs C's reported words, ‘learning Pakistani’.
Mrs C wanted the child admitted to a school where 98 per cent of the pupils were white.
A place was available at the school in question, and the LEA had no ground under  the 1980 Education Act for denying parental choice.
The LEA's decision to allow the child's admission to the school was challenged by the Commission for Racial Equality, which asked the Secretary of State to use his default powers in the 1944 Act and quash the LEA's decision, on the ground that the decision was racist and would encourage other parents to pursue the same course as Mrs C and for the same reason.
In reply, the Secretary of State said that parental wishes were paramount.
It is likely that a test case will be brought on this issue.
According to the Commission for Racial Equality, one similar instance a week is being referred to them.
The case demonstrates the difficulties which the policy of parental choice in education is presenting for multicultural education in state schools.
As multicultural education is cross-curricular in its scope, many parent groups regard the right of a parent to withdraw his/her child from religious education or collective worships (but not sex education) as offering insufficient choice where cultural or religious autonomy is at issue.
This is especially so, given the emphasis on Christianity which the ERA 1988 seems to demand (see Chapter 6).
Proponents of voluntary aided status for certain independent denominational schools could argue that the obstruction of their proposals is compounding the difficulties as well as denying them the choice which is available to other groups.
It is clear that the racial/religious dimension to parental choice of school is likely to become one of the dominant issues in education in the 1990s, making the preference versus policy dichotomy all the more difficult to resolve.
PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY AND SCHOOL ATTENDANCE
Compulsory education came to England and Wales in 1870, and was generally implemented by 1880 (by local by-laws).
Responsibility for ensuring that children were educated was then, as now, placed on parents' shoulders.
In the nineteenth century there was a need to protect children from exploitation by parents as juvenile labour.
Nowadays, parental responsibility may be viewed in the same light for school attendance as for child care generally, namely: ‘the duty to care for the child and to raise him to moral, physical and emotional health…the fundamental task of parenthood and the only justification for the authority it confers’.
Apart from the moral justification for such a legal responsibility, there are also the self-evident economic and social reasons why children should attend school.
In simple terms, a well-educated work-force is necessary to meet the needs of an industrial age, and an education will equip a person to play his or her part in society.
As we shall see, these days the concept of parental responsibility seems to demand considerably more involvement in a child's education than simply packing him or her off to school every day.
How is this involvement to be achieved?
The law on school attendance acts as a rather crude instrument in this regard, although the child-centred philosophy of the Children Act 1989 extends into the area of school attendance and perhaps offers a more appropriate method of enforcing parental responsibility.
As truancy is a major problem in many schools in England and Wales, it is important that all teachers are aware of the law governing enforcement of school attendance, and its limitations.
There has been considerable discussion of the legal enforcement of school attendance in recent years, and wide disagreement about the effectiveness or otherwise of the law.
In the face of sustained high levels of non-excused absenteeism in Britain's schools,(up to one in ten pupils in some secondary schools), there have been increasing calls for more active legal intervention in truancy cases, from head teachers, school inspectors, the DES (Circular 2/86) and a number of MPs.
Lining up in opposition are those who favour less use of the legal options in truancy cases, preferring policies which place greater emphasis on the causes of truancy.
Many LEAs deliberately try to avoid invoking the formal legal procedures unless absolutely necessary and have developed procedures which enable individual truancy cases to be examined ‘in the round’, with diagnostic and remedial intervention which obviates the need to press for legal sanctions.
Yet a number of head teachers believe that reluctance on the part of some LEAs at present to prosecute parents for the poor school attendance of their children is contributing significantly to high levels of truancy.
Nevertheless, some LEAs are adopting tough measures.
In some areas, ‘truancy patrols’ have been set up, consisting of teams of usually two persons (an education welfare officer (EWO) and a police officer) who question youngsters who look as though they should be at school.
Then, it the child's explanation is unconvincing, the team visits the parents.
The Elton Report advocated ‘truancy sweeps’ of this nature to maximise attendance and reduce juvenile crime.
In some cases LEAs operating such patrols are pressing magistrates to impose stiff penalties on parents of truants.
Meanwhile, the Children Act 1989 purports to offer LEAs a new legal solution to non-attendance at school — the Education Supervision Order.
Defining truancy
Before considering the legal enforcement of school attendance in depth it is necessary to understand what is meant by school absenteeism or ‘truancy’.
It has rightly been suggested that there is no legal definition of truancy.
But there are, of course, provisions governing compulsory education.
In law, a parent is required by section 36 of the Education Act 1944 to ensure that his/her child of  compulsory school age (5–16 years) receives ‘efficient full-time education, suitable to his age, ability and aptitude, either by regular attendance at school or otherwise’.
Leaving aside the possibility of the parental duty being satisfied by the child being efficiently (and so on) educated ‘otherwise’ than at school, in view of its relative practical insignificance, parents are under a legal obligation to ensure both that the child receives a proper education and, if registered at school, that s/he attends regularly (Education Act 1944, section 39).
Neither regular' attendance nor ‘full-time education’ are defined in the Education Act 1944.
It could be argued that failure to attend for, for example, part of one school day during any particular week, would not be truancy under the law.
This point is academic — first, because so much of this type of absenteeism goes unnoticed or unrecorded (it was described as ‘hidden’ truancy by the Pack Report), and second, because, realistically, the use of legal procedures would probably not be contemplated by any LEA until the problem had worsened and discussion with parents had failed to resolve it.
Much truancy in schools is of the ‘hidden’ variety (in one survey of fifth-formers, 52 per cent.
admitted to playing truant for the odd lesson here or there); as such it possibly lies beyond the scope of the law at present.
In this respect, the law on compulsory school attendance clearly has its limitations.
Cases of more persistent and ‘regular’ truancy fall squarely within the remit of the law (see below).
It is in the context of such cases that discussion of the merits or otherwise of legal intervention is really centred.
Under the law, there is no truancy if a child has the school's permission to be absent or if his/her absence from school is occasioned by: sickness of the child (not of his/her parent); or unavoidable cause affecting the child and generally involving an emergency; or a day of religious observance; or ‘the school…is not within walking distance…and no suitable arrangements have been made by the LEA for (the child's) transport…or for boarding accommodation’.
This rather limited list of excuses, laid down in section 39(2) of the 1944 Act, must be regarded as exhaustive.
Note that the law relating to the last of these excuses, concerning distance to school from home and transport arrangements, has been amended following the decision of the House of Lords in Rogers v Essex County Council (1986).
In this case a child's shortest distance to school along public thoroughfares was just less than 3 miles.
Section 39(5) of the 1944 Act states that ‘walking distance’ is 2 miles, or 3 miles if the child is aged 8 or over, ‘measured by the nearest available route’.
It was argued by the LEA that it therefore had no obligation to provide transport.
The parents contended that the shortest route in the case of their 12-year-old daughter was not truly ‘available’ because it was isolated and unlit and involved crossing difficult terrain.
Lord Ackner felt that the route did not cease to be available simply because it was not possible for an unaccompanied child to walk it without danger.
The test was whether  a child ‘accompanied as necessary’ could use it with reasonable safety.
More recently, the House of Lords held that in fulfilling his/her duty in relation to section 36 the parent had to do ‘those things that are reasonably practicable to be done and which an ordinary prudent parent would do’.
In the context of section 39(2) this might include ‘accompanying the child in situations where it would be unsafe for the child to go to school unaccompanied’, where the child did live (only just in this more recent case) within ‘walking distance’.
It was felt that councils ought to consider the practicability of the child being accompanied in the particular circumstances.
Following the Rogers decision, an amendment was made to the law requiring LEAs to make such transport arrangements as they deem necessary for the purpose of facilitating the attendance of pupils at school.
LEAs must, when deciding whether to provide transport for a child, have regard (amongst other things) to ‘the age of the pupil, and the nature of the route, or alternative routes, which he could reasonably be expected to take’.
The legal definition of truancy incorporates no distinction between its different forms.
There are, perhaps, three categories of what a teacher might call ‘truancy’: simple non-attendance, parentally condoned absence, and school refusal/phobia.
Parentally condoned absenteeism can, according to research studies over the past ten or so years, account for as much as 50–75 per cent of non-excused absenteeism.
Many recent government reports confirm its continuing presence.
But is parentally condoned absenteeism distinguishable from ‘truancy’?
There is a divergence of opinion on this question: Galloway, for example, argues that there is such a distinction, whilst others (for example , the Pack Committee) have defined all cases of non-excused absence as truancy.
In yet another classification, Reid distinguishes between truancy and less serious forms of poor attendance at school.
There clearly is much disagreement among academics and professionals about what is meant by ‘truancy’.
It is, therefore, perhaps understandable that the law continues to cover truancy in its broadest sense, using regular attendance as its yardstick.
The enforcement of attendance
So far as the enforcement of school attendance is concerned, increasing attempts are being made to control poor attendance from the fringe of the legal system and outside it.
Invocation of legal procedures, in particular court action, seems to have declined in recent years.
This has certainly been the case in Liverpool, where truancy prosecutions and care proceedings per annum fell by 40 per cent between 1981 and 1987 — although there has been a slight increase over the past couple of years.
Meanwhile, the development of administrative networks has intensified and tactics from counselling to  cajoling have been employed, as the efficacy of the legal procedures and their sanctions in the fight against truancy increasingly comes to be doubted in some quarters.
The pre-court ‘tribunal’ investigation employed in Sheffield and the growing emphasis being placed on ways that schools can improve pupils' motivation to attend through curriculum development and new approaches to teaching, serve as illustrations of the perceived inappropriateness of formal legal intervention other than in extreme cases.
There are several reasons for the dislike of the legal procedures.
For one thing, they are perceived as essentially punitive since they ultimately involve criminal prosecution or the ‘sanction’ of a care order.
If a child is not registered at school the LEA must issue a school attendance order (SAO) against the parents under section 37(1) of the Education Act 1944.
Failure to comply with the SAO is a summary offence, as is failure to cause a pupil registered at a school to attend regularly (see section 39(1)).
Before the changes contained in the Children Act 1989 came into effect the LEA, when contemplating prosecution, had to consider the appropriateness or otherwise of instituting care proceedings under section 1 (2)(e) of the Children and Young Persons Act (CYPA) in the juvenile court (on the ground that a child was ‘not receiving full-time education suitable to his age, ability and aptitude’), instead of or as well as prosecuting (see Education Act 1944 section 40(2)).
Grenville pointed out that although no legal duty to attend school rests with the child, s/he might find her/himself the subject of ‘welfare sanctions’.
Prior to the Children Act 1989 there might be a care order (400 were made in 1987), transferring parental responsibilities to the local authority indefinitely, or a supervision order for a specified period (of up to three years), with a social worker attached to supervise the child's resumption of full-time schooling.
Reid suggested that the CYPA had ‘led to truancy being considered as a symptom of distress which is seen as being allied to the social and educational problems of the individual child’.
Yet as he went on to say, the procedure, whatever its eventual remedial consequences, had ‘punitive consequences’.
Moreover, care orders have been obtained on the education ground without much difficulty, the courts often taking the view that if the child was not receiving a suitable education it was likely that the separate care and control test would almost certainly have been satisfied.
In one case, noted earlier, an order was made when a child from a good home was kept away from school because of the parents' opposition to comprehensive schools.
The Children Act 1989 will replace care orders in truancy cases with ‘education supervision orders’, likely to be seen as a more constructive and less punitive form of order (see below).
Although supervision was the most common form of disposal in truancy cases under section 1(2) (e)(and may become even more standard practice under the Children Act 1989), the practice adopted in  Leeds magistrates' court of adjourning such proceedings as a threat to the parents to improve the child's attendance or else the child might be made the subject of an order, was claimed to be more effective as well as reducing overall levels of local juvenile delinquency.
Cases were sometimes adjourned repeatedly, with a review each time the child reappeared in court.
Although the results achieved by the Leeds adjournment system appeared to favour its widespread adoption, this has not happened, although adjournment has been pressed for in some parts of the country — for example, in South Wales — and has been regarded as useful in certain cases by many authorities.
However, the Leeds system has been criticised on various grounds, the major complaint being that repeated adjournment of individual cases, and randomised outcomes to test whether adjournment or supervision was the more effective, was illegal.
If cases were selected for a particular disposal at random, Galloway suggested, how could proper consideration be being given to the welfare of the child in every case?
Another criticism of the Leeds adjournment system was that it added further stress to socially disadvantaged people already living under stressful conditions.
On the other hand, the Leeds researchers found that the effect of repeated court adjournments on the family, not least the inconvenience, was one reason for the system's success.
Under the pre-Children Act 1989 regime, between 10 and 25 per cent of care cases involving truants resulted in a residential care order.
Not only does such an arrangement disrupt the child's schooling — although arguably it has already been badly disrupted by the child's absenteeism — but it can often also be a traumatic experience for the child, entrenching the resentment and disaffection which were among the major causes of the child's truancy in the first place.
Under the Children Act 1989 a child's lack of suitable education had ceased to be a specific ground for taking him/her into care.
According to the minister, David Mellor, ‘none of us wants…to continue with the care order on education grounds, even though its use is declining, because that would not meet the spirit of the times’.
So far as prosecution is concerned, the most likely outcome, should a guilty decision be reached (most parents plead guilty), is a fine.
(The Children Act 1989 has abolished a rarely used power in section 40(1) of the Education Act 1944 to imprison the parent for up to one month.)
Although prosecution followed by a fine can bring home to parents the reality of their child's non-attendance problem, a financial penalty is likely to be inappropriate when imposed on what is often a poor family whose financial problems are already one of the factors threatening family stability.
For this reason, amongst others, Reid's recent suggestion that perhaps parents in Britain should, like those in France, lose some child benefit if it is proved that their children are truanting —‘Fines imposed on parents should be collected directly from child benefit’— deserves rejection.
(Note that the law seems to  assume that it is the father who should be prosecuted unless the mother alone has custody.)
The Leeds researchers claim that the system developed there, the adjournment system, has resulted in lower truancy rates than elsewhere in the country.
But many other researchers have concluded that legal intervention is of extremely limited value in truancy cases.
The findings of a major study in Sheffield between 1976 and 1978 lent ‘no support to the view that formal action encourages parents to ensure that their children attend more regularly in the future’.
Although legal intervention is often seen as a means of last resort in cases of extremely persistent truancy, the problem may, by then, have become too firmly entrenched.
Experience in Leeds suggests that intervention must take place at an early stage in order to be effective.
Truancy is most prevalent amongst young people approaching the end of their period of compulsory schooling when there is little point in taking legal action.
It is increasingly being asked whether the solution to the problem of truancy beyond the age of 13 lies in changes at school to alleviate the boredom, and increase the motivation to participate, of less academic pupils.
This point is considered further below.
Legal intervention in truancy cases has focused on the notion of parental responsibility.
There is a tendency amongst teachers and EWOs to blame parents for most instances of truancy.
Such a viewpoint is mirrored in the legal procedures, which put an emphasis on a child's return to school via sanctions against parents as the solution to individual cases of truancy.
But Galloway concluded from his study of procedures in Sheffield that prosecution will often be of little value, unless parents can be given a positive reason for insisting on their child's attendance at school.
This would involve something more than the counselling which EWOs routinely provide in truancy cases.
It requires changes in the way that parental involvement in their child's education is fostered by the school as well as changes in what the school has to offer the child.
Meanwhile the procedure adopted in truancy cases should, rather than being geared towards punishment of parents, be a constructive process, involving parent and child.
Nevertheless, even the staunchest advocates of non-legal solutions to truancy seem to accept that legal procedures must continue to be available.
Indeed there are some who will continue to argue that truancy rates would decline if tougher punitive measures against parents were taken, perhaps as a ‘short, sharp shock’ at an early stage of truancy, to ‘forestall later persistent absence.
But in the United States of America court sanctions are rarely used; there is an emphasis on personal and family support .
A visit there convinced one EWO that there should be more emphasis on home — school liaison and an end to the practice of ‘looking at school attendance as an enforcement issue.
Many professionals feel that criminal proceedings are inappropriate and that care-type procedures, which place an emphasis on the welfare of the child, are to be preferred despite their limitations.
The DHSS Review of Child Care Law (1985) suggested that a new form of supervision order, the Education Supervision Order (ESO), should be introduced.
Provision for this is now made in the Children Act 1989.
Before instituting criminal proceedings for non-attendance, an LEA must consider whether it would be appropriate, instead of or as well as prosecuting, to apply for an ESO.
Before applying for the order the LEA would normally have to consult the local authority social services committee.
An ESO may be made only if the court is satisfied that the child ‘is of compulsory school age and is not being properly educated’.
Under an ESO the supervisor will be under a duty to ‘advise, assist and befriend, and give directions’ to —(1) the supervised child; and (2) his parent(s); in such a way as will ensure that the child is ‘properly educated’.
The supervisor will give directions to the parents (or persons exercising parental responsibility), but should take steps to ascertain and, so far as is reasonably practicable, take into account, the wishes and feelings of the child (as appropriate, having regard to the child's age and understanding) and parents.
The element of parental responsibility is preserved by paragraph 18 of Schedule 3 under which a parent of a child who is the subject of an ESO commits an offence (maximum fine £400) for failing to comply with any directions given by the supervisor.
However, there are various defences available — for example, that the parent took reasonable steps to comply with the direction or that the direction was ‘unreasonable’.
Moreover, it would appear that the supervisor would be expected to consider other possible remedies (such as making new directions) before referring the matter for prosecution.
If there is a ‘persistent failure’ of a child to comply with directions the case must be referred to the local authority social services department for investigation of the circumstances.
The purpose is clearly to determine whether any other forms of intervention would be in the child's best interests.
An ESO will remain in force for one year, but at any time within three months before its expiry date an application for its extension may be made to the court.
The court could extend it for up to three years.
Further extensions would be possible.
The order will terminate when the child ceases to be of compulsory school age or if a care order is made.
The ESO provisions above have certain of the characteristics of the CYPA supervision order.
But the important difference is that truancy per se is more clearly separated from other child welfare issues, and this is confirmed by providing for LEA supervision in the Act.
The ESO has the advantage of offering greater scope for really getting to the root of truancy problems by keeping the education welfare service in close contact with the families with which it has been working.
Social workers, who have carried out routine supervision under CYPA, are said to concentrate too much on family dynamics whilst ignoring the child's educational difficulties.
On the other hand, research has  shown that in their dealings with families, EWOs, many of whom are not qualified social workers, are not likely to focus on the surrounding causes of truancy.
In any event, the education welfare service is frequently too busy and inadequately staffed to exercise the kind of supervision which enables the causes of truancy to be explored fully (nor to work with schools in order to develop links with parents, as advocated by the Better Schools White Paper in 1985).
The Elton Report called on LEAs to maintain adequate numbers of EWOs.
Unless extra resources and training are made available, the ESO procedure laid down in the Children Act 1989 may not herald a new emphasis on the causes of truancy.
An encouraging sign was the availability in 1990–91 of education support grant (covering 60 per cent of the cost of specific projects) for initiatives to improve school attendance, including the improvement of home — school liaison via extending the role of EWOs.
Schools and absenteeism
Given the emphasis currently being placed on the role that schools should be playing, by providing a more socially relevant curriculum, more student-centred learning and a less alienating environment so as to prevent truancy, it is clearly important that education becomes the focus of any intervention.
It may be observed that the object of EWO intervention under the ESO is to ensure, in the words of the Act, that the child is ‘properly educated’.
The ‘education’ focus offered by the law should extend into closer monitoring and intervention by teachers.
Indeed, another type of initiative which was eligible for three-year education support grant from 1990–91 was projects enabling teachers to play a more active role in relation to non-attendance.
Some researchers have observed that teachers are prone to ignore truancy, being less than sympathetic to those whom they regard as ‘non-conformers’ and whose absence means a smaller and easier class to manage.
The Elton Report advocates senior school staff carrying out random attendance checks on individual lessons.
School-based initiatives are far more likely to prevent either casual truancy or its exacerbation into persistent truancy.
Truancy and the law: some conclusions
Truancy is a matter of grave social concern; but is a solution possible?
Galloway has commented that ‘teachers and magistrates who see legal sanctions as the solution to the problem of poor attendance might be more happily occupied in search of the Holy Grail’.
(It remains to be seen whether the ESO is seen as a ‘sanction’).
Suggestions about school-based strategies, including changes in schooling, emanating from researchers and Her Majesty's Inspectorate will appeal to some  teachers; others will regard the law as rightly emphasising parental responsibility and in need of tougher enforcement.
A similar schism has emerged in the education welfare service between those who favour sanctions and those who prefer a more supportive role by EWOs.
Going to law in truancy cases is undoubtedly the ‘easier’ option, and accords with the prevalent notion in child law of parental responsibility.
For this reason, amongst others, it may be anticipated that many parents of children who truant will, at the end of the day, continue to be dealt with in punitive fashion.
This is unfortunate, for there is evidence that much more effective methods of tackling the problem can be adopted, without necessarily undermining in any way the principle of parental responsibility.
RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES IN RESPECT OF CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL EDUCATIONAL NEEDS
Since April 1983, when the Education Act 1981 was introduced, LEAs have had important responsibilities regarding the identification and assessment of children with special educational needs and the provision of suitable education for such children.
But in addition to imposing duties on LEAs, a major feature of the Act, the regulations made under it, and the Circulars issued in respect of it, is an emphasis on securing parental involvement.
As we shall see, some argue that while the law, modelled on the recommendations of the Warnock Committee, establishes a range of parental rights and duties, parental involvement in practice is hindered by a number of factors.
Singled out in particular has been the poor record of LEAs in involving parents effectively in the assessment process — something which the latest government circular on special educational needs seeks to redress.
The rights of parents under the Act concern consultation, information and appeal (in each case within limits).
In a number of cases there has been recourse to the courts by parents anxious to secure appropriate provision for their child in the face of local authority opposition.
There is not the space here for a detailed examination of the regime laid down in the 1981 Act and the Education (Special Educational Needs) Regulations 1983, as amended.
However, an outline is offered because it is important for all teachers to be aware of the legal framework of special education, and not just those working with the disabled in special schools.
Approximately one-fifth of all school children are believed to have special educational needs of one sort or another.
Moreover, an important principle in the 1981 Act is that of ‘integration’— the education of many of the children with special needs must, so far as practicable, take place in ordinary schools.
Because parental involvement is such a key feature, teachers also need to know about parents' rights and responsibilities under the legislation, in addition to those of the school and LEA.
Special educational needs defined
Under the Act, a child has special educational needs if s/he has ‘a learning difficulty which calls for special educational provision to be made for him’.
‘Learning difficulty’ is thus a key concept.
It is consonant with the Warnock Report's recommendation of a broader definition of special educational needs than one based simply on disability or deficiency.
One of the problems to have emerged is, however, the relativity of the concept of special educational need, which is said to be causing ‘uncertainty and confusion’ amongst LEAs, and consequently ‘variations in the extent of and provision for special educational needs from LEA to LEA’.
‘Learning difficulty’ is defined in the Act in a less than precise manner.
The House of Commons Select Committee which examined the operation of the legislation concluded that on balance the definitions should remain as they are, although better guidance for LEAs would be desirable.
The first type of learning difficulty is where a child ‘has a significantly greater difficulty in learning than the majority of children of his/her age’.
The second type is where the child has a disability which prevents or makes it difficult for him or her to make use of educational facilities of a kind generally provided in schools — within the LEA's area — for children of his/her age.
A child who is under the age of 5 and who is likely to have a learning difficulty when s/he reaches that age also has a learning difficulty.
If a child is aged under 2 then any provision which is made for him/her by the LEA is stated to be special educational provision; in the case of a child aged 2 or over it is ‘educational provision which is additional to, or otherwise different from, the educational provision made generally for children of that age in schools maintained by the LEA’.
The combined effect of these provisions is that the question of whether or not a child has special educational needs depends not so much on the child's specific needs considered in isolation, but rather on the appropriateness or otherwise of existing provision.
As stated above, if a child has a learning difficulty which calls for special educational provision to be made for him/her, the child has special educational needs under the Act.
The emphasis on ‘learning difficulty’ has given rise to several problems, identified by the House of Commons Select Committee on Education in 1987.
They found that ‘learning difficulty’ was being interpreted as poor achievement in traditional academic subjects and was not regarded as an appropriate description of emotional and behavioural difficulties.
They also found that some combined health and education needs were not considered to be adequately covered by the definition, citing speech therapy as a prime example.
In fact, the courts have now ruled (in the case of R v Lancashire County Council ex parte CM ) that speech therapy could be special educational provision.
Provided that a need for speech  therapy is, on the facts of any particular case, an educational need, then an LEA will have to ensure its provision.
Ex parte CM was one of several important cases in this field, and demonstrates the determination of some parents to secure appropriate provision for their child.
Another important case, which reveals a good deal about the workings of the legislation, is R v Hampshire County Council ex parte J .
Here the LEA had argued that a child (J) with dyslexia did not have special educational needs requiring special educational provision for the purposes of the 1981 Act, because he was an intelligent child whose needs could be provided for in an ordinary school.
J was aged 13½, was of small stature and was asthmatic.
His dyslexia caused a significant weakness in his capacity for continuous reading, spelling and essay writing.
His high intelligence resulted in his being depressed and frustrated by his inabilities.
The LEA proposed to place the boy at a comprehensive school.
His mother, who was opposed to this, sought medical opinion.
According to a doctor with considerable experience of cases of dyslexia, the boy was ‘moderately dyslexic, but the effects…are offset by his exceptionally high IQ which means that those effects are modified but not eliminated….
He is immensely creative’.
In the doctor's opinion the boy clearly had special educational needs for the purposes of the 1981 Act.
The doctor recommended a place at a named independent special school.
But the LEA refused to offer the applicant's mother a grant for the child to be educated at that school.
She then initiated the statutory procedure under section 9 of the Act to have an assessment made of J's educational needs.
The authority made an assessment, but did not consider that the boy's needs were such that it should determine in a statement the special educational provision that should be made for him.
(This aspect of ‘statementing’, which falls under section 7 of the Act, is considered below.)
The authority took the view that J's difficulties did not preclude him from following ‘a normal mainstream curriculum suited to pupils of his age’.
It did not accept that J had a learning difficulty.
In the High Court, Taylor J found it ‘very difficult to see how one could come to any other conclusion than that J had a learning difficulty’.
His Honour said that J's dyslexia ‘would appear to give him significantly greater difficulty in learning than the majority of children of his age’, and that J's high intelligence was ‘neither here nor there’ in relation to the specific cause of the learning difficulty.
Moreover, Taylor J felt that J's dyslexia was a ‘disability’ and thus was covered by the second definition of learning difficulty (above).
There was also a fair amount of discussion in this case about the meaning of the phrase ‘special educational provision’.
This, as mentioned above, is defined as ‘educational provision which is additional to, or otherwise different from, the educational provision made for children of [the child's]age in schools maintained by the LEA’.
The LEA had argued that if a particular type of educational  provision was generally available to children of the applicant's age in their schools, then it was not a special educational provision.
Thus, logically, any generally available additional provision for deaf or partially blind or disturbed children, and others such as dyslexic children, was not special educational provision.
Taylor J rejected this contention, holding that special educational provision was different from provision made to ‘the general run of normal children, to the normal majority’.
Thus provision intended to help dyslexic children with their special difficulty is special educational provision.
Identification and assessment of special educational needs
Parental rights and responsibilities are built into the arrangements for the identification and assessment of special educational needs.
Formal assessment of a child believed to have special needs which require special educational provision must be conducted, once the child has been identified either by the school, via its non-statutory assessment monitoring of pupils and assessment under the National Curriculum regime, or by the parents.
The school has a duty (which rests with the governors) to identify pupils with special educational needs and to ensure that appropriate provision is made.
Whilst the manner of non-statutory assessment is a matter for the school or LEA the Act prescribes a formal assessment procedure .
The relevant DES guidance has been revised to improve the advice to LEAs about how to secure effective parental involvement in the assessment process (see DES Circular 22/89).
Parents, who have no right to prevent an assessment, must be informed of the LEA's proposal to assess the child, given the name of an officer of the LEA from whom further advice may be obtained, and notified of the right to make representations (orally or in writing) within a minimum period of 29 days from service of notice by the LEA.
Once the period of notice has expired the LEA must proceed with the assessment, provided it considers it appropriate having regard to the representations which have been made.
Advice from a variety of professional sources (teachers, educational psychologists, doctors and others) must be sought by the LEA when carrying out the assessment.
This advice should relate to the child's home background and medical history, and to his/her difficulties and the provision required in respect of them.
The child will be examined as part of the assessment process.
Parental responsibility appears here in the form of a duty to ensure that the child is examined; there is an offence on failing without reasonable cause to comply with requirements of a notice requiting the child to be examined at a stipulated place and time.
Parents do have some important rights, however.
They may attend the examination (but not any case conference, although the Circular advocates their presence whenever  possible) and may submit information.
The House of Commons Select Committee found that insufficient weight was being given to parents' views in the assessment process.
The Circular emphasises that parents must be seen as ‘partners’ in the assessment process, although the evidence is that parents are by no means equal partners here.
The language used and the complexity of the procedures — both of which cause parents some difficulty — reinforce the seemingly inevitable ‘distancing’ of parents from the professionals.
The same may also be said of the existence of a right of appeal.
Parents have a right to appeal to the Secretary of State when the LEA has decided, following the assessment, that it is not required to determine the special educational provision that should be made.
The Secretary of State can only direct the LEA to reconsider its decision.
The fact that there is a right of appeal here demonstrates the importance of the LEA's decision on this matter.
If the LEA's decision is that it should determine the provision that should be made, it must make a statement of the child's special educational needs, in a form prescribed by regulation.
The existence of such a statement confirms that the child has greater special educational needs than most other children with such needs.
About 2 per cent of the school population has statements, but across LEAs the proportion varies from 4.2 per cent to 0.04 per cent.
This compares with an estimated proportion of the school population with special educational needs of 20 per cent.
In the case of R v Hereford and Worcester County council ex parte Lashford , the Court of Appeal confirmed that there is no duty on LEAs to maintain a statement in respect of every child with special educational needs.
The case concerned a 13-year-old girl whom the LEA accepted was a slow learner with special educational needs.
The LEA considered that the child's needs could be met in an ordinary school and that no statement was necessary.
The parents had come to the conclusion, after soliciting expert opinion, that her needs could best be met in a special (and, as it happened, private) school.
The parents had appealed to the Secretary of State, but had been unsuccessful.
The Court, in upholding the LEA's right not to determine the special educational provision that should be made for the child, drew an important distinction.
They distinguished between a child who has special educational needs, and a child who has special educational needs which are such that the LEA may be of the opinion that they should determine the special educational provision that should be made for him — in the words of Nicholls LJ, ‘not special needs simpliciter , but special needs that satisfy a further condition’.
Part of the parents' case had rested on the following argument: within the school which the child attended a decision had been taken to include her in a remedial class; thus, the special educational provision that should be made for her had already been determined; so a statement (under section 7(1) of the Act) should follow.
But Dillon LJ said:
if the [LEA]does not itself decide the special educational provision that should be made for the child, but leaves that to be decided by the school, with remedial classes and other facilities as may be available in the school, the [LEA]is not itself determining the special educational provision for the child within the meaning in section 7(1); consequently, the [LEA]is not obliged to make and maintain a statement….
A decision to leave what is to be done for a particular child…to the school is not itself, in my judgment, a determination of the special educational provision for the child…which would necessitate the making of a statement.
The Lashford case thus demonstrates the extent of LEA discretion under the 1981 Act.
Hannon's prognosis of the Act, that ‘LEAs will be able to draw the line between the ‘statemented’ and the ‘unstatemented’where they please’, would appear to have been accurate.
The case also confirms the limitations to the patchwork of parental rights provided by the 1981 Act.
Parents have various opportunities to question aspects of any statement which the LEA is proposing to make.
They are entitled to receive a copy of the proposed statement and to make representations, or arrange a meeting with an officer for discussion of the statement, within 15 days.
They must be notified of the LEA's subsequent decision concerning the statement (the LEA can modify the statement, leave it as it is, or determine not to make it).
If and when the statement is actually made, parents are entitled to a copy of it.
They must also be informed of their right of appeal to an appeal committee under section 8 of the Act and the name of a person from whom advice and information concerning their child's special educational needs may be obtained.
The appeal committee's decision is not binding on the LEA, but there is a further right of appeal to the Secretary of State who can confirm, amend or revoke the statement.
If the LEA declines to make a statement, the value of an appeal is somewhat limited in that the Secretary of State may direct the LEA to reconsider its decision, but cannot impose a decision on the authority.
Parents of children have a right to request a reassessment of their children; the LEA must comply unless to do so would be ‘unreasonable’(in the case of children who are not statemented) or ‘inappropriate’ and there has been no assessment in the previous six months (in the case of statemented children).
A reassessment of statemented children must, in any event, take place within six months either side of a child's fourteenth birthday.
But it has been held that although all statements must be reviewed at least once a year, a LEA is not obliged to re-assess a statemented child's special educational needs before s/he is that age unless the parents so request.
some conclusions
The House of Commons Select Committee on Education found that although the Act had enhanced the position of parents in many  respects, there were ‘still situations in which parents feel their contribution…to be insufficient or ineffective’.
Thus perhaps the fact that a number of legal cases have been brought is indicative of some parents' resistance to the subservient, rather than partnership, role which some say they are forced to assume by the Act (regardless of exhortations to LEAs to extend parental involvement).
Wolfendale argues that the involvement of parents has been fostered by professional and parental convictions rather than the law.
Edis and Brabazon have suggested that parental involvement would be improved if parents were given more extensive rights.
They argue that in some cases parents' contribution depends on their ‘tenacity, willingness to fight for their rights and a belief in their children's educational capacity’.
One suspects, however, that the lack of appropriate provision stems most often from the inadequacy of resources, about which parents can do little.
Although supporting the Act at the time of its enactment, the Labour Party's education spokesman, Neil Kinnock, highlighted lack of resources as likely to be the major impediment to the legislation's success.
The Select Committee on Education has found that the lack of specific resources has restricted the 1981 Act's implementation.
The Committee concluded that a commitment of extra resources was needed if significant further progress was to be made.
Evidence suggests that some LEAs have been redistributing resources to meet their obligations under the 1981 Act.
But given the fixed level of those overall resources, the inevitable result has been a reduction in resources for the remainder of the school population.
In any event, Her Majesty's Inspectorate have concluded that special education in England and Wales is ‘not well prepared’ for the challenges of the ERA 1988 reforms.
Access to information
INTRODUCTION: THE POWER OF INFORMATION
Education provides two major areas for arguments over access to information.
The first concerns the individual pupil's curricular record, what is in it and who may see it.
It is a fairly quiet fight, involving privacy and confidentiality, professionalism and relationships and the respective roles of parents and their children.
The second is the broader area of information about the education authority's policies and arrangements and about the individual school itself.
The clash of government policy may be heard here and there is some confusion between consumer and democrat.
Here the battles over sex education and opting out will take place, but there will be further battles over the ability to govern and effective use of resources.
Consumers do not always win, and free lunches are in decline.
Information and power have a very close relationship.
If it is true that ‘Political power and the effective control of communication go together’ and political power at a local level may concern formation of council or school policy; equally, consumer power depends on knowledge for choice and accountability while producer power needs control of the base materials, including know-how.
Power over individuals or autonomy rely on the control of personal information.
Power of professionalism involves both submission of the client to the professional's better judgement and a network of professional and inter-professional relationships, and probably rivalries, buttressed by exclusive sharing of information.
It is well to recognise that decisions about information-holding or access are, to an extent, always decisions about power.
We can then properly assess the value and consequence of an acquisition or transfer of power.
It is also well to recognise the confusions that arise in this area from the use of words or phrases with ill-defined but sometimes emotive meanings or with very different meanings.
‘Confidentiality’ may mean my right (or wish) that you do not pass on what I have told you (or don't identify me as the informant), or it may mean my wish (or right) that you do not pass on information about me, or, with ‘professional’prefixed, it may mean that our group will support each other by saying nothing about each other 's judgements, competencies or foibles.
In one statute ‘confidential information’ means information  disclosure of which is forbidden by statute or by the civil servant who gave it to the local authority.
It should be said at the outset that this is not the usual legal meaning of the word.
‘Privacy’ is a word even less susceptible of exact meaning, though probably everyone could define something they considered to be private.
In the present context the nearest to a definition might be the right to control who knows information about me.
Someone has pointed out that this would require an ability to control the Royal Mail to ensure that letters did not get lost!
‘Right to know’ is an emotive phrase used in campaigns to widen access to information.
But paradoxically the public right-to-know argument, which may be a pure power argument for involvement in decision making or an argument just to know what has been decided (and why), may conflict fundamentally with the individual right to know argument which may say, ‘I have a right to know information and decisions about me and to prevent anyone else from knowing’— the confidentiality argument (or one of them).
‘Professionalism’ and ‘relationships’(or ‘confidential relationships’) are also relevant words in this discussion which may be used in a way that is highly supportive of, or very antagonistic to, access to information by the person to whom it relates.
Thus professionalism may be seen as expertise applied to and building up the relationship with the individual pupil, where a trusting relationship which can share information and build autonomy is seen as a goal.
The professional takes power to give to the client self-determination.
Or professionalism and relationships may be seen mainly within the professional group.
Information may be shared within the group but its cohesion depends on limiting the sharing of information outside the group.
The strength, and even survival, of individuals depends on the cohesion of the group.
The loyalty of confidentiality is seen to be owed to members of the group and those relationships are the crucial ones which must be protected.
For many years the arguments for access to information have emphasised on the one hand the private values of privacy and autonomy and on the other hand the public values of democratic involvement in decision making.
In the last decade a new basis for argument has been that of consumerism and accountability.
As a general argument it straddles the two others, being more limited than either but broader than each.
A consumer is not the only person to whom information relates, but the consumer seeks more than personal information.
Accountability or value for money is not the only reason for knowing what government is doing and having a say in it, but the consumer may have a more direct effect on policy and the producer than any number of democratic arguers.
THE PUPIL'S RECORD
The development of a right of parents and pupils to see the pupil's personal school record has not been a specifically education issue but has arisen as part of the wider campaign for access to personal records.
Until recently what was on the child's school record and whether parent or child could see it was a vexed question.
There was little consistency on record-keeping, some authorities having extensive personal files while others kept only the minimum information.
Some of the tragic child-abuse cases publicly investigated in the 1970s and 1980s highlighted the need for schools both to record information about possible child abuse and to share it with other agencies.
In less extreme circumstances others were expressing concern that the holding of information and its transmission from teacher to teacher and from school to school might unfairly label and prejudice a child.
The NUT, reporting to the Younger Committee on Privacy in 1972, proposed that reports about a child's misbehaviour should be kept from parents and that information on the pupil or his home background ‘which might be gleaned from hearsay or possibly based on malicious gossip’ should not be kept on a permanent record.
Any information on parents should not be passed from one school to another.
For information which was on the file, there were very different approaches to letting parents or children have a look.
Most authorities kept files well away from parents and children.
Arguments against allowing access included that people would not write frankly if they knew their comments would be seen, it could be important to record facts which could not be proved and suspicions or impressions, the child or parent might be made unhappy by a teacher's judgement and it might impair the relationship or discourage the child, and access would lead to constant arguments about fairness or relevance of information.
A few authorities, however, have long had a formal policy of allowing parents to see their children's school records, and individual schools have sometimes had an open files policy and reported beneficial results to the motivation of pupils and relations with parents.
A general shift of attitude by teachers towards openness arose, at least in part, from their arguments in support of a right to see reports and references on the teachers themselves.
In 1984 the NUT reported ‘considerations of natural justice which led the union to adopt a policy opposed to confidential reports and references on teachers apply equally to the current demand from many parents for a right of access to files kept on their children’.
The union proposed that in principle parents should have access to their children's files.
The Assistant Masters and Mistresses Association (AMMA) in 1985 studied the arguments for and against access and concluded, ‘the opening up of school records to parents and older students would greatly reduce understandable, if unfounded, fears of needless secrecy,…serve  to strengthen the relationship between educational establishments, parents and pupils…[and]improve the quality and value of the records.
OPENING THE RECORD
The law now reflects this basic right of access.
The Data Protection Act 1984, whose only specific reference to education concerns examination results, gives a general right of subject access (with few exceptions) to all computerised personal information.
The Act requires data users to register, declaring the sources of data, uses and people to whom it may be disclosed.
It also provides a general right for the data subject to see and have copies of the data relating to him.
Information relating to another or which would identify another as its source may not be shown unless that person consents.
Names may have to be blanked out.
Health information is also subject to the doctor's right to refuse disclosure on the ground that it would be likely to cause serious injury to the health of the subject or another.
Apart from these exceptions the subject can see the whole computerised record.
If he disagrees with any part he can have it rectified or removed by agreement or have his dissent recorded and his own version put alongside.
For manual files (which includes the majority of school files) the relevant law is the Education (School Records) Regulations 1989.
The Regulations require from September 1989 that each maintained school, special school and grant-maintained school must keep a curricular record annually updated for each registered pupil at the school.
‘Curricular record’ is defined as a formal record of a pupil's academic achievements, his other skills and abilities and his progress in school (Regulation 4).
The authority and the school have wide discretion as to how the records should be compiled, given the two major purposes of providing basic data on a pupil's progress for other teachers and the parents and providing evidence to support the teacher's assessment of the pupil's level of attainment.
Other information such as behaviour and home circumstances may be included in the record but, if not entirely factual, it should be sufficiently well founded to bear scrutiny by the parents.
The Regulations recognise that a teacher may keep notes on a pupil simply for his or her own use.
These are not part of the formal record (Regulation 7 (2)).
One year's notice was given to enable schools to get the records into order.
From September 1990 parents, and in some cases the pupils themselves, have a right to see the record in so far as it is made after 31 August 1989.
Earlier material may be shown but at the discretion of the school.
Thus all material to be shown will have been compiled in the knowledge that it would be made available.
There are exceptions to access.
There is no duty to disclose information provided by or on behalf of another person other than an  employee of the local education authority, an education welfare officer or the person seeking disclosure.
Thus reports from social services and the medical service and probation service reports are not bound to be disclosed.
On analogy with subject access in social services and housing one might expect the governors to seek the consent of the person compiling the report and for such consent normally to be forthcoming since otherwise the record may clearly be incomplete.
However, it is not even clear in the Regulations that the governors have any such discretion.
It is suggested that an active policy to gain consent and then disclose would be supported by the law.
There is no liability for breach of confidence if consent is obtained.
In an extreme case the European Court of Human Rights decision in Gaskin could be invoked.
Mr Gaskin had been a child in care of the local authority.
He asked to see his social services file and eventually the local authority agreed, provided the donors of information consented.
Most did not.
The European Court held the refusal was a breach of his right to a private and family life, since the file was the major record of his childhood, and there should have been an independent body which could override an improper refusal of consent.
Such a body is now being provided in relation to social services but has not yet been provided for education.
Another perhaps rather negative exception concerns references to a prospective employer or higher education or other training body, though here there is a discretion.
Other exceptions are understandable.
Information concerning or identifying another pupil should not be disclosed, and information, the disclosure of which might cause serious harm to the mental or physical health or emotional condition of the pupil or anyone else, or which indicates that the pupil has or may be likely to suffer child abuse, should not be disclosed.
The law does make provision for a person on a child-abuse register to know and to challenge that decision but the information does not have to come through the school record.
Some other sensitive information has limited disclosure.
Thus only a parent may see information on the record concerning the pupil's racial group, language or religion, and only a parent may see a statement of special educational needs (under the Education Act 1981 — see Chapter 4) or results of the pupil's assessment.
(On the duty on schools to provide information to parents on the pupil's National Curriculum assessment, see the Education (Individual Pupils' Achievements)(Information) Regulations 1990, SI No. 1381 and circular No. 8/90.)
Part of the value of parents having access is to enable inaccuracies to be challenged and corrected.
The Regulations require the governors to arrange procedures for complying with requests for access within 15 school days and for correcting or removing any parts agreed to be inaccurate and to hear appeals.
If the record holder does not agree that an item is inaccurate, the parent is entitled to have a note of his disagreement added to the record.
ACCESS FOR PARENT OR PUPIL?
In much of the discussion it has been assumed that it is a parent who seeks the information.
If access is seen as part of the right of autonomy of the individual, one might ask why parents, rather than the children themselves, should have access.
If it is seen as part of control over quality of education, the parent might ask why the child should be given access at all.
In most cases the issue raises no problems, but estranged parents using the child to fight their bat ties or rebellious teenagers seeking recognition of their maturity and autonomy against over-protective or interventionist parents may see it as an important issue of principle.
The teacher may thus stand in the cross-fire between them.
ft is as well to know the legal position.
The general law is somewhat ambivalent on parents and children, and indeed the rights of children have only recently begun to be recognised.
The House of Lords case of Gillick v West Norfolk and Wisbech AHA (1985) is important in setting out the basic principle.
A mother sought a declaration that the doctors, health authority and Department of Health had no right to provide contraceptive advice and treatment for her children under 16 without parental knowledge and consent.
The rights of parents in relation to their children were thus an issue.
The House of Lords held that parental rights are recognised in law only for so long as they are needed for the protection of the child.
Lord Scarman said: ‘The principle is that parental right or power of control of the person and property of his child exists primarily to enable the parent to discharge his duty of maintenance, protection and education until he [that is, the child]reaches such an age as to be able to look after himself and make his own decisions.’
The principle is thus clear, though difficult to apply in the many practical situations which arise.
In the present context, however, there are further provisions.
The-Data Protection Act 1984 makes no distinction between adults and children.
The data subject is entitled to access personally or to authorise another.
The Registrar advises that if the data user is satisfied that the child understands what he is asking and is acting on his own volition his request must be obeyed.
For a child too young to make an informed request the information may be disclosed to a parent on his behalf.
In Gillick terms, the ability to make an informed request assumes the child to be old enough to make at least that decision for himself.
The Regulations for manual records make the position much easier to administer for the school though they may perhaps cause more family friction.
For a pupil under 16, the parent alone is entitled to access, for a pupil aged 18 or over he alone is entitled and when he is 16 and 17 they both have the right.
The exception to this is that only a parent may receive the results of the pupil's assessment.
Other particular provisions allow parents to be given special information relating to their child.
Thus if the school  head decides to disapply or modify the National Curriculum in respect of a particular child, or to revoke such a direction, a copy of the notice must be sent within three days to at least one parent of the pupil at the registered address.
If necessary the head must take steps to enable the parent to understand the Regulation.
DISCLOSURE AND TRANSFER OF THE CURRICULAR RECORD
Another aspect of the rights of the pupil in relation to his record is his right to have the record disclosed where it will be to his benefit and to prevent disclosure elsewhere.
It may also be very important to him that the record is transferred to his next school.
If the record is computerised, the Data Protection Act 1984 does not give any right to the subject to ensure disclosure.
Rather, the data user, the school or educational authority, has a right to disclose to any registered disclosee though not to anyone else.
The Act makes no provision about transfer of the record.
The position with manual records is again more clear.
The governors are under a duty to ensure that, on receipt of a written request, they transfer the curricular record to the head of a new school or place of education or training to which the pupil has transferred or, from September 1990, disclose the record to one which is considering the pupil for admission.
The institutions in question may not insist on receiving results of assessments ascertaining the pupil's educational achievements though there is nothing to stop the parent passing it on.
The institutions are also not entitled to receive information about the pupil's racial group, religion, home language or court reports.
Thus the Regulations aim to ensure that useful information will be passed on but possibly prejudicial information will not.
It cannot exactly be ascribed as a right of the pupil, however, since he cannot ensure that the other schools and so on ask for the record.
Neither do the Regulations say anything about limits to any other disclosures of the record (apart from the exempt parts).
The general law of confidential information would impose a duty to the donors of information not to use or disclose it beyond the purposes for which it is given without consent of the donors.
Schools entering into an entrepreneurial spirit should not, for example, sell school records to promoters of consumer goods or allow journalists or public relations consultants to leaf through them for good stories.
All staff must be aware that they are confidential and so must not be the topic of gossip.
Relations with the press may cause difficulties and advice should be taken before talking about a pupil.
THE EFFECT OF ACCESS ON RECORD-KEEPING
It is inevitable, and probably salutary, that an open records regime affects the way in which records are kept.
Items stated as fact should be accurate, and often the benefit of access is that their accuracy can be checked.
Care must be taken not to read more than is said into reports from others, particularly since the Regulations exclude access to the original report but a teacher's use of it may be on the record.
For example, a small boy was seen once by an educational psychologist at his parents' request on a problem of which hand he should write with.
The specialist's report to his school mentioned also some transitory emotional difficulties the child was having (while a loved schoolteacher was ill).
Two schools later (his parents having moved house) the boy was ill, and his then head wrote to the consultant treating him that he ‘had previously attended two schools, having transferred from the first because of‘transitory emotional difficulties’(Ed.
Psych.)’.
The result was that his serious physical illness was assumed to be a form of ‘school phobia’ and his parents were threatened with a court order if he did not return to school Access to the file, including the head's letter, would have enabled correction of the factual errors at least and perhaps an accurate diagnosis of his illness to be made.
Accuracy of recorded facts is in everyone's interests.
More difficulty arises over recording a suspicion or allegation, whether about the pupil or his family.
‘A bit concerned over X's honesty, though as yet no evidence’ and ‘Mother professes an interest in his welfare but we hear stories of drinking and late night parties’— both come from school records but could not stand parental scrutiny.
Is it necessary to record the item?
If so, is there supportive evidence?
It may be helpful for the record to include a brief pen-picture of the pupil, to assist the next teacher or school in getting to know the pupil and helping his development.
There is a danger that by remaining on the file the picture acquires a spurious aura of eternal truth.
‘Very much inclined to sulk.
Wants to be liked and likes to hang around and curry favour with teacher.
Very much inclined to cheat.
Rather lovable in spite of all’— was recorded at age 7 and still remained on the secondary school record at age 14.
Schools should have a policy of removing obsolete material.
Some recorded comments would be merely offensive if they were not so potentially damaging.
Another example found in school records, ‘this boy is big, black and smelly’ indicates a use of the school record for quite unjustifiable venting of a personal spleen.
Anyone recording or passing on such a comment is in danger now that records are open.
May critical or unflattering things no longer be written about pupils?
It is possible for teachers to keep a personal notebook which does not form part of the record and is not open to subject access, but  if information is intended to be used officially and passed on to the next teacher it should be treated in the same way as the formal record.
The law of libel reflects this difference.
Access to files sometimes leads people to worry that they will be sued if the record contains unprovable statements.
By the law of defamation the publisher of an untrue statement which brings the subject into ‘hatred, ridicule or contempt’ may have to pay damages.
But qualified privilege exempts the person who made or published the statement without malice in the course of their work to a person with a duty or interest to receive it.
This should be sufficient to protect the teacher preparing or passing on the records in any reasonable circumstances where what is written has a valid purpose.
Comments like ‘big, black and smelly’ can only be malicious and would not be protected.
Liability could follow simply from passing on the statement.
How the law would view the personal notebook is uncertain.
It is quite likely that qualified privilege would not apply here as there is no duty, as part of the teacher's work, to compile an informal, unofficial record.
The teacher who uses this aid will have to be particularly careful to keep it secret and so not publish any libel to anyone at all.
CONFIDENTIALITY OF THE PUPIL'S RECORD
Although the pupil or parent may now see what is in the file, it should otherwise be held in confidence.
In this context, this means used and disclosed only for the purposes for which it is compiled, or for which authority is given, or with the donor's consent or for certain other limited purposes.
There is a general rule that the holder may disclose information held in confidence if necessary to protect his own interests, and it may be that disclosure is justified if needed to protect someone from harm.
These grounds reflect some of the reasons some of the time for compiling records.
It may be necessary to chart events and actions to be able to show later that teachers acted promptly and appropriately; in child abuse particularly, but also in other cases, careful records may be helpful in protecting the child or someone else from harm.
The following sections describe some exceptions to the general rule of confidentiality.
Some of them have been used as an indirect way of seeing the file by parents denied access for themselves.
Now that access by parents and pupils is the normal rule, these indirect routes will become less important.
However, they may still be needed for information which for one reason or another is not made available by subject access.
DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION FOR LITIGATION
Any information which is relevant may have to be disclosed to the parties in respect of any court case.
There are exceptions, but the fact that information is held in confidence is not as such a sufficient reason for exemption.
A school record on a child may have to be disclosed as may any other record held by the school or authority.
The court has a discretion, and a record holder who would prefer not to hand over the file is entitled to refuse unless the party gets a court order to disclose.
Mrs Campbell was a schoolteacher in her fifties who suffered what many teachers fear.
She was violently attacked in the classroom by an 11 -year-old pupil and suffered injuries so severe that she had to take early retirement.
She wished to bring an action against her employers alleging that they had been negligent in failing adequately to protect her against the known risk of injury from this pupil.
She knew that a record had been kept on the child, including an educational psychologist's report, and that the school logbook would record other incidents, so she sought disclosure of these documents to help her in her case against the authority.
The Court of Appeal allowed her to see them, deciding that although the reports might contain information given in confidence, yet the public interest in parties to litigation being able fully to prove their case and so not be denied justice outweighed the public interest in maintaining the confidentiality of pupil files.
By contrast, in D v NSPCC (1976) parents wished to see a report which alleged that they had injured their child.
The House of Lords accepted evidence that the NSPCC relied on anonymous informants for much of its work in child protection and held that the public interest in informants coming forward with information outweighed the parents' interest in being able to sue a malicious busybody.
The name of the informant must not be disclosed.
GETTING THE COUNCILLOR TO SEE THE FILE
Councillors vary tremendously in the extent to which they expect to be involved in day-to-day matters of administration in the authority.
Some leave it all to officers and concentrate on policy issues in council and committee meetings, whereas others wish to know details of particular cases and administrative decisions.
Most councillors expect to be lobbied by constituents and asked to intervene on their behalf.
It has always been clear that a councillor must be allowed to see any information he needs to carry out his duties, but it has been unclear how far that goes.
A councillor member of a housing committee wanted to see information in a social services file on prospective adopting parents as she doubted their suitability as adopters.
The House of Lords eventually upheld her right, recognising that she had a genuine interest, but providers of information (particularly the BMA) and social services staff were extremely uneasy about the apparent danger to confidentiality of client files.
Eventually the local authority associations agreed a self-denying ordinance and in many authorities councillors do not seek access to records on individuals.
The general right to information was confirmed, and perhaps extended, in the Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985.
Any council member has a right to inspect any document held by or under control of the authority and relevant to any business to be transacted in council, committee or sub-committee.
Controversy about need to be a member of the committee is thus removed.
But the Act exempts some information from all its provisions, and exempt information includes information about a particular pupil or about the education of a particular person.
The Act does not override the common law rights decided in the Birmingham case, and under that decision a councillor could claim to see the individual file if he could show a need to know.
Since rights of subject access have been given, this is obviously less important than it was, but getting the councillor to see the file could still be important for pre-1989 information and reports from third parties which the parents and pupil still have no right to see.
Whether the councillor will press his claim to disclosure will depend on political factors (for example, in councils which regularly change political complexion it is much easier for an opposition party councillor to get information than in one which is solidly of one political complexion).
The parents have no right to insist that the councillor should get involved.
ACCESS BY THE OMBUDSMAN
If an individual claims to have suffered injustice because of maladministration by a local authority, the Commissioner for Local Administration may investigate the complaint on his behalf.
The investigation is held in private but the authority and individuals concerned may comment on the allegations.
The Commissioner has wide powers to receive information and look at document.
The Commissioner's report is made public, and the authority must consider it if an adverse finding is made.
The authority has no duty to implement any proposals for redress but clearly refusal to do so may lead to unwelcome publicity.
Maladministration is particularly concerned with procedural matters (as well as such obvious things as malice and discrimination) so the maintenance of accurate records is particularly important in countering any such allegation.
PUBLIC ACCESS TO SCHOOL INFORMATION
As part of the policy of accountability and choice, local education authorities and school governors have a duty to provide information not only for parents but also for prospective parents and the public generally.
This information is broadly of two kinds — that relating to the education authority's policy and arrangements, and that relating to the individual school.
Information about local authority policy and arrangements is clearly intended to provoke public awareness and discussion of local education policy generally.
Given the substantial resource committed to education and the consistent government policy of the last 10 years of shifting the balance of power from local authorities to individuals, this is not in any way surprising.
Authorities and teachers should welcome the policy of openness since informed debate is vastly more constructive than ignorant criticism and the determinedly ignorant can be reminded to do their homework!
That the policy is not restricted to increasing the knowledge of parents of pupils is seen by the access provisions under the various Regulations.
No special interest need be shown by a person seeking to see particular items, and availability must usually be given in local public places as well as in relevant schools.
Thus the main regulations of 1981 (as amended) provide that the authority must make available information on all its schools and the authority's policies on such matters as examination entries, special educational needs and charging and remission on charges.
This must be sent to parents of prospective pupils but also be made available in schools, public libraries and education offices.
Similar provision is made, for example, by the Education (Publication of Schemes for Financing Schools) Regulations 1989, whereby a copy of any such scheme must be available for reference ‘by parents and other persons at all reasonable times and without charge’ at the school, public libraries and education offices.
Not only future proposals but also information about the present financial position of schools must be made available for reference both to parents and to others, in education offices and public libraries.
A more extreme example of very local publicity relates to the publication of proposals in relation to grant-maintained schools under sections 89(1) or 92(2) of the ERA.
As well as being published in a local newspaper, the proposal must be posted at or near the main gate of the school and in ‘a conspicuous place’ in the area and made available for inspection at the school ‘or at any other place within that area to which members of the public may conveniently have access’(SI 1989, No. 1469).
It is to be hoped that this is not early warning of the demise of public libraries!
Access to the policy making of the LEA is already provided by law.
The Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985 requires each local authority to make available to the public before the meeting agendas, agenda papers and minutes of council and committees; and  there is a statutory right to attend council, committee and sub-committee meetings.
Information exempt from disclosure is defined and includes information relating to an individual's education.
Meetings may only exclude the public if exempt information is likely to be considered or if ‘confidential information’ would be disclosed.
I he particular definition of confidential information in this Act is information given by a central government department on terms forbidding disclosure to the public, or information, the disclosure of which, is forbidden by statute or court order.
On this basis education committee business and that of its sub-committees should be open to the public except when dealing with individual pupils.
INFORMATION ABOUT THE SCHOOL
Since the Education Act 1980 began the emphasis on parental choice of schools, it became obvious that comparable information must be available about the various schools.
The 1981 Regulations have been much amended and extended so that now each school must provide a School Prospectus containing a long list of prescribed information, including information about the curriculum, qualifications obtainable and careers education, and an Annual Report, including updates to the prospectus and dates and times of the school term.
Both documents must be given freely to parents of pupils on request and must be made available at the school for reference by parents and others.
The head must also make available for inspection at the school information on syllabuses, schemes of work and school hours as well as details of the arrangements for dealing with complaints and providing access to pupils' records and documents, such as any HMI Report on the school.
It might be thought that those seeking detailed information about a particular school should show a special reason for wanting it, but there is no suggestion in any of the Regulations that availability of the information should be limited.
In the past the courts have construed statutory and common law rights to information restrictively and have either required an applicant to show a special reason for wanting the information or have denied access to a person with an ‘indirect motive’ such as a councillor helping a constituent in a complaint against the authority.
In another case the court upheld an elector's right to see council documents (a statutory right without qualification, as here) unless his request ‘was so oppressive as to amount to an abuse of the right’.
It remains to be seen whether similar restrictions or limits will be placed on these public rights to information.
GOVERNORS' MEETING
If complete public openness is the policy, it might have been expected that the public would have free access to governors' meetings so that they could hear the arguments for policy and resource allocations within the school.
This could have been provided under the Public Bodies (Admission to Meetings) Act 1960 (as amended) under which local authority meetings are open to the public with limited exceptions.
Instead, the matter of attendance is left to the discretion of the governors with no restriction on their discretion.
Agendas, minutes and related papers are available For inspection at the school, but this is no substitute for attendance at meetings if public information and debate is fully intended.
The School Government Regulations even allow the governors to decide that any matter ‘by reason of its nature’ should be treated as confidential and so exclude papers and minutes about it from public scrutiny.
Thus the general scheme of the Regulations is to give public information about the authority and the school but to leave the governors free to make controversial decisions behind closed doors and without public knowledge.
ACCESSIBILITY OF ACCESS
All the relevant Regulations make provision for the translation of information, where appropriate, into languages other than English.
Ethnic minority groups for whom English is not their first language may find this very useful.
None of the Regulations refers to the possibility of translations into Braille or on to cassette to facilitate access to information by the many people who have a sight impairment.
For them, access to information, whether about themselves or their children, will remain an illusory right.
Perhaps that is the next campaign.
The school curriculum and the law
INTRODUCTION
Following the Education Act 1944, the school curriculum in England and Wales was (with the exception of religious instruction) unregulated, and the teachers who taught were not subject to legal constraint over curriculum content.
Little changed until the mid-1980s.
The equal opportunities legislation of the 1970s was and is important, but was regarded by most members of the teaching profession as a positive rather than constraining factor and had no influence over the locus of power or control over the curriculum.
The 1944 Education Act had heralded a ‘Golden Age’ of teacher freedom, according to commentators.
But in the late 1960s the relative autonomy of the teaching profession over the curriculum came increasingly under attack.
By the late 1970s the impetus towards central control was well established.
The situation today is quite different from that which prevailed following the 1944 Act.
Dent's comment at the time when that Act was still before Parliament as a bill has a curious irony to it, which will become all the more apparent from the discussion which ensues later:
I was asked…the other day whether the Bill would lay down the curricula for schools.
My reply was ‘God forbid!’
Stereotyped curricula would mean the end of democratic education.
We want infinite variety of curricula, to develop the infinitely various capacities of children…; we want teachers to experiment freely, research workers to carry out investigations, and the general public to make suggestions.
What we do not want is lessons laid down by law.
The Education Reform Act 1988 has produced a degree of prescription and central control to which the government was apparently resistant only a couple of years before its enactment.
This is, of course, symptomatic of the rapid move over the past few years away from a consensus-based approach to education policy making towards one based on central autonomy.
Its implications for teachers are profound.
This change in the law and in the locus of power will not end the  debate, which has prevailed for a number of years, about control of the curriculum of schools; such a debate emerged once the content of the curriculum become a controversial subject in the 1960s and has continued since.
A central concern must now be exactly that which was identified by Dent nearly 50 years ago — the ‘threat to democracy’, which it has been argued is also present, although manifested in a different form, in the changes in the legal framework to the university sector.
The threat in schools is posed by the degree of control which the executive is able to exert over the education of children, or rather by the possibility that the power to dictate (by inclusion or exclusion) the content of education could be abused by a government with extreme views.
The other alleged threat to democracy has been a threat to local democracy, as LEAs have lost their power to control the secular curriculum in their schools.
The government defended this charge by arguing that some LEAs manipulated the curriculum for ideological purposes rather than solely seeking to accommodate electors' wishes and meet children's needs.
It claimed to have wide support from parents for its provisions concerning homosexuality, the coverage of political issues in the classroom, and the ‘moral’ dimension to sex education.
Claiming a widespread dissatisfaction with the quality of education being provided by LEA schools, and promising greater opportunities for parent power to preserve local accountability, it was able to seize control over the curriculum with considerable public support.
A consequence of these changes to the control of the curriculum has been a considerable increase in the number of legal provisions.
The first 25 sections of the 1988 Act, and many other parts of that legislation and of the Education (No.2) Act 1986, concern the school curriculum.
These provisions are discussed in this chapter under two main headings.
The first is concerned with the legal regulation of the curriculum, and in particular with the requirements of the Education Reform Act 1988 concerning the National Curriculum — the most important educational reform since the 1944 Act.
The second section looks at the various legal provisions which can be said to be concerned with certain specific social and moral educational objectives: the law on sex and race discrimination, religious education and collective worship, sex education and the coverage of political issues in the classroom.
REGULATION AND CONTROL OF THE CURRICULUM
Writing about the future development of education following abolition of the Schools Council, which had had curriculum development and examination monitoring functions and which had managed to stem temporarily the growth of DES curricular involvement, Plaskow commented that without the achievement of consensus within a  workable framework, there would be central direction, with ‘prescription through authority’.
A few years later there were proposals for a National Curriculum in England and Wales under the law — a law which would provide, according to the government, ‘a framework not a straitjacket’.
Now that the National Curriculum is enshrined in law and is being phased in, how closely does the new system conform either to Plaskow's ‘prescription through authority’ or the government's consensus-backed ‘framework’?
Traditionally, architects of educational reform in England and Wales have held the view that, as the 1943 White Paper Educational Reconstruction put it, ‘Legislation can do little more than prepare the way for reform’.
True to this tradition, the DES/Welsh Office National Curriculum consultation document of July 1987 stated that while, to be effective, a national framework for the secular curriculum required the backing of the law, ‘legislation alone will not raise standards’.
Nevertheless, over the years the curriculum has become increasingly regulated, in the face of concern about the need for reform — expressed with increasing regularity once James Callaghan's Ruskin College (‘Great Debate’) speech in 1976 had acted as a catalyst for debate.
Part of this new regulation has involved a shift towards central rather than local control.
The Education Act 1944, after stipulating that LEAs should ‘contribute towards the physical, moral, mental and spiritual development of the community’ through educational provision (section 7), basically placed control of the secular curriculum in their hands (section 23).
Central government's role was to promote, plan and guide the system (section 1).
In extreme cases of default, powers (under sections 68 and 99) were, and still are, available to the Secretary of State, although they have rarely been used.
These powers have traditionally been regarded by the DES as ‘dangerously punitive measures, difficult to enforce in the courts, and…measures of absolute last resort’.
A House of Commons Select Committee found that local authorities had a considerable amount of discretion over what to include in or exclude from the secular curriculum.
The Secretary of State would, at that time (1981/82), not have considered using his default powers if, for example, a school failed to offer a modern language (other than English).
A High Court judge held that there was no basic statutory provision of education, so that if an LEA had (instead of, as in this case, charging for it) decided to cut music tuition altogether (because of financial constraints) it would not have been acting illegally.
Whilst not advocating the imposition of a national curriculum, the Select Committee called for greater powers for the Secretary of State to intervene in circumstances where ‘a nationally agreed guaranteed provision appears to be at risk’.
The government rejected this, claiming it to be contrary to the notion of partnership between central and local government which the 1944 Act had established.
Instead they would continue to work towards what they had earlier described  as ‘a national consensus on a desirable frame-work for the curriculum’ in the quest for ‘improvement in the consistency and quality of school education across the country’.
Rather than prescription, there would be guidance for LEAs and schools, which would be reviewed periodically.
Lord Joseph's reign as Secretary of State for Education saw an even greater emphasis on the improvement of quality in education, a theme pursued in his Better Schools White Paper in 1985.
So far as the curriculum was concerned, the policies and practices of many LEAs were seen as detrimental to quality.
Following on from Better Schools , the Education (No.2) Act 1986 removed control of the secular curriculum from LEAs (section 23 of the 1944 Act, above, being revoked).
Under section 18 of the Act, control of the curriculum in county schools has shifted to head teachers, although they must ensure that the curriculum is compatible with their LEA's statements on curricular policy — as modified by the governors in their own such statement.
The 1986 Act also regulated certain specific curricular areas — notably sex education (section 46) and political education and activities (sections 44 and 45)(see below).
But aside from this, and not forgetting the important duties laid on LEAs by the Education Act 1981 in relation to children with special educational needs (discussed in Chapter 4), there was little prescription.
Control had shifted away from LEAs, but central government claimed to lack the power to secure the improvement to education that it sought and which the Conservatives promised the electorate in 1987.
It was granted this power by Parliament in July 1988, when the Education Reform Act was enacted.
The Education Reform Act
The government regarded a solid legal framework as fundamental to the achievement of the main objectives of the proposed National Curriculum.
These were stated in the 1987 consultation document to be:
1
Raising standards ; by guaranteeing that all pupils get a balanced curriculum which prepares them for adult life; and by setting objectives over the full range of abilities — via ‘attainment targets’ backed up with appropriate assessment arrangements.
2
Raising levels of accountability ; by measuring schools against each other locally and nationally (whilst ‘taking account of [a school's]particular circumstances’), enabling LEAs and others to assess schools' strengths and weaknesses, through publication of National Curriculum assessments.
It was said that, as noted above, the law would provide not a straitjacket but, rather, scope for the ‘imaginative application of professional skills at all levels of the education service, within a statutory framework which sets clear objectives’.
But when the list of prescribed core and other foundation subjects was scrutinised, along with the suggested allocations of curricular time spelled out in the consultation document, many teachers wondered whether what they would be getting would not be a ‘straitjacket’ after all.
Although the Education Reform Bill, published in the autumn of 1987, failed to dispel these fears, there were some modifications.
The provisions, discussed more fully below, allowing a departure from all or part of the National Curriculum in certain cases or where certain individuals are concerned, were introduced when the bill was before the Commons in early 1988.
Allocations of time for individual subjects were omitted from the bill.
(Later the bill was amended to provide that the Secretary of State would be prohibited from prescribing periods of time or proportions of school timetables to be allocated to programmes of study: see now ERA 1988, section 4(3).)
But going into the House of Lords, the clauses concerning the National Curriculum in the Bill were still ‘frighteningly prescriptive and inflexible’.
In the Lords, Lord Joseph proposed an amendment to remove compulsion from the National Curriculum provisions — arguing that a mandatory National Curriculum was not working satisfactorily in France.
But the amendment was defeated.
Before examining the legal structure of the National Curriculum, it is important to identify the other areas of curricular regulation in the Education Reform Act.
These centre on what has been describe in DES guidance as ‘the whole curriculum’.
Under section 1 of the Act, a duty rests with the Secretary of State, LEAs, governing bodies and head teachers (of maintained schools) to ensure provision of ‘a balanced and broadly based curriculum which —(a) promotes the spiritual, moral, cultural, mental and physical development of pupils at the school and of society; and (b) prepares such pupils for the opportunities, responsibilities and experiences of adult life’.
Religious education and collective worship (provision of which is compulsory under sections 2 and 6) do not form part of the National Curriculum.
The government diffused pressure to include RE in the National Curriculum by arguing that it would form part of the statutory ‘basic curriculum’ provided for by section 2(1) of the Act.
(The National Curriculum forms the rest.)
So far as the National Curriculum is concerned, the Act (in section 3(1)) provides for foundation subjects, in two categories:
A.
Core subjects : mathematics, English and science (and, in Welsh-speaking schools, Welsh).
B.
Other foundation subjects : history, geography, technology, music, art, PE, and (in secondary schools only) a modern language.
Welsh is a also a foundation subject, in non-Welsh speaking schools in Wales.
A list of prescribed modern languages is laid down in an Order: Danish, Dutch, French, German, Greek (Modern), Italian, Portuguese and Spanish.
Other languages which may be offered by a school as a foundation subject, provided one of the above languages is available to a pupil as an alternative, are also prescribed by the Order: Arabic, Bengali, Chinese (Cantonese or Mandarin), Gujerati, Hebrew (Modem), Hindi, Japanese, Punjabi, Russian, Turkish and Urdu.
For each of the foundation subjects there are to be ‘attainment targets’, ‘programmes of study’ and ‘assessment arrangements’.
These terms are defined in section 2(2):
A.
Attainment targets (ATs): the knowledge and understanding expected of pupils of various ages and levels of maturity at different stages;
B.
Programmes of study (PS): ‘the matters, skills and processes’ to be taught to pupils;
C.
Assessment arrangements : the arrangements for assessing pupils' achievement of the attainment targets ‘at or near the end of each key stage’(that is basically at ages 7, 11, 14 and 16).
The ‘key stages’ referred to above are defined in section 3(3).
There are four such stages:
Key stage 1 (ages 5–7)(years 1 and 2): begins on attainment of compulsory school age and ends at the end of the school year in which the majority of pupils reach the age of 7.
Key stage 2 (ages 8–11)(years 3–6): begins with the school year in which the majority reach the age of 8 and ends at the end of the school year in which the majority are 11.
Key stage 3 (ages 12–14)(years 7–9): as in 2, with ages 12 and 14.
key stage 4 (ages 15–16)(years 10 and 11): as in 2, but with ages 15 and 16.
ATs and PS for mathematics, science, English, technology, Welsh, history and geography have now been prescribed.
The Orders refer to the ATs and PS numerically and in relation to key stages, and stipulate commencement dates.
The actual ATs and PS are set out in separate documents (for example Science and the National Curriculum ) which have recently been issued to schools (and are also available for purchase through HMSO).
The Act permits the ATs and PS to be prescribed via such documents.
Introduction of the National Curriculum began in September 1989.
Only key stages 1–3 were affected during this first year.
Prescribed  ATs and PS for maths, science and English applied to those in the first year of key stage 1, and (with the exception of English) in the first year of key stage 3.
Also in September 1989 pupils in key stages 1–3 were brought within the scope of section 10(3) of the Act — which provides that prior to the introduction of the prescribed ATs and PS the subjects should be covered for a ‘reasonable time’, taken to mean sufficient for ‘worthwhile study’ in each subject.
This applied in relation to all the foundation subjects in England, but only the core subjects in Wales.
It was extended to the remaining foundation subjects in Wales, and the core subjects in first year of key stage 4, from September 1990.
September 1990 also saw the prescribed ATs and PS for the core subjects in the first year of key stage 2 and for English in the first year of key stage 3 brought into effect.
ATs and PS for maths and science were introduced in the second year of key stage 3, and those for design and technology in the first year of key stages 1–3.
The first non-core subjects to have prescribed ATs and PS brought into effect will be geography and history — in key stages 1–3 from September 1991.
The full implementation timetable is set out in National Curriculum: From Policy to Practice , published by the DES.
Further Orders will be required to give the timetable legal effect.
Implementation will not be complete until 1997.
As the National Curriculum is implemented, it will be possible to carry out a check of the curriculum of each school.
Governors will be responsible for the submission to their LEA of a detailed ‘Annual Curriculum Return’ on a standard form.
Either copies of the forms, or appropriate information drawn from them, will have to be submitted to the Secretary of State.
(In grant-maintained schools — that is, those which have been allowed to opt out of LEA control — the information will be sent by the governors direct to the Secretary of State.)
‘Assessment arrangements’ may be (and some have already been) prescribed by the Secretary of State.
There will, for the first time, be a national standard against which a pupil's performance may be measured.
Assessment will be by a combination of national external tests and assessment by teachers.
Teachers will be able to identify pupils' weaknesses, which they will then be expected, so far as is possible, to correct.
Parents will be informed of the results of their child's assessment.
Aggregated results for key stages will be published so that comparisons between schools will be possible — enabling governors, LEAs and parents to judge the performance of a school.
Work on the development of the tests (‘Standard Assessment Tasks’) is being carried out under the direction of the School Examinations and Assessment Council (SEAC)(see below).
It is probably true to say that the likely arrangements for assessment and recording of pupils' achievement have provoked more concern among the teaching profession than almost any other area of  the National Curriculum.
The SEAC has identified the key areas of concern: ‘How do I assess so many attainment targets?
How can I observe one pupil and supervise the whole class?
Is it not all going to take more time?’
Moreover, in January 1991 it was announced that the tests for 7 year olds had been modified and would take up half of teaching time for three weeks.
Despite the fact that attainment targets may be grouped into ‘profile components’ for the purposes of reporting achievements, teachers are expected to ‘keep a record of pupils' progress in relation to each attainment target’, a particularly onerous requirement.
Teachers are relieved that the Secretary of State (albeit belatedly) decided to restrict compulsory testing at age 10–11 to the three core subjects.
But many feel that they are being forced to spend large amounts of time unnecessarily testing pupils and recording achievement.
One primary school head teacher in whose school pilot testing of pupils was carried out has expressed a willingness to ‘break the law unless the tests are drastically changed’ and another school's head (probably illegally) later suspended the tests in the face of parents' objections.
If the above constitutes only a ‘framework’, it is undoubtedly an elaborate one.
The degree of prescription is reinforced by section 10(2) of the Act, which lays a duty on LEAs, governors and head teachers to secure that the National Curriculum is implemented in their school(s).
Other legal requirements
The impact of other legal requirements relating to the curriculum also warrants mention here.
The confusing rules prohibiting charging for educational provision (including anything provided as part of the National Curriculum) and examination entry (see Appendix to this chapter), and the requirement that a course of study leading to a qualification authenticated by an outside body be approved by the Secretary of State or a designated body, have imposed further constraints on what may be offered.
Meanwhile the new regulations on provision of and access to information (discussed in Chapter 5) will, in addition to raising levels of public accountability, increase the already substantial administrative burden resulting from the Act.
Public accountability is further emphasised by the existence of arrangements for the consideration of complaints by parents about educational provision and the achievements of individual pupils.
LEAs are obliged, by section 23, to establish such arrangements.
The complaints procedure applies also to RE and collective worship.
The Secretary of State cannot interfere on a parent's behalf over a curricular matter until the complaint has been pursued via the local complaints machinery.
Flexibility
The freedom of the Secretary of State to depart from the recommendations of the National Curriculum Council (to which proposals on attainment targets and programmes of study must be referred), as in effect happened in the case of the history curriculum, stands in marked contrast to the restrictions binding teachers under the National Curriculum.
The tone of the guidance issued in 1989 suggests little flexibility:
Head teachers are responsible for ensuing that teachers do teach and carry out assessments as required….
Teachers and schools wilt not be free to pick and chose….
They can always do more than is required, and how they do it is left open; but they may not do less.
The starting point will be that teachers should know what will be expected of them.
What freedom teachers may have in this area centres principally on their delivery of the National Curriculum.
In this regard reference may ‘within the programmes of study teachers will be free to determine the detail of what should be taught’, although it urged teachers to prepare schemes of work to ensure consistency within a school.
There will be ‘full scope for professional judgment’, both in relation to teaching and organisation of the curriculum; and there will be ‘sufficient flexibility in the choice of content to adapt what they teach to the needs of the individual pupil’.
It would appear that all teachers will be placed in a similar position to that of teachers preparing pupils for external examinations, in that they will have set objectives, or learning outcomes, to be achieved, but will be free to plan their lessons as they think fit — especially where the core subjects are concerned.
Some of the other foundation subjects, such as art or PE, will have far less detailed ATs and PS.
A key concession towards greater flexibility was made in January 1990, when the Secretary of State, in a speech to the Society of Education Officers, stressed the need for a more flexible framework for the curriculum at key stage 4.
Mr MacGregor suggested that schools should be free, amongst other things, to offer vocational courses which might include material outside the National Curriculum and, exceptionally, enable the ablest pupils to drop a non-core foundation subject in order to take a non-statutory option.
To some extent the charge of inflexibility can also be countered by reference to the provisions sanctioning exception from the National Curriculum .
First, the Secretary of State has a power, in section 17, to provide, by regulation, that the National Curriculum shall not apply, or shall apply in a modified form, in cases or circumstances which may be specified.
This power, which can be used in respect of an entire category of pupils, has so far been exercised only in respect of English  and Welsh teaching in Wales (SIs 1989 No. 1308 and 1990 No. 2187).
Second, where a child with special educational needs is ‘statemented’ under section 7(1) Education Act 1981 (see Chapter 5), the statement may exclude the application of the National Curriculum or specify its provision in a modified form (section 18).
Third, under section 19 temporary exception or modification can be directed by a head teacher in respect of an individual pupil — for a period of six months initially, with the possibility of two further three-month periods of exception.
Regulations, which came into force on 1 August 1989, prescribe the circumstances in which a direction by the head teacher under section 19 may be given.
Basically, the head teacher must consider it inappropriate for the time being for the pupil to follow the National Curriculum and that either (1) circumstances giving rise to that opinion are likely to change within six months or (2) that the pupil may have special educational needs requiring modification of the National Curriculum and temporary exception is necessary while those needs are assessed.
A direction in relation to(1) is a ‘general direction’ and in relation to (2) a ‘special direction’.
A general direction could, for example, be necessary in respect of a recently immigrated child who speaks little English and who needs intensive language support.
Adjusting to regulation
As the legal regime for the National Curriculum comes into effect, it becomes increasingly apparent that it represents not so much a ‘straitjacket’ but a ‘corset’— holding things in place, while restricting, but not totally, freedom of movement!
Teachers will become ever more conscious not only of their increased administrative responsibilities but also of the fact that conformity to the prescribed ATs and PS is expected, under the law.
Opportunities to depart from the National Curriculum are severely limited, except where children with particular learning difficulties are concerned, although teachers will have freedom over how they teach the National Curriculum.
Teachers in this country are unaccustomed to operating in such a regulatory environment where the curriculum is concerned; and local authorities have for the most part exerted little control over what is taught.
Despite the fact that many western European countries have had a core curriculum for some years, prescription through central authority is associated, at least in the public mind, with authoritarianism.
In many Latin American countries teachers lack the freedom to devise and organise their own teaching plans, Peru being one of the few exceptions (and even here there is a general curriculum laid down by the ministry).
In the Soviet Union, central state control of the curriculum and syllabuses is said to be ‘virtually total’.
Curricula are  devised by the USSR ministry or a body responsible to it.
Contrasting the Soviet and English systems, Muckle points out that traditionally in England the task of working out what subjects should be taught was ‘replicated in every school’.
Now, following the enactment of the ERA, it may be observed that the contrast is less marked.
Nevertheless, one ought not to underplay significantly the degree of consensus aimed for in England and Wales through consultation and extensive teacher participation in National Curriculum syllabus working groups, even if this system was rather undermined by the government's rejection of several of the history working party's recommendations.
Nevertheless, the ERA has given the Secretary of State considerable powers.
He can, after appropriate consultation, change the content of the National Curriculum as he thinks fit.
This is an unprecedented and far-reaching power, with constitutional implications.
In any event, it may be asked whether all this regulation is necessary or desirable?
In the United States, academics have for some years been engaging in what has been termed the ‘deregulation critique’ of the federal role in education.
The ‘deregulation’ thesis has been described by Clune thus:
…it is possible to reduce the number and intensity of legal obligations on educational organizations without decreasing the quantity or quality of education in any respect.
Legal intervention, with its categorical rules and sanctions, is said to be incompatible with the adaptive, flexible, social interaction of teaching and learning.
There are arguments in both directions where regulation is concerned.
Legal regulation tends to create administrative burdens, resentment and loss of self-esteem through the undermining of professional autonomy.
On the other hand, it can create a system through which goals may be achieved, having taken them out of the realm of pure ideology.
The National Curriculum represents a middle course — the present government believing that law by itself cannot raise standards.
Experience has shown that social goals, such as equal opportunities in education, above all require personal and professional commitment.
As Clune puts it: ‘Being required to do anything and especially being required to do something specific cannot match the effectiveness of internally motivated, adaptive behaviour directed at the same underlying end.’
The Secretary of State urges teachers in England and Wales to work with commitment towards the improvement of standards in education, within a legal framework.
But proponents of the ‘deregulation critique’ might well question the degree of regulation which has been imposed.
Whatever the arguments, teachers face a challenging period of adjustment — not just to the procedural formalities of the National Curriculum and its prescriptive content, but also to the psychology of regulation.
RELIGION, SEX, RACE AND POLITIC: THE ENFORCEMENT OF MORAL, CULTURAL AND SOCIAL VALUES
It is a general feature of the education system that both through its programmed and ‘hidden’ curricula it plays its part in the socialisation of the individual and in social reproduction.
Whilst any legal provisions concerned with the curriculum may be said to add further legitimacy to the instillation of moral, cultural and social values by the education system (via the so-called ‘affective curriculum’), there are provisions associated in a particularly identifiable way with certain values — for example, those concerned with sex and race equality, which may be said to have almost universal support amongst policy-makers and practitioners.
Anti-discrimination measures are, of course, reflective of liberal values, many of which are in fact currently under attack.
The New-Right Conservatives have challenged the educational establishment's alleged over-liberalism which they claim has resulted in abandonment of the inculcation of traditional values by schools.
The law has been used to impose a structure in which traditional values are reasserted — for example via a provision which says that sex education should emphasise ‘the value of family life’— and in which the dominant religious tradition, Christianity, is emphasised — via the provisions concerning RE and collective worship contained in the Education Reform Act 1988.
Even before the National Curriculum swallowed up most teaching time, ‘Peace studies’, regarded as ideologically unsound by the government, was effectively killed off (by the Education (No. 2) Act 1986 — see below).
Religion
Religious education is part of the ‘basic curriculum’ to be provided in all maintained schools.
It is not part of the National Curriculum, for which, as we have seen, there are prescribed attainment targets and programmes of study.
Instead, religious education in county schools must be provided in accordance with a locally agreed syllabus.
(Voluntary controlled schools may be expected to follow the locally agreed syllabus.
In voluntary aided and special agreement schools the syllabus is to be determined by the governors and will be based on the requirements of the trust deed or the arrangements which prevailed before the school acquired voluntary status.)
A conference, in which the Church of England, representatives of principal religious traditions in the area, teachers' associations and the LEA may be represented, is to be drawn up by the LEA for the purpose of agreeing the syllabus.
The part of the 1988 Act which has upset certain religious minorities has been section 8(3), which states that all religious syllabuses adopted on or after 29 September 1988 must ‘reflect the  fact that the religious traditions in Great Britain are in the main Christian whilst taking account of the teaching and practices of the other principal religions represented in Great Britain’.
The pre-eminence apparently accorded to Christianity here may reflect the position in the country as a whole; but it is easy to see how some religious groups would identify an implicit suggestion by the section that the other religious traditions in Great Britain are less important.
The fact that the section seeks to justify its own requirements by stating a fact —‘the religious traditions in Great Britain are in the main Christian’— implies anticipation of this criticism.
Poulter argues that it would have been inappropriate to have given all the principal religious traditions represented in Great Britain equal weight in the RE syllabus, since it would leave Christianity being reflected in just one-sixth of the course.
He suggests that section 8(3) will probably be ‘sensibly construed as an attempt to strike a realistic balance’ and points out that there will be ‘room for legitimate differences of emphasis among the various agreed syllabuses, as at present’.
Ealing LEA's syllabus, which has been challenged by one parent for failing to give sufficient attention to Christianity, apparently states that, ‘whilst our children need to understand that Christianity is a living faith which has shaped the history, institutions, art and culture of Britain, they also need to explore the other living faiths in our borough so that the richness of our religious experience can be shared and appreciated’.
On the face of it, this approach is consonant with the requirements of the Act.
Moreover, the law continues to require that RE syllabuses should be non-denominational; RE must not be given ‘by means of any catechism or formulary which is distinctive of any religious denomination’.
The law now explicitly states that the study of any such catechism or formulary is not prohibited.
Thus detailed comparative analysis of different religions is possible.
As Poulter points out, this is in line with the modern ethos of concentrating on the broadly educational role of RE, which is underlined by the reference to RE instead of‘religious instruction’ to which the 1944 Act referred previously.
Given the emphasis on Christianity in the ERA 1988, parents from religious minority groups may now feel more inclined to exercise the right to withdraw their children from religious education at school, and perhaps also the right to have their children receive a particular form of RE away from school premises during school hours if appropriate arrangements can be made.
If, in the case of a child attending a county school, convenient arrangements for the RE to take place elsewhere cannot be made, the LEA is to allow it to be given on school premises provided that it does not consider that it would be unreasonable in the circumstances to do so and provided the authority does not have to meet the cost.
In either case, it is clear that a parent who wants his/her child to receive denominational RE at school may have to pay for it.
Although there is a general principle that education  in the state sector must be provided free of charge, there are exceptions to this in the case of, for example, ‘optional extras’(see Appendix to this chapter).
According to the government, this form of RE would, in the above circumstances, be considered an ‘optional extra’ for which a charge could be made.
Collective worship is also compulsory in the maintained sector.
The Education Act 1944 provided for the school day in every county and voluntary school to ‘begin with collective worship on the part of all pupils in attendance at the school’.
The Act required the whole school to meet for the daily act of collective worship unless the school premises made this impracticable.
It had become clear over the ensuing years that the requirements concerning collective worship had increasingly been disregarded by schools, and there were calls for the introduction of a more flexible system as well as suggestions that as a concept collective worship in school was outmoded and out of line with the more secular society in Britain, and should, therefore, be abandoned altogether.
The government chose to retain collective worship in schools, but to change the law to reflect ‘present practice’ in schools.
The law, now in section 6 of the ERA 1988, still requires all pupils to take part in an act of collective worship; however, there may be a single act for all pupils or separate acts for different groups of pupils.
Furthermore, whilst the act of worship must normally take place on school premises, it may take place elsewhere on a special occasion.
Given the ecumenical spirit which has prevailed in many school religious assemblies for a number of years, it was hardly surprising that serious objection would be taken to the emphasis on Christian traditions that was incorporated into the law on collective worship.
Like section 25(1) of the 1944 Act, which has now been repealed, the ERA provides that the act of collective worship should be non-denominational.
However, in county schools it must now be ‘wholly or mainly of a broadly Christian character’, reflecting ‘the broad traditions of Christian belief without being distinctive of any particular Christian denomination’.
(In voluntary schools the governing body may determine the character and content of collective worship.)
The emphasis on Christianity in this part of the Act came about as a result of a House of Lords amendment to the Education Reform Bill originally tabled by Baroness Cox and finally presented in a more pragmatic form by the Bishop of London after extensive consultation with interested parties.
Opposition to the emphasis on Christianity in the provisions on collective worship from non-Christian religious minority groups has continued.
One the other side of the coin, there are some parents who believe that their LEAs are ignoring the new law.
A white parent of a child attending a Wakefield school where one-third of the pupils come from Asian families has asked the Secretary of State to declare the school to be in default of its duty by continuing to offer a multi-faith  assembly, in the face of claims by the LEA that the arrangements for collective worship had been carefully designed to comply with the law.
But in fact there are several provisions which, as Poulter puts it, offer ‘plenty of scope for maintaining the pattern of multi-faith assemblies which schools have followed in recent years’.
For one thing, the 1988 Act specifically states that it is not necessary for every act of collective worship to be of a broadly Christian character providing that most of such acts are.
Furthermore, the Act allows pupils' family backgrounds, ages and aptitudes to be taken into account by the school in determining whether an act of collective worship which is not of a broadly Christian character takes place in the school.
These factors must also be taken into account when deciding whether the act of collective worship reflects Christian traditions and the ways in which such traditions are to be reflected in taken into account by the local statutory advisory council on religious education (SACRE) when it is considering an application by the head teacher of the school under section 12(1) of the 1988 Act for lifting or modifying the requirement for Christian collective worship at the school.
Race
The Report of the Swann Committee in 1985 added weight to the widely held view that in Britain's culturally and racially pluralistic society the education system has a crucial role to play in promoting racial harmony.
The Secretary of State for Education and Science has referred to LEAs' and schools' ‘important responsibility to work towards the promotion of equality of opportunity for the different ethnic groups who are part of our national life’.
One of the principal means of fulfilling this responsibility has been the development of the concept and practice of ‘multicultural’ education, which the Swann Report endorsed.
Multicultural education does not specifically form part of the National Curriculum.
However, the 1988 Act does make provision for the ‘whole curriculum’(in section 1).
As discussed earlier, this requires schools to prepare pupils for the ‘experiences and opportunities of adult life’ and to promote their spiritual, moral, cultural, mental and physical development.
The DES has explained that a range of cross-curricular issues is intended to be included within this concept of the whole curriculum — including ‘coverage across the curriculum of gender and multicultural issues’.
In fact, it would appear that other aspects of the new curriculum, and in particular the National Curriculum, have been given more immediate priority, although the National Curriculum Council has issued some guidance  on multicultural education and linguistic diversity.
It has been suggested that there is a danger that because the 1988 Act is silent on the subject of multicultural and anti-racist education these areas will be largely overlooked, to the detriment of race relations in this country.
The Race Relations Act 1976 deals only in a very indirect way with the causes of racism and is more concerned with its effects.
In particular, the law focuses on less favourable treatment of a person on the grounds of his or her ‘colour, race, nationality or ethnic or national origins’.
The courts and tribunals have had to determine the meaning of racial/ethnic group for the purposes of the Act where doubts have existed.
They have looked at a clear historical development, distinct traditions and geographical origins in determining this question, and so far have confirmed that Sikhs, Jews, and Gypsies, but not Rastafarians, are ethnic groups.
This means that only groups identifiable by their religion but not race, or national origins etc., are not protected by the Act.
In the sphere of education, the Act applies to direct and indirect discrimination (defined at page 70) or victimisation (treating someone less favourably because they are asserting their right not to be discriminated against) by schools and LEAs in a variety of contexts.
There could be unlawful discrimination in the admission of pupils (as discussed in Chapter 4), in a pupil's access to benefits, facilities and services provided by the school, or by the LEA in the way it fulfils its broad duties under the Education Acts.
Local authorities also have a specific duty to carry out their functions in such a way as will promote racial harmony.
Many LEAs pursue anti-racist policies vigorously.
Nevertheless, such policies must not be applied in a heavy-handed manner, as the MacDonald Report concluded, otherwise they could have the opposite effect to that which was intended.
In practice the Act requires teachers to avoid racial bias in the performance of their teaching and pastoral duties.
This requires a conscious effort, because it is clear that discrimination is more often unintentional than intentional.
The fact that discrimination is unintentional has no bearing on its legality or otherwise.
The Commission for Racial Equality's Code of Practice advises teachers that the form that discrimination takes could ‘vary from crude racist remarks to subtle differences in assessment, expectation, provision and or work experience.
It should be noted that positive discrimination would also be unlawful under the Act, since it inevitably results in one racial or ethnic group being treated less favourably than another on the grounds of their race, and so on.
In some circumstances it may, however, be desirable to afford an ethnic minority group greater access to specialist facilities such as language support, because of the group's special  needs.
This would not be unlawful under the 1976 Act.
However, if such pupils were removed from the mainstream for this purpose, this would be a form of segregation and would be unlawful indirect discrimination.
Discrimination in education, as in other spheres covered by the Act such as employment (see Chapter 9) is also permissible if it can be shown to be ‘justifiable’.
The school or LEA would have to show that, for example, a requirement which affected one group more than another and which therefore resulted in indirect discrimination, was justifiable irrespective of a person's race.
The question of justifiability has been considered by the courts in a number of employment cases, where it has been construed most recently as meaning that the discriminatory effect of the requirement or condition must be weighed against its ‘reasonable necessity’ for the purposes of the business enterprise in question.
The justifiability rule has yet to receive widespread judicial consideration in the context of education, but it might be expected to be applied more strictly.
Take, for example, the question of dress.
There have been several examples of ethnic customs with regard to dress conflicting with school rules on uniform.
In Mandla v Dowell Lee ,(1983), a school was unable to convince the court that its policy of playing down cultural diversity to create a harmonious, racially integrated environment justified the decision to refuse to allow a Sikh boy to attend the school wearing a turban.
It is highly likely that the decision of the governors of Altrincham Grammar School for Girls to suspend two Muslim girls who wished to wear head scarves to school for being in breach of school uniform rules would also have been unlawful.
So when would a rule or practice which had a discriminatory effect be ‘justifiable’?
The answer is probably that it would rarely be so.
If the rule is justifiable on safety grounds, however, it would be.
For example, the Altrincham governors could have argued that there was a safety risk in the girls wearing scarves in the laboratory or workshop — although it is by no means clear that they would have succeeded on this basis.
It may be that the wearing of jewellery (such as ear studs, as favoured by some groups) could also pose a risk to safety in certain situations.
But what if a school wished to ban Sikh girls from wearing trousers, and sought to justify its action with the argument that to create an exception from school rules for Sikhs would cause resentment from whites and thus work to the detriment of racial harmony?
The answer, in the light of the Mandla case, would appear to be that the school would be acting unlawfully.
To take a further example, suppose that a school had arranged a school trip abroad during a week which coincided with a Jewish religious festival.
A Jewish pupil was unable to attend the trip as a result.
If the school refused to reschedule the trip, would this amount to unlawful indirect discrimination, or would the school's decision have been ‘justifiable’?
Obviously, it all depends on the circumstances.
Assuming that the school had not confirmed its booking, so that rescheduling was still a possibility, it might depend on, for example, whether there was any other suitable time during the year for the trip to take place.
If the timing of the trip was important in terms of the curriculum of the school group in question in that year, the decision would clearly be justifiable.
The above example also prompts discussion of the extent to which a school might be required to go towards accommodating the diverse needs of various ethnic minority groups represented amongst the pupil body.
The obvious response to this question would be to say that the school should do all that it reasonably can.
But even if a school fulfils its legal obligations there will be some parents who will remain dissatisfied.
Some, for example, would argue that if the well -established indigenous white population are taught in their mother tongue, English, those originating from the New Commonwealth deserve a similar right to be taught in their mother tongue — Urdu, Punjabi, Bengali and so on .
But whilst these languages can be offered as subjects under the National Curriculum, it seems that the denial of an opportunity to be taught in one of these subjects across the curriculum would not per se be unlawful under the Act.
The framework for the enforcement of the Act may briefly be mentioned.
If the complaint centres on anything other than the broad duty resting with LEAs to provide their services without discrimination, a complainant can institute proceedings in a designated county court.
Provided the discrimination was not indirect and unintentional, damages can be awarded to take account of injury to feelings.
The Commission for Racial Equality can carry out a formal investigation and issue a non-discrimination notice.
A complaint of breach of the LEA's broader duty must be made to the Secretary of State under sections 68 and 99 of the Education Act 1944 (see Chapter 2).
Gender
The law on sex discrimination has provoked very little litigation in the educational context until the past few years, in contrast to the wealth of judicial consideration of the provisions concerned with sex equality in employment (see Chapter 9).
This is perhaps symptomatic of the fact that the principle of equal opportunities between the sexes has been so heavily promoted by educationists, in addition to being supported by the DES and politicians, that the law has been viewed as having a very much secondary purpose in this area.
On the few occasions when parents have taken their grievances over sex discrimination to the courts, the question has concerned school admissions and single-sex schooling, which was discussed in Chapter 4 in the context of parental choice.
But the Sex  Discrimination Act 1975, which outlaws direct or indirect discrimination and victimisation against men or women on the grounds of sex or marital status, has a much broader scope.
Like the Race Relations Act 1976 it applies not only to discrimination in relation to admissions, but also to the benefits, facilities and services offered by the school and the arrangements for discipline, including exclusion from school.
The duty not to discriminate rests with the ‘responsible body’— the governors or LEA or proprietor of an independent school.
LEAs are under a duty not to discriminate in the carrying out of any other of their functions.
LEAs and responsible bodies are also under a separate duty in section 25 of the 1975 Act to ‘secure that [their]facilities for education…and any ancillary benefits or services are provided without sex discrimination’.
This duty appears to overlap with the other duties vis-à-vis education which are imposed by the Act.
But it seems that the principal focus of the section 25 duty is not on correcting cases of illegality but rather on ensuring that LEAs and responsible bodies play ‘a positive role in relation to the elimination of sex discrimination’.
So far as the curriculum is concerned, equality of access to ‘benefits, facilities and services’ means that in relation to subject choices and the way they are taught, stereotypical assumptions about the respective roles of men and women in society should be avoided.
A formal investigation by the Equal Opportunities Commission on West Glamorgan schools showed that there was separate curricular provision for boys and girls in the areas of craft, design and technology (boys) and home economics (girls).
Although there was not a deliberate effort to discriminate on the grounds of sex, it was clear that the opportunities for girls to take CDT or for boys to take home economics were severely limited by the way the curriculum was organised.
The provision of separate facilities for boys and girls is not unlawful under the Act provided the facilities can be regarded as equal.
The crucial factor is that boys and girls must be given equal choice.
This does not necessarily mean that girls will necessarily choose subjects traditionally associated with boys and vice versa.
Nationally, girls still outnumber boys as candidates in biological and health sciences and boys still easily outnumber girls in physics and mathematics.
The National Curriculum will, however, give a greater number of girls exposure to the physical sciences, in which as pupils and employees in industry they are still under-represented.
At the same time, progress towards greater equality could be hampered by schools necessarily giving higher priority towards the development of the curriculum in the light of the National Curriculum changes in general.
Damages may be awarded to a complainant on complaint to the county court.
As with race discrimination, damages cannot be awarded if the discrimination is found to have been unintentional.
The court has no jurisdiction if the complaint concerns breach of the broad  duty in section 25; the complaint must be made to the Secretary of State under sections 68 and 99 of the Education Act 1944.
The Equal Opportunities Commission was established under the 1975 Act to monitor its implementation, give advice and play a part in its enforcement.
Not only can the Commission assist complainants by bringing proceedings on their behalf, but it can also conduct a formal investigation, as it did in West Glamorgan.
The Commission likes to play a positive, enabling role, working with schools and LEAs to ensure that best practice is adopted and that, once it has been identified, illegal practice is replaced in line with the Commission's recommendations.
The Commission has, for example, been monitoring closely the various measures attempted by Birmingham City Council to bring its admissions policy into line with the House of Lords judgment in respect of its school admissions arrangements (see Chapter 4).
Sex Education
If a school is going to prepare a pupil for the ‘opportunities and experiences of adult life’ as it is required to do by section 1 of the Education Reform Act 1988, it surely cannot ignore his/her sex education.
Thus the guidance given to governors by DES Circular 11/87 that, although it is expected that at least some sex education would be provided by the school, they have freedom to decide whether or not sex education should be offered should now be revised.
It is clear that knowledge of how human sexual reproduction takes place is required by the attainment targets for science.
But DES Circular 11/87 exhorts schools to acknowledge that some parents have strong religious or cultural objections to the imparting of sex education by schools and to comply with a request to withdraw a child in such circumstances.
This could not be handled via temporary exception from part of the National Curriculum, referred to earlier (see p. 118), because a ‘general direction’ can only be issued if the head teacher considers that it is inappropriate for the child to follow the National Curriculum and in his opinion that situation is likely to change within six months.
Withdrawal of a pupil from sex education in fact presents schools with something of a dilemma — whether to accede to parental wishes, which may reflect the parent's philosophical or religious convictions, or whether to make the welfare of the child the paramount consideration.
In fact, to refuse a parent's request would not be a breach of the European Convention on Human Rights, even though it requires such convictions to be upheld.
In one case, Christian parents argued that compulsory sex education (in Denmark) was contrary to their religious convictions.
But the Court held that while those beliefs should be respected, the overriding requirement was for schools to present information and knowledge with an objective, critical and  pluralistic approach.
Moreover, to comply with the request may be a breach of the school's duty under the curriculum requirements of Chapter I of the ERA 1988 as well as detrimental to the child's welfare.
If the request were denied, the parent would have to pursue the matter via the local curriculum complaints procedure established under section 23 of the ERA 1988, then via the Secretary of State under sections 68 or 99 of the Education Act 1944, before the matter could then be referred to the European Commission on Human Rights.
Assuming sex education is given to the child by a school, the question of what form it should take must be considered.
The governors' policy will be relevant: the 1986 Act requires the head teacher to ensure that there is compliance with the governors' policy statement on sex education at the school.
But that policy statement must surely be consistent with the other legal requirements as to the content of sex education.
The 1986 Act states (in section 46) that sex education should be given in such a way as to encourage pupils to ‘have due regard to moral considerations and the value of family life’.
The government was predisposed to see a ‘moral framework’ established for the conduct of sex education, emphasising the responsibilities attached to sexual activity and awareness of its possible consequences, and especially of ‘casual and promiscuous sexual behaviour’.
There was the suggestion that if pupils were ‘helped to appreciate the benefits of stable, married and family life and the responsibilities of parenthood’ such behaviour might be discouraged.
However, this assumption seems flawed.
For one thing, it ignores the social reality that teenage sexual experience is extremely common amongst young people; pupils may well appreciate the benefits of stable family life and so on without perceiving any need to desist from their sexual activity.
Second, it ignores the other social reality, that many pupils come from homes in which there is no stable and married family life and so will not be able to relate easily to this concept.
In any event, it may be noted that the science attainment targets seek to put the scientific aspects of human reproduction into a social and emotional context, in a way that is consistent with the requirements of the Education (No. 2) Act 1986.
Leaving aside the moral issue, it is obviously desirable that schools should foster awareness of the physical risks of sexual activity, and especially of the danger of contracting a sexually transmitted disease.
The government's advice to those engaging in casual sexual relations to use a condom to reduce the risk of contracting AIDS has rendered the suggestion in the Circular that contraception is a ‘controversial’ subject only to be discussed when pupils ask questions about it somewhat inappropriate, as well as inconsistent with the later advice in the Circular that in sex education ‘particular attention should be given to…ways in which risks [of infection with AIDS]may be avoided or lessened’.
So far as individual counselling on sexual matters is concerned, schools are advised that whilst pastoral care of pupils is an important aspect of the teacher's role, parents are expected to play their part, so that if a pupil were to approach a teacher for advice the teacher should, wherever possible, encourage the pupil to seek it from his/her parent whilst at the same time warning the pupil of the risks attached to the pupil's behaviour.
The case of Gillick v West Norfolk and Wisbech AHA (1985) established that doctors may, in certain circumstances, give advice about contraception to under 16-year-old girls without parental consent.
The Circular points out that the decision should not be taken as sanctioning such advice given to such girls by teachers.
Sexual orientation
Considerable controversy was provoked by the government's measure, still known by the name of its previous incarnation as ‘Clause 28’, in which it sought to ban the promotion of homosexuality by local authorities.
So far as education is concerned, it is known that the government has been concerned for some time about an alleged willingness on the part of some teachers to bring the question of homosexuality out into the open in a way that seeks to normalise it as a form of human relationship.
DES Circular 11/87, referred to above, said that there would never be a case for a teacher advocating homosexual behaviour to pupils.
It is doubtful, however, whether section 46 of the Education (No. 2) Act, which as shown above requires sex education to be given in a way that encourages pupils to have regard for ‘moral considerations and the value of family life’, prohibits discussion of homosexuality.
For one thing, ‘moral considerations’ will inevitably be viewed subjectively.
For example, would not fidelity be a ‘moral consideration’?
Moreover, is the concept of ‘family life’ restricted to heterosexual relationships?
There is a similar doubt about ‘Clause 28’(actually section 2A of the Local Government Act 1986, inserted by section 28 of the Local Government Act 1988).
This prohibits local authorities from intentionally promoting homosexuality or publishing material ‘with the intention of promoting homosexuality’, or promoting ‘the teaching in any maintained school of the acceptability of homosexuality as a pretended family relationship’.
It has been suggested the phrase ‘pretended family relationship’ is directed at the book Jenny Lives with Eric and Martin , which shows a girl living with her father and a male partner who have a homosexual relationship; the presence of this book in an ILEA school was seized upon by the tabloid press.
Doubt about whether section 28 bars the promotion of homosexuality in the course of teaching stems from the wording of the section.
It is actually outlaws the promotion by local authorities of  teaching of the acceptability of homosexuality, and so on, or their intentional promotion of homosexuality.
It is not at all clear whether the failure of a Local Authority to prevent one of its teachers from teaching the acceptability of homosexuality would be construed as promotion by the Local Authority itself.
There is the added complication here that, following financial delegation, the governors of the school have many of the rights of an employer previously resting with the Local Authority.
Political issues and activities
The Conservatives have been concerned about what they have regarded as bias, especially left-wing bias, in the way issues have been presented to pupils by some teachers.
In Better Schools (1985) the government singled out ‘peace studies’ for criticism, saying that it had no place on the school curriculum because it failed to deal with certain issues in a balanced and objective manner.
Under provisions contained in the Education (No. 2) Act 1986 Parliament has sought to remove all scope for political bias in teaching and in extracurricular activities.
Section 44 states that LEAs, head teachers and governing bodies are required to forbid the pursuit, at a junior school, of ‘partisan political activities’ by pupils, and, at any school, ‘the promotion of partisan political views in the teaching of any subject’.
These bodies are also required to ensure that pupils at primary and secondary schools are offered a ‘balanced presentation of opposing views’ when political issues are brought to their attention at school or during extracurricular activities organised by or on behalf of the school (section 45).
These measures could quite justifiably be regarded as something of a sledgehammer to crack a very small nut, since they are intended to deal with a problem the existence of which is almost totally unproven.
DES Circular 8/86 referred to the ‘important safeguards’ offered by these sections against what the side note to section 44 refers to as ‘political indoctrination’— indicating a somewhat alarmist approach overall.
‘Political issue’ may extend beyond the merely party political — to environmental issues or the prison system, for example.
So far as balance is concerned, would a teacher in a school with Afro-Caribbean children on the register have to present a case for as well as against apartheid when covering South Africa?
Clearly, many teachers would have great difficulty with strict compliance because of their own convictions.
Discipline
INTRODUCTION
The scale of concern recently about the level of indiscipline and disruption in many schools resulting from pupil misbehaviour has to some extent been unwarranted, possibly inflamed by scare stories in the media and a greater willingness on the part of the profession, during a period of low morale and frustration, to report incidences of disruption and physical attacks on teachers.
All the evidence suggests that schools are generally well-ordered places where acceptable behaviour is the norm.
But whilst the concern might, therefore, have been largely misplaced, it has been useful in fostering a re-examination of the way schools and LEAs maintain discipline amongst pupils and in prompting fresh research into the nature of misbehaviour in schools.
It has also focused attention on the law governing pupil discipline at a time when interest in analysing the extent to which the autonomy interests of children are upheld by the law is high.
Various studies have identified what is considered to be best practice for the maintenance of good discipline and the avoidance of pupil alienation, and the main recommendations are referred to below.
The most important recent investigation was carried out by a Committee of Enquiry chaired by Lord Elton.
The Elton Report has produced a detailed set of recommendations following a comprehensive examination of the subject, informed by specially commissioned research carried out by a team from the University of Sheffield.
MPs had been pressing for an enquiry following the publication of a damning report on the state of school discipline by the Professional Association of Teachers in 1987, which was given prominent coverage in the press.
The Committee took just under 12 months to carry out its investigation.
Its report was published in 1989.
This chapter focuses in particular on the legal issues raised by this important investigation.
The terms of reference for the enquiry by Lord Elton and his committee were as follows:
In view of public concern about violence and indiscipline in schools and the problems faced by the teaching profession today, to consider what action can  be taken by central government, local authorities, voluntary bodies owning schools, governing bodies of schools, head teachers, teachers and parents to secure the orderly atmosphere necessary in schools for effective teaching and learning to take place.
Thus the principal focus was to be on examining ways in which higher levels of discipline might be achieved rather than analysing the causes of indiscipline.
(Nevertheless, it is clear from the report that the Committee took into account identified causes of indiscipline in schools in producing their recommendations.)
DISCIPLINE AND PUNISHMENT
Although they are quite distinct concepts, discipline and punishment are often regarded, quite erroneously, as synonymous.
Hirst and Peters explain that the confusion arises because one of the logically necessary conditions for the existence of punishment, that it must be inflicted on an offender as a consequence of a breach of rules, is closely linked to the idea that a breach of rules is a breach of discipline.
The other necessary conditions, that punishment must involve pain or unpleasantness and must be inflicted by someone in authority, do not fit the concept of discipline so exactly — although clearly discipline is associated with authority.
Discipline is thus ‘a very general notion which is connected with conforming to rules’, whereas punishment is ‘a much more specific notion which is usually only appropriate where there has been a breach of rules’.
Traditionally it has been common practice for schools to seek to maintain discipline and control misbehaviour via the exertion of authority and the employment of sanctions as punishments.
Although there has been a growing amount of evidence that rewarding good behaviour can be far more effective in maintaining pupil discipline than punishing bad behaviour, and despite official encouragement for rewarding, there has been found to be ‘a continuing emphasis’ on punishments.
HMI (Her Majesty's Inspectorate (of schools)) found that ‘in many schools,…the guidelines for staff contain much on sanctions and punishments, and very little on praise and rewards,.
Best practice, as advocated by the Elton Report and HMI, is to strike a clear and healthy balance between rewards and punishments.
The Children's Legal Centre has urged teachers to be ‘quick to reward and slow to punish’.
Schools can do much to improve discipline in schools without the use of sanctions — by motivating pupils (emphasising and rewarding achievement), improving the physical environment, giving pupils more say and more responsibility, involving parents, and so on.
The government has argued that many schools consistently secure good order ‘not simply by a regime of sanctions and rewards but more broadly by creating within the school…. positive attitudes to good behaviour’.
But it seems to be widely accepted as inevitable that indiscipline will not be eradicated, no matter how positive or imaginative the school tries to be; hence the need to be able to apply sanctions and punishments, ‘to register disapproval of unacceptable behaviour and as a last resort to protect the necessary authority of teachers and the stability of the school system’.
In cases of bullying (which is widespread, though often ignored by teachers, and can be linked to racial or sexual harassment), theft or vandalism, pupils may be guilty of criminal conduct where social services or police intervention is warranted.
The Elton Committee expressed particular concern about the impact on a school of bullying and racial harassment, and recommended that head teachers and staff be alert to signs of such behaviour, deal firmly with it, and ‘take action based on clear rules which are backed by appropriate sanctions and systems to protect and support victims’.
BEHAVIOUR AND DISCIPLINE
The importance of good behaviour amongst pupils has been stated thus: ‘Good behaviour is a necessary condition for effective teaching and learning to take place, and an important outcome of education which society rightly expects.’
Thus it is accepted that without good discipline in a school the standard of teaching and learning, and thus the achievements of both teachers and pupils, will suffer.
Pupil behaviour has been described as ‘a touchstone of the quality of the school system’.
Although many of the official reports point to a need for a school to have a clear view, which they should communicate to pupils and parents, of what is acceptable and unacceptable behaviour, they do not attempt to define these concepts.
Obviously, it would be difficult to prescribe in precise legal terms for universal application acceptable standards of pupil behaviour — although the law does, of course, define criminal behaviour (albeit often with some difficulty).
The law simply leaves the determination of ‘acceptable’ standards of behaviour to the head teacher and governing body, whilst imposing a duty on the head teacher to: secure the promotion within the school of self-discipline and proper regard for authority amongst pupils; encourage ‘good behaviour’on the part of pupils; and otherwise regulate the conduct of pupils.
The Elton Committee recommended that the head teacher should take the lead in defining the aims of the school in relation to standards of behaviour, create the conditions for establishing the widest possible measure of agreement on these standards and how they will be achieved, and ensure that these standards are consistently applied throughout the school.
This is a delicate process, as the Committee acknowledged.
If teachers are to be expected to put the policy into practice, head teachers must ensure that  teachers' views are taken into account, as well as those of the governors — with whose general statement of principles on discipline within the school the head is legally obliged to comply.
The views of teachers were amongst the matters looked into by the Sheffield University team when carrying out research for the Elton Committee.
They found that the types of pupil behaviour in the secondary school classroom presenting teachers with the most difficulty ranged from talking out of turn, physical aggression towards the teacher, calculated idleness, verbal abuse, hindrance of other pupils, general rowdiness and so on.
Around the school, the main problems were physical aggression and/or verbal abuse towards the teacher or fellow pupils, lack of concern for others, persistent infringement of school rules, general rowdiness and physical destructiveness.
The extent to which these problems will be tolerated, and the measures adopted for dealing with them, will vary from school to school, and it is accepted that it would be impossible to lay down precise rules about the steps to be taken.
As we have seen, this is left to the discretion of the head teacher, acting on the guidance of the governors.
In an extreme case, the LEA may intervene — if it considers that there has been a breakdown of discipline at the school.
LEAs are empowered to take such steps as they consider are necessary to prevent the breakdown or continuing breakdown of discipline at a school, a power which the Elton Committee urges them to invoke when the situation warrants it.
The 1986 Act states that the power is only exercisable where the education of pupils at the school is likely otherwise to be ‘severely prejudiced’.
LEAs will probably be reluctant to use this power and rather uncertain as to the kinds of circumstances when it should be exercised.
AUTHORITY TO PUNISH
Traditionally it was supposed that the teacher's authority to inflict punishment on a pupil derived from the implied delegation of parental authority.
The basis for this implied authority was, therefore, seen as the in loco parentis principle — the teacher acting in place of the parent and subject only to the same limits imposed by the law on the parent.
In the corporal punishment case of Ryan v Fildes (1938) Tucker J confirmed that:
when a parent sends his child to school, he delegates to teachers at the school the power to inflict reasonable and moderate punishment as required…and…he delegates to the teacher the taking of such steps as are necessary to maintain discipline with regard to the child committed to the teacher's care.
It has been suggested that, at least in schools maintained by LEAs, the teacher's authority to inflict corporal punishment is, in fact, independent of that of the parent.
In relation to punishment in general in schools, lawyers point to section 1 of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933 which, in prescribing offences of cruelty to persons aged under 16, concludes (in sub-section (7)) by stating that ‘nothing in this section shall be construed as affecting the right of any parent, teacher, or other person having lawful control or charge of a young person to administer punishment to him’.
The Elton Committee suggested that there was some doubt about the application of the in loco parentis principle to the disciplining of pupils — for its application would mean that a parent's request to a school for a particular form of punishment not to be administered to his/her child would have to be granted.
Although the European Court of Human Rights had declared that it would be a breach of the European Convention on Human Rights for a child to be given corporal punishment against the philosophical or religious convictions of his/her parent, it was felt that the ruling did not revoke the teacher's independent authority to administer punishment.
The Committee concluded that the ‘case law is probably sufficient to inhibit litigation by parents opposed to particular actions, such as authority to impose sanctions was insufficiently explicit and should be made more definitive (see below).
Although the existence of a teacher's independent authority to punish contrary to parents’ wishes is inconsistent with the generally pervasive notion of parental choice in education, it would seem to be justifiable.
As Street on Torts puts it, the basis of this authority and the defence it affords to torts such as false imprisonment ‘is the need to maintain order in the particular organisation responsible for the training of the child’; parental wishes would merely be factors to be taken into account in deciding whether a punishment was reasonable.
Clearly the maintenance of discipline within a school is in all pupils' best interests if it helps produce an environment conducive to learning, and it seems appropriate to leave with teachers the decision of how to achieve that objective, acting on the guidance provided by HMI, the Elton Report and so on.
In any event, it was clear, when the Education (Corporal Punishment) Bill 1985 was being considered by Parliament following the ruling in Campbell and Cosans , that to give parents a choice over whether or not their children should receive corporal punishment was justifiable in principle but practically unworkable.
Moreover, it would have undermined the important principle of consistency in the response to like cases which should underpin any punishment regime.
Of course, not all parents would wish to dictate to the school how it should exercise discipline over their children.
In a major study of poor families in the inner city, it was discovered that a large majority of parents saw the teacher as a person of authority whose action they were prepared to back up, especially if they saw it as strict.
One  suspects that the position has been more complex where middle-class parents are concerned; such parents may well be more assertive, and keen to support discipline but perhaps more divided about how it should be achieved.
In any event, social attitudes towards teacher authority appear to be changing.
In the British Social Attitudes Survey of 1988, 90 per cent of people thought there to be less respect for teachers amongst parents and pupils than 10 years ago.
The Elton Committee noted changing attitudes towards professional providers of services both generally and specifically with regard to education, and expressed concern lest the increasing willingness among parents in the United States to pursue legal actions against the disciplining of their children be mirrored in Britain.
Such legal action in the United States is reported to be seen by teachers there as limiting their disciplinary authority to a significant extent.
The Elton Committee felt that teachers' authority in this country would be better protected by setting out the fundamental principles governing that authority in statute.
They viewed the law as providing a basis for the teacher's authority to exert discipline within the school, but lamented the fact that the legal limits were derived from a collection of diverse sources, more especially case law or precedent under common law.
The Report says that ‘If, as we believe, society wants teachers to have effective authority over pupils, it should make the basis and nature of that authority clear in statute’.
Of course, to a limited extent it already has — via the Education (No. 2) Act 1986, which has banned corporal punishment in state schools.
This Act has also established in law the authority (and responsibilities) of the head teacher over disciplinary matters, and has imposed a system for dealing with exclusions from school.
But there is some justification for the argument that, so far as in-classroom sanctions such as detention, confiscation and withdrawal of privileges are concerned, some consolidation of the law in a statutory form would be desirable.
However, it is doubtful that establishing the teacher's authority in a statutory form would automatically, as the Elton Committee hoped, remove all scope for argument, since any rules would have to retain the flexibility which exists at present— inevitably leaving grey areas.
The provisions the Committee recommend for inclusion involve little more than a restatement of the existing common law position:
1
The teacher has general authority over discipline for the purposes of securing the education and well-being of all pupils at the school.
2
The teachers' authority is not to be regarded as delegated by the parent.
Instead, teachers have authority to discipline pupils by virtue of their position as teacher.
3
The teachers' authority extends to the enforcement of school rules (which a head teacher has authority to make under the articles of government of school and which may, unless they are unlawful — for example because of sex or race discrimination — be regarded as the ‘law of the land’ so far as pupils and parents are concerned).
The teacher may impose reasonable punishments which are consistent with the school's discipline policy and the law.
4
Teachers are entitled to discipline pupils in respect of conduct while out of school, such as on a school trip or bullying out of school where a pupil's conduct ‘impinges on the school’.
(This re-states the authority to punish for out of school misbehaviour established by the courts.)
THE USE OF SANCTIONS/PUNISHMENTS
Sanctions used by teachers take many forms.
Less severe forms of sanction include rebuke, withholding of praise and demanding repetition of work; in more serious cases there may be referral to senior staff, detention, putting a pupil on report, writing to parents and calling them into school, referring the pupil to a special unit in the school and ultimately exclusion from school.
It is clear that in most cases limited sanctions such as disapproval of a particular form of conduct can be most effective.
The research carried out by the University of Sheffield team for the Elton enquiry found that a preponderance of teachers considered reasoning with pupils outside the classroom setting as the most effective strategy for dealing with difficult pupils.
Opinions were rather divided over the effectiveness of other strategies and sanctions such as setting extra work or detention.
The Elton Committee concluded that the lack of uniformity suggested that the effectiveness or otherwise of a particular sanction depended both on the individual teacher and on the circumstances of the school.
Within the framework established by the Education (No. 2) Act 1986 for the head teacher to be in overall control of discipline in a school (taking account of the governors' policy on discipline), the law is content to allow teachers much discretion in the enforcement of school rules and application of sanctions.
Generally, the law has traditionally played a minimal role in controlling the use of sanctions at school.
The banning of corporal punishment by statute (from 1 5 August 1987) and the new procedures governing reinstatement of excluded pupils must be regarded as exceptions to the prevailing laissez-faire approach by Parliament towards punishment of pupils.
The rulings of the courts have established limits on the power to punish, and the cases on corporal punishment are of continuing relevance in this respect.
In the case of R v Hopley (1860), for example, Chief Justice Cockburn said that punishment inflicted on a pupil must be reasonable and moderate, not motivated by passion or rage, and must not be ‘excessive in its nature or degree’ or ‘protracted  beyond the child's powers of endurance’.
Whilst this statement was made in a case arising out of an alleged assault on a pupil, its relevance surely extends to other punishments which are similarly controlled by the common law.
For example, detaining a child would be false imprisonment but for the fact that the law permits a teacher to carry out a reasonable punishment.
In those independent schools where corporal punishment may still be inflicted, the teacher is able to avoid committing the torts of assault or battery when striking a pupil by ensuring that the punishment is moderate and not unreasonable.
So far there have been very few legal challenges to disciplinary action falling short of exclusion, apart from those concerning the use of corporal punishment which is now banned in the state sector.
This may be a reflection of the willingness of parents to accept the authority of the teacher where only limited sanctions are employed.
However, where exclusion from school is concerned it would be reasonable to suppose that parents are far more likely to question the decision in view of its implications.
There is, since the Education (No. 2) Act 1986, a very important legal framework within which exclusions from school may take place, which allows parents and others to have their say in the decision-making process (see below).
The establishment of relatively uniform statutory procedures is particularly important in view of the wide disparities between individual schools in their policies on the sanction of exclusion.
PARTICULAR FORMS OF PUNISHMENT
Corporal punishment
Only about one-third of the state sector secondary school teachers questioned by the University of Sheffield team for the Elton Committee reported that in their school corporal punishment had not been in use prior to 1987 when it became illegal.
Thus for the majority of teachers corporal punishment was available as a sanction against pupil misbehaviour until comparatively recently, although some LEAs, about 30 in all, had banned its use prior to then.
As stated earlier, the European Court of Human Rights ruled in the case of Campbell and Cosans v United Kingdom that to inflict corporal punishment on pupils when parents were opposed to such punishment on the grounds of their religion or philosophical convictions would be a breach of the European Convention.
Moreover, corporal punishment could amount to ‘degrading treatment or punishment’, contrary to Article 3 of the Convention.
Although the European Convention on Human Rights has not been incorporated into domestic law in the United Kingdom and is not enforceable via legal sanctions against signatories, the government was under political pressure following Campbell and  Cosans to change the law.
Instead of banning corporal punishment outright, however, it sought merely to give effect to the Court's ruling.
The Education (Corporal Punishment) Bill would, in effect, have given each parent the right to veto the use of corporal punishment against his/her child.
As stated above, this would not have been workable.
The Education (No. 2) Act 1986 banned the use of corporal punishment in the state sector.
At last the government recognised what many researchers had been saying for years: that corporal punishment did not address the causes of bad behaviour, caused resentment among older pupils in particular, and was ‘inimical to the quality of relationships between teachers and pupils upon which good behaviour is based’.
There was also evidence that corporal punishment was counter-productive: the use of physical force by teachers tended to promote violent behaviour by pupils.
Regardless of what parents may think, and evidence suggests that many still support corporal punishment by teachers and seek to sanction its use in schools, the banning of corporal punishment in state schools was a wise measure.
Section 47 of the Education (No. 2) Act 1986 has not criminalised corporal punishment by a teacher (although in some cases striking a pupil excessively was and still is an offence).
Instead, it his removed from teachers a defence to civil proceedings.
Thus corporal punishment is defined in the section with reference to the tort of battery.
Corporal punishment amounts to anything done for the purposes of punishing the pupil, whether or not there ire other reasons for doing it, which would amount to a battery.
The general rule is that a battery is committed where a person touches or strikes another, grabs hold of their sleeve or lapels and so on, without implied or express permission.
There is implied permission to tap someone on the shoulder to attract their attention.
The most common purpose for which this might be done would probably be to ask for directions.
So far as teachers are concerned, it might be necessary to tap a pupil on the shoulder to point out that s/he has dropped something on the floor, or to grab hold of a pupil to prevent an assault by that pupil on another.
It is doubtful whether in either of these situations the action taken is primarily concerned with punishment; but the first example could fall within the definition of corporal punishment in the Act, which requires the action to have been taken wholly or partly for the purposes of punishment.
In any event, the Act makes it clear that it is not unlawful for a teacher to inflict corporal punishment (as defined in the Act) where it is necessary ‘for reasons that include averting an immediate danger of personal injury to, or an immediate danger to the property of, any person (including the pupil concerned)’.
Using reasonable force to break up a fight would, either way, not be unlawful, whereas pushing a pupil back into line most probably would be.
Detention
The Elton enquiry research showed that the majority of teachers in secondary schools had used detention of individual pupils or groups of pupils but that teachers were divided as to the effectiveness of detention as a sanction.
Rutter et al found that detention had a neutral effect on pupil behaviour.
The law permits detention of pupils by teachers; provided it is not excessive or unreasonable, in accordance with the test laid down in R v Hopley (1860)(above), it may be imposed without risk of liability for false imprisonment being incurred.
The Elton Committee concluded that a parent would not be able to prohibit a teacher from detaining his child for the purposes of punishment.
However, despite the teacher's independent authority to discipline pupils, the test laid down in the case of R v Rahman by the Lord Chief Justice Lord Lane for the limits to a parent's right to detain his/her child probably offers a guide to teachers.
Lord Lane said it would be unlawful to detain a child ‘for such period or periods or in such circumstances as to take it outside the realm of reasonable parental discipline’.
Thus detention beyond a reasonable time would be unlawful; what is reasonable will depend on the circumstances, including the ages of the children concerned.
Parental wishes, although not conclusive, would be relevant.
Detention of a whole class may technically still be lawful, although it is becoming increasingly likely that a judge would have doubts about the reasonableness of this course of action where it is known that there may only be one or two culprits.
The Elton Committee recommended avoidance of the punishment of whole groups, and this is consistent with the view of a judge in one recent case, who said that ‘Punishment should not be indiscriminate.
A blanket punishment such as detention of a whole class must only be used as a last resort, otherwise people who are quite innocent may be detained incorrectly or unlawfully.’
The Children's Legal Centre has argued that the practice of what it calls ‘mass detentions’ should be prohibited altogether, because it is morally unjustifiable to punish a whole class for the actions of one or two of its members and likely to precipitate resentment among pupils.
Exclusion
Exclusion of a pupil from school may be temporary (either for a fixed or indeterminate period) or permanent.
In either case it is generally seen as a last resort.
In the survey of secondary schools by Her Majesty's Inspectorate it was found that schools resorted to short- or longer-term exclusion of pupils ‘only when absolutely necessary and then with reluctance’.
In the Elton Report survey, only 9 per cent of secondary school teachers had ever requested the suspension of a  pupil.
Research shows that there is considerable variation in what schools regard as sufficient ground for exclusion and in exclusion rates in different schools.
Exclusion, which usually takes the initial form of suspension, is almost universally available for cases of severe disruption of lessons or verbal abuse of staff.
But it is also used in some cases for rather trivial offences.
The law states that the power to exclude a pupil from a county, voluntary or maintained special school may be exercised only by the head teacher.
This should be taken as referring to the office of head teacher, so that where a person is acting in place of the head teacher (usually this will be the deputy head teacher), s/he will be able to exercise this power.
Cases have established that the power of expulsion must be exercised ‘reasonably’ and that wrongful that is, unjust) expulsion does not in itself constitute an actionable tort.
The head teacher is required to inform the parents of a pupil who is to be excluded (or the pupil him/herself if aged at least 18) of the period of, and reasons for, the exclusion.
Reasons must also be given if the head teacher decides to make a temporary exclusion permanent.
The head teacher must also inform the parents (or pupil, if aged 18-plus) of their right to make representations about the exclusion to the LEA and/or governors.
In certain cases the head teacher is obliged to inform the LEA of his decision and the reasons for it.
First, s/he must do so if the pupil is to be excluded for an aggregate period of more than five days in any term, or if the pupil's exclusion will mean that s/he misses an opportunity to take a public examination which s/he was going to take.
Second, the LEA must be informed if the head teacher has decided to exclude permanently a pupil excluded for a fixed or indefinite period.
Reinstatement of an excluded pupil may be ordered by an LEA; but governors also have powers with regard to reinstatement.
The Poundswick dispute in Manchester, when the LEA wished to reinstate pupils excluded for scrawling graffiti on a school wall, and the teachers, backed by the governors, objected because the graffiti allegedly contained personal insults to teachers, prompted a reappraisal of the respective powers of schools and LEAs over reinstatement.
The position now depends on whether the period of exclusion which has been ordered is permanent , indefinite or fixed term .
The undoubtedly complex provisions in the Education (No. 2) Act 1986, outlined below, apply to county, controlled and maintained special schools.
(In voluntary aided schools the governors have many of the rights enjoyed by LEAs over reinstatement of pupils in other schools.)
If exclusion is to be permanent , the LEA's decision on whether to order the pupil's reinstatement is binding on the head teacher, although the governors may appeal against an LEA's refusal to reinstate a permanently excluded pupil, using the same machinery which the LEA is required to establish for such appeals by parents (and pupils if aged 18 or over).
If the pupil has been excluded for an  aggregate period of more than five days in any term or will miss an opportunity to take an examination as a result of his/her exclusion, the governors may order his reinstatement and the head has to comply.
(Note that the Act also establishes a general rule that where the LEA and governors both have a say in the matter, and their decisions conflict, whichever leads to the earlier return of the pupil should prevail.)
The Elton Report recommends that in order to ensure that there is central monitoring of the exercise by LEAs of their power to order reinstatement of a pupil permanently excluded by the head teacher with the backing of the governors, the LEA should be required to submit a report to the Secretary of State within 14 days after every such occasion.
The Report also recommends that the head teacher be asked to supply a report both in the above situation and where the governing body has directed that a permanently excluded pupil be reinstated against the head teacher's wishes.
If the pupil has not been excluded permanently, but his been excluded for an indefinite period, the governors can only order the head teacher to reinstate him/her if the aggregate period of exclusion would be more than five days in any term or if the pupil would miss an opportunity to take a public examination.
If the governors choose not to reinstate, the LEA may order reinstatement.
The Elton Report recommends that if a pupil is to be readmitted to school after an indefinite period of exclusion, the school should ensure that before the pupil is allowed to return his/her parent signs an agreement in which the terms of the pupil's readmission have been spelt out.
This is clearly seen as a way of encouraging parental involvement in the reintegration of the pupil into school life.
If the exclusion is for a fixed period which would bring the aggregate exclusion in any term to more than five days or would involve the pupil missing a public examination, the governors or LEA may order the reinstatement of the pupil and the head teacher would be bound to comply with the direction.
The governing body may delegate decisions concerning reinstatement to a committee of three or more of their number, excluding the head teacher.
The Elton Committee suggested that because of the concern in schools about the fact that LEAs will often be able to order reinstatement against the wishes of parents and governors, the Secretary of State should monitor the operation of the new arrangements for five years and consider any changes that appear necessary.
DISCRIMINATION
Race
The Race Relations Act 1976 makes it illegal for an LEA or governors to discriminate on the grounds of colour, race, ethnic or national origins or nationality against a pupil —‘by excluding him from the establishment or subjecting him to any other detriment’(section 17(c) (ii)).
In the context of employment, where the Act refers to dismissal ‘or other detriment’, it has been held that the phrase in quotation marks refers to an act of the same type as dismissal.
In a case where an employer referred to a secretary using racist language, this was not a ‘detriment’ for this purpose.
It may be, therefore, that section 17(c) (ii)(above) refers to the more serious forms of sanction only, although detention or removal to a special unit would surely fall within its scope.
Withdrawal of privileges would be covered by section 17(c) (i), which refers,inter alia , to denial of access to ‘benefits, facilities or services’ provided by the school.
It is difficult for an individual complainant to show that there has been discrimination against him/her on the grounds of race.
However, where a discriminatory practice has been in operation for some time it may be easier for the Commission for Racial Equality to produce evidence in support of an allegation.
For example, the Commission demonstrated that in Birmingham LEA's schools between 1974 and 1980 black children were four times more likely to have been suspended from school than whites, and that factors such as place of residence and single-parent family background could be discounted.
The Elton Committee urged schools not to stereotype pupils from certain racial groups as troublemakers.
Brief guidance on exclusions has been offered to schools by the Commission in its Code of Practice for Education.
Gender
Section 22(c) of the Sex Discrimination Act 1975, like section 17(c) of the Race Relations Act 1976 (above), outlaws discrimination in exclusion ‘or other detriment’ or in denial of access to benefits, facilities or services provided by the school.
Girls are underrepresented in the exclusion statistics — which would imply that there is unlawful sex discrimination, until one takes account of the well-documented fact that the behaviour of girls and boys and girls at school differs.
On the whole, boys tend to be more noticeably deviant and aggressive.
McManus notes that ‘aggression does not pay off for girls in the way some boys find it does for them’, with the result that many girls adapt to the social world of school in a different way.
If girls deviate, they tend to do it in a way that causes far less disruption  than boys, such as pretending to write when they are bored.
The consequence is, therefore, that far fewer girls than boys are excluded from school.
The Elton Committee urged teachers to take account of this difference in the way they exert discipline.
They felt that the aggressive behaviour and attention-seeking which are more prevalent among males should not be reinforced by teacher responses.
It almost goes without saying that any disciplinary strategies adopted by teachers must involve an even-handed approach towards both sexes if they are to be lawful.
GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSE TO THE ELTON REPORT
The government has endorsed many of the Elton Committee's recommendations, most of which call for action by schools and LEAs rather than central government.
The government was urged to provide funds for the training of staff and additional support for dealing with the more difficult pupils.
Provision has been made, via the LEA Training Grants and Education Support Grants Schemes.
Central government may also be expected to monitor the implementation of the Elton Committee's recommendations if not to provide the extra resources necessary for the extended role for (and numbers on education welfare officers, teachers and LEA officers envisaged by the Report.
Of particular interest to lawyers will be the Committee's recommendations concerning monitoring the operation of the exclusion and reinstatement provisions of the Education (No. 2) Act 1986 by the DES, for five years.
Already, a National Exclusions Reporting System (whereby heads, governors and LEAs, as appropriate, provide information relating to permanent exclusions (but not details of individual pupils) to the Secretary of State) has been established.
Lawyers, as well as teachers, will also be interested in the proposed establishment of the teacher's disciplinary authority in statute form.
Realistically, though, there was little prospect of the government's making time for the introduction of such a provision, and in any event, the government has decided ‘after very careful examination of the issues, that legislative action would not be appropriate’.
Also rejected has been the Elton Committee's proposal that parents might have civil liability imposed upon them in respect of their children's acts.
CONCLUSIONS
The Elton Committee managed to produce a comprehensive and widely supported report and a coherent set of recommendations in a relatively short period of time.
But because Lord Elton's team was  established as a Committee of Enquiry to look into a serious and immediate problem, it was precluded by its terms of reference from addressing the more fundamental questions concerning the conflict between teachers' autonomy and children's rights.
Wringe has shown how, traditionally, any conflict of notional ‘rights’, as might arise, for example, between a pupil's freedom of expression in classroom discourse and a teacher's authority to control a lesson and behaviour during it, is irreconcilable and tends to be weighed in favour of the teacher almost every time.
The Elton Committee did, however, offer pupils an opportunity to benefit from a more child-centred approach to school discipline.
Schools were urged to recognise the importance of ascertaining pupils' views both generally and more specifically in relation to the development of a behaviour policy by the school, and to instil a sense of ‘belonging’ amongst pupils.
Even so, these measures, like the abolition of corporal punishment before them, are not primarily concerned with the rights of children.
Instead, they are guided by institutional and functional considerations rather than moral principles.
The fact that it was shown that corporal punishment in a school tended to exacerbate rather than diminish misbehaviour was the principal reason for reform.
In any event, there are undoubtedly inherent difficulties in applying a child-centred approach to discipline in an institutional setting, although they are probably not insurmountable.
Another relevant factor here is the prevalence of parental rights in education (see Chapter 4).
This stands in marked contrast to the emphasis on parental responsibility in recent child-care law developments, although it must be acknowledged that in extending parental rights in education the government has been keen to stress the duty of parents to involve themselves in their child's schooling in various (often ‘consumerist’) ways.
Thus it has been observed that ‘it remains unclear whether the abolition of corporal punishment in schools results from a spread of child-centred views or not: references to parents' rather than children's rights to decide school policies make such interpretation doubtful’.
Similarly, if parents are able to have their views upheld (as might occur on an appeal against a decision not to reinstate a permanently excluded pupil), ‘it may not be clear whether it is primarily the child's right or the parents' rights over upbringing which is being upheld’.
Although it may not necessarily clarify the position, there should nevertheless be greater recognition of children's autonomy interests in the context of school discipline.
To take one example, there is no provision for independent representation for pupils aged under 18 in respect of appeals concerning reinstatement following permanent exclusion.
Such rights are now available in the family courts, and the lack of a child-centred approach in the law governing school discipline amounts to a clear anomaly 
Case study on discipline
At a primary school, Joan, a teacher of five years' experience, notices two 9-year-old pupils scuffling in the corridor.
As she approaches them, she forms the impression that one of the pupils, Victor, is bullying the other, Robert.
Joan decides to intervene immediately to prevent injury to Robert.
She manages to separate the boys forcibly, whereupon Victor kicks her shin.
Joan is angered by this.
She knows Victor to be a troublemaker, and even remembers the boy's father's remarks at the last parents' evening, encouraging her to give Victor a ‘good smack if he causes any trouble’.
Instinctively, Joan reacts to Victor's kick by slapping the boy on the back of the leg.
She orders Victor to accompany her to the head teacher's office.
Victor refuses to move, and Joan pushes him, saying ‘get moving’.
Unfortunately, Joan catches Victor slightly off-balance and he falls against a wall, bruising his arm slightly.
When the two arrive at the head teacher's office, Joan explains the situation to the head, Lydia.
Lydia telephones Victor's mother, Karen, immediately.
She tells Karen that Victor is being excluded from school indefinitely for bullying and for kicking Joan.
The next day Karen telephones Lydia and threatens to tell the local newspaper and the national press about the ‘assault on her boy by a teacher’ if he is not reinstated immediately.
Consider the legal implications of the above events and advise Lydia.