

The Turbulent Years
EVERYONE in the artistic world of Montparnasse knew Modi, drank with Modi or had been sketched by him.
When he came back from Livorno in the late summer of 1913 he made straight for the Café Rotonde, to be greeted rapturously by artists and models on the terrace.
Drinks were ordered and the crowd celebrated Modi's return.
He was in top form, witty and debonair, and the party continued until the next day when Modigliani, still in a happy mood, became so rowdy that he had to be thrown out and locked in a police cell all night.
Senior police officials profited from their prisoner.
Commissioner Descaves bought up canvases ten at a time, at a hundred francs each.
Zamaron bought the paintings of both Modigliani and Utrillo and let them out after a sobering night in the cells.
Sometimes Zamaron entertained the artists at his home.
At the age of 29, apart from a reputation for wild behaviour, Modigliani had little to show for his seven years in Paris.
His marvellous carvings were unappreciated, some of them lost, broken or half finished: his painting output had dwindled.
It was still unthinkable to see him without his sketchbook and pencil, but of the hundreds and hundreds of drawings he made, he gave away many or sold them for a few francs.
All around him his friends and contemporaries were exhibiting and selling their work, some of them under contract.
Cubism was the rage, but Modigliani remained aloof.
When Charles Beadle, an English journalist living in Paris, asked him what his manner was, he replied imperiously: ‘Modigliani.
When an artist needs a label he is lost.’
But his talent did not go entirely unnoticed.
Art dealers were beginning to realize that paintings could become valuable investments for speculators.
The market in modern art was not yet developed and contemporary painters rarely had a one-man show.
Paul Chéron, Modigliani's first dealer, a former bookmaker and wine merchant from the south of France, had entered the business through marriage.
His father-in-law owned one of the best-known galleries in Paris on Place Saint-Augustine.
Chéron lacked the finesse of the old-established dealers in the art world, but he brought energy and a flair for spotting new talent to the trade.
He deliberately cultivated a policy of signing up young, unknown artists whose works would appreciate.
To encourage speculators Chéron published a brochure, assuring his would-be customers that by collecting paintings of promising young artists and selling them ten or fifteen years later, they could realize an increase of five to ten times on the purchase price.
A gambler by instinct, Chéron listened to the gossip and hung about in the artists' cafés.
Foujita, the Japanese artist, swore that the dealer bought the artists drinks and gave them a contract to sign when they were drunk.
Modigliani and Utrillo were not difficult to enlist by this method.
Chéron also made sure that his string of artists produced.
He considered that he gave Modigliani a fair deal: ‘He came to my shop about ten o'clock in the morning.
I shut him up in my cellar with all he needed for painting and a bottle of cognac, and my maid, who was a very pretty girl, served as his model.
When he finished, he kicked at the door, I opened it and gave him something to eat.
And a new masterpiece was born.’
To economize, Chéron sent his wife to pose for Modi, but he was furious and sent the unfortunate lady upstairs.
The maid was a young country girl, more acceptable as a model, and Modi painted her as ‘The Girl With Red Hands’.
Chéron paid Modigliani a louis, a gold piece worth twenty francs, for his day's work in his shop on the Rue de la Boétie.
The arrangement allowed Modigliani materials, food, and a model but the status of hired hand was humiliating and Modigliani hated it.
The contract between two individuals with such  opposing values obviously could not last.
Chéron boasted of Modigliani's masterpieces.
One day Modi had made a collage by pasting a verse from a popular song around a painting, in Cubist fashion.
Chéron took it off and replaced it with a poem by Baudelaire, considering that he had elevated the tone.
Appalled at the dealer's vulgarity and furious that he had changed the work, Modi told Chéron he was a cheapskate.
In the fierce row that followed the ‘contract’ was dissolved.
Apparently Chéron hid Modi's clothes to keep him in, for Brancusi claimed to have rescued the stranded painter by buying him a jersey and a pair of trousers so that he could go out into the street.
Almost all Modigliani's portraits have an air of mystery which raises them above the level of the mundane.
The portrait of Chéron, however, shows a mild, mean little man with bowler hat and moustache, sitting legs wide apart as if astride a horse.
His eyes are pinpoints, surely the smallest in any Modigliani portrait, as if to reveal to us the man's utter lack of vision.
The painting is dated 1917, but was probably earlier, since dealers preferred to date the works from Modigliani's more profitable years.
There were affairs inevitably, and important friendships were made that year.
Gaby, a handsome woman of 30, was a very experienced and alluring person, madly in love with Modi.
The love affair gave him new life, he looked better, drank less and stayed away from the cafés.
Gaby also shared her favours with her ‘official’ lover, a lawyer without a practice.
When he came to hear of her liaison with a penniless painter, his vanity was stung and he insisted that ‘honour’ be satisfied.
He demanded an interview with Modi at the Café Panthéon on the Boulevard Saint-Michel.
On the appointed day Modigliani appeared looking confident and distinguished in his cords and red scarf; he ordered a good bottle of wine and began to rhapsodize about Gaby's beauty and charm.
No man of distinction, he insisted, certainly no artist, could fail to fall for her.
The affronted lover tried to interrupt, to insist that Gaby was under his protection and that the arrangement was impossible, but Modigliani insisted that he had painted several portraits of Madame in the nude that would be worth ‘thousands’ one day and pressed one on her luckless lover.
The toasts to Gaby, the protestations persisted and in the end the two reeled out of the café arm-in-arm at two in the morning swearing eternal friendship.
Without his love of women, so often reciprocal, Modigliani would not have been able to afford to paint the beautiful women in his repertoire.
He disliked paid models, and his success in love affairs and his access to ‘free’ models infuriated the bohemian community.
He was still extremely conscious of his position as an outsider in Paris.
To friends and lovers he always made it clear that he was a Jew, perhaps to anticipate and reject the rebuff.
Critics noticed that he was one of the few    artists genuinely enthusiastic about new talent.
‘He never worried about exhibiting his work: never came to steal from neighbours; he lived in and for himself’.
The tribute may sound fulsome, but Modigliani showed exceptional appreciation of nascent ability.
Years before others, he recognized the difficult genius of Chaim Soutine.
The gauche, twenty-year-old art student from Russia with his stoop, short neck and thick lips, coupled with the crudest of manners, repelled most people at first.
But Modigliani saw the torment in the deep, hooded eyes and admired the power and fantasy of his work.
Through his friendship Soutine was introduced to other young artists and saw them work in their studios and Modigliani guided him round the Louvre, pointing out the Italian painters he admired, the primitives and Giotto, Botticelli and Tintoretto.
Soutine could speak hardly a word of French.
Modigliani helped him with the language and, with surprising patience, taught him to wield a knife and fork, to use a pocket handkerchief and to mix in society.
Modigliani was blamed later for encouraging Soutine to drink, but Soutine already had a taste for drink when he came to Paris.
The difference between them was that Soutine slunk away ashamed when he was drunk whilst Modi displayed a theatrical abandon.
One hot summer's night in 1913 Léon Indenbaum, a Russian Jewish sculptor, called round to visit Soutine at the Cité Falguière.
The two men lay stretched out on their truckle beds with bowls of water placed round the room to attract the bugs.
Modigliani was reading Crime and Punishment by candlelight, so engrossed in his book that at first he didn't notice the visitor.
Then he looked up, slapped the book closed and said ‘Dostoevsky: he was a man.’
The vivid impression that Modi made on his artist friends, coupled with the resonance of the legend, makes descriptive anecdotes about him read like captions for frames in a film.
Ossip Zadkine, a Russian Jewish sculptor, often repeated stories of encounters with Modigliani at the time, always with slight variations: ‘Modigliani's studio was a glass box.
Coming near, I saw him lying on this tiny bed.
His magnificent grey velvet suit seemed to be floating aimlessly in a raging sea, as if petrified in the expectation of waking.
Around and everywhere the white sheets of his drawings…made fluttering wave crests…
‘And, more realistically, describing Modigliani on his work: ‘…
He did not explain everything; we did not discuss sculpture itself.
His only response to my comments as a professional sculptor was a pleased laugh…
‘And Zadkine referred to Modigliani's unfinished heads, outside in the mud, most of them still in a rough stage.
In 1912 Nina Hamnett, a modern and talented young artist from England, briefly visited Paris, where she met Epstein and his wife.
Ever since the visit she had longed to be part of the artistic excitement of the city.
In February  1914 she scraped together the money for the trip and took lodgings in Montparnasse in a foul-smelling room on the Boulevard Raspail.
On her first night she went to eat at Rosalie's, the cheap restaurant Epstein had recommended.
As she sat alone in the smoky little room eating her dinner, in walked a handsome man, with curly black hair and brown eyes, wearing a black hat and corduroy suit.
He marched straight up to Nina and, pointing to his chest, said: ‘Je suis Modigliani, Juif, Jew’, and unrolled a roll of newspaper he had been carrying.
In it were his drawings, curious long heads with pupilless eyes, some of them in blue and red chalk.
He gave her his price: five francs.
Nina found them very beautiful, looked through carefully and chose a pencilled head and paid him.
Then he sat down beside her.
They tried to communicate and got on very well, despite the language difficulties.
By then La Rotonde, which had opened in 1911, had become the place for artists to meet, and every morning Nina met Modi selling his drawings for five francs (although in bad times he reduced the price to three francs).
By twelve o'clock he had usually earned enough to live on for the day.
‘He was then quite happy and able to work and drink all day.’
Modigliani's studio was on the Boulevard Raspail where Nina lived.
She glimpsed him through the glass walls of his studio as she walked past, his watch nailed to a tree so that he could see the time.
The neighbours thought him very odd, because he would start to carve at two or three in the morning when he came home.
One hot night he came home drunk and lay down on the flower-bed in the garden just outside the studio and fell fast asleep.
Suddenly two cats on the roof dropped down on to his naked body and woke him.
He ran yelling up the Boulevard Raspail into the arms of an astonished policeman.
At the time he was hardly painting at all, concentrating on drawing and sculpting.
Whenever she could afford it Nina tried to buy one of his drawings, but most of the artists thought he was simply a nuisance and told her she was wasting her money.
She noticed, however, that ‘Picasso and the really good artists’ considered him very talented and bought his work.
Modi's drink was wine, she said, absinthe when he could afford it; and every night he would sit beside Nina at the Rotonde and draw while she watched him.
When he became too drunk or sleepy to go on he would put his head on her shoulder and go to sleep.
She sat up straight, feeling proud but rather foolish.
The atmosphere just before the First World War was free, live and very young.
At Van Dongen's studio negro boxers sparred with the guests on Thursday afternoons, critics came in to drink liqueurs and Nina danced naked under a black veil.
Every two or three weeks there were fancy-dress parties.
At a certain stage in the evening Modigliani would decide to undress, unravelling the long red scarf he wore around his waist in theatrical fashion.
Since they  knew exactly what was going to happen the others usually grabbed him, tied up the red scarf and sat him down.
On Saturday nights the crowd stayed out nearly all night.
One night Zadkine, Modigliani, Nina and Marie Wassilieff walked to a café in the Boulevard St Michel frequented by ‘painted ladies, dull students from the Sorbonne and sometimes businessmen who bought everyone drinks.
We drank cheap red wine and talked and laughed and sang’.
Zadkine and Modigliani bought Nina a large bouquet of roses and at seven-thirty in the morning escorted her back to her hotel after a marvellous night.
Nina and Modi flirted playfully.
She was marked out by her brightly coloured stockings, some red, some yellow and some that looked like a chessboard.
Early in the morning, after the Rotonde had closed, Modigliani would chase her up the street.
One night he nearly caught her, so she climbed up a lamppost. and waited until he had gone.
All-night parties, Nina dancing in the nude, Modi stumbling into the sketching class very drunk, the weekly visits to the Gaieté Montparnasse, a small, bawdy music-hall where they sat up in the gallery, all paint a happy-go-lucky picture.
In Nina's stories it is Modigliani who was pushed off the bench, made to carry the beer in for a party.
To her, at least, he seemed to be a part of the gaiety, having a wonderful time.
Jacob Epstein had been the unwitting means of introducing Nina Hamnett (Miss Hamlet to Montparnasse) to Modigliani by recommending Rosalie's restaurant to her.
By coincidence it was also Epstein who brought Modigliani together with a woman writer who was to have a profound effect upon his life — Beatrice Hastings.
At a party in Soho in 1914 Epstein was talking to Beatrice, who made it clear that she was at a loose end in her life.
‘Go to Paris’, he advised, ‘there is a painter there who is a beautiful man and a genius — Modigliani.’
At 35 Beatrice looked like the thoroughly modern woman she was, with high breasts, a little pert head, and a slim body.
She wore smocked Liberty dresses and sandals and smoked in the street, considered very daring.
On her bedpost, it was said, she notched up a mark for every new lover.
The daughter of a wool dealer from Hackney, Beatrice had spent much of her life in South Africa, where she married and then divorced a professional boxer.
In London her intense interest in the occult and the mysterious Madame Blavatsky led to a meeting with Alfred Richard Orage, editor and owner of The New Age , an important weekly review of politics, literature and art.
As Beatrice and Orage became lovers, she worked for the paper, assuming increasing importance editorially and soon writing about a third of the contents herself as reviewer, poet, satirist and literary adviser.
The New Age numbered Shaw, Wells, Chesterton and Belloc among its contributors and  new writers encouraged by them both included Katherine Mansfield, Wyndham Lewis and Herbert Read.
A spirited campaigner for women's rights and for abortion at a time when birth-control was practically unavailable, Beatrice was sometimes incomprehensible and hysterical in her arguments, driven by her exposed position to extremes.
She was passionately attached to Wyndham Lewis and advised all young artists ‘to go on boozing and wasting’ because they were such odd creatures.
‘Men have to do with morals’, she wrote, ‘women with conventions.
It seems to have been against creative law that the female should be endowed with morals.
Convention is less disastrous to culture than the nature of women unrestrained…‘
As her relations with Orage deteriorated her influence in the paper declined, and by 1913 he had replaced her column of literary criticism with his own.
She had a cruel pen and a reputation for physical violence to match.
By 1914, she described her domestic affairs as ‘quite intolerable’.
When she arrived in Paris in May 1914, she was in a dangerous frame of mind, footloose, resentful and spoiling for adventure.
However, the charm of the city raised her spirits and her first impressions after a night out at an artists' ball were fresh and delightful: ‘You can't walk home at dawn in Paris, even two hundred yards.
The streets are all being washed.
Much laughter, much applause for your frock, if it is chic.
Three hundred people inside and outside the Rotonde, very much alive!
Models arrived in a flame or a half-moon dancing down the boulevard to the ball and absolutely unmolested, an Indian in full war-paint, Spaniards, Chinese, Bacchus, everybody you can think of.
No old fat men, no painted women: all young, agreeable and spirited.’
Even in that company Beatrice would look original; sometimes she carried an open wicker basket with a live duck inside.
A tangle of witnesses confuses the Beatrice/Modi romance.
Both Nina and Zadkine claim the privilege of introducing them.
And there is a third story of Beatrice passing provocatively by Modigliani's table at the Rotonde.
He whistled after her and shouted a coarse word, whilst Beatrice looked down at him, unshaven and dishevelled, and asked who the big Sicilian was (an insult, of course to an Italian).
‘Beatrice Hastings — poetess — Amedeo Modigliani — drunk’, Picasso told her laconically.
After the affair Beatrice described him sourly: ‘A complex character.
A pig and a pearl.
Met in 1914 at a crémerie [Rosalie's].
I sat opposite him.
Hashish and brandy.
Not at all impressed.
Didn't know who he was.
He looked ugly, ferocious and greedy.
Met again at the Café Rotonde.
He was shaved and charming.
Raised his cap with a pretty gesture, blushed to his eyes and asked me to come and see his work.’
With hindsight, Beatrice's    remark that she was not at all impressed and didn't know who he was seems significant.
She was looking for her genius…
In her column, which she used almost as a diary, she gives a charming account of the early encounters.
In June 1914, she was sitting inside the Rotonde because the weather was cold and was delighted to shock ‘the fair and pure English bourgeoise’ by being ‘very glad with the bad garçon of a sculptor.
He has mislaid the last thread of that natty rig he had recently and is entirely back in cap, scarf and corduroy.
Rose-Bud was quite shook with the pale and ravishing villain’.
(Nina Hamnett mentions a new outfit of blue suit and yellowish brown cap that Modigliani had bought just like Picasso's, with money from the sale of a head.
Then he fell in the mud…)
A week later, 11 June, her column is full of the sculptor tempting her: ‘You're only seeing Paris…come and see ‘Par-ee’…leave all these people’(Modigliani delighted in showing his visitors the real Paris).
‘I thought it was like London when we sat in the cinema’, she went on.
‘Ah! j'adore ça’, he said and never looked at a single picture.
‘You mustn't go to sleep on my shoulder’, I objected, ‘all the world knows you’.
‘Not a soul,’ he said and waved anew to somebody else.
‘You mustn't fall in love with me…it's no use — yes, do!
No, don't, it's no use.’
‘Don't be absolutely ridiculous,’ I said.
‘You're much more likely.’
‘Ah! that's all accomplished’, he said, ‘but you look at me responsively, like my first statue…’’
In her obsession with Modi, Beatrice glosses lightly over more weighty concerns.
There was no female suffrage in Paris that she could observe.
She remarked tartly: ‘The women count money all day long and make love on Sunday…!’
But when she writes or herself, her tone is almost girlish: ‘The romantic world seems to have supposed that I kissed the sculptor last week.
Not a bit of it…!’
In the opening stage of their affair she could not keep her column free of the subject of her lover, even indirectly.
Walter Sickert, the English artist, a contributor to The New Age , praised Parisian artists who had the courage to sell their drawings in the cafés.
Apparently in Paris the ‘aesthetic nuts’ disapproved of the practice.
‘Nuts are awful bores…
‘, Beatrice remarked casually.
On 9 July, for the first time, she manages to introduce Modigliani's name to readers of The New Age .
She had been twice to see Rousseau's paintings very reluctantly.
Although they were in vogue she could not abide them: ‘What beats me is when an unsentimental artist like Modigliani says: ‘Oui, très joli’ about them.
One of Modigliani's stone heads was on a table below the painting of Picasso and the contrast between the true thing and the true-to-life thing nearly split me.
I would like to buy one of those heads, but I'm sure  they cost pounds to make and the Italian is liable to give you anything you look interested in.
No wonder he is the spoilt child of the quarter, enfant, sometimes terrible, but always forgiven.’
(A sentimental view if one contrasts it with Nina Hamnett's, who said that most people found him an awful nuisance.)
‘Nothing's lost,’ he says and bang goes another drawing for 2d. or nothing, while he dreams off to some café to borrow some paper.
He will have, as an art dealer said to me, ‘a good remember’.
They say here that he will do no more of these questionless immobile heads as his designs begin to set the immobile against the mobile.
He is a very beautiful person to look at when he is shaven, about 25 I should think [he was just 30, as she probably knew], always laughing or quarrelling à la Rotonde…he horrifies some English friends by tubbing at two-hour intervals in the garden and occasionally lighting up all after midnight, apparently as an aid to sculpturing Babel.’
Early entries about Modigliani are all written in this playful, slightly sardonic tone.
In the middle of July she left Paris for a brief trip to England.
Modigliani stopped her taxi as it was crossing Montparnasse and implored to be allowed to ride with her, and even that was relayed to her readers.
‘It was so chic, like being his rich uncle who died of the gout.
On the station Modi fainted loudly against the side of the carriage and all the English stared,’ she wrote gleefully.
‘Modi was muttering ‘Oh!
Madame, don't go’.
‘Modigliani’, someone said, ‘you've been three years fiddling about with one type of head and you'll be another three on the new design.’
‘Cretin’, he glared at me as if I'd said it.
‘Mais, ma petite, he is right.
I might as well have grown asparagus in the time.’’
Obviously, Beatrice was enjoying taunting her editor and former lover with her constant references to another man which he would have understood.
In her column, La Rotonde is the café that Beatrice always mentions, although of course Modi and the other artists often visited the Café du Dôme opposite, favoured by Germans and Americans, Au Closerie des Lilas or Le Petit Napolitain.
But Libion, the fat, good-natured proprietor of La Rotonde, created a homely atmosphere in the little café with sawdust on the floor.
Everyone was welcome, including prostitutes whom Libion would advise to become models, even drug traffickers, provided their dealings were discreet, as well as Slav families, Russian revolutionaries and the artists, Libion's favourites.
Hungry and often lonely, they hung about all day for the warmth and company, for Libion's good coffee and the hot croissants, soup and ham sandwiches and red wine they could barter for their work.
The colony, always hard up, came to look on Libion as a kind of father and the café as their own.
Marevna (Maria Vorobiev), a talented young art student from Russia, ran to La Rotonde for comfort and consolation whenever she was in difficulty.
She had arrived in Paris in 1912 and soon became a good friend of Soutine and a familiar Montparnasse character.
In the summer of 1914 Marevna drew Modigliani, Kisling, the Polish Jewish painter, and Soutine seated round a table.
Kisling is attempting to refill Modi's glass.
Modigliani, engrossed in a book, holds up his hand to refuse disdainfully whilst Soutine, head in hands, looks plunged in despair.
The drawing just pre-dated the wilder stories of Modigliani's debauchery, before he became the established drunk of Montparnasse in the eyes of the world.
It makes an interesting comment on the legend.
They were all young, all the artists of Montparnasse, all talented to a greater or lesser degree, all bravely pitting themselves against the indifference of the public.
After the war, most of Montparnasse would claim to have been intimate friends of Modigliani.
It is perhaps worth remembering that both Epstein, Akhmatova and Nevinson knew him as solitary and an intensely private man.
Perhaps it is only in retrospect that the artists' balls, the fancy-dress dances, the 14th of July celebration seemed more brilliant than usual that summer just before the First World War.
Nina Hamnett dressed up as a Paris Apache, in a pair of French workman's trousers, a blue jersey, corduroy coat and cap borrowed from Modigliani and a toy butcher's knife.
For three days and nights she danced in the streets with the crowd.
Modigliani did not recognize her when she met him and brandished her knife on the corner of the Rue Delambre and the Boulevard Montparnasse.
He ran away from the fearsome ruffian.
Just over two weeks later war broke out, and the happy mood of Paris changed to one of agitation and anger.
In the first week a German dairy was pillaged, two Germans were battered and an Austrian student was surrounded by a hostile mob, whilst traffic came almost to a standstill.
The smaller shops closed down, the larger ones put up their shutters and long queues formed for vegetables.
Only gold and silver coins were accepted, paper money was refused everywhere.
Foreign artists were desperately hunting out their papers and passports and some of them, including Amedeo de Sousa Cardoso, decided to leave Paris and go home.
Modigliani's family urged him to come back to Livorno too but his work, his world, was now in Paris.
And so was Beatrice.
She decided to brave it out and applied for permission from the Prefect of Police.
Everyone thought the war would be over in a matter of months.
‘All is war now,’ she records in her column early in August, ‘and art is under worse than lock and key.
Very little fresh food is delivered in Montparnasse and one keeps open house on bread, cheese and fragments.’
It was impossible to dine out in view of hungry acquaintances.
The foreign artists and the dealers were thrown together by the prospect of the destruction of their world.
One Sunday afternoon, just after war broke out, Picasso, Rosenberg the dealer and Modigliani were sharing a table at the Dôme when André Level, a young and enthusiastic collector of modern art, came and sat down beside them.
Level was introduced to Modigliani and was impressed by the intelligent and fine-looking young man.
When they left the café, Picasso suggested to the other two that they should visit Modigliani's studio to see his work.
Level was captivated by one of Modigliani's large caryatids in watercolour and wanted to buy it.
But it was Picasso who fixed the price, knowing that Modigliani would undersell himself.
Level paid twenty-five francs and took the beautiful work home under his arm.
The price was one of the highest Modigliani ever received at the time.
He would have asked far less.
Modigliani's style was so entirely different from Picasso's that the two were in no way rivals.
That he took his  dealer to see it is a measure of Picasso's opinion of Modi's work.
Soon after Beatrice came back to Paris, Modigliani moved into her studio on the Rue de Montparnasse, his large drawings of caryatids on the walls.
At the time he was still sculpting and he continued to carve his large heads, sometimes in polychrome, until 1915 or 1916.
But in wartime everything was more difficult: building had ceased, building sites were closed and workmen were mobilized, so that he had no easy source of stone.
Increasingly, the physical effort of carving in stone provoked fits of coughing and the mess and the rubble annoyed Beatrice.
Besides, he was tempted to paint her.
He captured her in a variety of poses and moods which reflect her many facets: as a grande dame in a hat and fur collar; as a great courtesan —‘Madam Pompadour’ he called the painting, perhaps deliberately mis-spelling it; in a wicker chair; demure in front of the piano; and he sketched her all the time, with quick, deft strokes.
One beautiful drawing reveals Beatrice nude, weary and bedraggled, holding a sheet which barely covers her pubic hair.
‘Someone has done a lovely drawing of me.
I look like the best type of Virgin Mary, without worldly accessories as it were’, she wrote in The New Age of 5 November.
For a time Beatrice was a wonderful companion; she had taste, style, wit and a knowledge of literature and an interest in philosophy which matched Modi's own.
Editorially in The New Age she had encouraged and brought on new poets and writers.
It seems certain that to Modigliani she acted as stimulant, irritant and catalyst for his work.
If she could say playfully, in public, that he had been fiddling about with one design for three years, their conversations on his work in private must have been explosive.
Their violent, witty, literate affair at first amused and intrigued their friends at a time when life was grim.
Beatrice's column is full of the distress and hardship among the artists.
‘Foreigners get poorer and poorer, those that are left — and there are hardly any left’, she wrote in the first month of the war.
Most of Modigliani's friends joined the Army.
Paul Alexandre, his loyal and sympathetic supporter, left Paris to serve in the army medical service.
Kisling and Zadkine, both Poles, joined the Foreign Legion.
Modi, too, tried to join the Foreign Legion, felt it was the ‘price’ to pay for living as a foreigner in France, and justified his inconsistency by saying: ‘I'm so much a revolutionary that I'm even willing to be a soldier and revolt against my own anti-militarist beliefs.
A little contempt for military life makes it all the easier…
Nothing can be done without the spirit of contradiction’.
He was, predictably, rejected on health grounds.
That provoked a depression and a drinking bout.
Asked by a passer-by if he had enrolled, the artist replied: ‘I fight your battle, my friend, every day.
Go you now and fight mine.
Keep the German bombs off the Louvre’.
That anecdote, told in Beatrice Hastings' New  Age column, seems true to life.
For, if he used her as a model, she used him as good copy.
At the end of August, the first German warplanes bombed Paris and also distributed leaflets warning Parisians to surrender: the Germans were at the gates.
After that the bombers came nightly, the city was blacked out, cafés closed at 8pm and the sale of absinthe was banned.
The blackout extended to news of the war and the German advance on Paris; newspapers suspended publication temporarily and crowds gathered round the official bulletins pasted on the walls as rumour raced round the city.
Life as the artists had known it only a few weeks earlier no longer existed.
There was, as Beatrice wrote graphically, a ‘universal and systematic suppression of everything but grief and groceries’.
Sales of art were difficult and prices of paintings and sculpture even went down.
Foreign artists tried hopelessly to find work, dig trenches, look after the four cows in the Bois de Boulogne, anything to earn a few francs.
To feed the foreign artists, who were literally starving, a committee headed by a wealthy American woman was set up and a canteen quickly opened.
A meal was provided at a nominal price at midday in two studios each seating about sixty artists and models.
In the evenings Marie Wassilieff, the enterprising little Russian artist, began to serve dinners in a courtyard next door to her studio in the Avenue du Maine.
She persuaded her friends to bring chairs, stools, tables and a hotchpotch of furniture, and three artists cooked surprisingly good meals.
For fifty centimes (fivepence), sixty with a cigarette, guests were offered soup, meat, fruit and tea or coffee.
When Beatrice visited the canteen in October 1914 she found a good deal of atmosphere, although there was no beer or wine.
An international crowd of Belgians, Japanese, Russians, Czechs, Italians, Spaniards, Argentinians, Swiss and a Finn shared a meal.
Visitors were expected to pay in advance but credit was always given to favourites like Modigliani and Leon Trotsky the Russian revolutionary.
Every evening a crowd gathered to squabble over politics or new art forms or to ‘dance to Zadkine's mad music, ‘The Camel’ s Tango’.’
On Saturdays, after dinner, concerts of classical music were so popular that artists sat on the floor or perched on tables to listen.
The Russian writer, Ilya Ehrenburg, remembered evenings at the canteen when Modi sat on the stairs: ‘sometimes declaiming Dante, sometimes talking of the slaughterhouse, of the end of civilization, of poetry, of anything except paintings.’
Modigliani's innately pessimistic view of life was fuelled by the war.
He spoke to Ehrenburg of the prophecies of Nostradamus, the French sixteenth-century mystic, and quoted from a battered book: ‘Nostradamus foresaw military aviation.
Soon all those who dare to smile or weep at the wrong  moment will be sent to the poles…a cruel ruler will seize power, everyone who does not learn to keep silent will be put in prison and the extermination of mankind will begin.’
Very quickly the quarter of Montparnasse adjusted to wartime.
The German bombers came about six every evening but nobody stayed indoors.
And although absinthe was banned, cafés shut early and many bars closed down, secret drinking-clubs offered liquor and amusement through the night.
In the two-roomed apartment on the Rue de Montparnasse, Beatrice kept a ‘twixty’, a bottle of brandy so named because it was never full and never empty.
She appealed unashamedly to her English readers for money for the foreign artists: ‘If anyone likes to send some money, I will promise to dispense it with the most rigid favouritism towards people who would probably sooner beg than risk the jaundice of a free meal and would sooner have a note of twenty francs all at once than beg every day.’
She had announced that she would stay in Paris until October, but by October she was looking for a new place to rent, now deeply involved with Modi and unable to leave.
Curiously this dead period in Paris, when the city was preoccupied with war, coincided with a time of intense growth and change for Modigliani.
By temperament he could never be a member of a group, but at the time he was associated with a talented wartime circle which included Max Jacob, the poet Cocteau, the composer Eric Satie, the painters Juan Gris, Kisling, Foujita and, more rarely, Picasso and the sculptors Archipenko, Zadkine and Lipchitz.
Max Jacob and Modigliani were always assumed to be good friends; they had a great deal in common.
They were both intellectual Jews with a deep knowledge of literature and art enmeshed with a taste for mysticism and the occult.
Temperamentally they were worlds apart.
Max Jacob, subtle and devious, was driven by a deep sense of insecurity to please everybody and to stage-manage his friends’ lives, whereas Modi was direct and uncompromising, always his own man despite his inner anxiety.
Max Jacob was homosexual, trying desperately to look distinguished in his top hat, evening dress, spats and monocle, whilst Modi's affairs with women were known all over the quarter.
He looked right whatever he wore, so handsome that girls stood up to catch a glimpse of him when he walked into a café.
Relations between the two were complex, very close for a time during the war.
Max Jacob believed he should have been given full credit for persuading Modi to return to painting.
Max, with his shining bald head, big nose and wide mouth, was a tortured and talented man, a gifted prose poet, a painter as well as an astrologer, a palmist and an antiquarian.
He knew everyone worth knowing and liked   nothing better than to make connections.
He had spoken to Paul Guillaume, an ambitious and knowledgeable young dealer, about Modigliani and went to some trouble to arrange an introduction.
Guillaume had already bought some drawings of Modigliani's, but one afternoon at the Rotonde Max Jacob and Modi were sitting together on the terrace with Modi sketching as usual on the Rotonde's thin paper napkins when Paul Guillaume sat down at their table and asked Modigliani whether he ever painted.
‘Say yes,’ Max whispered urgently into his ear, ‘you'll make out.’
Modigliani accepted his advice and muttered ‘Yes, I paint a bit.’
‘You'll bring me your canvases, then,’ the imperious young dealer said as he left the café.
As soon as he had gone a furious argument broke out.
‘You've put me in an impossible position,’ Modigliani said angrily.
‘You know I don't paint at all.’
‘Draw on the canvas then and fill in the outlines with colour,’ Max replied.
Later, when Max told his friend effusively that Guillaume adored his painting, Modigliani spat on Max Jacob's shoes.
From then on relations between the two were strained.
Max Jacob's resentment revealed itself years later in private letters.
In public he was unctuous.
He believed he had had a determining influence on Modigliani's evolution although the painter was too haughty to admit it.
Later Marie Wassilieff too was to claim that she had persuaded Modigliani to take up painting again.
In some measure Max's intervention was a help.
Modi, cut off from his family's allowance by the war, needed the money.
And the prospect of the buyer forced him to concentrate.
During 1914 he completed only eight portraits, tentatively and experimentally, for he was struggling to find himself, trying out different styles.
He worked either at Beatrice Hastings's place or at the large studio owned by the painter Frank Burty Haviland, in the Rue du Schoelcher — conveniently near Picasso's place, for Frank was a disciple.
Known as ‘le riche’, Frank Haviland was the envy of the artists of Montparnasse because of his comfortable life, the luxurious meals he ate, the smart clothes he wore, the paintings and Negro sculptures he could afford to buy.
Fernande Olivier, Picasso's mistress, described him as stingy, but he was a good friend to Modigliani, encouraged him to paint and lent him colours, brushes and canvas.
More in love with art than an artist himself, he later became a museum curator.
Modigliani painted him in tiny brush strokes of colours reminiscent of the Divisionist style, in vibrant reds and blues, as if he was celebrating a return to the colours of the spectrum.
Yet despite the vibrant colours Modigliani captured something of the wistful yearning of his nature.
Ilya Ehrenburg knew Modi better than most; he said, ‘Of course he could have painted portraits that might have pleased the critics and buyers…
But  Modigliani knew neither how to lie nor how to adapt himself; everyone who met him knows how very straightforward he was.’
All the people that he painted that Ehrenburg knew resembled their portraits: ‘What is extraordinary is that Modigliani's portraits resemble each other; it is not a matter of an assumed style or some superficial trick of painting, but of the artist's view of the world…
I believe that the world seemed to Modigliani like an enormous kindergarten run by unkind adults.’
And Modigliani's paintings, Ehrenburg added, not only resembled their models, they disclosed the inner nature of the subject: ‘Diego Rivera, for instance, is large and heavy, almost savage…
‘Diego Rivera, who became a world-famous fresco painter when he went back to his native Mexico, was 25 when he came to Paris in 1914, a political as well as an artistic rebel and just the sort of companion Modi enjoyed.
A huge, dark, bearded man with a large stomach protruding from blue dungarees, the ‘kindly cannibal’ had a voracious appetite for women and drink.
In 1914 he was living with Angelina Beloff, a Russian engraver several years his senior by whom he had a child.
He also fathered a child by Marevna (Maria Vorobiev) and abandoned both women when he left for Mexico in 1921.
Quick-witted, volcanic, with a profound knowledge of painting, Rivera was unusual even in the exotic milieu of Montparnasse and Modigliani badly wanted to portray him.
He persuaded the Mexican to share a room with him, at least whilst Modi painted his portrait.
Leon Indenbaum remembered seeing Modigliani, rather merry, sitting on the floor sketching Rivera one evening when he was visiting.
For his exciting portrait of Rivera, Modigliani made two drawings and a preparatory sketch in oils.
The big man, sensual and mysterious, with hooded eyes and thick lips, almost overflows off the paper.
The sensual luminous face appears from whirling blobs of dark colour whilst the great bulk, barely contained in the frame, is merely suggested.
In his painting Modigliani evoked the power and the volcanic nature of his model in a style which mirrored the inner world of his subject in a marvellously inventive way.
At that time he was 30, now completely cut off from his family and their protection and released from all their loving bonds.
Perhaps it is no accident that he began at last to find his true identity as a painter, although his dream of sculpting still haunted him.
One day in 1915 he arrived in Berthe Weill's gallery and begged her to come and look at his stone heads.
He was so drunk that he almost fell on top of her.
She recoiled and of course refused his invitation.
‘How sad, such a fine and cultured person with a magnificent head,’ she wrote later.
‘Is he really a drunkard?’
His friends disagreed on the question.
‘We all [drank], he and I and the others,’ wrote the poet and critic Charles-Albert Cingria, a close friend.
‘I    don't think wine is made for any other reason…
As to the question of Modigliani's terrible drinking, there has been a lot of talk.
It has been exaggerated…
To drink is not to be a drunkard!’
The painter Vlaminck maintained that Modi never lost his quality of distinction: ‘I knew Modigliani well.
I've seen him drunk.
I've seen him when he had money.
I've seen him without.
Never have I found a trace of low sentiment.
But I have seen him angry, irritable at the power that money, which he so much despised, had to cross his will and his pride’.
His personal life in the years with Beatrice had never been so wild.
‘You sat on a low step, Modigliani, your cries were those of a stormy petrel…‘, wrote Ehrenburg in a poem written early in 1915.
On good days Ehrenburg found him calm, courteous, clean-shaven, gentle and friendly.
On bad days he was frantic, with black bristles sprouting over his face, screaming shrilly so that he was quite incomprehensible.
The idyll which had promised so much with Beatrice was gradually deteriorating into a drawn-out brawl.
Their love affair was carried on against a background of nightly bombings, wartime tension, the advance of the German army on Paris.
They quarrelled and argued about everything: spiritualism, art, philosophy and poetry.
Neither would give in and they both had fierce tempers.
Modigliani would come home drunk.
Beatrice, too, drank; she had no doubt learnt a few tricks from her ex-pugilist husband and could take care of herself spiritedly.
Blaise Cendrars witnessed a fight in which she was getting the better of Modigliani.
The concierge would listen at the door with a running commentary: ‘The Italian's had a drop’, or ‘the Englishwoman seems to be winning’.
The stories grew more inflamed with the telling and witnesses were about equally divided as to whether Beatrice encouraged Modi to debauchery or he provoked her.
Late one night, the concierge knocked on the door of Beatrice's apartment, alarmed at the commotion, and demanded to know what was going on.
‘I assure you, madame, nothing untoward is happening’, Modigliani replied in his most urbane manner.
‘I am merely chopping firewood in the salon and beating my mistress like a gentleman.’
According to another story from Lipchitz he complained bitterly that Beatrice had ‘bitten him in the balls’.
Beatrice's column provides a coded guide to their affair.
Sometimes she used it to further her arguments with Modi.
At others she seemed to air his concerns.
In The New Age of 5 November, for example, she complained of the influence of Les Chants de Maldoror (the book that was Modigliani's constant companion): ‘No one would deny the mischief done by Maldoror during recent years’.
The book, said Beatrice, was used like opium or cocaine by poets and painters as a ‘defence from modern life, this very modern life of  noise and advertisement which they profess to find more real than the glory and the grandeur of earlier civilizations…
’ Beatrice's own escapism took many forms: she wrote under different names, always as Alice Morning in her ‘Impressions of Paris’but also as Robert West, Cynicus, Beatrice Tina, Robert A. Field, T.K.L.’Minnie Pinnikin and occasionally in her own name.
In imagination she saw herself as a devotee of Bacchus, in the golden world of the Greeks, as these extracts from her poem ‘The Lost Bacchante’ reveal.
It was written originally in 1910 and republished in February 1941 in The Democrat , a one-woman paper of four pages, which contrived to be both anti-Semitic and anti-Catholic:
I'll tear my robe from a tiger spine
I'll bind up my ruddy hair
In a band of tendrils plucked from the vine
And ivy grapes will I wear.
and in the last stanza which deteriorates into doggerel:
I'll work in the timid heart of the maid
With magic I'll ripen her bosom scanty
Till her lover gasp — nor will know that he clasp
No mortal maid but a lost Bacchante.
However ‘decadent’ his taste, Modigliani looked to literature, Dante, Lautréamont, D'Annunzio.
Beatrice saw him reading Les Liaisons Dangéreuses and slated that too, claiming that it was a steamy romance seized upon by the mothers of France ‘and said to have been largely responsible for the modern severity towards young daughters’.
It is difficult to know Beatrice's intention from her column.
Few of her readers would have read the books and in wartime would be unlikely to obtain them.
Perhaps she was merely scoring points, in print, off her lover.
But in the same column Modigliani's hand seems to be guiding her pen when she raises the question of the Turkish Jews in France, ordered to leave the country.
‘The question of peace for the Jews is not less important to civilization for their being a scattered tribe, and ever-rancorous Catholicism may yet have to be bloodily taught not to provoke the persecution and murder of those whom life abides even with partiality’.
Beatrice pointed out that Christian Turks, Orthodox Turks, Catholics Turks and Armenian Turks were allowed to stay in the country.
Later in her life she became a Fascist sympathizer.
Anti-semitism increased in wartime, and Ilya Ehrenburg remembered an   incident in a café on the Boulevard Pasteur when Modigliani confronted a group of card-players at a neighbouring table who were making anti-semitic remarks and subdued them into silence by his withering contempt.
Modigliani read Ehrenburg sonnets by an Italian Jewish poet of the fourteenth century, Emmanuele Romano, ‘mocking, bitter poems that were nevertheless full of the love of life’, Then he told Ehrenburg how in bygone days the Romans had celebrated the carnival by forcing the Jewish community to elect a Jewish runner who had to run naked three times round the city, whilst the elegant crowd of bishops, ambassadors and ladies looked on.
It is tempting to imagine that Modigliani was acting out the runner's part in his life with Beatrice in those years.
The atmosphere was restless, impatient and mad, a word that kept cropping up.
At Christmas, as a gesture of defiance against the general gloom, Beatrice flung a party.
‘It wasn't meant to be mad.
but it went; because half the people turned out to hate the other half and so everybody had to strive like anything to make things go.
We strove and we strove; we played and sang to each other; we improvised, we dashed out and fetched guitars.
we danced…
And then Sylvia came in with apologies and that perennially green hat, and we lowered the lights while she recited De Musset's ‘Nuit de Mai’.
And I wept nearly.
But what a poem.
They don't write like that now…‘
Beatrice had a wonderfully fluent French-flavoured pen and captured the frenetic quality of their life together in those first few months of the war.
But the drinking, drug-taking and the high-pitched battles soon toppled the frail structure of their romance.
And although Modigliani and Beatrice were deeply embroiled, the early enchantment was over.
Chaim Soutine, 1915
Caryatid, 1913
Beatrice, 1915
Nude
Modi, Kisling and Soutine, 1914
Paul Guillaume, 1916
Diego Rivera, 1914
Head of a man, 1915
Luisa, 1915
Will he flower
MORE than any other woman he had met, Beatrice was able to share in Modigliani's life, and his work changed dramatically during her reign.
By 1915, Modigliani had begun to paint the portraits reproduced in every art book: Paul Guillaume, his dealer; the painter Moise Kisling; the fat child; the bride and groom.
His years as a sculptor had taught him to see the human figure in solid, three-dimensional form, and his people now have necks like columns, oval or elongated faces and noses sharply drawn, as if cut into the planes of the face.
He always began a portrait with the eyes.
And the eyes in his paintings hold the key to the psychologically charged atmosphere.
Even when they are blanks, sightless as in sculpture, they focus the attention hypnotically.
He had begun to paint some portraits with one eye ‘blind’, the other seeing.
‘With one eye you look out at the world; with the other you look in at yourself’, was Modigliani's explanation.
But even when both eyes are painted within the normal convention he makes the expression in each subtly different, as if to express the duality in his subject.
In 1915 he was still experimenting with different styles.
His paintings were rather angular, with the nose, in particular, appearing as if it was glued to the canvas in an echo of Cubism.
The exquisite lyricism of line of his later paintings is not yet present, but by now the work is in his handwriting, unmistakably Modigliani.
With Beatrice his life was as turbulent as ever.
Although he had a key to her apartment and tried to lock her out once when she lost hers he did not live permanently with her.
He often worked in a friend's studio, and took his meals at Rosalie's where he peeled potatoes or washed up to pay for the meals.
An artist, he told her, ought not to have to starve.
When he slept with Beatrice at No. 53 Boulevard Montparnasse, he often turned up at Indenbaum's next morning, still in a euphoric state from the after-effects of a drug, almost certainly hashish.
Indenbaum remembered that he was gentle, with a beatific smile, and asked for a tune on the harmonium…
There were days and nights when the lovers did not see each other, and when they did they often fought, verbal arguments at first which turned into brawls as they drank.
They were both dreamers, rudely awoken by the reality of the other.
Signs of Beatrice's disillusion can be read into her column in The New Age .
She vents her spleen on the war, the blackout, the Zeppelins which made it imperative to shut the shutters at night; the price of groceries; the petty bourgeois; the landlords and the concierges.
The ‘mad’ quarter of Montparnasse where illicit drugs were so cheap and available earns her special scorn.
In print she boasts that she is not in the least attracted by drugs, even scared to touch ‘ordinary cheerful liquor’.
But her comments about her own behaviour are foggy and sometimes wildly misleading.
Beatrice was often out drinking that winter, at the Rotonde or the Closerie des Lilas.
Max Jacob was delighted to discover ‘an English poetess who gets drunk alone with a bottle of whisky’.
They must have drunk deeply because the very next week in her column Beatrice introduces her readers to a ‘charming book of Breton verse by Max Jacob’, translates a poem of his and describes him as ‘one of the few classical critics in the world’.
She adored celebrities and hoped to meet Picasso through Jacob, a close friend and admirer who had even shared a bed with Picasso in the painter's early years.
Picasso was working at night and sleeping during the day, whilst Max earned the rent by taking a job in a department store.
Picasso did not take to Beatrice, but her column two weeks later benefited: ‘By the way’, she wrote, ‘M. Picasso is painting a portrait of M. Max Jacob in a style, the mere rumour of which is causing all the little men to begin to say that, of course, Cubism was all very well in its way, but was never more than an experiment.
The style is rumoured to be very photographic, in any case, very simple and severe.’
Picasso was quite capable of working conventionally as well as experimentally, and Max Jacob himself was not keen on the drawing, which made him look ‘very much the old peasant’.
Modigliani was intensely unhappy and suspicious of Beatrice's growing intimacy with Jacob and by extension Picasso.
Although he knew Max would not share her bed, the poet was malicious and a great gossip.
If Max knew about Modigliani's private life then all Montparnasse would soon be seething with the story.
Modigliani did not gossip, he was too preoccupied and always discreet about his love affairs.
Beatrice's column of 11 February 1915 gives fascinating clues to their complex relationship.
She has not seen much of Montparnasse recently, she confesses to her readers, she has been staying indoors ‘nursing a sick wasp and writing a comic romance.
The wasp strays in, eats a little honey, warms  itself, tries to sting and travels out to some winter lair.
I suspect it is more sleepy than sick.’
The reference to her unsatisfactory lover is clear.
But in the same column Beatrice complains that she nearly had her apartment burnt down after casually remarking that artists were rarely able to distinguish between their good work and their bad and therefore only critics could decide upon the value of a work.
Suddenly a fire broke out.
(By implication Modigliani started the fire — or the quarrel.)
And then: ‘I possess a stone head by Modigliani which I would not part with for a hundred pounds even at this crisis: and I routed out this head from a corner sacred to the rubbish of centuries and was called stupid for my pains in taking it away.
Nothing human, save the mean, is missing from the stone.
It has a fearful chip above the right eye but it can stand a few chips.
I am told it was never finished, that it never will be finished, that it is not worth finishing.
There is nothing that matters to finish!
The whole head equably smiles in contemplation of knowledge; of madness of grace and sensibility; of stupidity of sensuality; of illusions and disillusions — all locked away as matter of perpetual meditation.
It is as readable as Ecclesiastes and more consoling for there is no lugubrious looking-back in this effulgent, unforbidding smile of intelligent equilibrium.
What avail for the artist to denounce such a work?
One replies that one can live by it as by great literature.
I will never part with it unless to a poet: he will find what I find and the unfortunate artist will have no choice as to his immortality.
But I don't think artists understand or bother much about immortality (I hope no flames of wrath are about!)’.
Artists, Beatrice generalizes with a fine sweep of her pen, have no principles whatsoever.
They are driven to cunning in order to buy the materials they need for their work…they are vain, envious and antagonistic to writers ‘who are really their best friends, who control the public and try to bring it to a greater state of culture which will offer the artists great subject for their work…
’ This seems to be the root of the quarrel between Modigliani and Beatrice, a battle of the egos, her determination to patronize and his fury at her presumption.
Yet even if Beatrice's regard for her lover had diminished, her admiration for his art had not.
Her imaginative and generous appreciation of his stone head at a time when his sculpture was rarely valued or sold shows her to be a woman of taste and courage as well as a dangerous and destructive lover.
As Max Jacob became one of Beatrice's favourites, his name begins to appear more frequently in The New Age .
In March 1915 Beatrice decided to leave Montparnasse and move to the Right Bank, to Montmartre.
She settled in a four-roomed cottage with a garden at No. 13 Rue Norvins, where Zola had once lived.
And Max Jacob was there to help her, she informs her readers   She found him far more useful and reliable in household matters than Modigliani.
A week after she had settled in, the writer Katherine Mansfield came to call.
Earlier that year, Katherine, en route to a romantic assignation with the writer Francis Carco at Gray, a banned military zone, had got drunk in Paris with Beatrice.
The two women knew each other from London and The New Age .
As a young writer Katherine had been encouraged and dominated by Beatrice, who instructed her ‘in bitchiness and swank’.
Behind her back Katherine, who was almost mesmerized as well as scared by Beatrice, nicknamed her ‘Biggy B.’.
Since both women were sexually ambiguous their encounters were highly charged.
On the 20th of March Katherine and Beatrice dined together at the Closerie des Lilas.
Katherine visited the ‘very jolly’ new flat and described it in detail:
‘four rooms and a kitchen, a big hall, a cabinet and a conservatory.
Two rooms open on to a garden.
A big china stove in the salle à manger heats the place.
All her furniture is second-hand and rather nice.
The faithful M. [Max Jacob]conducts her shopping.
Her own room, with a grey self-colour carpet, lamps in bowls with Chinese shades, a piano, 2 divans, 2 armchairs, books, flowers, a bright fire was really unlike Paris, very charming.
But the house I think detestable.
One creeps up and down stairs.
She has dismissed D. [Dedo]and transferred her virgin heart to P., who lives close by [Alfredo Pina, an Italian sculptor].
Strange and really beautiful though she is, still with the fairy air about her and her pretty little head so fine, she is ruined.
There is no doubt of it.
I love her but I take an intense, cold interest in noting the signs.
She says ‘It's no good me having a crowd of people.
If there are more than four I go to the cupboard and nip cognacs till it's all over for me, my dear’, or ‘Last Sunday I had a fearful crise .
I got drunk on rhum by myself at the Rotonde and ran up and down the streets crying and ringing bells and saying ‘Save me from this man!’
There wasn't anybody there at all.’
And then she says with a faint show of importance, ‘Of course the people here simply love me for it.
There hasn't been a real woman of feeling here since the war…‘’
The dismissal of Dedo was temporary; the affair with Pina contrived.
Sporadically, Katherine Mansfield conveys the volatile atmosphere in the comfortable apartment and Beatrice emerges as a deluded and rather pathetic exhibitionist.
Katherine described the terrors of war, in 1915, the trumpets sounding the alarm, the searchlights sweeping the sky, the Zeppelins gliding by, the bombs.
She went to tea with Beatrice and found the atmosphere almost as dramatic: ‘At B.'s this afternoon there arrived du monde including a very lovely young woman, married and curious — and blonde — and passionate.
We danced together.
I was still so angry about the horrid state of things…
I can't talk about the tea-party tonight.
At any rate it isn't  worth it really.
It ended in a great row.
I enjoyed it in a way, but B. was very impossible — she must have drunk nearly a bottle of brandy, and then at 9 o'clock I left and refused either to stay any longer or spend the night there.
She flared up in a fury and we parted for life again…
B. makes me sad tonight.
I never touched anything but soda-water and so I realize how other people played on her drunkenness and she was so…half-charming and such a fool’.
In May Katherine returned to Paris to write.
She kept her resolution not to see Beatrice any more but wrote revealingly to Middleton Murry, who later became her husband: ‘I wonder if Beatrice Hastings has maxed her jacob yet or if she flew to Italy with her Dado [Dedo].
I am not really curious and I'll never seek to know.’
This is the clearest indication, apart from Beatrice's column in The New Age , that Beatrice was playing Max off against Modigliani.
She took to asking Jacob to sleep in a shed at the bottom of the garden to defend her against Modigliani's violent forays.
‘When she wouldn't open the door to him, he broke the window panes…
When he finally got in there were scenes with revolvers and bottles of rum’, Max Jacob, her night-watchman declared.
Beatrice described his assaults in her fluent, showy style, the nights when Modigliani came home drunk: ‘If I happened to be drunk too, there was a great scene!
But I was writing, usually, and just plagued to hear him ring.
If Max was there when Dedo arrived the chances were not altogether against a peaceful conversazione and the witty exit of Modigliani to his own atelier close by…
’ Beatrice complained that she was run down in health and beginning to dread ‘the swoop of the Assyrian on my fold’.
In one of their battles they chased each other ten times up and down the house, Beatrice armed with a long straw broom and Modigliani with a pot.
One cannot, of course, take Beatrice's accounts at their face value.
But there is no doubt that in her company Modigliani was wild, over-excitable and sometimes frightening.
Witnesses at their wild parties saw his restlessness and rage.
Ilya Ehrenburg visited a party one night in a studio littered with rubbish.
Beatrice kept repeating in a pronounced English accent: ‘Modigliani, don't forget that you're a gentleman.
Your mother is a lady of the highest social standing.’
These words acted on Modi like a spell.
He sat in silence for a long time.
Then he could not bear it any longer and started breaking down the wall.
First he scratched away the plaster, then he tried to pull out the bricks.
His fingers were bloody and in his eyes there was such despair that I could not stand it and went out into the filthy courtyard’.
Ilya realized, as did Beatrice, that the way to wound Modigliani was to attack his family pride, to bait him about his mother.
No matter how long he lived in Paris, or how wild  his life was, he retained a love for Eugenia and a sense of family honour that jibed awkwardly with the easy amorality of the crowd.
Beatrice knew that and bitterly resented the influence of her greatest rival, his mother.
Perhaps it was at that same party that Marevna, who stayed until dawn, saw Modigliani and Beatrice fighting ferociously until Modi grabbed her and flung her through a closed window.
Later Beatrice was carried in and laid on the sofa, sobered by the experience, her breasts daubed in blood.
‘She wept while Modigliani repeated ‘Non mea culpa, non mea culpa ’.’
When Marevna finally went home at dawn: ‘Max Jacob stood with a missal in his hand and Modigliani was still on his feet methodically tearing the rest of the wallpaper off the walls and singing an Italian song.’
There were too many stories of that nature, and it was in that year that Modi was labelled for long after his life.
A down-at-heel English journalist, Charles Beadle, lived nearby and shared a passion for gardening with Beatrice.
He collected the scurrilous gossip and the half-truths about Modi, much of it from Beatrice, and sent it to be collated by Douglas Goldring (Charles Douglas was his pseudonym), who produced the book Artist Quarter , the first extensive biography in English of Modigliani.
Published in 1941, it influenced many biographers.
In spite of his wild nights, Modigliani completed thirty-six oils and gouaches during 1915, approximately three paintings a month, apart from the preliminary studies and his sketchbooks full of drawings.
That year the young dealer who had expressed interest in his work, Paul Guillaume, opened his own gallery and Modigliani was elated to have a professional dealer at last.
Beatrice was pleased and invited Guillaume to her cottage for tea.
Both Beatrice and Modigliani behaved impeccably for the occasion.
Several times Paul Guillaume came back to the house to have his portrait painted in a discreet, dark suit, starched collar and tie, jaunty trilby hat, a gloved hand languidly holding a cigarette and thinly parted lips which seem to be saying ‘I am a man of exquisite taste’.
Guillaume was a pioneer in buying the work of the new painters, the ‘extremists’, Picasso, Matisse, Derain, Chirico and Modigliani, and also had a fine collection of Negro sculpture himself.
Modigliani wrote the words ‘Nova Pilota’(new pilot) and ‘Stella Maris’(guiding star of the sea) on his portrait: he was no longer, he felt, with a mere merchant but with a man of vision.
Inevitably, as he visited Modigliani more frequently, Paul Guillaume began to realize how disorderly the artist's domestic life was, One evening, walking along the street, he heard screams and bangs coming from Beatrice's cottage.
As soon as he was inside the garden he saw the couple hitting each other with chairs; ‘The woman hit harder and had the upper hand’.
Guillaume, a careful and prudent man, was quietly appalled.
He was able to sell Modigliani's work during 1915 to André Level, a well-known collector, for from twenty-five to sixty francs.
Guillaume believed in Modigliani's gift and felt convinced that the price of his work would appreciate, but only if the painter was allowed to develop in peace.
A man who tempered sentiment with business sense, it was said of Guillaume that he revealed the price of a painting with the same air of awed reverence that he mentioned a woman's age.
In 1915 he rented a studio for Modigliani in the Bateau Lavoir.
The investment was modest but it was an indication of his faith in the painter at a time when Modigliani badly needed the support.
Almost all the evidence of Modigliani's behaviour in the years with Beatrice comes either from her or from outsiders.
Only from the mood of his paintings and from the cryptic jottings on his work, mottoes, inscriptions, aphorisms, quotations from Dante and other poets written in French, Italian or Latin, can one attempt to decipher his state of mind.
‘Don't say: ‘Don't do that’: say ‘Do that’’; ‘The empty seeks the full and the full seeks the empty’;, ‘No.
Integrity does not lie that way’; ‘What is true is equally true in three worlds’.
On one drawing he wrote: ‘The Flamboyant Style’, underlined it and underneath wrote: ‘3 designs: 3 worlds: 3 dimensions’.
He portrayed himself as Pierrot in one painting and wrote on it in Italian: ‘Will he flower?’
Paul Guillaume considered Modi a poet as much as a painter and remembered two improvised rhymes:
Il y a dans le corridor
Un homme qui m'en veut à mort.
(There is a man in the corridor who wants to see me dead)
This was a reference, perhaps, to the illness stalking him.
And:
Ma plus belle  mâitresse 
C'est la paresse.
(Idleness is my most beautiful mistress.)
On some drawings there are figures and symbols considered to be cabbalistic.
He drew the Star of David, the Jewish symbol, a number of times and Paul Guillaume said that Modigliani liked his work to be considered Jewish.
The question of his origins was much on his mind in those years.
His friend Max Jacob was just about to be received into the Catholic church when he became entangled in the affairs of Modi and Beatrice.
Born in Brittany, the son of a Jewish tailor and antique dealer, Max Jacob had seen a vision of Christ on the   wall of his little room in the Rue Ravignan.
After lengthy instruction and considerable scepticism on the part of his friends as Max veered from piety and a longing for the monastic life to drug-taking and debauchery, he found a priest in Montparnasse willing to baptize him.
The ceremony took place with Picasso acting as godfather.
Picasso presented Max Jacob with a bound copy of L'Imitation de Jésus-Christ and inscribed it: ‘To my brother Cyprien Max Jacob, Souvenir of his Baptism, Thursday 18 February 1915.
Pablo.’
The conversion was the cause of both amusement and astonishment amongst the artists.
Beatrice Hastings commented on it obliquely in her column and the sculptor Jacques Lipchitz, who used to invite Max Jacob and Modi to lunch when he could afford it, found himself warmly advised to embrace the faith.
‘Just take communion’, Jacob urged him, ‘and all your worries will disappear.’
Modigliani was more interested in the rites and rituals of Judaism, always asking questions, although Max Jacob would wave his talk away with an impatient gesture.
For seventy years Max Jacob has been regarded as Modigliani's closest friend.
In public he paid handsome tribute to Modigliani, but the truth of their private relations is more tangled.
During 1915 Modigliani came to feel that Max had betrayed him by siding with Beatrice.
‘He admired and loved Max at first but when Jacob tried to take Beatrice Hastings from him, Modigliani wanted to kill him’.
Max's conversion must have seemed like a second betrayal.
The rift between the two men was particularly painful since they had been so close at first.
Although Jacob was eight years older than Modigliani, as an astrologer he believed that they shared a common destiny, both ultra-sensitive Cancerians, Modigliani born on 12 July, Max on the 13th.
For a time the two saw each other daily.
Modigliani dedicated a drawing to Jacob ‘très tendrement, comme un frère’, and Jacob wrote a poem: ‘To M. Modigliani, to prove that I am a poet’, on the subject of embracing religion rather than woman.
‘Jews want me to flatter their pride of race’, Max Jacob complained bitterly and added that they ‘imagine themselves superior and ignore the rest of the world’, in a book of ‘Ecstasies, remorse, visions, prayers, poems and meditations of a converted Jew’, entitled La Défense de Tartuffe .
Modigliani never practised his faith.
For him it was a question of identity rather than creed and, particularly in a period of rising anti-semitism, he could no more deny his ancestry than change his name.
The bitterness of the rift between the two is revealed in a letter written by Max Jacob in January 1943, the year before he died tragically on his way to the gas chambers.
‘Modigliani was the most unpleasant man I knew.
Proud, angry, insensitive, wicked and rather stupid, sardonic and narcissistic’.
The tone of that extraordinary attack, written almost thirty years after his close friendship   with Modigliani, suggests the disappointment of a lover spurned, rather than During the First World War the little colony of gifted foreigners in Montparnasse and French artists unfit for military service was increasingly shunned by the rest of society at a time when xenophobia was rife and contempt for any man out of uniform was universal.
The artists lived as one extended bickering family and writers and painters who would never have seen each other before the war were thrown together.
Perhaps it was this atmosphere, coupled with Max Jacob's fierce Catholicism, that led Modigliani to seek out his roots.
Chana Orloff, the gifted sculptor from Palestine, did not especially like Modigliani; she was repelled by the permanent smell of drink on his breath.
Whenever he saw her he would ask her to explain the Bible to him, and in the drawing he made of her, he wrote the Hebrew version of her name, Chana, daughter of Rafael, in Hebrew characters across the top of the head.
‘I carry no religion,’ he told her, ‘but if I did it would be the ancient Jewish religion of my ancestors’.
In 1915 Modigliani asked Lipchitz to introduce him to the small group of Jewish artists living in La Ruche, the beehive-shaped building with small studios in Le Passage Dantzig.
They were delighted and arranged a reception for him in a studio formerly occupied by Chagall, who had left France before the war to go back to Russia to get married.
Before he left, Chagall twisted a coil of stout wire around the door handle twenty-five times, certain that the one hundred and fifty paintings he had left inside would be secure.
When he returned in the spring of 1923, Chagall found a new lock on the door, a new occupant inside and all the paintings gone.
A man named Maisel, a retoucher of photographs, was living in the studio in 1915 and the Jewish artists who knew Modigliani's work gathered to welcome him.
They offered him hot wine and canella, surrounded him and talked eagerly in a mixture of Russian, French and Yiddish.
Modigliani, delighted with the atmosphere of warmth and sincerity, resumed his friendship with Soutine and Indenbaum.
Pinchas Kremegne and Chaim Soutine became his constant companions.
The two men, who both came from a small village in Lithuania, almost hero-worshipped the handsome Italian with his love of liquor and of women.
In their small hamlets drink was associated with Cossack brutality, when horsemen would swoop down into the Jewish shtetels after Easter and terrorize the people.
As for women, the choice was limited and marriages were often arranged.
But Modigliani broke all the taboos and behaved like a modern-day King David.
When he was speaking, the pair would stand at a respectful distance, to hear him declaim poetry or discuss painting with a breadth of knowledge.
They admired his  ability to handle an awkward bill in a café or fix lodgings for the night.
Soutine, in particular, tried to capture the secret of Modigliani's style by using his models.
But Modigliani recognized the anguished power of Soutine's painting and encouraged him to develop along his own path.
‘He gave me confidence in myself’, Soutine admitted.
Modigliani needed encouragement himself and he enjoyed the admiration of the two and gave them his ageing clothes when he could.
Under his guidance the little group shared his special feeling for Rembrandt, who painted Jewish faces from the Amsterdam ghetto with such humanity that Modigliani insisted he must have been a Jew.
The contrast between the mondaine world of Beatrice Hastings and the ghetto of Jewish painters from Eastern Europe could hardly have been greater, and Beatrice had little patience for Modigliani's gauche, unsophisticated friends.
She did travel to Italy in June 1915, but not with Modigliani as Katherine Mansfield had suggested.
Perhaps she went in secret with the good-looking, but rather boring Italian sculptor Alfredo Pina.
‘Love’, she wrote in July 1915, ‘is one of the means of perfection: a voice only, a way of calling men onwards…
Love…has nothing to do with sexual relations.
It is a state of exaltation of the individual, a great and rare gift of a great and rare invigorating dream.
It visits some people never.
It visits others many, many times…the rest are the great artists whose works are all love, though they may never indicate this by any common sign.’
That was one of Beatrice's most tender passages, and it seems impossible that she did not have Modigliani in mind.
Despite her irritating affectations, she did have a genuine flair for divining quality in both literature and the visual arts.
Modigliani still admired Beatrice's sense of style.
She liked to dazzle Montparnasse with her originality; sometimes she wore long flowing veils, usually she appeared in the smocked Liberty dresses that suited her pert little-girl look.
One evening they were planning to go to a ball.
It was only a small gathering in a studio, but in wartime those were great occasions.
But Beatrice complained sadly that she had nothing to wear that hadn't been seen a hundred times.
Modi told her to put on a tightly fitted black silk dress.
‘But that's an old thing,’ she protested, ‘everybody has seen it.’
‘Do as I say,’ he replied, ‘and I'll make you the best-dressed, most beautiful woman at the ball.’
Curious, she did as he said and Modi looked at her critically and fetched his box of pastel crayons.
First he sketched an arabesque design on the dress in white to make it appear décolleté, then he covered her dress with magnificent, multi-coloured flowers and finally sprayed his design with fixative.
Once the dress had dried, Modigliani told Beatrice to cut the neckline where he had drawn the white line.
The originality of the dress drew a gasp when Beatrice walked into the  room, and since he did not dance he was content to watch her dance the tango with a number of admirers.
Then she flirted a little too blatantly and Modi roared off to get drunk.
She turned up at the Café Dôme one night, her beautiful dress torn to shreds.
‘Modi's been naughty’, she explained sweetly.
Another evening when she invited some of their friends, including Juan Gris and his wife, to dinner at the cottage, Modi turned up late, drunk and covered with mud.
‘Go and wash,’ she said disgustedly, ‘you look like a cabman.’
‘I may look like a cabman,’ he countered, ‘but I'm a charm in a salon.’
The private combat between Modi and Beatrice took place against the background of nightly air-raids, appalling casualties and wartime shortages.
Modigliani's health deteriorated, he was drinking and smoking more, taking hashish, so that he could no longer hide his ill-health behind his good looks and gaiety of manner.
Although he was opposed to war and sometimes his pacifist fervour offended strangers during the war years, nevertheless to be rejected as a weakling was an affront to a proud and physically courageous man like Modigliani.
For the first time, in 1915, a tinge of cynicism appeared in his painting.
Modigliani sketched a middle-aged couple in evening dress who had probably dropped in to the Rotonde late one night.
Modigliani clearly felt no empathy towards the stuffed shirt towering above his wife.
The elegance of the woman's appearance, her hoop ear-rings, is carefully realized, but the couple stare out of the canvas blankly, nothing has  registered on their faces, neither pain nor passion, and Modigliani remains detached, if faintly amused, by their front of respectability.
There is a trace of the multiple overview of Cubism in the treatment of their faces; for once Modigliani was experimenting in technique, not engaged in grappling with the secret of personality.
Raymond Radiguet was a youth of 12 when Modigliani painted him, a brilliant schoolboy who had won a scholarship to a Paris Lycée and began coming in daily to the city from the suburbs.
Raymond's father, a free-lance artist, often sent him to deliver his caricatures and satirical drawings to newspaper offices.
Raymond was witty and unusual and from time to time he was invited to drink coffee at the artists' cafés.
The talk at the Dôme and Rotonde struck him as far more amusing than his lessons at the Lycée and before long he had dropped out of school.
By the time he was 18, the youth had written his best-selling novel Le Diable au Corps , a striking and original book of love and infidelity.
Modigliani must have sensed the originality in the young boy's personality even at that age; perhaps he saw something of himself as a youth.
He painted Raymond as a mysterious and sensitive young man with an air of extraordinary prescience in an as yet unmoulded face.
The painting has been described as the ‘masterpiece of Modigliani's Cubist adventures…[the]small head is divided into two clearly defined zones, each of which has its own viewpoint’.
In the left-hand zone of the picture the features are treated almost realistically and ‘brought forward towards the observer.
In the other half of the picture the shoulder-line tilts towards us…and the face retreats and takes on a mask-like, wall-like quality’, wrote John Russell.
Raymond has one blank eye, looking in on himself, in the mask-like side of the painting.
Modigliani saw the potential of the boy, who ironically became Beatrice's lover within a few years when he was 18 and she was over 40.
After a wild success Raymond died at the age of 20 from typhoid brought about by eating oysters.
Modigliani did not have a formal contract with his dealer.
‘To ask him to sign a legal contract was ridiculous’, Paul Guillaume said.
The dealer found him a difficult artist to deal with.
If he fixed a price with the buyer, and the buyer asked for Modigliani's address, the painter was likely to give away his work at a lower price or offer it as a present if the purchaser was shrewd enough to take him out for a meal and a few drinks.
Unfortunately there is no record of Modi's side of the story.
He remained desperately poor and obstinately proud.
And although he would borrow happily enough to buy painting materials or drinks, he had his own sense of honour.
When he was living in Montparnasse, the sculptor Leon Indenbaum had bought a head by Modigliani for two hundred francs when he was in funds.
The heavy stone   head remained in Modigliani's cluttered studio until one day Modi marched up to Indenbaum at the Rotonde and said baldly, ‘I've sold your head’.
‘You did the right thing’, replied the sculptor generously.
But Modigliani did not forget and in 1915, when Indenbaum met him in Montparnasse, looking pale and unshaven, Modi came up to him and said in a hoarse voice, ‘I'm going to paint your portrait.’
Indenbaum did not take the proposition seriously, as he felt sure that Modi would have forgotten all about it in the morning, but Modigliani was insistent and asked Indenbaum if he had canvas and paint at home.
Eventually they agreed on an appointment at nine o'clock the next morning, but Indenbaum was still convinced that Modigliani would not turn up.
Promptly at nine next morning Modigliani rang Indenbaum's door bell, clean-shaven, his hair carefully brushed.
‘I could see that he had not had a drink yet and I was doubly surprised that he seemed in a good mood.’
Indenbaum offered him some old pictures to paint over, but Modigliani picked carefully through them so as not to paint over any painting, however unimportant, which showed a hint of talent.
Finally they found a canvas and Modi seated Indenbaum at one end of the long narrow studio while he sat at the other.
While he was painting, Modigliani barely looked at his model, ‘or if he did it was merely to check against his portrait.
He had made himself an internal picture of me and now only examined it against my external appearance’.
To complete the portrait took three sittings and each time, to Indenbaum's surprise, Modigliani turned up clean-shaven and well-groomed, and behaved in a modest, almost shy manner.
When he had finished the portrait he looked at it with an expression of satisfaction and said to Indenbaum: ‘There — that is for you’.
Indenbaum knew how badly Modigliani needed money so he tried to offer him a sum within his means for the beautiful oil, but Modigliani was offended and obliged Indenbaum to accept the portrait as a present.
When he was involved in serious work, Modigliani could control his drinking and live more moderately, keeping clear of Beatrice's hectic parties.
All Montparnasse knew that Beatrice had other lovers during her time with Modi.
But no one has suggest that Modigliani, the womanizer, was ever unfaithful to her.
By September 1915 the tone of her writing in The New Age had changed completely.
Gone were the carefree, witty passages written in the first person, the conversational style, the caustic bitter comments.
Instead Beatrice retreated behind long translations of French poetry, light satire and erudite literary discussion, almost as if a part of her had died.
Charles Beadle, Beatrice's neighbour, tells many stories of Modigliani, full of drink and drugs, quarrelling, when he was in the garden with Beatrice innocently discussing the plants; of Modigliani walking in the cemetery   because ‘death was not far off’(‘Wouldn't it be magnificent’, he said to Beadle, if we could contemplate our own skeletons?’); of Modigliani reciting Lautréamont beside the graves, hungry for drugs, suspecting all Beatrice's male friends.
Modi's elder brother, Emanuele the politician, who visited Paris some time during 1914, knew all about the affair.
According to him Beatrice was so jealous that she locked Modi up in the cottage to keep him from going off with other women.
Whatever the truth of it, by the end of the year Modigliani seems to have turned away from the brawling and tension.
On 9 November 1916 he sent his mother a postcard:
My dear Mamma,
I am a criminal to leave you so long without news.
But — but so many things have happened.
First of all I have moved.
My new address is 13, Place Emile Goudeau, XVIII.
But in spite of all the commotion, I am relatively happy.
I am painting again and I'm selling and that means a lot.
I'm very pleased that my brother [Umberto]is in munitions.
As to Laure, I feel that if she keeps her intelligence that is very important.
I am greatly touched that she thinks of me and remembers me even in the state of forgetfulness of human affairs in which she now finds herself.
It seems impossible to me that she cannot be brought back to life, that such a person cannot be brought back to normal life.
Give my father a hug from me when you write to him.
Letters and I are enemies but never think that I forget you or the others.
A big kiss
Dedo
Laure, his favourite aunt, was suffering from a severe mental breakdown.
Her sister Gabrielle Garsin, who had lived with Eugenia and the family when Dedo was a child, had committed suicide that year by throwing herself down a steep flight of stairs.
Laure's distress was obviously compounded by her sister's suicide.
Modigliani did not mention Beatrice; it seems likely that Eugenia never heard about the affair from him, and she remained an unintegrated part of his life.
head, 1911
Kikoine, 1917
Les Pampas, 1916
Parade, Rue de la Gâité, Paris.
Modi, Soutine, Rivera, Marevna, Voloshin, Ehrenburg, Picasso, Max Jacob.
Drawing by Marevna.
Woman with red hair, 1915
Seated woman, 1916
Towards the intense life
PICASSO keeps taking me to the Rotonde,’ the rising young poet Jean Cocteau wrote to a friend in 1916.
‘Gloves, cane and collar astonish these artists in shirt-sleeves — they have always looked on them as the insignia of feeble-mindedness…still, it's great to be in the thick of the dog-fights of great art.’
That year the twenty-five-year-old Cocteau was working on the book of Parade , Diaghilev's controversial new ballet which was to express the new spirit in the arts, with music by Satie and Cubist costumes and sets by Picasso.
‘I was on my way towards the intense life,’ wrote Cocteau, ‘towards Picasso — towards Modigliani — towards Satie.’
A rising star, Cocteau was very much the dandy, full of elegance and highly conscious of the impression he made.
So aware of the ‘internationalism of art’(he told the story himself) that when a journalist asked him who the great French artists were, he replied: ‘Why, Picasso, Modigliani, Lipchitz, Stravinsky’— a Spaniard, an Italian and two Russians.
Cocteau would have been delighted to introduce Modigliani to his world of the new couturiers and of Diaghilev's Ballets Russes, to help him to become a fashionable and popular portrait painter.
And apparently he did try.
But with his damnable purity, which they all praised after his death, Modigliani insisted on going his own way.
He despised what he called the ‘snobs d'art ’ and all the high-falutin discussion of art.
‘We working artists suffer from them’, he once told Epstein.
He was still seen intermittently with the ‘bizarre Englishwoman’, but by 1916 the love affair was effectively over.
For both Beatrice and Modigliani it had been a glorious adventure at first, the excitement of the sexual encounters heightened by intellectual friction.
But their feelings for each other had been irreparably damaged by the brawls and fights and the recriminations afterwards.
Now Modigliani was living and working in his own place, producing about four paintings a month.
By 1917 his paintings  were to fetch the highest prices during his lifetime and in that year he is credited with painting one hundred and twenty-five canvases, a painting every three days.
But his daughter implies that the high prices paid for work executed after 191 6 may have affected the chronology.
That seems extremely likely, as although he worked rapidly, all Modigliani's models speak of two- or three-day sittings.
Of course when he was living with Beatrice — and he painted her at least fourteen times — he could resume his sittings more or less at will.
By 1916 Kisling, who had served in the French Foreign Legion, was discharged wounded and working at his studio, No. 3 Rue Joseph Bara, and Modigliani often worked there with him.
An easygoing, good-natured man, Kisling had a strong constitution and enjoyed the bohemian life of ‘chance romances, shindigs, drinking parties, sing-songs, brawls and wordy discussions’, unclouded by guilt or ill-health.
Whatever time he went to bed, Kisling was at his easel working early next morning, painting agreeable, nostalgic portraits of women.
Kisling adored women and had an easy way with them, his face alive with sexual vitality.
Never desperately short of money, he was lucky in attracting funds and spent his money generously.
One day when he had sold a painting for a hundred francs, he spent it all on buying flowers for every woman who passed by in the street in a gesture that Modi much admired.
However, when he invited Beatrice Hastings to come and model for him nude early on in their affair, Modigliani objected and she failed to keep the appointment.
This happened twice.
When Kisling asked Beatrice why she had not turned up, Modigliani replied: ‘I am responsible.
If a woman poses for you, she gives herself to you.’
Kisling allowed Modigliani to use his studio, often lent him brushes and paints and behaved with a careless generosity towards him, but the two men were too different in temperament to become intimate friends.
Modigliani appreciated Kisling for what he was, a sweet-natured, high-spirited, sensual young man.
Jean Cocteau came to Kisling's studio to have his portrait painted and Kisling and Modigliani both painted him, side by side.
No doubt Picasso had advised Kisling of Modigliani's talent.
Pierre Reverdy, the poet, sat in the large studio watching the artists at work.
Cocteau would not stop talking.
He kept up a non-stop stream of words against the patter of the raindrops beating against the skylight, to Modigliani's silent exasperation.
In Kisling's studio, where there was always a bottle or two open, Modigliani wrote on one of the preparatory pencil sketches that he made: ‘I, the undersigned, author of the drawing, swear never to get drunk again for the duration of the war’.
In Kisling's portrait Cocteau appears as a small, sensitive, dreaming figure, almost lost in the large room, with its chairs and table, open window, blue sky and a cat.
Whereas Modigliani cut out all extraneous detail and painted Cocteau in a high-backed chair, looking every inch a peacock, angular and dominant.
When he saw the finished portrait Cocteau was shaken and described it privately as ‘diabolical’.
The painting was proof, he said, that Modigliani detested him.
Cocteau was acute, yet the exaggerated portrait had a curiously prophetic quality.
By 1956, when Cocteau was a man in his sixties, he had grown to have an uncanny resemblance to the painting.
Despite the unspoken antipathy he felt, Modigliani was reluctant to accept a fee for the painting.
When Cocteau insisted, Modigliani stipulated his price: five francs.
The canvas was too large for Cocteau to carry, and since he did not have the cash to hire a fiacre, the painting remained at the Rotonde for years.
Modigliani's paintings always reveal what the painter thought of his  model.
In the majority of his work, he displays a sympathy which reaches to the inner core of his subject.
But Modigliani found Cocteau unbearably pretentious, a name-dropper with an instinct for self-advertisement.
Possibly Cocteau's exaggerated, precious manner made Modigliani feel threatened in his own sexuality.
Although he was plainly heterosexual, he had an unusually sensitive, almost feminine, side to his nature.
And then again perhaps Modigliani's exasperation stemmed in part from envy of this brilliant young man.
By deliberately turning his back on the new spirit in art, Modigliani found himself excluded from most of the excitement and gaiety in the arts that flourished in spite of the war.
Picasso and Matisse sponsored a Granados — Satie concert in 1916, a very fashionable occasion with a select audience.
Later in the year, when the poet Apollinaire came back from the war with a head wound, a grand banquet was held in his honour at the Palais d'Orléans in the Boulevard du Maine.
Ninety guests, including André Gide, Picasso, Max Jacob, Matisse, Vlaminck and Cocteau, sat down to a meal of fantasy.
The twelve courses included ‘Hors d'oeuvres cubistes, orphistes, futuristes: Méditations esthétiques en salade: Café des Soirées de Paris ’, and Alcools .
The evening ended in a brawl between the different factions in Cubism, but it brought a moment of splendour into the blackouts and bombings of war.
Yet Modigliani was too much a part of the life of Montparnasse, too involved with the individuals leading the ‘new art’, to remain completely aloof.
In 1914 he had met Hans Arp, the French painter who was to become prominent in the new Dada movement, at the artists' canteen in the Avenue du Maine.
Two years later Arp was living in Zurich, a member of a group of talented émigré artists who had left their own countries because of the war.
Through casual meetings at cafés, the artists drew together to form a movement in protest against the waste of war, against nationalism and against everything pompous, conventional or boring in the art of the Western world.
Since they held the bourgeois responsible for the war, they went out of their way to shock.
In New York Duchamps provided the Mona Lisa with a moustache and Picabia painted absurd machines that mocked technology and efficiency.
But it was in Zurich that the first shot was fired.
The Dadaists, a nonsense name chosen at random, evolved the idea of a miniature variety show and held their first show in a little bar, the Cabaret Voltaire.
Hugo Ball, a German actor and playwright, Hans Arp, Tristan Tzara and Marcel Janco, a poet and artist from Rumania, and Richard Huselsenbeck, a German poet, were the leaders of Dada.
‘We wanted to make the Cabaret Voltaire a focal point of the ‘newest art’, although we did not neglect, from time to time, to tell the fat and utterly uncomprehending Zurich   philistines that we regarded them as pigs and the German Kaiser as the initiator of the war…
The Cabaret Voltaire group were all artists in the sense that they were keenly sensitive to newly developed artistic possibilities…
In that period as we danced, sang and recited night after night in the Cabaret Voltaire, abstract art was for us tantamount to absolute honour.
Naturalism was a psychological penetration of the motives of the bourgeois, in whom we saw our mortal enemy, and psychological penetration, despite all efforts at resistance, brings an identification with the various precepts of bourgeois morality…
Dada was to be a rallying point for abstract energies and a lasting slingshot for the great international artistic movements’.
Modigliani was in sympathy with the broad sentiments of the movement, the internationalism, the disgust at the war and those who profited from it, and the sensitivity to the new possibilities in art, although the emphasis on abstract art did not fit into his creed.
But at the time of the launch of Dada, Modigliani was not clear about the meaning of the new movement and no one else seemed to know.
‘With psychological astuteness, the Dadaists spoke of energy and will and assured the world that they had amazing plans.
But concerning the nature of these plans, no information was forthcoming.’
When the Dada brochure,Cabaret Voltaire , was published in June 1916 it was ‘a catch-all for the most diverse directions in art which at that time seemed to us to constitute ‘Dada’.’
The cover design was by Arp and inside were contributions from Picasso, Kandinsky and Modigliani as well as the leaders of the movement.
Modigliani's contribution was a portrait of Arp.
Very probably he gave Arp the drawing, who used it with the artist's consent.
His work was also shown at the Dada gallery in 1917, the Cabaret Voltaire, with a very mixed group of artists including Picasso, Arp, De Chirico, Paul Klee and Oscar Kokoshka.
For Modigliani it was important for his work to be seen outside France in an international setting.
By now he had come to symbolize the Montparnasse adventure, and even in his worst moments he had a glamour about him, a sense of intensity, that excited envy and admiration.
Jean Cocteau recognized it, although there was no personal sympathy between them and Jean Cocteau was deeply involved in the avant-garde.
In Paris, at No. 6 Rue Huyghens, in a dingy, badly heated studio which belonged to a Swiss painter, Lejeune, modern art exhibitions, poetry readings and performances of new music were held in wartime.
Paul Guillaume arranged the art exhibitions.
Sometimes in a display of the new ‘simultaneity’ that was all the rage, there would be a combined performance of art, poetry reading and music of high quality with a fashionable, well-dressed crowd mingling with the artists.
Modigliani was among the painters who showed their work at the studio in  the narrow street off Boulevard Montparnasse in 19 16.
Visitors to the studio could gain an impression of his work as a whole and grasp the cumulative effect.
One evening Leopold Zborowski, a Polish poet, came to look at the modern paintings exhibited and was immediately taken by Modigliani's remarkable talent.
Zborowski had arrived in Paris before the war to study literature on a government grant.
When the grant ceased Zbo, as he was called, tried to earn a living by selling books and prints along the quayside, and gradually began to deal in the paintings of the modern and as yet unrecognized artists.
Zborowski displayed an intuitive and passionate enthusiasm for works of art.
A gambler and a dreamer by temperament, he and Modigliani felt an immediate recognition and understanding.
Not since Paul Alexandre had supported Modigliani eight years previously had anyone shown such excitement and deep interest in his work.
‘He is a very great artist,’ he told Lunia Czechowska, ‘it is disgraceful that he has to sell his work on the café terraces.’
Lunia Czechowska came from a prominent family of Polish intellectuals.
With her husband Casimir Czechowski, a soldier on leave, she was Zborowski's guest for the evening and after the exhibition Zborowski invited the couple to the Rotonde, which was only a short walk away.
As they sat with their drinks on the terrace, Lunia noticed a handsome young man in a velvet suit wearing a large black felt hat and a red scarf crossing the Boulevard Montparnasse.
Under his arm he carried a large portfolio of drawings and she saw that he had pencils sticking out from his pocket.
Lunia was a beautiful young woman with an air of great distinction.
Modigliani, of course, spotted her at once and came and sat at the next table.
She was enchanted by the artist, by his distinguished looks, ‘his radiance and the beauty of his eyes.
He was at the same time very simple and very noble.
How different he was in his least gestures, even to his way of shaking your hand’.
As they talked, Modigliani began to sketch her.
In the presence of a lovely woman he was carried away and, ignoring her husband completely, presented Lunia with the finished sketch and invited her to go out with him that evening.
Madame Czechowska felt embarrassed and it was Zborowski who coped with the awkward moment.
He explained that they had made plans for the evening and politely invited Modigliani to join them.
Modigliani declined as politely but suggested to Lunia that she should come to his studio and pose for him the following day.
Arrangements were carefully made so that Lunia would not be compromised and Modigliani came to paint her portrait the following day in the Sunny Hotel on the Boulevard de Port-Royal, the little lodging house where Zborowski was living with his  handsome and somewhat forbidding common-law wife, Anna (Hanka) Zborowska.
As well as admiring Modigliani's talent, Zborowski found him a romantic figure, living a life he would have liked to lead.
He was already acting for a number of young painters including Kisling, Hayden and Kremegne, and was determined to find a way of fostering Modigliani's talent.
He was poor himself but passionate in his conviction that Modigliani deserved a sponsor.
He was to become Modigliani's only permanent dealer, linked with his legend.
With poetic licence he described their first meeting:
In the open street towards evening in July,
the vagrant crowd, haggard and dejected;
they need warmth, these men,
new passions.
On both sides a café.
A young man, my neighbour, gets up from his seat, takes several steps forward and stops in the middle of the road.
He heeds neither motors nor tramways — the young man takes the notebook in his hands, opens its blue covers — the loose leaves fall on the warm pavement.
A kind of swooning,
An evening prayer.
Come on, let's take this gentleman home.
Policeman.
Friends.
The door closes like weary lids at night.
That is how my life became linked with Modigliani one July night.
Lunia was flattered at having her portrait painted by a gifted artist, but at first she felt rather intimidated by the experience.
Modigliani painted her with such ferocity, in his shirt-sleeves, his hair all ruffled.
From time to time he stretched out his hand to take a swig from a bottle of cheap, raw brandy.
‘I could see the alcohol taking effect; he became so excited that he began to talk to me in Italian.
He painted with such intensity that the painting fell on his head as he leant forward to see me better.
I was terrified.
Ashamed of having frightened me, he looked at me sweetly and began to sing Italian songs to make me forget the incident’.
How much of a comfort Modigliani's singing was remains in doubt.
He sang ‘horribly out of tune’ and had a very limited  repertoire.
Often he sang a Livornese song with the words: ‘I work for a hundred lire a month.
My wife wears a silk costume…and a hat with black feathers’.
His speaking voice by contrast was pleasing, his diction in French and Italian excellent.
When he wanted to emphasize a point he rolled his rrrs.
‘Admir — rable’ he would say.
In her eighties Lunia recalled a slightly different first meeting with Modigliani.
In this account he realized her timidity and managed to pretend that he was not looking at her, which seems extremely unlikely.
During the sittings, which lasted for three afternoons, he was drinking grappa and reciting Dante.
Since he painted her fourteen times in all, the detail may be mistaken.
But alive in her memory was the friendship with Modi.
They strolled through Paris together, after her husband went back to the front.
Lunia insisted that Modigliani did not drink to excess, that the stories of his drinking and drug-taking are extremely exaggerated.
He only drank when he was worried, she claimed, then he became quarrelsome, but never with his friends.
In company where he felt at ease, able to be himself, with Paul Alexandre, Anna Akhmatova, Lunia Czechowska, Modigliani still behaved like the well-bred and courteous young man who had first charmed Paris.
His extreme empathy coloured his behaviour and made him a heady, if unpredictable companion.
On 7 July Amedeo wrote a card to his mother telling her, somewhat cruelly, that as Italy was now in the war, he had thought that he might be called back for military service, even though he was an invalid and had felt a slight desire to return to Italy.
‘But — I am still here.’
The new hope that Zborowski would be able to sell his paintings and manage his affairs might have affected his decision to stay in Paris.
First of all he had to free himself of his arrangement with Paul Guillaume.
Guillaume relinquished Modigliani as a client without too much regret.
‘The young man has a real gift’, he told Zborowski patronizingly.
‘It's a pity he is not a bit more French.’
Guillaume would have liked Modigliani's work to be more Cubist, more à la mode .
Guillaume was also disturbed by Modi's unpredictable and unbusinesslike behaviour: ‘the mere idea of asking him for a signature, which would have legalized a relationship, seemed ridiculous to me’.
So the arrangement was tenuous and Modigliani revealed his feelings about his dealer in the 1916 portrait which shows Paul as a worldly, superior-looking figure, detached and ironic.
Guillaume understood that Zborowski, ‘who led the same kind of life as Modigliani, haunted the cafés with him’, would be far more suitable.
Unfortunately Zborowski fell ill that summer and travelled to the south of France to recuperate.
Modigliani found  work wherever he could.
When André Warnod came home on leave he asked him politely whether he would like to have his portrait painted in uniform.
Warnod had to decline, to his later regret.
But Jacques Lipchitz, who had recently married, decided to commission Modigliani to paint a wedding portrait.
Now under contract to Léonce Rosenburg, Picasso's dealer, Lipchitz felt more secure financially.
Rosenburg, of course, knew of Modigliani's work and perhaps Lipchitz felt he could put some work Modigliani's way and at the same time acquire a beautiful painting that might appreciate.
When Lipchitz asked Modigliani what he charged, he replied: ‘You know my price.
Ten francs a sitting and a little alcohol.’
The next day Modigliani turned up at Lipchitz's studio and made a number of preliminary drawings of Lipchitz and his wife with speed and precision.
The three of them discussed the pose for the painting and Lipchitz brought out the wedding photograph to help Modigliani decide on the pose.
The formal sitting began at one o'clock the following day.
Modigliani arrived with a box of paints and a canvas he had already worked on.
He preferred painting on a closely woven canvas, and sometimes when he had finished the work he placed a sheet of paper carefully over the fresh paint to merge the colours.
He worked without an easel and with the minimum of fuss, placing his canvas on a chair and painting quietly, ‘interrupting only now and then to take a gulp of alcohol from a bottle.
From time to time he would get up and glance critically over his work and look at his models.
By the end of the day he said: ‘Well, I guess it's finished.’
Although the portrait was finished Lipchitz felt loath to pay Modigliani so little for his work, so he invented reasons for extra sittings.
‘Can't you work on it a little more?’ he asked Modigliani.
‘You know we sculptors like a little more mud, a little more substance.’
Modigliani agreed reluctantly: ‘If you want me to ruin it I can continue.’
For almost two weeks
Modigliani worked on the painting, an unusually long time for him and perhaps the only time when he agreed to ‘continue’ a painting.
Ironically, when it was finished, and it certainly was not ‘ruined’, Lipchitz preferred the drawings to the painting, which he put away in a cupboard.
Soon after Modigliani's death Lipchitz exchanged the portrait to buy back two of his own stone heads from his dealer.
Lipchitz was a kindly man, who came from a small, close-knit Jewish village community in Russia.
His background had taught him to be sober, frugal and methodical.
He could not understand Modigliani's disregard for both his health and his money and found it shocking.
Not only Modigliani's drinking worried Lipchitz, he criticized his way of eating his food highly seasoned, with piles of salt and pepper on his plate.
Modi also liked his food smothered in garlic: ‘when I eat garlic it's as if I kiss the mouth of the woman I   love.’
Lipchitz felt sure this was a means of reviving his jaded palate.
He felt bound to reproach his friend for his excesses, which made Modi furious.
‘You talk just like my family,’ he retorted.
‘But you're shortening your life,’ Lipchitz pointed out patiently.
‘Too bad,’ snorted Modi.
‘I want a short life but an intense one.’
Biographers have always taken that to mean that Modigliani was hell-bent on self-destruction.
In context it seems more likely that it was his impatient response to Lipchitz's well-intentioned nannying.
Women, too, often felt the temptation to look after Modigliani.
Marie Wassilieff, who ran the artists’ canteen, gave him free meals and heaped advice upon him lavishly.
A young woman called Simone Thiroux had eyed Modigliani for a long time.
Simone was a wealthy French Canadian girl who had come to live with an aunt in Paris.
She was a pretty, rather fleshy blonde, who revelled in the bohemian life of Montparnasse and enjoyed hanging round artists, posing for them, helping them to buy paints and cigarettes, studying intermittently at the Sorbonne until she had spent most of her inheritance and could no longer afford to pay for tuition.
At Rosalie's little restaurant Simone watched the handsome Modigliani making a magnificent scene or sketching beautiful women at the Rotonde and, with her girl-friends, she had found him ravishing.
She longed to get near him, and when he was quite drunk Simone would gently steer him to his room and help him get to bed.
Inevitably one night she ended up by going to bed with him.
Some people said she was a scalp-hunter, but most agreed that she was genuinely devoted to Modi, more interested in the man than the artist.
Modigliani found her attentions annoying; he enjoyed the sport of courting and did not like to be chased.
Although for a time Simone tagged along in his life, he never took the affair seriously.
When the weather was cold Simone bought him scarves and warm clothes.
When it was wet she would turn up at the cafés with galoshes.
Lipchitz remembered her coming to watch when Modigliani painted his wedding portrait.
He found her solicitude touching but Modigliani dismissed her, calling her a milksop.
Whilst Zborowski was still in the south of France Modigliani met Madame Zborowska in the street and asked her to pose for him.
His relations with her were formal and wary, and she clearly looked on painters as a necessary evil for her husband's livelihood.
Nevertheless, she was a handsome woman and very competent and Modi persuaded her to pose for him nude.
Throughout his chaotic years in Paris he continued to go to life classes, but he could not afford the five francs an hour for a model and so rarely had a chance to paint the nude, except for his girl-friends, and that, as he was beginning to realize, was expensive too.
Anna Zborowska posed for two nude paintings, presumably painted in her rooms at the Sunny Hotel with Lunia acting as  chaperone.
These he sold, on the spot, to a barber in the district, more interested in the salacious aspect than the superb swelling line of his work.
The third portrait he promised to give to Madame Zborowska in gratitude for acting as a model.
But as the painting was not yet dry he kept it in his room, and when a buyer came unexpectedly to see Modigliani and offered him ten francs for her portrait he took the money.
When Hanka Zborowska arrived asking for her portrait Modigliani was shamefaced.
He apologized and explained, but she did not waste time in argument.
They were all barely managing with their money.
By selling paintings by Derain and a study by Kisling, Hanka raised the train fare for Zbo's return journey to Paris.
Zborowski had a stroke of luck when he came back.
He sold one of Derain's paintings for a thousand francs to a Norwegian dealer and was able to offer Modigliani a contract.
Unlike Guillaume, Zborowski was  unbusinesslike, and a poor book-keeper, but he did have a wonderful faith in Modigliani's talent.
From the autumn of 1916, Modigliani used a room in Zborowski's apartment in the Sunny Hotel as a studio, until they moved late in the year to an apartment in the Rue Joseph Bara.
In a bare, narrow room, which also served as Zbo's ‘gallery’, Modigliani worked daily for fifteen francs.
Zborowski supplied the charcoal, paints, canvas, and brushes; he also hired the models (Modigliani insisted that they must be paid three to five francs an hour) and any accessories, although the painter rarely asked for anything but the human figure for his work.
Despite his reputation, Modi behaved impeccably at first.
He never came to the hotel drunk and for the first time for years worked almost to a routine.
After a late sleep and lunch at Rosalie's restaurant, he worked steadily through from 2 to 6pm.
In the course of an afternoon he usually managed to finish a medium-sized painting, although larger paintings took two or three sessions.
He also smoked the cigarettes Zborowski provided as part of the contract and managed to get through a bottle of wine.
By now two or three glasses had become indispensable to his output.
‘After the first it didn't work; after the second things were a little better; after the third his hand worked by itself’.
Surprisingly little drink was enough to intoxicate him but it seemed as if the wine released the power in him.
All his friends noticed that no matter how drunk he was, his hand remained steady and he could draw with astonishing skill and sensitivity.
At the time, Maurice Utrillo was confined to a lunatic asylum through his chronic alcoholism and Lunia and the Zborowskis went to visit him every day.
Modigliani felt the pain of these visits more than any of them, and was horrified to see his old friend in dingy and sinister surroundings, humiliated and frightened.
They bought him canvas and paints and Maurice continued to paint from postcards.
Occasionally they contrived to smuggle in a small bottle of crème-de-menthe in response to Utrillo's pathetic pleas.
Modigliani often asked Lunia to accompany him when he took Utrillo out for a walk.
Periodically Utrillo was allowed out of the asylum for a few days and occasionally he escaped.
Then, unerringly, he found his way to Modigliani, wherever he was, and the two of them would drink the night away until they were unconscious, taken to the police station and beaten up.
Despite Zborowski's frantic efforts to sell his work, Modigliani's living was still very precarious.
Kisling, Lipchitz, Utrillo, all his friends were selling and it was bitter for him to realize that his work was not yet marketable, not to the public taste.
On the rare nights when Zborowski had a sale he left the lights on in the room.
More often Hanka Zborowska switched the lights off and they pretended to be out so that Modigliani would not come up and ask for an advance on the next day's work.
When he came to work at lunchtime, his first question was: ‘How goes it?
Have you sold anything?’
But apart from the occasional buyer, Modigliani's paintings remained stacked in a corner in Zborowski's apartment and the price was depressingly low.
Zborowski did have a buyer for the drawings in Lucien Descaves, the brother of the Police Commissioner who bought them up by the batch.
To Zborowski's annoyance, Modigliani still clung to his old habits in the cafés, making dozens of sketches and giving most of his work away or bartering it to buy drinks.
One evening when Zbo and Modi were sitting together in a café, Modigliani finished a sketch he had made and then tore the page out of his blue sketchbook.
Thinking he was going to throw it away, Zborowski put out his hand to take it but Modigliani cowed him with a look and gravely presented the drawing to the sitter.
If he was annoyed, Zborowski smothered his feelings: he was somewhat in awe of Modigliani who was, after all, a gentleman.
Blaise Cendrars, the writer, saw Modigliani let fall a twenty-franc note one evening when a well-known pauper came in to sit at the next table.
‘I say, you're in luck,’ Modi said pointing to the note at the poor man's foot.
‘Look what you've found,’ and he hurried away.
Many anecdotes of this kind were repeated in Montparnasse and they found their way to the Zborowskis, who were struggling themselves.
Sometimes Hanka Zborowska would go to the grocer and buy a kilo of red beans which they would share with Modigliani, just to make sure they all had something to eat.
Even if other painters had to wait for their money, Zbo tried desperately hard to make sure that Modi did not go without.
His ‘good behaviour’ did not last too long.
For whole days he wandered off to the cafés and bars in a stand to assert his independence.
‘I'm neither a boss nor a workman’, he would say.
Simone tagged along in his life, sometimes rooming with him.
Inevitably he painted ‘La Canadienne’, but although she was deeply in love, Modigliani's emotions never seem to have been engaged in the affair.
One evening, when the two of them were sitting at the Rotonde, Beatrice, ‘the lady of Montmartre’, entered with a handsome escort.
A furious row broke out and in the confusion Modigliani got the blame and poor Simone was cut over the eye with broken  glass and scarred for life.
Libion, the kindly café proprietor, was so exasperated that he had them all thrown out.
For Simone, who was dependent and entirely besotted, Modigliani proved an impossible lover.
If he disappeared for more than a few hours she became frantic and ran to the Zborowskis' apartment in the Rue Joseph Bara to ask for news, and almost lived there until he was eventually found.
Zbo did his best to placate her, telling her that Modigliani often behaved oddly; in the end he went out to telephone the hospitals and the police stations.
One day when Modi finally turned up he was penniless, unable to account for his lost weekend, hungry and dirty.
Zbo, who had been out all day trying to sell his paintings, returned to find Modigliani sleeping off his drunken stupor on their sofa.
Zborowski said nothing but went into his room and changed into worn summer clothes and came out carrying his only winter suit parcelled up to take to the pawnbroker.
However romanticized that account may be, it remains true that, whether through loyalty, vision or ambition for himself, Zborowski trudged the streets of Paris trying to sell Modigliani's work to dealers, critics and collectors.
In his anxiety he often allowed himself to be beaten down in price.
Writing a dutiful postcard to his mother on 16 November 1916 Modigliani, as uninformative as ever, tries to reassure her and is optimistic:
Darling Mother, I have let too much time pass without writing, but I haven't forgotten you.
Don't worry about me.
I'm working and if I am sometimes worried, at least I am not as short of money as I was before.
I wanted to send you some photographs but they didn't turn out too well.
Send me your news.
A big hug from Dedo
Zborowski's constant, if precarious, backing had meant that Modigliani was not so desperately short of money.
The war was still on, with nightly air-raids when the signal whined and the wardens cried ‘Garde à vous ’ and cleared the streets, and Modigliani sometimes stayed to watch the ‘show’and then continued to drink after it was over.
Since his student days in Venice, when he went to seances, he had been fascinated by the occult.
In 1908 he had made a drawing of a table-turning.
In Paris during the war, ‘La Rotonde was full of Russians who told fortunes, necromancers, palmists and spiritualists’, and Modigliani was extremely susceptible to the mood of mysticism.
In the face of the city's desperation he expressed his melancholy through his painting.
During 1916 he drew a  series of drawings of Christian significance, of a crucifixion, a monk and of Max Jacob as a Benedictine monk.
The drawings bore Latin inscriptions —‘Day of Resurrection’, ‘Day of Wrath’— that are so unlike any of the rest of his works that they have been largely ignored, and sell for far less than any other of Modigliani's works.
Carol Mann suggests that Max Jacob may have invited Modigliani to illustrate his book,La Défense de Tartuffe , ecstasies, remorse, visions, prayers, poems and meditations of a converted Jew.
That seems possible because in one of Jacob's books,Cornet à Dés , there was a dedication to Modigliani in the edition published in 1917 which was deleted subsequently, presumably as a result of the mysterious quarrel over Beatrice.
From Jacob's correspondence it is clear that he knew little of Modigliani's life in the last years.
An unusually cold winter in 1916/17 brought the city of Paris almost to a halt.
Lamp-oil was impossible to get and candles were scarce, but the worst shortage was of coal.
All over Paris people queued to buy a small bagful to heat their homes, and in the Rue de la Paix the most fashionable jeweller in Paris placed a lump of coal, surrounded by diamonds, in his window.
In this frigid season, crowds lined up to buy sugar, milk, chocolate and potatoes.
The U-boat activity and the occupation of part of France by the enemy were responsible for the food shortages, which sent prices soaring.
At the beginning of March 1917, the cost of Modigliani's favourite food, fish, rose by fifty per cent in one day.
Shop windows were still frosted over and dustbins lay unemptied in the icy streets.
One winter morning Vlaminck noticed Modigliani standing on a street island in the Boulevard Raspail.
‘With the haughty air of a general in charge of manoeuvres he was watching the taxis streaming past [there was no petrol rationing until April 1917].
An icy wind was blowing, but the moment Modi saw me he came and said, quite casually, as if referring to something he didn't need in the least: ‘Look here, I'll sell you my overcoat, it's much too big for me and should fit you nicely.’’
28 Vlaminck was a bulky man, taller than Modi, and the overcoat would not have fitted him.
Modigliani also tried to sell an old suitcase to an artist friend, but without success.
In recent years it has become fashionable to say that Modi only suffered from poverty because of his drinking and drug-taking.
Hashish pills cost about twenty-five centimes a day and there is no evidence that Modigliani took anything else.
As for drink, he drew endlessly to supply his need.
You could get a meal for five francs at Rosalie's little place, and Modi often bartered a meal for drawings which she believed were worthless.
His contract allowed him fifteen francs a day, if Zborowski could manage it, to cover all his needs.
In Paul Guillaume's gallery a book on African sculpture was selling for   fifty francs in 1917; it was a book Modigliani would have prized, but at the cost of three days' subsistence plus one meal, it was out of the question.
In 1917, as if in defiance of the death and destruction all around him, Modigliani painted his most glorious series of nudes.
Ever since he was a student in Florence and Venice, Modigliani had studied the female form repeatedly and passionately and when he came to Paris he continued to go to life classes.
Unlike almost all his portraits, the nudes are not melancholy, but direct, open, sensuous in form and sumptuous in colour.
The faces of the nudes are simpler, less tormented than those of his portraits, but since his friends were intellectuals, artists and writers, intense, complex men and women, consumed by an inner reality, that is hardly surprising; the girls who posed for his nudes were healthy young women, models, maids, waitresses, milkmaids revelling in their bodies and their sexuality.
He painted about thirty nudes in Zborowski's apartment in 1917.
Other painters would complain if a model did not please them, but Modigliani never swore at the girls or reproached them.
But if he laughed all through a sitting or recited passages of Dante, Rimbaud or Verlaine by heart, that was a dangerous sign, ‘Then one knew that he shouldn't be annoyed.’
Seventy years ago Francis Carco, the writer, was one of the first private buyers of Modigliani's nudes.
A corporal, home on leave from the army, he was a friend of both Modi and Zborowski.
When Carco called to see the paintings Zborowski ran to buy a candle, stuck it into the neck of a bottle, then showed Carco into a narrow, unfurnished room where a stack of Modigliani's canvases stood in the corner.
The dealer ‘showed you his marvels, caressing them with his hands and his eyes, then cursing the fate which weighed on Modigliani and spitting in disgust…what poetry’, he said.
Zborowski told Carco how he had taken fifteen canvases to a merchant the other morning and wanted very little money for them, but the merchant sent him away…
‘They are stupid,’ Zbo said fervently.
‘They are not yet accustomed to him’, and he added prophetically, ‘…but you will see later on, they'll all want Modigliani, and in the meantime he has no money and he suffers…
’ Carco asked if he could buy a painting, ‘The Standing Nude’, and Zbo was so overcome with emotion because Carco appreciated Modigliani that he refused to take any money for it.
When Carco's concierge came to clean his room the next day, she almost fainted at the sight of the nude picture hanging over his bed.
Simone Thiroux, the Canadian student so enamoured of Modigliani, was still shadowing him; by now she was pregnant and claiming he was the father.
Modigliani adamantly refused to admit paternity of the child.
Simone had happened to come into his bed, he said and shrugged.
Her clinging  rapidly brought the affair to an end.
Gossip in the quarter reported that Rosalie's son had overheard that Simone had decided to ‘have’ Modi for a bet and, when that story came to Modi's ears, he turned from her disgusted.
Lipchitz's version was that Modi found Simone in bed with a painter friend of his.
Simone had a reputation for sharing her favours and Modi felt no obligation towards her.
In March 1917 when news of the Russian revolution reached Paris, Modi went running to find his writer friend Ilya Ehrenburg, embraced him and began ‘screeching enthusiastically’, so that Ehrenburg could barely make out what he was saying.
Ehrenburg was convinced that Modi had a gift of prophecy.
When he told Modi that the police had been to question him because his neighbour had hidden stolen goods in the wardrobe in Ehrenburg's room, Modigliani merely smiled.
‘They'll lock you up soon,’ he said.
‘You want to blow up France and everyone knows it.’
Later, as Modigliani predicted, Ehrenburg was arrested and charged with subversive activities.
War and revolution were in the air.
One night Modi was sitting at the Rotonde with Rivera, Boris Savinkov, a revolutionary writer, and Max Voloshin, a poet.
Fernand Léger and Lipinski the revolutionary were earnestly discussing the political situation at the next table.
Late at night Modigliani persuaded them all to go back to his place to continue the discussion.
Ehrenburg reported it, and he is one of the few who described Modigliani in serious mood, not merely hitting the bottle or making a scene.
Fernand Léger, on leave from the Engineering Corps, was a socialist, profoundly affected by his army service.
‘I found myself on a level with the whole of the French people; my new companions…were miners, navvies, workers in metal and wood.
Among them I discovered the French people.
At the same time I was dazzled by the breech of a 75-millimetre gun which was standing uncovered in the sunlight: the magic of light on white metal.
This was enough to make me forget the abstract art of 1912–13!’
Léger determined that in future the motifs of his paintings would be more closely connected to working people.
He was optimistic about the future and told the others that the politicians would be driven out after the war and the people would find their inspiration in science, technology, work and sport.
Voloshin argued against him and then Modi interrupted: ‘You're all a lot of bloody innocents.
Do you think anyone is going to say to you: ‘My dear fellows, take your choice?’
You make me laugh.
The only people who make a choice today are the ones with self-inflicted wounds, and they get shot for it.
When the war is over, everyone will be put in prison…
Everyone will have to wear a convict's uniform.
At the most the academics will be entitled to wear  checked trousers instead of striped ones.’
The others disagreed with Modigliani's pessimistic vision of a grey and uniform post-war world.
Léger insisted that a new approach in art was necessary.
Rivera felt that that was hopeless.
Art was dying: no one in Paris needed it.
And Modigliani was wrong because the worst was over.
‘The socialists could…
’ Then Modigliani interrupted again: ‘Do you know what the socialists are like?
Bald-headed parrots.
I said so to my brother.
Please don't take offence: the socialists are better than the rest all the same.
But you don't understand anything…what's the difference between Mussolini and Cadorna?
[Luigi Cadorna was Chief of Staff and Commander-in-Chief of the Italian armies, 1915 — 1917.]
‘Rubbish!’
Modigliani went on.
‘Soutine has painted a marvellous portrait.
There's a Rembrandt, believe it or not.
But he'll be caged behind bars like everyone else’.
He turned to Léger.
‘Listen, you want to organize the world.
But the world can't be measured with a ruler.
There are people…
‘Ehrenburg noted down Modigliani's remarks, remembering everything he could.
But before Modi could continue, Rivera shut his eyes, a sign that he was about to break into one of his fits, when he would erupt and turn white.
Modigliani and Ehrenburg edged towards the door whilst Rivera hoisted the stout and sturdy poet Max Voloshin from the floor as if he were a baby, but fortunately he quietened down before any damage was done.
Modigliani's profound humanism and pessimism made him distrust political systems.
He put his faith in the genius of individuals.
Ever since Zborowski took him on, Modigliani had been urging Zbo to act as Soutine's dealer, pointing out his greatness.
But Soutine's painting was even less accessible than Modigliani's.
Besides, Hanka Zborowska could not bear to have Chaim Soutine in her house.
She found him uncouth and dirty and he often smelt of abattoirs and of the chicken carcases or sides of beef he had been painting.
In exasperation Modi painted a portrait of Chaim Soutine on a door of the Zborowskis' apartment in the Rue Joseph Bara, as a permanent reminder of his friend's great talent, to Hanka's fury.
When Georges Braque, badly wounded and invalided out of the infantry, came back to Paris in 1917, Marie Wassilieff gave a banquet for him at her canteen.
The numbers were limited to thirty-five, and Marie and a committee including Picasso arranged the guest list.
She produced a striking table with a black paper tablecloth, white plates and red napkins.
Two crowns of laurels were offered to Braque and his wife.
When Marie saw Modigliani she said to him: ‘For heaven's sake don't come tomorrow.
I haven't invited you.
Do me a favour and I'll give you three francs instead of your fifty centimes [which she gave him daily].’
Among the invited guests were Beatrice Hastings and the lover who replaced Modigliani, Alfredo Pina.
The meal was peaceful, but when it was over the doors burst open and in surged a crowd of painters and models who hadn't been invited.
When Pina saw Modigliani he drew a revolver and pointed it at him.
Marie Wassilieff relates that she seized the gun, forced Modigliani out of the door and rolled him down the stairs.
The banquet went on all night and ‘by six in the morning Braque and Derain were dancing with the bones of the lamb’.
In 1917 Moise Kisling married, and the occasion gave the party-loving painter a wonderful excuse to entertain.
After the ceremony, the wedding party and their guests went to the Rotonde and Libion, the popular patron, offered champagne on the house and toasts were drunk enthusiastically.
After that Kisling expansively invited all the guests to dinner with him at Leduc's restaurant.
Chana Orloff, who was sitting next to her husband and Modigliani, was a little worried by the grandiose gesture, but the men shrugged and said: ‘We'll get a good meal’.
Then in the middle of the grand dinner, when Kisling was sufficiently drunk, he announced to his guests that he would ‘dance the dance of chastity’.
‘He pulled his shirt out of his trousers and galloped around us; after which he declared ‘you take care of the bill’, and he skipped’.
There was a stunned silence, then the guests scrambled to leave, but the proprietors of the restaurant stood guard at the door with a policeman.
Somehow or other the artists managed to pay or promise to pay, and most of the guests went good-humouredly back to Kisling's studio to continue the party.
The evening ended in a terrible brawl.
Drunks were making a din on the stairs and a sculptor was tearing up a collection of Kisling's drawings and throwing them down on to the head of the concierge.
Kisling was livid, and with the help of some friends managed to grab the sculptor and throw him down the stairwell from the seventh floor.
By clinging to a bannister he miraculously managed to land safely.
As the guests left in a state of alcoholic haze, two policemen stood at the door.
After the wedding the Kisling parties grew even wilder.
Renée Kisling, the daughter of an officer, was as ardent a party-goer as her husband, a powerful woman capable of blacking the eye of any guest who wanted to slip out before a rowdy party broke up.
Modigliani did not like her and the two often quarrelled.
The wild bohemianism of the life at Kisling's was stimulating and hectic but a drain on Modigliani's limited energy and he was looking for a change in his life.
Kisling at the ‘Academy’.
Lunia, 1918
Simone, 1918
Hanka Zborowska.
Reclining nude, 1917
À notre Amour, 1917
Mechan, 1917
Max Jacob, 1916
Nude on Divan, 1910
Jeanne
IN April 1917, shortly after her nineteenth birthday, Jeanne Hébuterne was trying on her costume for the artists' fancy dress ball during the Carnival.
She pulled on high boots, home-made poncho-style Russian blouse and long skirt and put up her gleaming chestnut hair in a chignon with a fashionable fringe.
At a friend's studio she posed, head on one side and delicate long fingers hanging languidly from the enveloping sleeves of her home-made gown.
Jeanne looks, in a faded photograph, as if she were a Modigliani model.
He was to paint her more than twenty-five times.
Jeanne Hébuterne studied art at the Academi Colarossi and the École des Arts Décoratifs where she met the sculptor, Chana Orloff, who claimed to have introduced Modigliani to Jeanne.
As in all the important events in Modigliani's life, there are differing versions of the story.
In Montparnasse artists and art students met each other in the cafés and at the life class and in the little restaurants.
At the time Jeanne was fascinated by Foujita, the diminutive Japanese artist, who wore gold ear-rings to set off his owl-shaped face and a toga he had woven himself under the influence of Raymond Duncan's Greek worship.
Foujita, an inventive witness, claimed that they were lovers, although Jeanne's friends insist that she was a virgin when she met Modigliani.
Once in Amedeo's company everyone agrees that she ‘only had eyes for him’.
Jeanne was drawn to Modi, not only by his looks but because of his talent, his sense of style and his dangerous reputation with women.
All Montparnasse knew the stories of Simone and Beatrice.
Like Modigliani, Jeanne was a romantic, a mysterious young woman with soulful blue eyes and a generous mouth.
A talented student, she was immensely serious about her work and Modigliani helped and encouraged her.
Unconsciously perhaps Jeanne was seeking to free herself from her narrow and oppressively respectable bourgeois family.
Her parents were not Parisians, they came from the provinces and Jeanne herself combined  innocence with imaginative courage.
After the flamboyant destructiveness of Beatrice, the cloying of Simone, Jeanne Hébuterne, talented and secretive, with her fresh looks which held a hint of sensuality, was enormously appealing.
They shared a love of music; Jeanne played the violin more than competently; Bach was a favourite composer.
She was also interested in literature, subjected at home to a diet of Plotinus, the third-century Greek philosopher, and especially Pascal, read to her by her father whilst she and her mother peeled potatoes.
Achille Hébuterne worked as chief cashier in a perfumery.
His passion for seventeenth-century literature had led the former atheist to a sudden conversion and during the war years he developed into a pillar of the Roman Catholic church.
Jeanne's brother André, an academic landscape painter four years her senior, also became a convert whilst Jeanne's mother, Eudoxie Hébuterne, tried to enter into the spirit of ardent Catholicism.
Like her mother Jeanne was of a more sceptical frame of mind  but she could not remain unaffected by the atmosphere of piety in the fifth-floor apartment.
With her milky complexion set off by chestnut hair the artists nicknamed her ‘coconut’.
She was one of the few members of the artistic community who admitted to religious observance.
Modi's friends did not know what to make of the romance.
In their eyes Jeanne was charming to look at but a timid, uninteresting little thing.
They were all much older than she was, many of them well known, and wisely she kept quiet in their company.
Her youth and looks aroused envy of Modi in the men and jealousy of Jeanne in the women.
But with student friends like Chana Orloff and Germaine Labaye, known as ‘Red Bean’, Jeanne's friend from the Colarossi, she could be herself, intelligent, interested in fashion, with a style of her own.
Jeanne and Germaine went to the Dôme or the Rotonde regularly at aperitif hour to meet Modigliani and Roger Wild (who was to become Germaine's husband).
Modi was fourteen years older but so attractive and youthful that they enjoyed his company and often ate together at Rosalie's restaurant or Les Trois Portes, another eating-place favoured by artists.
The two of them, both intensely introverted people, conducted their love affair in secret.
Surprisingly, no anecdotes exist of conversations or scenes between the lovers.
Jeanne and Modigliani walked hand in hand through Montparnasse but no one really understood the attraction.
For three months Jeanne kept her love for Modigliani a secret from her family, went to Mass and appeared gentle and dutiful, if somewhat abstracted.
Years later her parents made a sworn statement testifying that the couple had met in July 1917.
By then Jeanne had taken the extraordinarily courageous step of leaving her comfortable home to live openly with Modigliani in a seedy hotel room.
From her family's point of view she could scarcely have chosen a more unsuitable lover.
He was fourteen years older than Jeanne, barely able to support himself, let alone a wife, a weakling unfit for army service, a bohemian, a drunk and, worst of all, a Jew.
But Jeanne was surprisingly strong-minded.
Nothing that her family could say, none of their warnings, could dissuade her.
Her elder brother André, an academic painter, was fond of Jeanne and close to her.
He did not mix with the crowd at the Rotonde and had little sympathy with the wild scenes of the moderns.
Besides, he remained living at home, and had to side with his parents.
Although the couple lived in poverty, through Modigliani Jeanne was introduced to the high point of the Montparnasse adventure.
In June 1917 his paintings were on exhibition again at the improvised gallery in the Rue Huyghens, where Modigliani, Kisling and Zadkine each had a wall with their  works displayed.
At the same time the contemporary composers Satie, Auric, Honegger, Poulenc, Milhaud and Germaine Taillefer had their works played on the piano by the Brazilian pianist Ricardo Vines.
Cocteau and Cendrars read their poems.
‘Worldly Paris mingled in these sessions with artists in sweaters who had come from the Rotonde and the Dôme…
There were in this dingy, badly heated studio, moments of rare artistic quality of a kind that occurs but rarely in a century’.
Jeanne was there, proud of Modigliani, although as usual his work did not sell.
Now when she saw him drinking, wild-eyed and aggressive, in her inner eye she kept the vision of the distinguished and striking man she knew him to be.
During the summer of 1917 Léon Bakst, the designer of Diaghilev's Russian ballet, commissioned a portrait by Modigliani.
Almost certainly Bakst visited the exhibition of modern art at the Rue Huyghens.
He was a man of advanced tastes who appreciated African art and the films of Charlie Chaplin.
A Russian Jew, he lived in an elegant and beautifully ordered apartment, No. 112 Boulevard Malesherbes, his drawings all catalogued and filed in cabinets.
The designer surrounded himself with exquisite objects — Chinese porcelain vases, a life-sized bronze reproduction of Donatello's David, the paintings of Rousseau.
He also grew cacti enthusiastically.
Modigliani knew how to adapt himself to his surroundings and made a great impression on the day he came to sketch Bakst.
The following day, when Modigliani was due to begin painting his portrait, the writer Michel Georges-Michel paid a visit and was just about to leave when Bakst persuaded him to stay on.
‘You will see an Italian painter who is really somebody.
He is going to paint my portrait.
Look, here is the drawing he gave me: see how fine it is, how accurate, how personal…
Modigliani must be poor, but he has the air of an aristocrat.’
Bakst spoke with admiration of Modigliani's erect carriage, of the air of inner fire that lighted up his face.
By now Modigliani could not transform overnight into a conventional husband, and Jeanne accepted him with his failings.
In her silent way, she had committed herself entirely to a life for art's sake.
Gradually he did begin to stay with her in the evenings and to neglect the cafés.
Sometimes they sat together and worked, or Jeanne would play the violin whilst Modigliani painted.
She had the right — as no other woman had ever had — to fetch him when it grew late.
He often went out alone, Italian style, and Jeanne would wait for him in the street after the cafés closed.
He would sit slumped on a seat near a bar or a café waiting for her.
Then Jeanne would say very quietly, ‘Let's go, Amedeo’, and half dragged, half led him home.
Zborowski was enthusiastic about the love affair.
With a loyal and loving woman behind him and the semblance of domestic life, he hoped that at last Modi would  settle down and produce more paintings.
There was still the bitter disappointment of his failure to win the recognition he deserved.
That autumn Zbo worked hard to arrange a one-man show for Modigliani.
After many earnest conversations with Berthe Weill, who dealt in the works of modern artists such as Dufy, Vlaminck, Utrillo, Pascin and Picasso, he persuaded her to put on an exhibition for Modigliani.
She took on the ‘difficult’ painter more out of sympathy for Zborowski's hopeless task than of belief in Modigliani.
By December 1917 Madame Weill had moved from her tiny shop on the Rue Victor-Masse, where she pinned up her pictures with clothes-pegs on an overhead wire like washing, to a more imposing venue, Galerie B. Weill, 50 Rue Taitbout in the 9th arrondissement.
Zborowski decided to feature Modigliani's nudes as well as his portraits.
The dealer himself was intrigued by the nudes.
When Modigliani was working, Zbo could not resist peeping through the door once or twice to watch, with the excuse of seeing that everything was all right.
For Modigliani painting was a very private encounter between artist and sitter.
When Zbo interrupted he flew into a rage at the violation.
On one occasion Zborowski came in when Modigliani was painting a standing nude.
The artist became so angry that he started to slash the canvas.
Lunia, the sympathetic friend and neighbour, who was herself interested in Modigliani, managed to calm him  and after that she stood guard at the door to prevent any intrusion.
The exhibition of paintings and drawings was to run from 3 to 30 December to catch the Christmas crowds.
Jeanne herself had posed for the model of the drawing of a young girl, her hands covering one breast, a triangle of pubic hair prominent.
Blaise Cendrars, the vagabond poet who had shared many a bottle with Modigliani, wrote these mysterious lines as preface:
On a portrait of Modigliani
The interior world
The human heart with
Its 17 impulses
Of the soul
The come-and-go of passion.
The Sunday before the private view, Modigliani, Zborowski and Berthe Weill spent all day hanging the paintings and drawings.
Zbo insisted on placing a bold and magnificent nude in the window to attract passers-by in the street.
Distinguished visitors were invited, including M. Henry Simon, the Minister for the Colonies, and fashionable men and women as well as Modigliani's friends from Montparnasse.
Unfortunately Zborowski was too successful in attracting attention.
Outside the gallery a group of curious bystanders gathered, staring and leering at the nude painting.
As the crowd grew, pressing against the window, the Divisional Police Commissioner Rousselet, who had been keeping an eye on events, sent a policeman down with orders to have the nude painting removed from the window.
The guests milled round in confusion; Madame Weill, a tiny woman in a tailored suit, tried to fob the policeman off.
She told him she was too busy to attend to the matter, whilst the guests gave up all pretence of looking at the pictures to stare at the intruder.
Then the policeman raised his voice and said in an insolent tone: ‘The Commissioner orders you to remove that nude’.
Anxious to be rid of the interruption, Madame Weill carefully brought the offending nude inside.
But before he left the policeman peered round the walls and noticed other equally frank nudes.
Meanwhile the crowd outside, sensing a scandal, pressed even more closely against the windows of the gallery and grew so thick that the traffic was held up.
In a few minutes the same policeman forced his way through the mob to the gallery.
‘Monsieur le Commissaire wants to see you upstairs in his office’, he announced importantly.
Berthe Weill protested that she could not leave the gallery for the moment, she hadn't the time, there were all the guests to look after.
Again the policeman ordered her sharply to   come with him.
Berthe Weill shrugged and crossed the street after him to the catcalls of the crowd.
In the Commissioner's office she put on a brave front.
‘You asked me to come here?’
‘Yes,’ he replied sternly, ‘and I order you to take down all that filth.’
Madame Weill tried to reason.
‘Fortunately there are some connoisseurs of art who are not of that opinion.’
‘But those nudes,’ said Rousselet growing red-faced, ‘they have h-h-hair.’
Until that time the convention in painting nudes had been to omit pubic hair altogether.
Modigliani painted hair when he saw it as part of his design.
But the Commissioner, enjoying a high state of moral indignation, looked for no explanation.
The paintings, in his view, were an affront to public morality.
‘If you don't see that my orders are obeyed immediately, I'll have a squad of policemen seize the lot,’ he barked.
In wartime the police enjoyed special powers and abused them.
Madame Weill had little choice.
She went back to the gallery, furious, shut the door, pulled down the blind, and those other guests still inside helped her to remove the paintings from the walls.
Modigliani's one-man show, scheduled to last throughout the month of December, closed on the day that it opened.
Despite the débâcle, two drawings were sold for thirty francs each and Madame Weill bought five of the paintings herself ‘to help out Modigliani’.
Modigliani's luck was appalling.
For a brief moment the one-man show had seemed so promising and he had dared to hope.
The episode could only have increased his distrust of authority and his disdain for the bourgeois.
Modigliani's nudes, neither prostitutes nor wives, are equal partners unashamedly enjoying their sexuality and inviting a response.
That frank acknowledgement of the new freedom between the sexes, which Modigliani and the women he loved enjoyed, was what offended the respectable Parisians.
His nudes do not titillate, caught unawares.
They invite.
The rather coy nude which featured on the catalogue cover is so uncharacteristic that it was possibly suggested by Zborowski, to attract attention.
As late as 1949, when Life magazine featured Modigliani nudes in an article on the painter, they continued to offend high-minded citizens.
Many American subscribers rang to cancel their subscriptions in protest.
Soon the story of the scandalous exhibition was all over Paris and, ironically, the unlooked for publicity did make his work more saleable — although when Zborowski offered Jacques Lipchitz four nudes from the show for five hundred francs, he refused.
He had not the room, he pleaded.
‘Where will I put those four nudes with all those triangles?’
However, a trickle of collectors and speculators began to arrive at Zborowski's flat early in 1918, buying up Modigliani's oil paintings, worth millions of pounds today, for  three or four hundred francs.
Jacques Netter, a well-known collector, asked Zbo to put aside several Modiglianis for him.
Zamaron, the friendly policeman who was now promoted to Secrétaire Général of the Prefecture of Police and had bought Modigliani's early work, came to the apartment to buy.
Louis Libaude and William Kundig also purchased paintings and finally a banker named Schenemayer hurried over to see Zborowski and bought six portraits for four thousand francs without even bothering to look at them.
After the terrible disappointment of the one-man show, Modigliani was overjoyed.
‘We're saved,’ he shouted.
For the first time in all his years in Paris, his future and Jeanne's seemed assured.
Francis Carco, who was a friend who had bought Modigliani's work before the crowd, also bought Modigliani's paintings, but he was given them for what he himself described as a ridiculously cheap price.
The cost of living continued to rise in wartime.
In January 1918, which was another freezing month, gas, electricity and coal were rationed.
All food was scarce, milk, eggs and butter were in short supply and expensive.
Because of the frost vegetables too were hard to find.
Butchers closed their doors for three days in the week.
Air-raids, which the Parisians had become accustomed to, now intensified.
On 30 January 1918 the Germans sent fifty much larger bombers over the city.
They dropped ninety-three bombs and caused casualties and damage at a rate Paris had not experienced before.
By March, with the Germans driving forwards toward Paris from the north-east and renewed heavy air-raids, Parisians were spending more and more time in cellars and shelters.
But worse was to come.
On 23 March the city suffered twenty-five shattering explosions during the morning without an aircraft in sight, killing and injuring the civilian population.
The Germans, some seventy-five miles north-east of Paris, had begun to pound the capital with shells from three extra-long-range guns.
No warning, of course, had been given of the shelling from the ‘Big Berthas’ and the public feared that an advance on Paris would soon follow.
As the shells hit the city, banks and Ministries began to send their records and documents, and sometimes their personnel, out of the capital.
The British Embassy made arrangements to evacuate the British colony and by April almost half a million Parisians were travelling to safety in the south of France.
Art dealers too left the city, and as many artists as could afford the fare.
The art market, which had fluctuated greatly during the war, collapsed, with the price of the modern painters Derain, Vlaminck, Valadon completely depressed.
The sales boom that Modigliani had enjoyed at the beginning of the year faded.
Zborowski boldly decided to leave the city and take Modigliani and Jeanne with him.
Zbo had been impressed, when he convalesced in the  south in 1916, by the rich residents there and he believed, somewhat naïvely, that he would find important clients to buy his paintings.
He bought himself a smart new suit for the purpose.
On a human level he hoped that the change from the shelling and bombing in Paris would benefit Modi's health.
Another pressing reason for leaving was that Jeanne Hébuterne had just discovered that she was pregnant and she had confessed as much to her mother.
Despite her disapproval Madame Hébuterne felt that her daughter, just turned 20, could hardly fend for herself and decided to accompany her.
The ill-assorted travelling party grew and grew.
Almost certainly at Modigliani's insistence, Soutine was included.
During the war years, the Russian artist had rarely been able to sell his work and he took to following Zborowski round like a shadow, hanging about outside the Rotonde.
Zborowski had to find the money for Soutine's trip.
Then Foujita, the Japanese artist, and his beautiful domineering wife Fernande Barrey joined  the party.
Fernande openly admitted to starting life as a street-walker and Madame Hébuterne must have felt she was travelling with a menagerie.
Although Modigliani had promised openly to marry Jeanne, it was just a question of arranging the papers…
Not such an easy matter in wartime, and Modi had an abhorrence of officialdom.
Jeanne's father wanted nothing to do with the couple.
‘Amedeo, excited like a virgin by the bombardments, has gone to Cagnes near Nice over a month ago…
He took the girl with the braids and her mother,’ the writer André Delhay gossiped in a letter of 13 May 1918, adding, in the malicious tone of Montparnasse, ‘The little Thiroux is running after Scandinavians — and rich Americans — anybody famous will do’.
Although Modigliani had rejected Simone Thiroux's claim on his paternity, and her child, a boy, was born in the spring of 1917, he was happy to acknowledge that Jeanne was carrying his child.
His relations with her mother, however, were anything but happy.
Madame Hébuterne was constantly disapproving and interfering.
Zborowski had rented an apartment in the Rue Masséna, but Modigliani was restless and unsettled living in a constrained atmosphere.
After all those years in Paris he found the bright sunshine and the sparkling translucence of the air disturbed his concentration and made it difficult for him to work.
In his portraits he looked for shade, for intimate interiors.
During his long stay in the south he made only one portrait with an out-of-doors setting; the pretty shopkeeper, sitting on a chair in front of her shop, looking out with uncomprehending suspicion against a white wall.
In Nice, as in Paris, he looked to the impersonal comfort of the café and the solace of red wine for his escape.
Jeanne's mother nagged and poor Jeanne, left with her, was desperately unhappy.
Relations between Modi and Madame Hébuterne became so strained, with Jeanne refusing to give him up and Madame cursing him and his art, that after a time he moved away to stay in the Hôtel Tarelli, 5 Rue de France.
In Nice Modigliani was delighted to meet a man he had recently painted, the Russian-born Cubist painter, Leopold Sturzvage (known usually as Survage).
Anyone from Paris was reassuring, and Survage was a congenial man, who offered Modigliani one of his two rooms to work in.
He began to paint feverishly, as if he had time to make up.
In Nice he got up early and went to Survage's room and painted until midday, then took a swig of alcohol, made a face and returned to the canvas.
He was plagued in the south by the lack of models.
In Nice the people were not used to painters and felt embarrassed at the idea of posing for them.
In Paris, if he strolled into the Dôme or the Rotonde, he would find interesting types, émigrés, intellectuals, beauties or bohemians, or Zbo could hire models   for him.
He painted Jeanne many times, but was often glad to escape from the apartment and from Madame Hébuterne's endless criticism of him.
When he visited the Russian sculptor Archipenko and his wife, who were living in a villa in Nice, Modi grumbled of the women who bossed him around.
At the end of the visit Archipenko told Modigliani to help himself to the fruit and vegetables in their garden which he took back to Jeanne and her mother as a peace offering.
In the apartment, Jeanne sketched and painted whenever she had the peace.
She herself was a talented artist, but all her energies were taken up in caring for Modigliani, keeping the peace between her lover and her mother.
The few examples of her work that exist show her to have a strong sense of composition and a bold yet sensitive line.
She drew Modigliani reading by lamplight in Nice, absorbed and distinguished with an air of apartness.
Jeanne was quiet, appeared timid but had an immensely strong will.
Modigliani would never have stayed with a nonentity.
She made the choices in her life.
More than a hint that, although deeply in love, she could grow exasperated with her impossible husband appears in a poem in Modigliani's drawing of his friend Fabiano de Castro in 1918:
Un chat se gratte la tête
Comme un poète qui cherche une rime.
Ma femme pour un prêtre
Me jette une verre  a là tête.
A cat scratches his head
Like a poet seeking for a rhyme.
My wife for a priest
Throws a glass at my head.
An indication, perhaps, that Jeanne, or more particularly her mother, wanted Modigliani to marry in the Catholic Church.
The accounts of the journey to the south remain contradictory.
Some report that at the beginning of the journey south, the party stayed at the little village of Cagnes-sur-Mer close to Nice.
There Zborowski rented rooms for them all from Papa Curel, an elderly eccentric who let out rooms in his villas and ‘knew all about artists.’
The Zborowskis with Jeanne and her mother took rooms in Le Pavilion des Trois Soeurs, a villa set on a hill at the back of the village, two miles from the sea.
To prevent quarrels between Modi and Jeanne's mother, he was housed with the other artists in a villa higher up on the hill.
Angry at being separated from Jeanne, Modigliani spent much of his time drinking in a windowless little bar where local artists met, where he drank and ran up debts.
But Madame Zborowska, who seems to have spent most of her time smoothing out the quarrels between the artists, asserted that Modigliani also worked ‘passionately’.
Whether Modigliani and Jeanne lived in Nice or in nearby Cagnes-sur-Mer, or more probably both, can never be definitely proved and is of little consequence.
The accounts are third-hand, told years after the events.
Apparently the party returned to Nice because Zborowski had failed to sell enough paintings to pay the rent.
Papa Curel, who had plagued their lives by playing the trumpet at all hours in the artists' villa, retained their luggage but allowed the party to take their paintings with them.
Later when the prices soared he was said to be furious.
Before long Foujita and Fernande returned to Paris, and after August 1918, the Germans stopped shelling the city.
The people Modigliani painted usually remembered the circumstances vividly.
In July 1918 the actor Pierre Bertin, who became a member of the Comédie Française, was introduced to Modigliani one day when he was strolling along the Promenade des Anglais with Zborowski.
The painter looked handsome but shabbily dressed.
Sensing that Bertin was an art-lover, Zbo showed him some paintings and made a sale.
In conversation Bertin remarked that his young wife played the piano well and was particularly fond of Ravel.
Modigliani disliked social gatherings but was persuaded by the promise of music to visit the couple.
Jeanne came with him to accompany Bertin's sister-in-law, Germaine Meyer, who was later to marry Survage, on the violin.
Germaine Meyer was wearing a sky-blue blouse that summer afternoon and Modigliani was immediately arrested by her colouring, a blend of rose and white, and asked her eagerly if he could paint her.
To his relief she agreed, and the following day Modigliani arrived.
First he asked Germaine to play something by Ravel for him, presumably to glean an impression of her personality.
After about ten minutes he stopped her.
‘That's fine,’ he said.
‘Let's begin.’
He sketched her deftly in a few minutes.
‘Then he drew my face, my clothes and put on the colour.
The portrait was painted in a few hours without Modigliani stopping for a single minute.’
In Zborowski's apartment in Nice, Modigliani drew a second portrait of Germaine, very similar, only this time she was wearing a black dress.
A good model was a wonderful aid to him in Nice.
Germaine fell ill with influenza and the sessions had to be interrupted.
Once she was better, he insisted on starting again, explaining to the young woman that he could never resume a canvas that had been abandoned.
Like all the women he painted, Germaine remembered his attraction and details of his appearance.
‘His only shirt, blue and white check, was always spotless and though friends offered him clothes to replace his worn velvet suit he would not accept them.’
Germaine also saw him with Jeanne and her mother in the Rue de France.
She found him utterly sympathetic and charming.
‘He loved Jeanne.
She adored him,’ she explained.
The Modigliani that Germaine described was the man that so many women admired: fascinating, intelligent, with beautiful manners.
Always generous, he invited her to drink coffee in the evening and she never saw him drunk.
Germaine lived with her mother and Modigliani was courteous and considerate towards the older woman.
Sometimes he spoke to the girl lovingly of Eugenia, his mother.
To Leopold Survage he also spoke of his mother with affection and respect.
But Leopold knew the other side.
Modigliani was plagued and anxious because of the difficulty of finding models, and when one had been found he waited in a state of tension for fear of being let down.
In the evenings after the  two painters had been working, they would often stroll towards the café.
Late at night, when he had drunk quantities of red wine to relax, Modi would begin to hum and sing, badly out of tune, Italian and Hebrew melodies, obviously still hankering for his home.
He was, said Frans Hellens, a Belgian writer whose portrait Modigliani painted in Nice, a charming and a strong-minded man but ‘completely out of his element in this world’.
Modigliani's penetrating artistic judgement and his talent for graphology made him ‘a sort of magician’.
Hellens did not like the portrait painted of him but later came to recognize its prophetic qualities.
His youngest son looked exactly like the portrait.
And Hellens said he sensed a terrible mystery at the heart of the man.
As the war dragged on Modigliani's horror at the waste of life increased.
The sight of a wounded soldier left him raw and angry.
Sometimes he would throw away his francs to the soldiers and go home without a sou.
At Nice when he heard the devastating news that his Portuguese friend, the artist Amedeo de Sousa Cardoso, had died of Spanish flu he broke down and sobbed like a child.
Modigliani himself contracted the flu and his illness left him badly frightened.
For a time he gave up drinking and smoking altogether.
His dealer, Zborowski, found to his chagrin that the rich pleasure-seekers in the south of France were not in the least interested in buying modern paintings.
More often than not he came back to his apartment empty-handed and crestfallen.
The painters were envious of Zbo's life, strolling round the big hotels in style.
According to Foujita, the dealer's ‘method’ was ‘to sit reading a paper on the esplanade or to go into hotels, presumably with a rendezvous with a duke or some important person, but nothing came of all this’.
When he approached a group of well-known writers, they refused to buy even a drawing.
Others better informed bought paintings at twenty francs.
There is no doubt that Zbo played on Modigliani's illness to excite sympathy in a way which the artist did not appreciate.
He pleaded with the writers to help to save Modigliani.
They merely shrugged: ‘Hmm.
it's normal.
A painter doesn't need to live in luxury if he is poor.
Let him look after himself.’
And when Zbo explained that Modi was coughing up blood they chased him away.
Zborowski travelled along the coast trying to sell, with little success.
In Toulouse that summer one of Modigliani's nudes, prominently displayed in the window of the Choppe-Lautier Gallery, again caused a scene.
Local students were so excited that they threw stones at the painting.
The commotion caused a young couple passing by to go into the gallery to have a closer look at the paintings.
They were so impressed that they asked the owner whether he had any other works by Modigliani.
After some bartering they acquired both the nude and a splendid portrait of a  servant girl for five hundred francs.
The young couple, the Castaings, were taking refuge from the Paris bombing, staying with M. Castaing's parents.
When the paintings were delivered the older couple were almost apoplectic at the sight of them and refused even to store them in their house.
Modigliani's ‘dry’ period lasted for two or three months.
Then Modigliani's old friend, Blaise Cendrars, came to Nice to work on a film script and was shocked to see Modigliani looking so ill.
He told the story himself.
‘You must start to drink again’, he said, and invited Modigliani to his hotel room.
He put a thousand-franc note on his bedside table and told the porter to let Modigliani in whenever he wanted.
For some days the note lay untouched on the table.
Then one evening, Cendrars was delighted to find it gone.
The convivial bohemian made a round of all the bars and cafés in Nice, looking for Modigliani.
Returning late to his hotel, he noticed a man asleep in the middle of the Place Iéna: Modigliani.
After that, Cendrars swore that Modi recovered his health and resumed his Parisian habits.
In a more sober account, Cendrars’ first wife Félicie remembers seeing Modi, poor and preoccupied, escorting Jeanne, who was wearing a white shawl which served as a cloak to hide her figure, across the Avenue de la Gare.
Jeanne was expecting the baby at the end of November 1918.
Some of Modigliani's most beautiful paintings in the south of France were of children and young people.
From paintings like ‘The Peasant Boy’ in the Tate Gallery it is clear that Modigliani did not patronize or talk down to his models.
They are submissive but dignified, with that look of yearning that brings to mind Ehrenburg's comment that Modigliani saw all his subjects as lost children: his own Jeanne, Zborowski, and perhaps most of all, although he would never admit it, he himself come into that category.
One of his most affecting pictures, bordering on the sentimental, is of ‘The Little Girl in Blue’.
The blue eyes of the child look out sadly, with a hint of reproach.
She stands almost in the corner, her feet awkwardly placed, her hands clasped tightly, not folded in resignation as is usual with Modigliani paintings.
According to a popular anecdote, the little girl had been told to bring a bottle of red wine but bought lemonade instead, to Modi's fury.
On 11 November 1918 bells and cheers rang out all over France on Armistice morning, and Modigliani cannot have missed out on the celebrations.
Shortly after peace was declared, Madame Hébuterne quarrelled violently with the almost full-term Jeanne and left the lodgings to take rooms nearby.
Modigliani moved in to be with her for the last few days and at the end of November Jeanne entered the Nice Maternity Hospital.
Félicie waited with him for news of the birth, and during the anxious time Modi asked her for advice, knowing that Jeanne was too preoccupied in looking   after him and coping with her mother's often unhelpful interference to look after a new baby alone.
He confided to her his anxiety for the well-being and safety of the new baby.
The baby, a girl, was given her mother's name: Jeanne Hébuterne.
Modigliani always called her Giovanna, the Italian version.
He was excited and overjoyed and turned out to be an enthusiastic and forgetful parent.
After the baby was born, he was so elated that he did not manage to get to the Town Hall to register his daughter's existence.
Although his brother later made the excuse that it was too hot that day, late November, it seems far more likely that he simply got drunk.
To say that he did not care, however, would be a gross over-simplification.
He wrote to his mother and told his brother about the baby; he said more than once that he intended to marry Jeanne.
Eugenia responded enthusiastically to his news.
In an undated letter he wrote to thank her:
Darling Mother, A million thanks for your loving letter.
The baby is well and so am I. You have always been so much a mother that I am not surprised that you feel like a grandmother, even without ‘legal sanction’.
I'll send you a photograph.
I have changed my address again: write to me 13 Rue de France, Nice.
I kiss you warmly Dedo
Modigliani's fears for the baby were realistic.
When Félicie Cendrars saw them again Jeanne and Modi were looking for a reliable wet-nurse, since neither she nor her mother ‘could do anything with little Jeanne.
The baby was only three weeks old and Jeanne was still very tired.
A tangerine that Modigliani gave me — we were in front of a fruit-shop — and another that he gave to his wife: that is my last memory of them.’
Modigliani took great trouble to find a suitable nurse for the baby and after some time found a compatriot, a woman from Calabria.
In happy mood on 31 December, he saw the New Year in.
Presumably Jeanne stayed at home with her baby daughter.
Warmed with wine and the festive spirit he wrote to Zborowski, now back in Paris:
‘On the stroke of Midnight’
Dear Friend, I embrace you as I would like to have done on the day you left.
I am living it up with Survage at the Coq d'Or.
I have sold all my pictures.
Send  me some money soon.
Champagne flows like water.
We send you and your dear wife best wishes for the New Year.
Resurrectio Vitae.
Incipit vita nova.
Il nuovo Anno .
Modigliani
At the foot of the card Survage scrawled: ‘Happy New Year’, in Russian and underneath: ‘Long live Nice: Long live the first night of the New Year’.
Zborowski took his words literally and was alarmed that Modi had sold his paintings himself.
A few days later Modigliani set him straight:
My dear Friend, You're a fathead who doesn't understand a joke.
I haven't sold a thing.
Tomorrow or the day after I will send you the merchandise [that was the way Modi always referred to his paintings].
Now for something real and very serious which has happened to me.
My wallet with 600 francs in it has been stolen.
This seems to be a speciality of Nice.
You can imagine how annoyed I am.
Naturally I am broke, or almost.
It's idiotic of course, but since it's neither in your interest nor mine that I'm stuck like this here is what I suggest: wire me, care of Sturzvage, 500 francs…if you can.
And I'll repay you 100 francs a month; that is, for five months you can take 100 francs out of my monthly allowance.
I'll keep track of the debt in every way I can.
Apart from the money, losing all my papers is a terrible worry.
That was all I needed…just when I had found a little peace at last.
In spite of this, nothing vital is broken I hope.
Please believe in my loyalty and friendship and give my best wishes to your wife.
And a cordial greeting to you.
Modigliani
The loss was important and embarrassing to Modi and the somewhat impatient tone of his next letter to Zbo suggests that he was annoyed at having to return to the subject:
My dear Zbo, Here is the question or ‘That is the question’[written in English], see Hamlet.
That is: ‘To be or not to be’.
I am the sinner or the bloody idiot.
I recognize my fault (if there is a fault) and my debt (if there is to be a debt) but the question now is this: if I'm not completely broke, I am at least in serious trouble.
Understand.
You sent me 200 francs, 100 of which   naturally went to Survage, without whose help I would have been completely broke…but now…
If you free me I will acknowledge my debt and keep going.
If not I'll remain immobilized at my place, tied hand and foot…and in whose interest would that be?
There are actually four canvases.
I have seen Guillaume.
I hope that he will be able to help me with my papers.
He gave me some good news.
Everything would be going well except for that damn business [of the lost wallet].
Why can't you put it right immediately so as not to stop something that is going well?
I've said enough about it.
Now, do what you will or can, only it's urgent.
Time presses.
Say hello to Madame Zborowska, Affectionately, Modigliani
A street photographer snapped Paul Guillaume and Modigliani walking along the Promenade des Anglais, Guillaume looking natty and brisk, with knife-edge creases in his trousers, Modigliani in shabby, baggy clothes, shoes unpolished, very much the poor relation.
Without his mask, the brave public face he put on to hide his sickness and anxiety, Modigliani looks ill and depressed.
Guillaume was interested in him again as his work was beginning to command higher prices.
The dealer had recently exhibited some of his paintings in a mixed show with Picasso, Matisse and Derain.
Modi asked Guillaume, as a Frenchman, to make a recommendation to the authorities for replacement of his papers.
Guillaume, it appears, did not exert himself to keep the promise and Modigliani repeatedly asked Zbo about them.
Although no saint, Zborowski was genuine in his interest in Modigliani as an extraordinary, if exasperating, human being.
Modigliani was pleased when Zbo responded quickly to his pleas for money and told his dealer he was going back to work: ‘I must explain — though real explanations are impossible in letters — that there has been a ‘vacuum’.
I had a charming letter from your wife.
I don't want you to wipe out any of my debts — on the contrary.
Set up, or let us both set up, a credit for me.’
A generous gesture always provoked a generous response in Modigliani, it was a point of honour.
To find the right models was proving so difficult that Survage suggested that he should paint landscapes.
In his twelve years in Paris Modigliani had painted portraits almost exclusively and had lost the ‘habit of contemplating landscape’ that had fired him as a boy.
‘I need a human figure in front of me to paint’, he told Survage.
‘In landscape there is nothing to express.’
And he warned Zborowski not to expect too much: ‘I am trying to do some  landscapes’, he wrote.
‘The first canvases might possibly look like a beginner's’.
The four surviving landscapes Modigliani painted are dry, limpid scenes with an air of desolation; trees dominate, cypress trees or leafless trees, standing like sentinels in front of the houses and buildings, as if waiting for the people to emerge.
Modigliani disliked writing letters, but during the winter of 1919 he wrote several times to Zborowski in Paris on practical matters, asking urgently for money and canvases, thanking Zbo for sending money and, rather touchingly, explaining his progress or the lack of it to his dealer.
Most of his correspondence was written in cafés, with a glass of wine at his elbow, using the establishment's writing-paper.
From the Café de Paris in Nice he wrote again:
Dear Zbo, Thank you for the money.
I am waiting until a head of my wife is dry before sending you — with the ones you know about — four canvases.
I am like the Negro, I just go on.
I don't think that I can send you more than four or five canvases at a time because of the cold.
My daughter is wonderfully healthy.
Write if all this is not too much trouble.
My best wishes to Madame Zborowska and warm greetings to you.
Modigliani Please send the canvases as soon as possible .
Don't forget the Place Ravignan business and write to me.
In 1914, Paul Guillaume had found Modigliani a studio in the Rue Ravignan.
Possibly there were some canvases left there.
If Zbo did rescue some of the earlier work, that may explain some of the muddle about the authenticated chronology of Modigliani's work.
Zbo would probably have dated them 1919, when Modigliani's prices were beginning to rise.
All this is speculation.
By now Modigliani put an enormous physical effort into his painting: ‘His shoulders heaved.
He panted.
He made grimaces and cried out.
You couldn't come near him.’
Yet his work appeared effortless and flowing.
He had adopted what he called the ‘grand style’, an aura of peace and elegance surrounds his subjects, painted in fastidious and arresting harmonies of colour.
Again and again he painted Jeanne in what one writer described as a series of ‘love letters’.
In some of the later portraits her body is thickened by pregnancy, her face saddened by experience.
In April 1919, just turned 21 she was pregnant again.
Spring comes early to the Riviera and it made Modigliani, always sensitive to change, more restless than ever.
He was on the move again, whether he   had annoyed the proprietor at his cheap hotel by his late night rowdiness, or quarrelled with one of the pimps because the girls staying there posed for him free or simply grown tired of the place, is not clear.
But it was a new start.
In a letter to Zborowski dated 27 February, he told his dealer that he was going to work at No. 13 Rue de France.
‘All these changes, changes of circumstances and the change of the season, make me fear a change of rhythm and atmosphere.
I've been loafing a bit for the last few days.
Fertile idleness is the only real work’.
Apparently he had quarrelled with Survage too, although he does not explain why.
‘Are you coming in April?’ he asks his dealer.
The question of his papers, thanks to his brother Emanuele, was almost arranged, he explained.
Before he knew whether he could obtain replacement identity documents, Modigliani had been haunted by the fear that he would be trapped in the south.
Typically, now that he could leave when he pleased, he was tempted to remain longer and return to Paris in July.
After almost three years of backing Modigliani's work, Zborowski scented the first whiff of success in the spring of 1919.
Sacheverell Sitwell, a young aesthete from England, had crossed the Channel to look at the new painting in post-war Paris with a view to putting on a comprehensive exhibition in London.
After making the rounds of the galleries and dealers, Sitwell had concluded that Picasso and Modigliani were the most exciting modern painters.
Young Sitwell visited Zborowski in his apartment and suggested that Zbo should help to choose and supervise the shipping of all the canvases and then travel to London to help in the hanging and selling of the pictures.
Sitwell had wanted to buy a Modigliani painting to take back with him to show to his brother Osbert, who was to sponsor the Exhibition jointly with him.
But his funds only ran to buying a Modigliani drawing.
Still an ‘amateur’ working from his apartment, Zborowski contacted other dealers about the proposed exhibition and wrote enthusiastically to Modigliani.
This was the opening Zborowski had worked for, a chance for Modigliani's work to be appreciated by a wider public outside France.
In his letter he asked Modi for his name, date, and place of birth for the catalogue and for press publicity.
Grateful and overjoyed Modi replied:
My dear friend, I was sincerely moved by your letter.
I am the one who must thank you.
So far as publicity is concerned, I naturally leave it up to you if it is indispensable…
Your affairs are ours, and if I don't believe in it on principle, or because I am not mature enough for publication, neither do I despise ‘vile money’.
But since we are in agreement, let's go on to other things.
Here is my date and place of birth: Amedeo Modigliani, born on 12 
July 1884, at Livorno.
I wrote to my brother two or three days ago and am awaiting an answer.
Also my ‘real’ identity card (I only had the receipt for it) is in the Commissioner's office on the Rue Camp Premier.
It shouldn't be too difficult to arrange this matter.
Another thing: You speak of coming here towards the end of April.
I think I can easily wait for you here until that time.
In the meantime you should look into the possibility of settling in Paris as there is a great ‘hic’.
[Perhaps Zborowski had considered opening a gallery in the south.]
(Are you ever going to look into the Montmartre business?)
My daughter is growing marvellously.
I find great comfort in her and an enthusiasm that can only increase in the future.
[The baby was not yet six months old.]
Thanks for the toys.
It's a little too soon for them perhaps…
The only thing I can do now is to let out a great shout with you, ‘Ça ira’ for men and for people, believing that man is a world worth many times the world and that the most ardent ambitions are those which have the pride of Anonymity.
Non omnibus sed mihi et tibi …
Modigliani
The idealism of Modigliani's youth re-emerges in this letter which reveals him as modest, humane and a proud father.
His delight and sense of wonder at the growth of his baby were erratic as other interests pressed, but real enough.
During 1919 he painted a mother and child which took him more than forty sittings, perhaps because the subject was of such personal interest.
Modigliani left Nice for nearby Cagnes in the first half of April.
On the 13th of that month he sent his mother one of his cryptic postcards: ‘I am here near Nice very happy.
As soon as I am settled I shall send you my permanent address’.
It was probably at that time that Zborowski took Modigliani to visit Anders Osterlind, a Swedish painter whom Modi had met in Paris years earlier when they visited the Cézanne retrospective together and almost cried with excitement.
Worried by Modigliani's condition, Zborowski brought him, ill and coughing, to the quiet of Osterlind's house, into a garden of olive and orange trees.
Modigliani…had the beautiful features of an Italian prince but he was tired and dirty…as if from having unloaded in the port of Genoa.
With him was his shadow, the poetic Zborowski, who, in brotherly friendship, wanted to protect him from the dangerous life of Nice.
Osterlind and his wife Rachel did their best to make Modigliani comfortable.
A dark-haired, gentle beauty, Rachel Osterlind was fatally ill with intestinal tuberculosis, as a result of Spanish influenza.
The couple, with their daughter of 9 or 10, lived quietly, drank only tea.
Modigliani was given the best room, all white and clean, ‘where he never did sleep very much’.
Sometimes he worked in his room and painted a haunting portrait of Rachel Osterlind, her cheek resting gently on her hand, as a thank-you to his hosts.
During his stay Modigliani strolled in the garden and often trudged up a winding road, overlooking the sea and shaded by palms and eucalyptus trees, to the village café bar for a drink.
There he drank absinthe on a rustic table, like a table by
Cézanne, Modigliani said.
The advertisement for Pernod on the wall, of a bottle and two glasses painted on a black background, struck him forcibly.
Poster art, he assured Osterlind, was the art of the future.
At the same time, he realized how much poster artists had derived from the ‘fine’ artists of the past.
During those peaceful weeks Modigliani would occasionally break out from his comfortable existence, as if afraid that he might become sucked into bourgeois life.
One evening Anders Osterlind was astonished to find Modi in the nude, spitting on the white walls of his room.
‘It's too nice in here,’ he complained.
Sometimes Soutine, who was living in the village, came over to enjoy a good chicken dinner, and after eating their fill the two artists reproached their host for living in such luxury.
‘Everything dances round me like a landscape by Soutine,’ Modigliani said when he was in his cups.
At that time Soutine was painting turbulent and violent landscapes and the two were said to have shared a studio at Cagnes-sur-Mer owned by a M. Nicolai, the proprietor of the general store.
When they left, owing money for rent, alcohol and meals, the studio was filthy, with broken dishes and a disgusting mess everywhere.
The owner kept the canvases they had left behind and used them to cover his chicken coops and rabbit hutches.
A few years later he discovered, to his fury, that the painters' prices had soared and the paintings that he despised would have been immensely valuable.
There is much legend attached to Modigliani's life in the little village of Cagnes-sur-Mer.
The visit to Osterlind's neighbour Renoir is another story told with many variations.
Osterlind himself told it this way.
As a close friend and neighbour of the elderly painter, Osterlind used to visit Renoir every day.
He lived two hundred metres higher up than Osterlind in a rambling house overlooking the sea, Les Collettes.
The building intrigued Modigliani, and he asked Osterlind to take him up to see Renoir.
Osterlind extracted a promise from Modi that he would stay sober.
Crippled with arthritis and wheelchair-bound, at 77 Renoir detested meeting strangers but he had heard about  Modigliani from Osterlind and, almost certainly, from Zborowski and agreed to the visit.
Modigliani arrived quite sober for the occasion but when the two painters came to discuss their work the conversation became dangerously frigid.
Renoir had some of his canvases taken down from the wall so that Modigliani could look at them more closely.
Modi scanned them carefully, his face grim.
‘So you paint, young man?’
Renoir remarked mildly.
Modi nodded.
‘You must paint with joy, the joy with which you make love to a woman.
Before I paint, I caress the buttocks for hours…
’‘I don't like buttocks,’ Modigliani ground out and left, slamming the door.
From the styles of the two painters their difference is apparent.
Renoir, with his earthy delight in flesh, offended the fastidious Modigliani whose nudes, for all their frankness, are stylized and elegant.
Obviously Modigliani also found the old man's lasciviousness offensive.
Despite the legend, he was extraordinarily discreet and reserved about his relations with women.
With Osterlind he discussed art and philosophy but not his personal life.
The Swedish painter was surprised to learn later that Modigliani had a wife and child.
Modi's reserve might have sprung from a desire to shield Jeanne from gossip, and perhaps a feeling of shame in front of a married man, at his own role in the affair.
Apparently the elderly Renoir bore Modigliani no malice.
Zborowski had been trying to find a way of flattering the old man ever since the party arrived in Nice.
Shortly afterwards, Renoir even sold two canvases to Zborowski in order to help Modigliani.
For Jeanne the time in the south had been desperately unhappy, with the endless rows between Modigliani and her mother.
Although he referred to her in letters to Zbo as ‘his wife’ and was concerned and excited about the baby, Modi was very much the Italian husband, leaving his woman alone while he visited the cafés, living inside of himself for much of the time, coming home drunk and moving restlessly from place to place.
She was deeply in love with him.
That he loved ‘his charming companion’ cannot be in doubt, but for him work always took precedence.
Just turned 21, Jeanne had sacrificed any hope of fulfilling herself as an artist to Modigliani.
On 27 May the Cagnes police issued Modigliani a safe conduct c/o Osterlind and he travelled by train to Paris on the last day of the month.
Jeanne and the baby were to follow as soon as a wet-nurse could be found near the capital.
Jeanne, c.1918
Modi at a café with Adolphe Basler, c.1918.
The cover of the Catalogue of Modigliani's one–man exhibition at Galerie B. Weill, 1917.
Madame Dorival.
Leopold Survage, 1918.
Man with pipe, 1918–19.
The little peasant.
Paul Dermée, 1918.
Portrait of a Young Woman, 1918.