

I. The Bounds Of Authority
3 The Justification of Authority
This chapter develops and defends the conception of the nature of practical authority outlined in the previous chapter, i.e. authority as involving essentially THE power to require action.
The explanation proceeds through normative theses of three kinds.
One concerns the type of argument required to justify a claim that a certain authority is legitimate.
The second states the general character of the considerations which should guide the actions of authorities.
The last concerns the way the existence of a binding authoritative directive affects the reasoning of the subjects of the authority.
The explanation and defence of the three theses is preceded by an introductory section defending the general approach to the analysis of authority adopted here, and introducing some of the themes which are explored in greater detail later in the essay.
1.
‘Surrendering One's Judgement’
How is authority to be related to the nebulous notion of a valid requirement for the obedience of one's subjects?
As Richard Flathman disapprovingly remarked, ‘There has been a remarkable coalescence of opinion around the proposition that authority and authority relations involve some species of ‘surrender of judgment’ on the part of those who accept submit or subscribe to the authority of persons or a set of rules and offices.
From anarchist opponents of authority such as William Godwin and Robert Paul Wolff through moderate supporters such as John Rawls and Joseph Raz and on to enthusiasts such as Hobbes, Hannah Arendt and Michael Oakeshott, a considerable chorus of students have echoed the refrain that the directives…of authority are to be obeyed by B irrespective of B's judgments of their merits’.
But what is ‘a surrender of judgment’?
H. L. A. Hart, who has recently added his voice in support of this kind of analysis, provides the following explanation: ‘The commander characteristically intends his hearer to take the commander's will instead of his own as a guide to action and so to take it in place of any deliberation or reasoning of his own: the expression of the commander's will…is intended to preclude or cut off any independent deliberation by the hearer of the merits pro and con of doing the act.’
Understood literally, this explanation is, however, implausible.
Surely what counts, from the point of view of the person in authority, is not what the subject thinks but how he acts.
I do all that the law requires of me if my actions comply with it.
There is nothing wrong with my considering the merits of the law or of action in accord with it.
Reflection on the merits of actions required by authority is not automatically prohibited by any authoritative directive, though possibly it could be prohibited by a special directive to that effect.
Richard Friedman offers an explanation aimed at the same target which avoids this objection:
The idea being conveyed by such notions as the surrender of private judgment…is that in obeying, say, a command simply because it comes from someone accorded the right to rule, the subject does not make his obedience conditional on his own personal examination and evaluation of the thing he is being asked to do.
Rather, he accepts as a sufficient reason for following a prescription the fact that it is prescribed by someone acknowledged by him as entitled to rule.
The man who accepts authority is thus said to surrender his private or individual judgment because he does not insist that reasons be given that he can grasp and that satisfy him, as a condition of his obedience.
Is this conception of authority correct?
One point to remember (it is consistent with Friedman's account) is that a person may have limited authority (e.g., in matters concerning football only, or in military affairs but not in the conduct of the economy).
It should be noted that Friedman's explanation shows how misleading the metaphor of ‘surrendering one's judgment’ can be.
Unlike Hart's, Friedman's explanation shifts the emphasis from the subjects' deliberations to their action.
The subjects accept that someone has authority over them only if their willingness to do his bidding is not conditional on their agreement on the merits of performing the actions required by the authority.
This condition is open to two interpretations.
The minimalist interpretation maintains that they are willing to obey if they have no judgment of their own on the merits of performing the required action.
They will not then defer decision until they form their own judgment.
The maximalist interpretation claims that the subjects accept that they should obey even if their personal belief is that the balance of reasons on the merits is against performing the required act.
The minimalist interpretation is too weak since it assumes that people are never bound by authority regarding issues on which they have firm views.
The maximalist interpretation is more promising, and the views to be argued for in the rest of this essay explore and develop it.
Either way no surrender of judgment in the sense of refraining from forming a judgment is involved.
For there is no objection to people forming their own judgment on any issue they like.
Nor does one surrender one's judgment if that means acting against one's judgment.
For an authority is legitimate only if there are sufficient reasons to accept it, i.e. sufficient reasons to follow its directives regardless of the balance of reasons on the merits of such action.
There are more ways than one in which a metaphor can mislead.
It can sometimes mislead people who perceive clearly the fallacies the metaphor invites and therefore reject it altogether, turning a blind eye to the true insight it encapsulates.
This has happened to the many theorists who thought they had a simple explanation for the confusion of thought which led to the surrender of judgment metaphor.
According to them, to accept the legitimacy of an authority is simply to accept that whatever other reasons there may be for a certain action, its being required by the authority is an additional reason for its performance.
Inasmuch as that additional reason may tip the balance one can perhaps over-dramatize the situation by saying that an authoritative requirement is a reason to act against the balance of reasons on the merits of the case.
This means no more than that the authoritative requirement is an additional factor.
Much the same can be said of any reason for action.
The fact that it will rain tomorrow, for example, may mean that I should not go to London, even though the balance of reasons on the merits of my going (i.e. all the reasons pro and con but the rain) suggest that I should go.
This description of the relevance of authority to practical reasoning is profoundly misguided.
It is wrong not in what it says but in what it leaves out and implicitly denies.
To be sure, if a person accepts the legitimacy of an authority then its instructions are accepted by him as reasons for conforming action.
But until we understand how and why they are such reasons and how they differ from ordinary reasons we will not begin to understand the nature of authority.
Perhaps the point can be best brought out by considering first authority as it functions in one, not untypical, context.
Consider the case of two people who refer a dispute to an arbitrator.
He has authority to settle the dispute, for they agreed to abide by his decision.
Two features stand out.
First, the arbitrator's decision is for the disputants a reason for action.
They ought to do as he says because he says so.
But this reason is related to the other reasons which apply to the case.
It is not (like the rain in the example of my going to London) just another reason to be added to the others, a reason to stand alongside the others when one reckons which way is better supported by reason.
The arbitrator's decision is meant to be based on the other reasons, to sum them up and to reflect their outcome.
For ease of reference I shall call both reasons of this character and the reasons they are meant to reflect dependent reasons.
The context will prevent this ambiguity from leading to confusion.
Notice that a dependent reason is not one which does in fact reflect the balance of reasons on which it depends: it is one which is meant to do so.
This leads directly to the second distinguishing feature of the example.
The arbitrator's decision is also meant to replace the reasons on which it depends.
In agreeing to obey his decision they agreed to follow his judgment of the balance of reasons rather than their own.
Henceforth, his decision will settle for them what to do.
Lawyers say that the original reasons merge into the decision of the arbitrator or the judgment of a court, which, if binding, becomes res judicata .
This means that the original cause of action can no longer be relied upon for any purpose.
I shall call a reason which displaces others a pre-emptive reason.
It is not that the arbitrator's word is an absolute reason which has to be obeyed come what may.
It can be challenged and justifiably refused in certain circumstances.
If, for example, the arbitrator was bribed, or was drunk while considering the case, or if new evidence of great importance unexpectedly turns up, each party may ignore the decision.
The point is that reasons that could have been relied upon to justify action before his decision cannot be relied upon once the decision is given.
Note that there is no reason for anyone to restrain their thoughts or their reflections on the reasons which apply to the case, nor are they necessarily debarred from criticising the arbitrator for having ignored certain reasons or for having been mistaken about their significance.
It is merely action for some of these reasons which is excluded.
The two features, dependence and pre-emptiveness, are intimately connected.
Because the arbitrator is meant to decide on the basis of certain reasons, the disputants are excluded from later relying on them.
They handed over to him the task of evaluating those reasons.
If they do not then deny them as possible bases for their own action they defeat the very point and purpose of the arbitration.
The only proper way to acknowledge the arbitrator's authority is to take it to be a reason for action which replaces the reasons on the basis of which he was meant to decide.
2.
The Dependence Thesis
The crucial question is whether the arbitrator's is a typical authority, or whether the two features picked out above are peculiar to it and perhaps a few others, but are not characteristic of authorities in general.
It might be thought, for example, that the arbitrator is typical of adjudicative authorities, and that what might be called legislative authorities differ from them in precisely these respects.
Adjudicative authorities, one might say, are precisely those in which the role of the authority is to judge what are the reasons which apply to its subjects and decide accordingly, i.e. their decisions are merely meant to declare what ought to be done in any case.
A legislative authority on the other hand is one whose job is to create new reasons for its subjects, i.e. reasons which are new not merely in the sense of replacing other reasons on which they depend, but in not purporting to replace any reasons at all.
If we understand ‘legislative’ and ‘adjudicative’broadly, so the objection continues, all practical authorities belong to at least one of these kinds.
It will be conceded of course that legislative authorities act for reasons.
But theirs are reasons which apply to them and which do not depend on, i.e. are not meant to reflect, reasons which apply to their subjects.
A military commander should order his troops in the way best calculated to achieve victory at a minimal cost.
If he wisely orders his men to occupy a certain hill it does not follow that they had reason to occupy that hill even before they were ordered to do so.
Parliament is to distribute the burden of taxation in an equitable way, but it does not follow that the citizens had any reason to pay tax before the passing of the (just) tax law.
These are telling points.
But the argument is by no means over.
First, even if not all legislative authorities share the characteristics of dependence and pre-emptiveness we found in the arbitrator's case, it is plain that some do.
Consider, for example, an Act of Parliament imposing on parents a duty to maintain their young children.
Parents have such a duty independently of this Act, and only because they have it is the Act justified.
Parliament, of course, is not limited to the enactment of laws where there is a prior obligation on the subjects to behave in the required way.
But there can be, and perhaps there are, authorities which are so limited.
Note that the decrees of such a body will be binding even if they in fact err as to what people's obligations are.
The arbitrator's decision is binding even if mistaken and so are the decrees of our imagined legislator.
Both are meant to decide on the basis of dependent reasons and their decisions are therefore pre-emptive.
The example shows that the objector's neat distinction between adjudicative and legislative authorities is mistaken.
The mark of the adjudicator is simply that he is called upon to decide what parties in dispute should have done or should do in the circumstances of a particular case.
Nevertheless, the objector may well remain convinced that many legislative authorities are not meant to act on dependent reasons and that their directives are not pre-emptive.
So let us consider his examples with some care.
One simplifying assumption has to be explained before we proceed.
We have been concerned with the authoritative imposition of duties.
But authorities, even practical authorities, do much else besides.
They can declare that a certain day shall be a national holiday, that a certain organization shall have legal personality, that a person shall be granted citizenship or shall be divorced or excommunicated, that certain land shall be dedicated to the public, or that some people shall have certain rights, and much else.
Concentration on the imposition of duties does not, however, distort our understanding of authority since all the other functions authorities may have are ultimately explained by reference to the imposition of duties.
The possession of citizenship, for example, is important because it confers rights (such as the right to vote in general elections) and duties (such as the duty of loyalty).
Rights themselves are grounds for holding others to be duty bound to protect or promote certain interests of the right-holder.
Legal personality is the capacity to have rights and duties.
In every case the explanation of the normative effect of the exercise of authority leads back, sometimes through very circuitous routes, to the imposition of duties either by the authority itself or by some other persons.
Therefore, while it is impossible to ‘reduce’ rights, status, etc., to duties, it is possible to explain ‘authority’by explaining the sense in which authorities can impose duties.
One difficulty is that prising apart the imposition of duties from other effects of the exercise of authority is far from straightforward.
Consider a tax law again.
It not only imposes a duty to pay, but also sets up (not necessarily in the same statute) the machinery for collecting and distributing the money.
When the imagined objector said that there was no reason to pay the money now due as tax before the tax law was passed he was of course right.
But is this because there was then no machinery for collecting and distributing the money or because there was no authority-imposed duty to pay it?
For the first two years of the First World War there was no conscription in Britain, but there was machinery to recruit volunteers.
So this may be the sort of case we are looking for, a case in which the effect of the duty can be separated from the effect of other aspects of authoritative action.
In this case at any rate the conclusion is clear.
By and large, those who approved of conscription when it came did so because they believed that it was everyone's duty to serve in the armed forces in any case.
They would have denied that the conscription law imposed a completely new duty.
It merely declared what people ought to have done.
Because the doubters were bound, by the fact that they were subject to the authority of Parliament, to follow Parliament's judgment as to what their duties were, its Act is not merely dependent on those duties but also pre-empts them.
We are to imagine a situation in which the State provides all the services it currently provides, let us say roads and a sewerage system, free education and a free health service, social security and unemployment benefits and the like.
They are provided by raising money from the public for a state-run charity, contributions to which are voluntary but which publishes guidelines for self-assessment for those who wish to use them.
I hope it will be agreed that those who think that the tax law is justified do so partly because they believe that there is in the circumstances imagined a reason voluntarily to contribute a sum which is equivalent to a just tax.
Let us take stock of the argument so far.
One thesis I am arguing for claims that authoritative reasons are pre-emptive:the fact that an authority requires performance of an action is a reason for its performance which is not to be added to all other relevant reasons when assessing what to do, but should exclude and take the place of some of them.
It will be remembered that the thesis is only about legitimate authority.
It is relevant for the explanation of the character of de facto authorities because every de facto authority either claims or is acknowledged by others to be a legitimate authority.
But since not every authority is legitimate not every authoritative directive is a reason for action.
Furthermore, authoritative directives are not beyond challenge.
First, they may be designed not finally to determine what is to be done in certain circumstances but merely to determine what ought to be done on the basis of certain considerations.
For example, a directive may determine that from the economic point of view a certain action is required.
It will then replace economic considerations but no others.
Or the authority may direct that the final decision must be based on economic considerations only, thus replacing all but the economic factors.
Even where an authoritative decision is meant finally to settle what is to be done it may be open to challenge on certain grounds, e.g. if an emergency occurs, or if the directive violates fundamental human rights, or if the authority acted arbitrarily.
The non-excluded reasons and the grounds for challenging an authority's directives vary from case to case.
They determine the conditions of legitimacy of the authority and the limits of its rightful power.
This point is worth emphasizing not only because of its importance in the developing argument to follow, but also because it marks the way in which my use of ‘the limit of an authority's rightful power’ differs from some common uses (though it conforms with others, including the legal usage).
Sometimes authorities are understood to be limited by the kinds of acts which they can or cannot regulate (given some restrictive ways of classifying acts).
In this book authorities are said to be limited also by the kinds of reasons on which they may or may not rely in making decisions and issuing directives, and by the kind of reasons their decisions can pre-empt.
The argument for the pre-emption thesis proceeds from another, which I shall call the dependence thesis.
It says:all authoritative directives should be based on reasons which already independently apply to the subjects of the directives and are relevant to their action in the  circumstances  covered by the directive.
Such reasons I dubbed above ‘dependent reasons’.
The examples of conscription and taxation were intended to give the dependence thesis some plausibility, and in particular to disprove the suggestion that dependence is the mark of adjudication.
But doubts are bound to linger and further clarifications are required to dispel them.
A few preliminary points.
The dependence thesis does not claim that authorities always act for dependent reasons, but merely that they should do so.
Ours is an attempt to explain the notion of legitimate authority through describing what one might call an ideal exercise of authority.
Reality has a way of falling short of the ideal.
We saw this regarding de facto authorities which are not legitimate.
But naturally not even legitimate authorities always succeed, nor do they always try to live up to the ideal.
It is nevertheless through their ideal functioning that they must be understood.
For that is how they are supposed to function, that is how they publicly claim that they attempt to function, and, as we shall see below, that is the normal way to justify their authority (i.e. not by assuming that they always succeed in acting in the ideal way, but on the ground that they do so often enough to justify their power), and naturally authorities are judged and their performance evaluated by comparing them to the ideal.
Remember also that the thesis is not that authoritative determinations are binding only if they correctly reflect the reasons on which they depend.
On the contrary, there is no point in having authorities unless their determinations are binding even if mistaken (though some mistakes may disqualify them).
The whole point and purpose of authorities, I shall argue below, is to pre-empt individual judgment on the merits of a case, and this will not be achieved if, in order to establish whether the authoritative determination is binding, individuals have to rely on their own judgment of the merits.
Nor does the thesis claim that authorities should always act in the interests of their subjects.
Its claim is that their actions should reflect reasons which apply also to their subjects, but these need not be reasons advancing their interests.
A military commander, for example, should put the defence of his country above the interests of his soldiers.
He may therefore order them to act against their own interests.
But then soldiers are supposed to put their country above their personal interests and but for this they would not have to obey their commander.
Much of the resistance to the dependence thesis comes from confusing it with a claim about what authorities do in fact, or with the view that requires authorities to act only in the interests of their subjects.
But the most common confusion is between the dependence thesis and the no difference thesis, which was briefly discussed in the last chapter.
The no difference thesis asserts that the exercise of authority should make no difference to what its subjects ought to do , for it ought to direct them to do what they ought to do in any event.
It may appear that the dependence thesis entails the no difference thesis, but this is not the case.
There are at least three ways (others will be discussed in the next chapter) in which an authority acting correctly may make a difference to what its subjects ought to do, which are all consistent with the dependence thesis.
First, many aspects of every action we perform for a reason are not uniquely determined by reasons.
I have a reason to buy a loaf of bread, but, let us assume, no reason to prefer a sliced loaf to an unsliced one or vice versa.
Since I have a reason to buy a loaf of bread I have a reason to buy a sliced loaf, as well as a reason to buy an unsliced one.
But I have no reason to get one rather than the other.
Since there is no other kind of bread, inevitably if I do as I have reason to and buy a loaf I will buy one or the other.
That is, in acting on the best reasons I will also inevitably transcend reason and take a deliberate decision (e.g. to buy a sliced loaf) concerning some aspects of which reason is undetermined.
The same general considerations apply to directives issued by authorities.
The legislator, for example, has reason to impose a certain tax.
There are reasons showing that it is better to require that the tax due shall be paid either in quarterly or in monthly payments.
These intervals are superior to all others.
But while some reasons favour monthly payments and others favour quarterly ones, neither is sufficient to establish the superiority of doing it one way rather than the other.
In this situation the authority may leave the choice to individuals.
But sometimes there are decisive reasons against doing so.
Then the authority has to decide for one of the two or more acceptable options.
When this happens the authoritative directive does make a difference.
Without it individuals would have had a choice as to which of the acceptable solutions to adopt.
The authority quite properly denies them the choice, and exercises it itself.
Second, as was mentioned in the last chapter, one important function of authoritative directives is to establish and help sustain conventions.
Conventions are here understood in a narrow sense in which they are solutions to co-ordination problems, i.e. to situations in which the vast majority have sufficient reason to prefer to take that action which is (likely to be) taken by the vast majority.
Where there is a co-ordination problem the issuing of an authoritative directive can supply the missing link in the argument.
It makes it likely that a convention will be established to follow the authoritatively designated act.
It is often the proper job of authorities to issue directives for this purpose.
Such authoritative directives provide the subjects with reasons which they did not have before.
They therefore make a difference to their practical deliberations, and serve to refute the no difference thesis.
It is true that once a useful co-ordinating convention is established every person has reason to adhere to it, a reason which is independent of the existence of the authority, a reason deriving entirely from the existence of the useful convention.
The same is true where there is a good prospect that such a convention will emerge.
The point of my argument is that sometimes authoritative intervention creates that prospect, and that it creates it because of its authoritativeness.
Similarly, the existence of an authoritative directive may prevent or delay processes which, but for it, would have undermined the convention.
These cases are not only common, though hardly ever in the much over-simplified form we have considered, but also of some theoretical interest.
Once the directive is issued, individuals have reasons to take the action it requires which they did not have before, because now there is ground to expect that a convention will be formed.
But while this shows that the directive made a difference, it does not refute the dependence thesis.
The authority took the action in order to help generate a convention.
In so acting it acted for a dependent reason, for the assumption is that individuals have reason to wish for a convention and hence reason to take action to help form one.
Every person in the group concerned has, before the directive is issued, a reason both to form a convention and to follow it once formed.
This is the reason for which the legislation is adopted and it is, for the legislator, a dependent reason.
Third, Prisoner's Dilemma type situations are another class of cases where authorities make a difference while conforming with the dependence thesis.
In these cases while people have reason to act in a certain way, given the situation they are in, they also have reason to change the situation, though they are unable to do so by themselves.
It is this feature, shared by cases where there are co-ordination problems, which enables authorities to make a difference while acting on dependent reasons.
It should be remembered that many moral theories may land their adherents in Prisoner's Dilemma type situations.
The problem does not arise merely through lack of moral fibre.
Another source of doubt about the validity of the dependence thesis can be removed by eliminating an ambiguity in its formulation.
It speaks of authoritative directives being based on or reflecting reasons which apply to their subjects in any case.
This can be taken to mean that the one proper way for an authority to decide its actions is to ask itself what are the reasons which apply to its subjects and attempt to follow them.
This is indeed a way of trying to meet the requirement of the dependence thesis.
But it is not the only one, nor is it always the best.
The dependence thesis does not exclude the authority from acting for other reasons which apply to it alone, and not to its subjects.
All it requires is that its instructions will reflect the reasons which apply to its subjects, i.e. that they should require action which is justifiable by the reasons which apply to the subjects.
Sometimes the best way to reach decisions which reflect the reasons which apply to the subjects is to adopt an indirect strategy and follow rules and considerations which do not themselves apply to the authority's subjects.
Sometimes, in other words, one has to act for non-dependent reasons in order to maximize conformity to dependent reasons.
The clearest example of considerations which affect authoritative decisions but which do not apply to individuals acting on their own are considerations arising out of the needs and limitations of bureaucracies.
Bureaucratic factors have to be considered alongside substantive considerations which do apply to the individual subjects of the law or any other authority.
Bureaucracies, for example, are almost invariably forced to embrace a de minimis rule in order to be able to achieve their tasks where it really matters.
The intrusion of the bureaucratic considerations is likely to lead to solutions which differ in many cases from those an individual should have adopted if left to himself.
Reliance on such considerations is justified if and to the extent that they enable authorities to reach decisions which, when taken as a whole, better reflect the reasons which apply to the subjects.
That is, an authority may rely on considerations which do not apply to its subjects when doing so reliably leads to decisions which approximate better than any which would have been reached by any other procedure, to those decisions best supported by reasons which apply to the subjects.
These considerations point to another way in which the no difference thesis distorts.
Even while authoritative actions reflect the subjects' reasons, indeed in order that they should do so, they may well lead to different outcomes on particular occasions, and that without being in any way wrong or mistaken on those occasions.
I will return briefly to these considerations in the next chapter, where their importance in pointing to the source of doctrines of the authority of the State will appear.
For the time being let me conclude by admitting that the considerations adumbrated in this section do not prove the dependence thesis.
They adduce support for it mainly by removing misunderstandings and a few possible objections.
Implicitly the argument appeals to our common understanding of the way authority should be exercised.
The argument gains much strength by considering the case of theoretical authority, i.e. authority for believing in certain propositions.
Nowadays it is not the fashion to talk of authorities in this context.
Instead we have experts.
But the notions are very similar, at least in all that matters to our concerns.
There is likely to be ready agreement that experts of all varieties are to give advice based on the very same reasons which should sway ordinary people who wish to form their minds independently.
The expert's advantage is in his easy access to the evidence and in his better ability to grasp its significance.
But the evidence on which he should base his advice to me is the same evidence on which it would have been appropriate for me to form my own judgment.
It is possible that practical and theoretical authorities have little in common.
But it is more likely that, while they provide reasons for different things, they share the same basic structure.
If so, the fact that a dependence thesis is true of theoretical authorities is strong evidence to suppose that it holds for practical authorities as well.
3.
The Justification of Authority
The dependence thesis, it will be remembered, is a moral thesis about the way authorities should use their powers.
It is closely connected with a second moral thesis about the type of argument which could be used to establish the legitimacy of an authority.
I shall call it the normal justification thesis .
It claims that the normal way to establish that a person has authority over another person involves showing that the alleged subject is likely better to comply with reasons which apply to him (other than the alleged authoritative directives) if he accepts the directives of the alleged authority as authoritatively binding and tries to follow them, rather than by trying to follow the reasons which apply to him directly.
This way of justifying a claim that someone has legitimate authority, i.e. that those subject to his authority should acknowledge the authoritative force of his directives, is not the only one.
It is, however, the normal one.
Consider the case of a person whose reason for accepting his friend's advice is that the friend will be hurt if he does not.
This may well be a perfectly good reason for accepting advice.
But it is not the normal reason.
It is regrettable that the friend will be hurt if his advice is not followed after it was given due consideration, or at least it is regrettable that he will be hurt to a degree which justifies this reaction.
The friend himself does not intend his advice to be accepted for that reason, and is likely to be doubly hurt if he finds out that his advice was judged mistaken on its merits but was followed in order not to hurt him.
The reason is that even when this is a good reason to accept advice it is not a reason to accept it as a piece of advice.
It is a reason to accept it as a way of being kind to a friend.
The normal reason for accepting a piece of advice is that it is likely to be sound advice.
The normal reason to offer advice is the very same.
It will be clear that these judgments of normality are normative.
But the very nature of advice can only be understood if we understand in what spirit it is meant to be offered and for what reasons it is meant to be taken.
The explanation must leave room for deviant cases, for their existence is undeniable.
But it must also draw the distinction between the deviant and the normal, for otherwise the very reason why the ‘institution’ exists and why deviant cases take the special form they do remains inexplicable.
The example of advice is close to the case of authority.
Indeed some, though not all, advice is authoritative advice.
It is, for example, sometimes justifiable to accept someone's authority in order not to hurt his feelings.
Many grown-up people feel obliged by such considerations to continue to acknowledge the authority of their parents over them.
But just as in the case of advice, and for the very same reasons, such grounds for recognizing the authority of another, even though sometimes good, are always deviant grounds.
Slightly different considerations show that some reasons for recognizing the authority of another are secondary.
To call them secondary means that they are valid reasons only if they accompany other, primary, reasons which also conform to the normal justification thesis (whereas deviant reasons may validly replace the normal reasons).
Accepting the authority or leadership of a person or an institution is, for example, a way of defining one's own identity as a member of a nation or some other group, though needless to say it is unlikely to be the only way any person will express his identification with such a group.
Such a reason can be a perfectly valid reason, but only if there are other reasons which, in accord with the normal justification thesis, support the authority of that person.
The secondary reasons help to meet the burden of proof required to establish a complete justification, i.e. they may suffice in conjunction with the primary reasons in circumstances in which the primary reasons alone will not be enough to establish the legitimacy of an authority.
But reasons of identification and self-definition cannot by themselves establish the legitimacy of an authority.
Identification is a common and often proper ground for accepting authority.
It is therefore important to establish the reasons why it is no more than a secondary justification dependent on the availability, at least to a certain degree, of another justification.
Acceptance of an authority can be an act of identification with a group because it can be naturally regarded as expressing trust in the person or institution in authority and a willingness to share the fortunes of the group which are to a large extent determined by the authority.
But trust in the authority is trust that the authority is likely to discharge its duties properly.
It therefore presupposes a principle which should govern its activities.
Accepting the authority as a way of identifying with a group will be justified only if the trust is not altogether misplaced.
Otherwise the odd situation may result that a person will quite properly express his identification with a group by supporting an institution which grossly betrays its duties to the group.
For the same reasons one cannot properly express one's willingness to share the fortunes of a group by submitting to an authority which grossly betrays the trust it owes to the group.
Identification with the group in such circumstances calls for the rejection of that authority.
The dependence and the normal justification theses are mutually reinforcing.
If the normal and primary way of justifying the legitimacy of an authority is that it is more likely to act successfully on the reasons which apply to its subjects then it is hard to resist the dependence thesis.
It merely claims that authorities should do that which they were appointed to do.
Conversely, if the dependence thesis is accepted then the case for the normal justification thesis becomes very strong.
It merely states that the normal and primary justification of any authority has to establish that it is qualified to follow with some degree of success the principles which should govern the decisions of all authorities.
Together the two theses present a comprehensive view of the nature and role of legitimate authority.
They articulate the service conception of the function of authorities, that is, the view that their role and primary normal function is to serve the governed.
This, to repeat a point made earlier, does not mean that their sole role must be to further the interest of each or of all their subjects.
It is to help them act on reasons which bind them.
It will be noticed that the normal justification thesis identifies the case that must normally be established to show that a person has authority.
It is not a matter of showing that he is entitled to have authority, but that he has it, that he is in authority, with all the consequences which follow from this fact.
The main objection to this point revolves round the feeling that a person can have authority, or be in authority only if his authority is recognized by some people, whose identity varies with the nature of his authority.
The difficulty in assessing this point is that in most cases the normal justification cannot be established unless the putative authority enjoys some measure of recognition, and exercises power over its subjects.
There is a strong case for holding that no political authority can be legitimate unless it is also a de facto authority.
For the case for having any political authority rests to a large extent on its ability to solve co-ordination problems and extricate the population from Prisoner's Dilemma type situations.
These considerations explain why to say of someone that he is entitled to have authority means that he should be in a position of real power and then he will have legitimate authority.
They may be sufficient to account for the feeling that as a matter of meaning, recognition is a condition of possession of legitimate authority.
If I am right then this is not a matter of meaning, but of normative justification.
The normal justification thesis allows for deviant reasons.
Apart from these it is meant to account for all the reasons there can be for accepting authorities.
But a complete justification of authority has to do more than to provide valid reasons for its acceptance.
It has also to establish that there are no reasons against its acceptance which defeat the reasons for the authority.
Because the reasons against the acceptance of authority vary it is not possible to discover in advance how strong the reasons for acceptance of the authority need be to be sufficient.
Some reasons against the acceptance of authority pertain, with varying force, to many situations.
One recurring kind of reason against accepting the authority of one person or institution is that there is another person or institution with a better claim to be recognized as an authority.
The claim of the second is a reason against accepting the claim of the first only when the two authorities are incompatible, as are the claims of two governments to be legitimate governments of one country.
Sometimes there are two compatible authorities whose powers overlap, as is the case with the authority of both parents over their children.
Another cluster of recurring considerations concerns the intrinsic desirability of people conducting their own life by their own lights.
This obviously applies to some areas of life more than to others, to choice of friends more than to the choice of legal argument in a court case.
The case for the validity of a claim to authority must include justificatory considerations sufficient to outweigh such counter-reasons.
That is one reason why the case is hard to make.
But if anarchists are right to think that it can never be made, this is for contingent reasons and not because of any inconsistency in the notion of a rational justification for authority, nor in the notion of authority over moral agents.
4.
The Pre-emptive Thesis
From the dependence and normal justification theses it is but a short step to the pre-emption thesis.
It turns on the general relation between the justification for a binding directive and its status as a reason for action, and more generally on the relation between rules as reasons for action and their justification.
Consider the rule that, when being with one person and meeting another, one should introduce them to each other.
The fact that this rule is a sound, valid or sensible rule is a reason for anyone to act in accordance with it.
It is a sound rule because it facilitates social contact.
But the fact that introducing people to each other in those circumstances facilitates social contacts is itself a reason for doing so.
Do we then have two independent reasons for introducing people?
Clearly not.
When considering the weight or strength of the reasons for an action, the reasons for the rule cannot be added to the rule itself as additional reasons.
We must count one or the other but not both.
Authoritative directives are often rules, and even when they are not, because they lack the required generality, the same reasoning applies to them.
Either the directive or the reasons for holding it to be binding should be counted but not both.
To do otherwise is to be guilty of double counting.
This fact is a reflection of the role of rules in practical reasoning.
They mediate between deeper-level considerations and concrete decisions.
They provide an intermediate level of reasons to which one appeals in normal cases where a need for a decision arises.
Reasons of that level can themselves be justified by reference to the deeper concerns on which they are based.
The advantage of normally proceeding through the mediation of rules is enormous.
It enables a person to consider and form an opinion on the general aspects of recurrent situations in advance of their  occurrence .
It enables a person to achieve results which can be achieved only through an advance commitment to a whole series of actions, rather than by case to case examination.
More importantly, the practice allows the creation of a pluralistic culture.
For it enables people to unite in support of some ‘low or medium level’ generalizations despite profound disagreements concerning their ultimate foundations, which some seek in religion, others in Marxism or in Liberalism, etc.
I am not suggesting that the differences in the foundations do not lead to differences in practice.
The point is that an orderly community can exist only if it shares many practices, and that in all modern pluralistic societies a great measure of toleration of vastly differing outlooks is made possible by the fact that many of them enable the vast majority of the population to accept common standards of conduct.
More directly relevant to our case is the fact that, through the acceptance of rules setting up authorities, people can entrust judgment as to what is to be done to another person or institution which will then be bound, in accordance with the dependence thesis, to exercise its best judgment primarily on the basis of the dependent reasons appropriate to the case.
Thus the mediation of authorities may, where justified, improve people's compliance with practical and moral principles.
This often enables them better to achieve the benefits that rules may bring as explained above, and other benefits besides.
These reflections on the mediating role of authoritative directives and of rules generally explain why they are reasons for actions.
Ultimately, however, directives and rules derive their force from the considerations which justify them.
That is, they do not add further weight to their justifying considerations.
In any case in which one penetrates beyond the directives or the rules to their underlying justifications one has to discount the independent weight of the rule or the directive as a reason for action.
Whatever force they have is completely exhausted by those underlying considerations.
Contrariwise, whenever one takes a rule or a directive as a reason one cannot add to it as additional independent factors the reasons which justify it.
Hence the pre-emption thesis.
Since the justification of the binding force of authoritative directives rests on dependent reasons, the reasons on which they depend are (to the extent that the directives are regarded simply as authoritative) replaced rather than added to by those directives.
The service conception leads to the pre-emption thesis.
Because authorities do not have the right to impose completely independent duties on people, because their directives should reflect dependent reasons which are binding on those people in any case, they have the right to replace people's own judgment on the merits of the case.
Their directives pre-empt the force of at least some of the reasons which otherwise should have guided the actions of those people.
The pre-emption thesis helps explain one additional respect in which the no difference thesis is wrong.
The three respects surveyed in Section Two above depended on the difference that the existence of a legitimate authority makes to what one ought to do.
The pre-emption thesis shows how its existence makes a difference to the reasons why one ought to do what one ought to do.
In a sense this point is a trivially obvious one.
If one ought to act because of an authoritative directive one's reasons are different than if one ought to perform the same act for other reasons.
The non-trivial point I am making is that the difference is not in the presence of an additional reason for action, but in the existence of a pre-emptive reason.
That is why what is validly required by a legitimate authority is one's duty, even where previously it was merely something one had sufficient reason to do.
Authoritative directives make a difference in their ability to turn ‘oughts’ into duties.
The pre-emption thesis will be readily accepted inasmuch as it concerns successful authoritative directives, i.e. those which correctly reflect the balance of reasons on which they depend.
But, a common objection goes, the thesis cannot justify pre-empting reasons which the authority was meant to reflect correctly and failed to reflect.
Successfully reflected reasons are those which show that the directive is valid.
They are the justification for its binding force.
Therefore, either they or the directive should be relied upon, but not both, that is not if relying on both means adding the weight of the directive to the force of the reasons justifying it when assessing the weight of the case for the directed action.
Reasons that should have determined the authority's directive but failed to do so cannot be thought to belong to the justification of the directive.
On the contrary they tell against it.
They are reasons for holding that it is not binding.
The pre-emption thesis is wrong in claiming that they too are pre-empted.
So much for the objection.
It fails because its premiss is false.
Reasons which authoritative directives should, but fail to, reflect are none the less among the reasons which justify holding the directives binding.
An authority is justified, according to the normal justification thesis, if it is more likely than its subjects to act correctly for the right reasons.
That is how the subjects' reasons figure in the justification, both when they are correctly reflected in a particular directive and when they are not.
If every time a directive is mistaken, i.e. every time it fails to reflect reason correctly, it were open to challenge as mistaken, the advantage gained by accepting the authority as a more reliable and successful guide to right reason would disappear.
In trying to establish whether or not the directive correctly reflects right reason the subjects will be relying on their own judgments rather than on that of the authority, which, we are assuming, is more reliable.
These reflections suggest another objection to the pre-emption thesis.
It says that in every case authoritative directives can be overridden or disregarded if they deviate much from the reasons which they are meant to reflect.
It would not do, the objection continues, to say that the legitimate power of every authority is limited, and that one of the limitations is that it may not err much.
For such a limitation defeats the pre-emption thesis since it requires every person in every case to consider the merits of the case before he can decide to accept an authoritative instruction.
The objection does not formally challenge the pre-emption thesis.
It does not claim that the reasons which are supposed to be displaced by authoritative instructions are not replaced by them but should count as additional independent reasons alongside the instructions.
Its effect is to deny that authoritative instructions can serve the mediating role assigned them above.
That role is to enable people to act on non-ultimate reasons.
It is to save them the need to refer to the very foundations of morality and practical reasoning generally in every case.
But as the directives are binding only if they do not deviate much from right reason and as we should act on them only if they are binding, we always have to go back to fundamentals.
We have to examine the reasons for and against the directive and judge whether it is justified in order to decide whether its mistake, if it is not justified, is large or small.
The mediating role is unobtainable.
The failure of this objection stems from its confusion of a great mistake with a clear one.
Consider a long addition of, say, some thirty numbers.
One can make a very small mistake which is a very clear one, as when the sum is an integer whereas one and only one of the added numbers is a decimal fraction.
On the other hand, the sum may be out by several thousands without the mistake being detectable except by laboriously going over the addition step by step.
Even if legitimate authority is limited by the condition that its directives are not binding if clearly wrong, and I wish to express no opinion on whether it is so limited, it can play its mediating role.
Establishing that something is clearly wrong does not require going through the underlying reasoning.
It is not the case that the legitimate power of authorities is generally limited by the condition that it is defeated by significant mistakes which are not clear.
The pre-emption thesis depends on a distinction between jurisdictional and other mistakes.
Most, if not all, authorities have limited powers.
Mistakes which they make about factors which determine the limits of their jurisdiction render their decisions void.
They are not binding as authoritative directives, though the circumstances of the case may require giving them some weight if, for example, others innocently have relied on them.
Other mistakes do not affect the binding force of the directives.
The pre-emption thesis claims that the factors about which the authority was wrong, and which are not jurisdictional factors, are pre-empted by the directive.
The thesis would be pointless if most mistakes are jurisdictional or if in most cases it was particularly controversial and difficult to establish which are and which are not.
But if this were so then most other accounts of authority would come to grief.
5.
Objections
I will conclude this chapter by considering a few objections to the account of authority suggested above which challenge its general orientation.
I shall start with a misunderstanding which the method of explanation adopted here is likely to give rise to among readers used to philosophical explanations of concepts such as authority being presented as accounts of the meanings of words.
Three theses were presented as part of an explanation of the concept of authority.
They are supposed to advance our understanding of the concept by showing how authoritative action plays a special role in people's practical reasoning.
But the theses are also normative ones.
They instruct people how to take binding directives, and when to acknowledge that they are binding.
The service conception is a normative doctrine about the conditions under which authority is legitimate and the manner in which authorities should conduct themselves.
Is not that a confusion of conceptual analysis and normative argument?
The answer is that there is an interdependence between conceptual and normative argument.
The philosophical explanation of authority is not an attempt to state the meaning of a word.
It is a discussion of a concept which is deeply embedded in the philosophical and political traditions of our culture.
The concept serves as an integral part of a whole mesh of ideas and beliefs, leading from one part of the net to another.
There is not, nor has there ever been, complete agreement on all aspects of the concept's place and connections with other concepts.
But there is, as part of our common culture, a good measure of agreement between any two people on many, though frequently not the same, points.
Accounts of ‘authority’ attempt a double task.
They are part of an attempt to make explicit elements of our common traditions: a highly prized activity in a culture which values self-awareness.
At the same time such accounts take a position in the traditional debate about the precise connections between that and other concepts.
They are partisan accounts furthering the cause of certain strands in the common tradition, by developing and producing new or newly recast arguments in their favour.
The very activity is also an expression of faith in the tradition, of a willingness to understand oneself and the world in its terms and to carry on the argument, which in the area with which we are concerned is inescapably a normative argument, within the general framework defining the tradition.
Faithfulness to the shape of common concepts is itself an act of normative significance.
Since this chapter is meant as a normative-explanatory account of the core notion of authority, it can be extended to explain reference to authority in various specific contexts.
But such extensions are neither mechanical nor automatic.
For example, the three theses apply in the most straightforward way to discourse of people being in authority or having authority over others.
It is an account of authority relations between a legitimate authority and those subject to it.
How does it help to understand discourse of someone being an authority?
It is false that only a person in authority is an authority.
There are various contexts in which we speak of a person or institution being an authority.
Consider as an example cases where a person (but only exceptionally an institution) is said to be an authority on a certain matter, as in ‘John is an authority on Chinese cooking’ or ‘Ruth is an authority on the stock exchange’.
Neither John nor Ruth have authority over me, even though my Chinese cooking and my financial affairs will prosper if I follow their advice rather than trust my own judgment.
One may say that to be an authority on a certain matter is to be an authority about what to believe rather than about what to do.
While generally true this does not solve the difficulty in the case of John and Ruth since each of them may claim to be both a theoretical and a practical authority.
They do not have authority over me because the right way to treat their advice depends on my goals.
If I want nothing but to prepare the best Chinese meal I can manage then I should just follow John's instructions.
If I want to maximize my savings I should follow Ruth's advice.
But if I wish to enjoy myself dabbling in cooking or in playing the stock exchange then I should try and form my own judgment.
I should not yield to theirs unless I see its point and come to agree with them.
Here the normal justification thesis establishes the credentials of John and Ruth as authorities in their fields.
But whether or not there is a complete justification for me to regard their advice or instructions as guides to my conduct in the way I regard a binding authoritative directive depends on my other goals.
In such cases while talking of a person as being an authority one refrains from talking of him as in authority over oneself, and avoids regarding his advice or instructions as binding, even when, given one's goals, one ought to treat it in exactly the same way as one treats a binding authoritative directive.
My proposed account of authority is not even an account of the meaning of the phrase ‘X has authority over Y’.
It is an account of legitimate authority, whereas the phrase is often used to refer to de facto authorities.
There is no purely linguistic way of generally marking the intended use.
As indicated above, the notion of a de facto authority depends on that of a legitimate authority since it implies not only actual power over people but, in the normal case, both that the person  exercising that power claims to have legitimate authority and that he is acknowledged to have it by some people.
In some unusual cases one is willing to apply the term when only one of these conditions obtains.
What is it to claim authority or to accept that someone has authority over one?
It means to believe that one has legitimate authority, or that that person has authority over one.
Here we encounter one of the main differences between normative-explanatory accounts such as the ones offered here of authority or the later account (in Chapter 7) of rights, and the purely linguistic explanations often advocated by analytic philosophers.
A purely linguistic account of authority claims to yield a simple explanation of what people believe who believe that someone has legitimate authority.
Had the above account been a linguistic account, an explanation of the meaning of ‘legitimate authority’, it would have followed that anyone who believes of a person that he has legitimate authority believes that that person satisfies the condition set by the justification thesis.
This implication does not hold for a normative-explanatory account.
In being normative it avows that it does not necessarily conform to everyone's notion of authority in all detail.
It does claim to be an explanatory account in singling out important features of people's conception of authority.
It helps explain what they believe in when they believe that a person has authority.
But some people's beliefs may not conform to the account here given in all respects.
This is a key to the difference between linguistic and explanatory-normative accounts.
The latter, while providing a crucial guide for the understanding of the way terms are used in different contexts, does not allow for a simple explanation based on substitutivity.
This might have been a drawback of such accounts but for the fact that linguistic accounts understood in accord with the current consensus among analytic philosophers either are not possible or lack any philosophical interest.
But that is a matter for an extensive argument which will have to wait another occasion.
How can the account of authority here offered be thought to represent important strands in Western thought?
If there is a common theme to liberal political theorizing on authority, it is that the legitimacy of authority rests on the duty to support and uphold just institutions, as, following Rawls, the duty is now usually called.
But that duty is of course dependent on a prior understanding of which institutions are just.
The account here offered is meant as a beginning of an answer to that question.
Or rather it contributes by setting the question in a certain way.
One has a duty to uphold and support authorities if they meet the conditions of the service conception as explained above.
Furthermore, the duty to uphold and support just institutions is, in some respects, wider than the duty which devolves on one as a result of the fact that someone has legitimate authority over one, in three different ways.
First, there are just institutions which neither possess, nor claim to possess, any authority.
Think of the British Council, or the BBC, for example.
One owes them the duty to uphold and support them.
But this has nothing to do with any issue concerning authority.
Second, the duty involves more than a duty of obedience.
One may be obligated to help fight opponents of the institution or help overcome obstacles to its successful operation in ways which one is not required by its laws to do.
Third, the duty is owed to institutions which may have authority but only towards other people.
For example, one may owe the duty to the just government of foreign countries.
We must conclude, therefore, that the duty to support just institutions, where it has to do with just authorities, is parasitical on the normal justification thesis, and not an alternative to it.
In other ways the duty to uphold and support just institutions is narrower than the duty corresponding to the right of a legitimate authority.
One has a duty to obey those in authority over one even in circumstances in which disobedience does not imperil their existence or functioning.
To the extent that legitimate authorities have power over us, the pre-emption thesis governs our right attitude to them.
The duty to uphold and support just institutions does not come into play.
It is primarily an other-regarding duty.
I have a duty to support just governments in foreign countries, even though they have no legitimate power over me.
I have reason to support the authority of my neighbours over their children, etc.
In other words, the duty to uphold and support just institutions comes into play when the conditions of legitimacy implied by the service conception of authority are satisfied.
It then supplements the pre-emption thesis by showing that we should be concerned not merely to have the proper attitude to those in authority over us, but also to those in authority over others.
Finally, let us return to our starting point.
What is wrong with regarding an authoritative directive as one additional prima facie reason for the action it directs, which supplements, rather than supplants, the other reasons for and against that action?
The service conception establishes that the point of having authorities is that they are better at complying with the dependent reasons.
Take a simplified situation.
I regularly confront a decision, for example, whether or not to sell certain shares, in varying circumstances.
Suppose that it is known that a financial expert reaches the ‘right’ decision (whatever that may be) in 20% more cases than I do when I do not rely on his advice.
Should I not, when confronting such decisions, carry on as before but take his advice as a factor counting in favour of the decision he recommends?
Perhaps I should always take the case for his solution as being 20% stronger than it would otherwise appear to me to be.
Perhaps some other, more complicated formula should be worked out.
In any case would not the right course require me to give his advice prima facie rather than pre-emptive force?
The answer is that it would not.
In cases about which I know only that his performance is better than mine, letting his advice tilt the balance in favour of his solution will sometimes, depending on my rate of mistakes and the formula used, improve my performance.
But I will continue to do less well than he does unless I let his judgement pre-empt mine.
Consider the case in a general way.
Suppose I can identify a range of cases in which I am wrong more than the putative authority.
Suppose I decide because of this to tilt the balance in all those cases in favour of its solution.
That is, in every case I will first make up my own mind independently of the ‘authority's’ verdict, and then, in those cases in which my judgment differs from its, I will add a certain weight to the solution favoured by it, on the ground that it, the authority, knows better than I. This procedure will reverse my independent judgment in a certain proportion of the cases.
Sometimes even after giving the argument favoured by the authority an extra weight it will not win.
On other occasions the additional weight will make all the difference.
How will I fare under this procedure?
If, as we are assuming, there is no other relevant information available then we can expect that in the cases in which I endorse the authority's judgment my rate of mistakes declines and equals that of the authority.
In the cases in which even now I contradict the authority's judgment the rate of my mistakes remains unchanged, i.e. greater than that of the authority.
This shows that only by allowing the authority's judgment to pre-empt mine altogether will I succeed in improving my performance and bringing it to the level of the authority.
Of course sometimes I do have additional information showing that the authority is better than me in some areas and not in others.
This may be sufficient to show that it lacks authority over me in those other areas.
The argument about the pre-emptiveness of authoritative decrees does not apply to such cases.
This way of reasoning is unrealistically simple even in the relatively straightforward circumstances of simple stock selling decisions.
But it helps to illustrate the general lesson.
If another's reasoning is usually better than mine, then comparing on each occasion our two sets of arguments may help me detect my mistake and mend my reasoning.
It may help me more indirectly by alerting me to the fact that I may be wrong, and forcing me to reason again to double check my conclusion.
But if neither is sufficient to bring my performance up to the level of the other person then my optimific course is to give his decision pre-emptive force.
So long as this is done where improving the outcome is more important than deciding for oneself this acceptance of authority, far from being either irrational or an abdication of moral responsibility, is in fact the most rational course and the right way to discharge one's responsibilities.
Richard E. Flathman,The Practice of Political Authority , Chicago 1980, p. 90.
H. L. A. Hart,Essays on Bentham , p. 253.
I used to hold a similar view.
See my ‘Reasons, Requirements, and Practical Conflicts’, in S. Korner (ed.),
Practical Reasoning , Oxford 1
R. B. Friedman, ‘On the Concept of Authority in Political Philosophy’, R. E. Flathman (ed.),
Concepts in Social and Political Philosophy , Macmillan, NY, 1973, p. 129.
In ch. 1 of The Authority of Law I explained some of the formal features of pre-emptive reasons.
My analysis has been criticised by Flathman in The Practice of Political Authority , among others.
It is not possible to reply to the criticism here.
This would be a very wide interpretation indeed.
It would, for example, count my instruction to my son to be back by midnight as legislative, and the policeman's order to move on when a driver stops in a prohibited zone as adjudicative.
But this liberality does not affect the argument.
The no difference thesis is about what happens if authorities reach the right decision.
Since their directives are binding even when mistaken, they do then make a difference.
It would be a mistake to think of them as exactly tied options.
All that is here assumed is that reasons are insufficient to establish the superiority of one option over the others.
The importance of authorities for the generation and maintenance of conventions has led on occasion to ill-conceived attempts to explain the nature of authority exclusively by reference to conventions.
Such accounts fail, as L. Green has shown in his ‘The Authority of the State’, a D.Phil. thesis approved by the University of Oxford 1984, to account for the pre-emptive force of authoritative directives.
My account is consistent with Green's arguments on this point.
The nature of authority is explained by the combination of the three theses we are discussing.
Conventions are relevant only as one illustration of the non-equivalence of the dependence and the no difference theses.
Conventions can arise in other ways and authorities can do other things.
But one way of generating or protecting and stabilizing conventions is by authoritative intervention.
Sometimes it is the best, or even the only feasible way.
Even when it is not it is often a good way of generating conventions.
For the relevance of Prisoner's Dilemmas to the study of authority see E. Ullman-Margalit,The Emergence of Norms , Oxford, 1980.
For an analysis of the way Prisoner's Dilemmas arise within the bounds of various moral theories see D. Parfit,Reasons and Persons , Oxford, 1984.
O. M. Honoré pointed out that even if an (informal) arbitration  concluded in my favour, if I later become convinced that my original claim was mistaken I should acknowledge the claim of the other litigant rather than rely on the arbitrator's decision.
Here it seems as if , contrary to the pre-emption thesis, the original reasons are not pre-empted by the arbitrator's decision.
Nevertheless one's duty undergoes a complete change in such circumstances.
I may rely on the arbitrator.
I may say that we both agreed that our relations will be governed by his decision, that I would have gone along with it had he made a mistake which harmed me.
I would be rather ungenerous and unfriendly but nevertheless formally correct.
The situation is the same as in cases of agreement.
I buy a chest from you and a price is agreed.
It then transpires that the chest is a valuable antique and the price I paid is ludicrously low.
If I ought to pay a fair price for what I buy then I ought to come back and add to the agreed price.
On the pre-emptive character of duties see my ‘Promises and Obligations’,Law, Morality and Society , ed. by P. M. S. Hacker and J. Raz, Oxford, 1977.
For an incisive critique of much of the current consensus regarding language among analytic philosophers see G. Baker and P. M. S. Hacker,Language, Sense and Nonsense , Oxford, 1984.
4 The Authority of States
So far, even though we have kept an eye on the question of political authority, the discussion has been concerned with the wider notion of authority in general.
In this chapter, while occasionally branching out to consider wider issues, the implications of the foregoing for the authority of states will be examined.
The first section shows that the authority which states and governments claim cannot be based on the main argument for the justification of authority, i.e. that described by the normal justification thesis.
Even reasonably just states claim more extensive authority than they are entitled to by that criterion.
Sections 2 to 4 proceed to examine whether these limits of political authority can be extended by consent or in other ways.
The final section of the chapter draws the emerging picture of the moral relations between the conscientious citizen and his state, assuming it to be reasonably just.
It denies the existence of a general obligation to obey the law even in a reasonably just society, though it is argued that just governments may exist, and that in certain circumstances their existence is preferable to any alternative method of social organization.
Throughout the discussion I refer interchangeably to the state, which is the political organization of a society, its government, the agent through which it acts, and the law, the vehicle through which much of its power is exercised.
It is useful to avail ourselves of the general habit of personifying the law and talking of what it requires, permits, claims, authorizes, etc.
The law requires, permits and claims what the organs of government, acting lawfully, and in particular the courts, say that it does.
1.
The Normal Justification of Political Authority
The justification of authority, concluded the previous chapter, depends on one main argument, which may be extended and supported by a variety of secondary arguments.
The main argument for the legitimacy of any authority is that in subjecting himself to it a person is more likely to act successfully for the reasons which apply to him than if he does not subject himself to its authority.
For several reasons the normal justification thesis may seem to overlook some of the essential facts of political power.
It therefore may be felt that the thesis cannot serve for the analysis of political authority.
Before we proceed any further such doubts have to be dispelled.
The analysis of authority has concentrated exclusively on a one-to-one relation between an authority and a single person subject to it.
Does not the fact that political authorities govern groups of people transform the picture?
Does it not add to the reasons for which they have to act, and to the considerations which may justify their authority?
It is an advantage of the analysis offered in the last chapter that it is capable of accounting for authority over a group on the basis of authority relations between individuals.
Suppose, for example, that what is commonly known as the general, or the community's, interest would be served by a certain public scheme such as compulsory education in mixed ability schools whose students are drawn from mixed social backgrounds.
That may mean no more than that such a scheme may do more good than harm and that it would do more good than the obvious alternatives.
This is not enough to show that anyone can have authority to introduce or enforce such a scheme.
To have that authority over members of the community one has to show, among other conditions imposed by the normal justification thesis, at the very least that members of the community on whom the scheme will impose some burdens have reason to contribute their share to the maintenance of the scheme.
Some of them will benefit by it.
What of those who would not?
The government has authority over them only if they have reason to contribute to a scheme which benefits others.
Suppose that they do.
It is possible that they have a reason to do a little to promote such a scheme, whereas the government requires them to make much larger sacrifices.
If so the requirement may be unjustified and the government may have no authority to impose it (see the next paragraph for the difference between these possibilities).
One has, however, to be cautious here.
It may be the case that such schemes cannot operate unless some people make a substantial sacrifice for them.
If one had reason to contribute only a little to the scheme this might show that the scheme is unjustifiable since it requires greater sacrifice than can be justified.
But sometimes when we say that every person is only required to sacrifice a little we mean that the antecedently expected sacrifice is small, i.e. that the odds that he will have to sacrifice a lot are small.
But since the scheme is a good one, and since it is only viable if some people sacrifice a lot, it is a justified scheme, even though one may be called upon, according to fair procedures, to contribute much more than the antecedently expected sacrifice.
Reasoning along such lines is necessary to bridge the gap between the public and the private aspect of authority.
It is not good enough to say that an authoritative measure is justified because it serves the public interest.
If it is binding on individuals it has to be justified by considerations which bind them.
Public authority is ultimately based on the moral duty which individuals owe their fellow humans.
Do these comments entail a total rejection of any doctrine of raison d'état , of the view that governments sometimes may, indeed should, act for reasons which are out of bounds to individuals?
Not quite.
It entails the subordination of political reasons to ordinary individual morality.
If there are special political reasons then their use is justified to the extent that it enables individuals better to act for the ordinary reasons which apply to them.
This may sometimes be the case.
Sometimes, as was remarked above, by relying on indirect strategic reasons one may achieve greater conformity with the underlying basic reasons than is possible through a direct attempt to pursue them.
To the extent that this is so, there is room for a doctrine of reasons of state in political action.
The discussion of the previous paragraphs is, however, misleading in one respect.
It concentrates on an individual measure.
Usually arguments for authority are general.
They apply to the justification of the use of public power over a range of issues, for an extended period of time.
But how general is political authority?
What is the question to be asked when one wishes to determine the scope of the authority of law?
Should it be, ‘Has it authority in all matters?’, or should one ask a separate question regarding its authority in matters of taxation, or perhaps one should inquire separately concerning its authority in matters of corporate taxation and personal taxation?
How does our proposed account of authority deal with the generalized power of authority?
It combines two features.
On the one hand generality is built into the account: the normal justification of authority is that following it will enable its subjects better to conform with reason.
One cannot establish that this is the case in one case without establishing that it is the case in all like cases.
Authority is based on reason and reasons are general, therefore authority is essentially general.
On the other hand the thesis allows maximum flexibility in determining the scope of authority.
It all depends on the person over whom authority is supposed to be exercised: his knowledge, strength of will, his reliability in various aspects of life, and on the government in question.
These factors are relevant at two levels.
First they determine whether an individual is better likely to conform to reason by following an authority or by following his own judgment independently of any authority.
Second they determine under what circumstances he is likely to answer the first question correctly.
Some people in some circumstances are more likely correctly to assess the argument for authority if put at one level of generality than at another.
One has to assess that factor, and the importance of avoiding mistakes in such matters.
One also has to take notice of the disadvantages to one's life of too obsessive a preoccupation with questions of the precise limits of authority.
The importance of these considerations again will vary from person to person, and from one society to another.
Finally, to the extent that political authority is justified by its ability to co-ordinate the activities of large populations, the vindication of its claim to authority over any one individual may depend on its having legitimate authority over the population at large.
Most common discussions of political authority presuppose existing political institutions and ask under what conditions do institutions of that kind have legitimate authority.
This begs many questions, and precludes many possibilities.
It presupposes that either this government has all the authority it claims over its population or it has none.
Here again we notice one of the special features of the account of the previous chapter.
It allows for a very discriminating approach to the question.
The government may have only some of the of the authority it claims, it may have more authority over one person than over another.
The test is as explained before: does following the authority's instructions improve conformity with reason?
For every person the question has to be asked afresh, and for every one it has to be asked in a manner which admits of various qualifications.
An expert pharmacologist may not be subject to the authority of the government in matters of the safety of drugs, an inhabitant of a little village by a river may not be subject to its authority in matters of navigation and conservation of the river by the banks of which he has spent all his life.
These conclusions appear paradoxical.
Ought not the pharmacologist or the villager to obey the law, given that it is a good law issued by a just government?
I will postpone consideration of the obligation to obey the law until the last section of this chapter.
For the time being let us remove two other misunderstandings which make the above conclusion appear paradoxical.
First, it may appear as if the legitimacy of an authority rests on its greater expertise.
Are political authorities to be equated with big Daddy who knows best?
Second, again the suspicion must creep back that the exclusive concentration on the individual blinds one to the real business of government, which is to co-ordinate and control large populations.
These doubts stem from a failure to appreciate the many ways in which the communal character of political authorities affects their claim to legitimacy vis-a-vis each individual.
Let us examine some of these points in brief.
The fact that political authorities rule over whole communities itself dictates some of the ways in which the question of the justification of such authorities should be formulated.
Of the five most common reasons capable of establishing the legitimacy of an authority some are more appropriate to the political context than others.
The five are:
1.
The authority is wiser and therefore better able to establish how the individual should act.
2.
It has a steadier will less likely to be tainted by bias, weakness or impetuosity, less likely to be diverted from right reason by temptations or pressures.
3.
Direct individual action in an attempt to follow right reason is likely to be self-defeating.
Individuals should follow an indirect strategy, guiding their action by one standard in order better to conform to another.
And the best indirect strategy is to be guided by authority.
4.
Deciding for oneself what to do causes anxiety, exhaustion, or involves costs in time or resources the avoidance of which by following authority does not have significant drawbacks, and is therefore justified.
(This is a borderline case between normal and deviant justification, or rather it points to one of the many ambiguities in my formulation of the normal justification thesis.)
5.
The authority is in a better position to achieve (if its legitimacy is acknowledged) what the individual has reason to but is in no position to achieve.
Though some of these reasons are currently out of fashion in discussions of political authority I believe they all have their role to play, though some are more important in some societies than in others.
The last has for a long time been the argument most favoured by political theorists.
It is easy to see why so many people, from Hobbes onwards, have regarded the possession of de facto power, of actual effective power over the behaviour of people, as crucial to the possession of legitimate authority.
If there is any range of activities in which those who possess great power clearly can do better than most people it is in co-ordinating the activities of many people.
It seems plausible to suppose that unless a person enjoys or is soon likely to acquire effective power in a society he does not possess legitimate political authority over that society.
He may deserve to have such authority.
It may be better if he acquires it.
He may even have a right to have it.
But he does not as yet have it.
One crucial condition which, in the case of political authorities governing sizeable societies, is necessary to establish their legitimacy, does not obtain.
That is the ability to co-ordinate the actions of members of the society in cases in which they have reason to co-ordinate their actions, and the ability to do so better than they can.
That ability requires effective power over them.
It is itself required for the fulfilment of the task we usually associate with political authority.
While effective power may be a necessary condition of political legitimacy it is not a sufficient condition.
It is not in itself sufficient for legitimacy.
The wicked governments we have known throughout history are evidence of this.
They are unlikely to satisfy the test required by the main argument, i.e. that individuals were more likely to succeed in realizing that which reason required of them if subjected to the government concerned than if left to themselves.
Is political authority ever legitimate?
In most contemporary societies the law is the only human institution claiming unlimited authority.
Take the United Kingdom, for example.
Parliament, according to English constitutional theory, can make and unmake any law, on any matter, and to any effect whatsoever.
We know that some laws it may make will not be effective.
They will be largely disregarded, or even lead to organized resistance.
But we are not now concerned with the limits on the effective power of British political institutions.
It is their claim to unlimited authority which is at stake here.
Britain is a country without entrenched constitutional limits on the powers of its supreme regular legislator, Parliament.
But things are much the same in countries with strong constitutional traditions.
The American Congress's power to legislate may be limited by the Constitution, but the Constitution itself may be changed by law.
Hence, even in the USA, the law claims unlimited authority.
Any conditional or qualified recognition of legitimacy will deny the law the authority it claims for itself.
If you say ‘one has an obligation to obey any law which does not violate fundamental human rights’ you have denied that the law has the authority it claims for itself.
This is not because the law does violate human rights.
It may not.
Nor because legal institutions intend to or will ever admit to violating human rights.
They may not.
It is because the law provides ways of changing the law and of adopting any law whatsoever, and it always claims authority for itself.
That is, it claims unlimited authority, it claims that there is an obligation to obey it whatever its content may be.
Though politicians often claim that the authority the law claims for itself is justified, there has hardly been any political theorist in recent times who has shared this view.
It is, however, often claimed that there is a qualified obligation to obey the law, based on the authority of governments in just regimes, for so long as they remain just.
Such a qualified endorsement of the authority of the law falls short of acknowledging the authority the law claims for itself in two respects.
First it denies it the right to impose certain obligations, denies that some laws if enacted will be binding.
Thus, for example, they may deny that any government has authority to deprive people of their fundamental human rights.
Secondly, it admits only a prima facie obligation to obey the law.
It is not that the law claims that one ought to obey the law come what may.
There are many legal doctrines specifically designed to allow exceptions to legal requirements, doctrines such as self-defence, necessity, public policy, and the like.
The point is that the law demands the right to define the permissible exceptions.
Those who claim that the obligation to obey the law is prima facie only implicitly deny it that right.
They maintain that there could be circumstances in which disobedience is justified even though the law itself does not admit that it is.
It is important to see that even this qualified recognition of authority, the recognition of the authority of just governments to impose prima facie obligations on their subjects, cannot be supported by the argument of the normal justification thesis.
Again we have to take account of the flexible character of the argument of this thesis.
People differ in their knowledge, skills, strength of character and understanding.
Since the main argument for authority depends on such factors it is impossible to generalize and indicate an area of government regulation which is better left to individuals.
But regarding every person there are several such areas.
One person has wide and reliable knowledge of cars, as well as an unimpeachable moral character.
He may have no reason to acknowledge the authority of the government over him regarding the road worthiness of his car.
Another person, though lacking any special expertise, knows local conditions well and has great insight into the needs of his children.
He may have no reason to acknowledge the government's authority over him regarding the conditions under which parents may leave their children unattended by adults.
Notice that these examples do not depend on the law being unjust.
It may be a just law.
It is based on reasons which apply to its subjects.
But because of the bureaucratic necessity to generalize and disregard distinctions too fine for large-scale enforcement and administration, some people are able to do better if they refuse to acknowledge the authority of this law.
We are forced to conclude that while the main argument does confer qualified and partial authority on just governments it invariably fails to justify the claims to authority which these governments make for themselves.
The people over whom governments have authority, the kind of considerations which their instructions pre-empt and the areas of activities over which they have authority are all, to the extent that they are determined by the normal justification thesis, less extensive than the claims made by governments and by the law.
I have concentrated attention on the undramatic failures of laws which are not unjust or immoral authoritatively to bind everyone to whom they are meant to apply.
In doing so I did not of course mean to deny that sometimes immoral or unjust laws are not authoritatively binding.
Remember that sometimes immoral or unjust laws may be authoritatively binding, at least on some people.
The existence of the occasional bad law enacted by a just government does not by itself establish much.
However just a government may be, it is liable to pass undesirable and morally objectionable laws from time to time.
This need not be due to any moral shortcoming in the government.
Even assuming complete good will and unimpeachable moral convictions, inefficiency, ignorance and other ordinary facts of life will lead to objectionable laws being passed.
Even so it may be that regarding each individual, he is less likely successfully to follow right reasons which apply to him anyway if left to himself than if he always obeys the directives of a just government including those which are morally reprehensible.
Can it be that governments have in such circumstances authority to pass immoral and unjust laws?
The reason this conclusion is objectionable is because the locution ‘X has authority to pass laws of kind X’ indicates in most contexts that X has the authority to issue such laws in order to use it to make such laws.
That is, it implies that part of the reason for his authority is that it be used in this way.
Clearly it is not part of the reason for any government's authority that it should pass unjust or immoral laws.
But one can have authority to do that which one ought not to do.
I can delegate authority over my son to a baby-sitter instructing him to make sure my son is in bed by a certain time.
If the baby-sitter orders my son to complete his home work after that time he is disregarding my instructions and his duty.
But my son nevertheless has to obey him.
He may, perhaps he should, complain to me.
But since he was put in the charge of the baby-sitter he ought to obey even (some of) his misguided orders.
This situation is very familiar from the law of agency.
Agents often have authority to bind their principals in ways they should not, they can act wrongly in the exercise of their authority without forfeiting it.
Governments may be acting within their authority when they act unjustly or immorally.
But clearly some immoralities may be of a kind that no government has authority to commit.
There may, in other words, be general limits to the authority of governments, limits restricting governmental powers over any of their subjects.
The rest of this book is, in part, an exploration of one kind of such general limits.
It examines the possibility that there are general restrictions on the authority of political institutions designed to protect individual liberty.
But whether or not one can establish the existence of general limits to the authority of governments, the normal justification thesis invites a piecemeal approach to the question of the authority of governments, which yields the conclusion that the extent of governmental authority varies from individual to individual, and is more limited than the authority governments claim for themselves in the case of most people.
The question we must now turn to is: can one of the subsidiary arguments for the justification of authority supplement the main argument and show that at least the authority of relatively just governments is as wide as they claim it to be?
2.
Consent
The long tradition that regards consent as either the foundation or a foundation of legitimate authority displays two separate strands of thought.
One, deriving from Hobbes and Locke, regards the consent given as an expression of rational enlightened self-interest.
Its approach is instrumental.
One consents to the establishment of a political society and to its authority because of the benefits one will derive from its existence.
The other approach, deriving from Rousseau, regards consent non-instrumentally.
The consent is a constitutive element both of the condition of the person who gives it and of the society resulting from it, which is good in itself.
In this section I will offer an analysis of consent.
I will then show, in the next section, how the non-instrumental approach to consent allows for a natural extension of the scope of the legitimacy of an authority to some cases where there is no consent.
‘Consent’ means consent to a change in the normative situation of another — to a change in his rights and duties.
It is sometimes expressed and is spoken of what is agreed.
Consent is, however, narrower than agreement and is roughly equivalent to the performative sense of ‘agreement’.
One can agree that another has or should have a right, that is, believe that he has or should have it, or agree to give him a right.
The first is a cognitive agreement, the second is a performative one.
By agreeing to give him a right one purports to confer it on him, or one promises to do so in the future (the expression is ambiguous).
Though consent, if valid, has normative consequences, and can only be explained through its purported normative consequences, it does not bear its normativeness on its face.
The typical expressions using ‘consent’ are ‘X consented to Y's doing.
..’ or ‘X consented to Y's being.
..’. The second is completed by specifying a position or role the occupier of which possesses certain rights and duties, and which the consent purports to allow Y to occupy.
For example, ‘I consented to his being the leader’.
The first kind of sentence is completed by specifying an action, and the consent purports to give Y a right to perform it.
Less commonly, consent can be given to duties or requirements imposed on other people.
For example, ‘He consented to his son's being obliged to retake the examination.’
Consent is given by any behaviour (action or omission) undertaken in the belief that
1.
it will change the normative situation of another;
2. it will do so because it is undertaken with such a belief;
3. it will be understood by its observers to be of this character.
The third condition characterizes consent as a (purportedly) public action.
Consenting in one's heart is not a performative consent but a psychological state akin to coming to terms with.
The core use of ‘consent’ is its use in the performative sense.
It is explained by the combination of the first two conditions, and since it is a performative purporting to affect the rights or duties of another, it has to be public at least in intention.
Consenting is very similar to promising.
Both purport to change the normative situation of another, and both purport to do so by voluntary acts undertaken in the belief that they have these normative consequences.
Yet consenting and promising, while overlapping, are not the same.
According to Simmons, consenting differs from promising in two ways:
First, consent in the strict sense is always given to the actions of other persons.
Thus, I may consent to my daughter's marriage, to be governed by the decisions of the majority, or to my friend's handling my financial affairs.
Promises, on the other hand, cannot, except in very special circumstances, ever be made concerning the actions of another person.
Further, while both promises and consent generate special rights and obligations, the emphases in the two cases are different.
The primary purpose of a promise is to undertake an obligation; the special rights which arise for the promisee are in a sense secondary.
In giving consent to another's actions, however, our primary purpose is to authorise those actions and in so doing create for or accord to another a special right to act: the obligation generated on the consentor not to interfere with the exercise of this right takes, in this case, the secondary role.
These are suggestive observations.
But they are not quite right.
One consents not only to actions but also to the holding of certain positions and to the imposition of duties and burdens.
Promises quite often concern the actions of others: to consent to be governed by another is to promise to obey him; to consent to his joining the expedition is to promise to provide him with the facilities and the help made available to members of the expedition.
Finally these examples in which to consent is to promise refute the suggestion that in one case the purpose is to confer rights and in the other to undertake an obligation.
Promising differs from consenting in two respects.
Both establish promises to be a special case of consent.
First, while promising always purports to impose obligations on the promisor, consenting does not always do so.
Two cases of consent can be distinguished.
In the first, consent does not purport to affect the agent's personal normative situation.
The president may consent to a bill imposing a new tax or conferring certain rights.
The commanding officer may consent to his soldiers' being assigned certain duties by another officer.
The second kind of case includes those where the agent's personal normative position is affected by his consent, if it is valid, i.e. if it has its purported normative consequences.
In the first type of case, but not necessarily in the second, the consent is a response to a proposal initiated by another.
Consent can adversely affect the normative situation of the agent either by placing him under an obligation or by derogating from his rights.
One can waive one's rights by consenting, but not by promising (except in the special case in which the very undertaking of an obligation to act in a certain way terminates one's right not to do so).
Besides, sometimes a person's consent to a right or benefit is required for him to acquire that right or a benefit.
Consent, in other words, differs from promises by being capable of investing the consentor with rights.
There are, therefore, three kinds of consent that do not impose obligations on the agent: first, where his personal situation is not affected by the consent; second, where his personal situation is favourably affected, for the consent is a condition of his possession of a right or of some other benefit; third, where his personal situation is adversely affected, but by waiving a right rather than by undertaking an obligation.
It is worth noting, however, that consent to a political authority entails a promise to obey it (as well as perhaps an obligation to support it in other ways).
It is an undertaking of an obligation.
Second, promises are made by acts intended to undertake obligations and confer rights.
Only acts whose purpose is to realize this result are promises; not so consent.
Acts undertaken for another purpose and not in order to consent can constitute consent if undertaken in the belief that they will confer a right or impose a duty and if the fact that they are undertaken with such a belief is the reason for them having this result.
Typical examples are cases where one is given notice that everyone who enters a certain house, club, or park must abide by certain rules, obey a certain authority, or do so at his own risk.
Acts of consent are acts believed to change the normative situation because they are performed with that belief.
They are performed by people who have certain beliefs about the normative consequences of their acts.
In particular they believe that their beliefs make a difference to the consequences of their acts, that their acts impose duties, confer rights, grant permissions, and so on, in part because they believe that their acts do so.
Consent, in other words, is an act purporting to change the normative situation.
Not every act of consent succeeds in doing so, and those that succeed do so because they fall under reasons, not themselves created by consent, that show why acts of consent should, within certain limits, be a way of creating rights and duties.
We cannot create reasons just by intending to do so and expressing that intention in action.
Reasons precede the will.
Though the latter can, within limits, create reasons, it can do so only when there is a non-will-based reason why it should.
Admitting this, it might nevertheless be claimed that a person's consenting entails, as a matter of the meaning of ‘consent’, not only that he acted in the way I have described, but that his action has the purported normative consequences.
Against this interpretation lies the evidence that we can and do say, when appropriate, things like ‘Of course he consented to the operation, but that does not entitle you to perform it since he is just a child’(or he did not know how dangerous it is).
I would, therefore, suggest that consent is to be explained by reference to its purported normative consequences only.
On what grounds is it ever justified to regard consent as having its purported normative consequences?
In special circumstances there may be a variety of occasional reasons that make the consent valid.
Most common, perhaps, are those cases where the person to whose rights the agent consented was misled, through the agent's fault, into believing that the consent was valid and acted reasonably on this belief to his detriment.
The agent might, for example, be at fault if in the circumstances the consent could be taken as sufficient evidence that the agent has power to consent (i.e., that there were reasons for holding the consent valid) and the agent should have realized this.
In such cases the agent's liability is to make good the detriment thus caused to the person to whose rights he consented.
Occasionally this requires recognizing that the consent and the circumstances surrounding it create the rights it purported to create.
It is clear that such a justification not only depends on very special circumstances but is essentially parasitic.
It presupposes a reasonable belief in the existence of some other reasons for which consent is valid in some circumstances and the misled person's mistaken belief that these reasons apply to his case.
Are there non-parasitic reasons that justify acknowledging the validity of consent in certain classes of cases?
One is tempted to say that consent is valid if one has a right that the normative consequences will not occur without one's consent.
To say this is to say both too much and too little.
It is saying too much in that the same normative consequences can sometimes be reached by different routes.
For example, a person may consent to his child's staying the night with a friend only to find that his spouse has already allowed the child to do so.
It is saying too little in that to ask for the reason for the validity of a consent to certain normative consequences is the same as to ask for the reason for recognizing a person as holding a certain right to bring about these consequences.
Many justifications of consent are instrumental.
Were the consent to be valid then if the rights or duties consented to and their creation have good consequences, which outweigh the bad consequences to which their creation or existence lead, the validity of the consent is instrumentally justified.
The most common type of instrumental argument relies, as a reason for recognizing the validity of consent, on the facts that the agent has the best information to judge whether it is best to create the right or not and that he is sufficiently motivated to act for the best.
One such case is where the consent, if effective, will not affect third parties, provided that the agent is a normal adult able to judge his own interests in the area involved and that the same is true of the person receiving the right, assuming that he is able to refuse it if he so wishes.
Other cases are those where the agent's knowledge and motivation can be surmised from the circumstances of his life (parents or children) or where a special arrangement is made to make sure of them (e.g., when legislators are periodically elected, thus providing them with motives to find out what are their electors' best interests and to satisfy them, at least where the prestige, power, and lawful remuneration of their office are their only rewards and where these rewards are themselves substantial).
Another common instrumental justification of consent turns not on the benefits of consenting but on the benefit of being able to consent.
It is sometimes a way of endowing a person with a responsibility that trains him to fulfil various roles in the future, or that it is hoped will change his character for the better, or that endows its holder with prestige, or that gives him a certain hold on other people and makes them more likely to act in his interests.
There are no doubt other forms of instrumental justification, but these are the most common.
In addition to them and to other kinds of instrumental validation, consent can be given non-instrumental validation in many contexts.
Through consenting a person attempts to fashion the shape of his moral world.
All too often moralists tend to regard a person's moral life as the story of how he proves himself in the face of moral demands imposed on him by chance and circumstance.
Crucial as this aspect is, it is but one side of a person's moral history.
The other side of the story evolves around the person not as the object of demands imposed from the outside, but as the creator of such demands addressed to himself.
We are all to a considerable degree the authors of our moral world.
This theme will be further explored in Parts Four and Five of the book.
A few brief observations will suffice for present purposes.
Essentially, this view of people as each one partly creating his own moral world is to be justified through arguments concerning the nature of morality and moral knowledge.
These provide the framework within which generally valid considerations justify the specific ways through which people can impose moral demands upon themselves and can endow their lives with value or with moral significance.
Broadly speaking, such considerations refer to two kinds of moral value.
First, and most obviously, they depend on the value of some human relationships.
The precise course of such relations and the detailed moral requirements they generate depend on the way individuals choose to develop them and the different normative implications with which they deliberately endow the relations.
Consider, for example, the variety of morally permissible and even valuable courses that relations between children and their parents can take, and their different moral implications.
With many relationships the case for self-creation is even stronger, since in them the fact that one chose to have a relationship of a certain kind and chose one's partner is part of what makes the relationship valuable.
(Compare ideals of love of which this is true with those of which it is not.)
The second kind of moral value involved in the justification of different ways in which persons mould their moral world is the value of forming and pursuing projects that give shape and content to one's life.
This is reflected in our admiration for people who have made something of their lives, sometimes against great odds, and in our somewhat disappointed judgment of those who merely drift through life.
Consenting often serves such projects and relationships instrumentally, but beyond that it is sometimes a constitutive element of relationships between people.
There are relations that can be created by expressions of consent, and there are many in which such acts form or can form a component of their creation or perpetuation.
A constituent element of projects and relations is the existence of consensual rights and obligations which express the persons' continued acknowledgement of the relations or the projects.
Consenting to have one's mail opened by another, to be visited without prior arrangement, and to have another arrange aspects of one's plans or activities without prior consultation (e.g. accepting invitations in one's name) may or may not be justified by their instrumental value, but in any case they are taken in our culture as expressing the existence of certain attitudes, as in part constituting those attitudes.
What actions express an attitude is largely a matter of social convention.
Our conventions and those of other societies differ, but to the extent that they regard consent as expressing certain worthwhile relations, as a constituent element of such relations, they provide validation of the appropriate kinds of consent.
3.
Consent as the Foundation of Authority
Turning to the relevance of consent to the obligation to obey the law, we will here be concerned not with the well-known problem that most citizens in any given society have not consented to the authority of their government, but with the prior question whether their consent, if given, would have been valid.
The main lesson of the discussion of the previous section is that judgment on the validity of consent has to be discriminating.
Consent may be valid in certain contexts or subject to certain conditions and invalid in other contexts and or when the conditions are not met.
From the fact that in some circumstances consent is valid, it does not follow that consent to the government's authority is valid.
One has to examine closely what arguments can establish the validity of such consent.
Doubts about the validity of consent to political authority are sometimes expressed on the ground that citizens have no choice but to consent.
Therefore, their consent is tainted by duress and is invalid.
Such arguments show that the instrumental as well as the non-instrumental validations of consent depend on its being freely given.
Duress that invalidates consent consists either of a credible threat to take substantial action against the agent or against a person or a cause that he values if he does not consent or in the taking of such actions against him or against persons or causes that he values with an offer to restore the situation if he does consent.
Either way duress is always action designed to exert pressure in order to secure the consent.
This explains why duress invalidates consent.
There is no harm in a person using his power to consent in order to avert a threat or to extricate himself or others from a dire situation.
A person's power to confer rights on others by his consent does, however, expose him to blackmail and abuse.
Given that, whatever the justification for giving him such power may be, it has nothing to do with encouraging blackmail, such action frustrates the purpose of validating the consent and is to be discouraged because of its undesirable consequences.
If consent is invalidated by duress then duress may fail to achieve its aim.
Hence, consent to a political authority secured by threats of legal penalties is not binding.
But consent by a person in Hobbes's state of nature can be perfectly valid.
The undesirable aspect of duress is not in the absence of choice but in the fact that it is engineered in order to extract the consent.
Consent to political authority, where given, is often free.
It does not follow that it is binding.
It is binding only if there are good reasons to enable people to subject themselves to political authorities by their consent.
Can its validity ever be established by instrumental considerations alone?
The conclusion of the first section was that a just government can exist even if its subjects are not bound by a general obligation to obey it.
Therefore, consent cannot be justified as a necessary means to establish a just government.
Moreover, to the extent that in order to establish or preserve a just government a qualified recognition of authority is necessary, such recognition in itself, independently of consent, is sufficient to establish a suitably qualified obligation to obey.
The instrumental value of consent to the authority of just governments is to be seen as reinforcing other moral motives to support just institutions where those may fail due to human ignorance or weakness.
Consent may produce the results that belief in other reasons should but may fail to produce.
This is particularly valuable in the case of government officials.
Their power to affect the public and the importance of public confidence in their loyalty give special importance to their fidelity to justified authority.
Hence reinforcing this fidelity by consent is a valuable common practice in many countries.
Consent, duly qualified, can play a subordinate but none the less valuable role in reinforcing independent obligations.
Against this undoubted benefit one has to set the likely bad consequences of recognizing the general and unqualified validity of consent to political authority.
It may mislead people into obeying the law where, but for their consent, it would have been clear to them that it is better to disobey.
An extreme example of this kind of distortion is provided by the scruples of many German generals about breaking their oath of loyalty.
They took the oath, for the most part, in order to be able to pursue their chosen careers in the armed forces.
Relying on the moral relevance of one's consent and exaggerating its moral significance is all the more tempting when doing so serves one's own interests.
Denying such consent any validity, and educating people in that conviction, could prevent such distortions.
A second consideration against allowing consent to political authority general validity turns on the undesirability of allowing the validity of consent which binds for life, is open-ended, and affects wide-ranging aspects of a person's life.
In these circumstances the presumption that the agent is a competent judge of what is best to do is very hard to maintain.
Regarding political authorities, the most obvious danger is of a change of government or a change of circumstances which turns a reasonably just government into an unjust one.
Human knowledge is as yet unable to predict such changes.
These costs of consent to political authority suggest that, on instrumental grounds, consent can only be held binding if it is so qualified that its effect is almost entirely confined to reinforcing independently existing obligations to obey.
In other words one may validly consent to obey a government whose authority can be established in accordance with the normal justification thesis.
Such a consent is binding, and is not trivial as it reinforces one's motivation to respect that government's authority.
But it cannot be used as a way of endowing anyone with authority where that person had none.
Does non-instrumental justification relax the conditions under which consent to authority is binding?
Relationships and personal projects are valuable only if they realize something of value.
It is the autonomous achievement or pursuit of a goal or an activity of value which makes relationships and personal projects valuable.
Hence, to the extent that consent is justified non-instrumentally as a constitutive element in a relationship between a citizen and his society, it is valid only if it exists between a citizen and a reasonably just society.
I say a reasonably just society, rather than a reasonably just law, for consent to obey the law expresses an attitude not to the law but to the society whose law it is.
It expresses an attitude to the law as an aspect of that society (which it can be only if the law is felt to express social conventions and outlook).
There are various attitudes towards society that consent to the authority of its laws can express.
They can all be regarded as so many variations on a basic attitude of identification with the society, an attitude of belonging and of sharing in its collective life.
Attitudes belonging to this family vary.
They can be more or less intense.
They may be associated with some features of society more than with others.
They may, but need not, express themselves in one's attitude towards the law.
Rousseau's vision of the citizen's attitude toward his community is, of course, an example of an attitude of identification.
It is, however, an extreme example.
Identification includes much less intense and less exclusive attitudes.
A person who finds value in identification need not be attracted by Rousseau's vision.
He may prefer one of the milder varieties of this attitude.
All that is necessarily involved is a sense of belonging that excludes indifference to the group as well as alienation from it.
That consent to be bound by the law is an expression of such an attitude of loyalty and identification (i.e. a sense of belonging) is a matter of fact.
As was noted, the forms in which relations and attitudes express themselves are largely conventional.
In many societies, the convention regarding consent assumes formalized and ritualistic forms, as with the requirements to give such formal consent upon assuming an important public office or when naturalizing.
These are meant not merely, if at all, to serve a useful instrumental function, but also to be solemn, ritualized expressions of loyalty and identification.
To say this, of course, does not mean that the consent is not binding on the agent.
It is precisely because it is thought to be binding that it can serve as an expression of identification.
For while the ways one expresses such attitudes and relationships are conventional, the means chosen by the convention are suitable for their role by virtue of some of their features.
Undertaking an obligation to obey the law is an appropriate means of expressing identification with society, because it is a form of supporting social institutions, because it conveys a willingness to share in the common ways established in that society as expressed by its institutions, and because it expresses confidence in the reasonableness and good judgment of the government through one's willingness to take it on trust, as it were, that the law is just and that it should be complied with.
I assume that consent to obey the laws of an unjust government is not a morally appropriate expression of identification with one's society.
Either the society is, in such circumstances, alienated from its government and its laws or it is not.
In the first case, identification with the law does not express identification with the society which is hostile to this law.
In the second case one identifies oneself with the worst aspects of the society.
Such an attitude cannot be morally valuable and cannot validate the consent.
Noninstrumental validations of consent are, therefore, limited to consent to the authority of a reasonably just government.
This condition is, as we saw above, weaker than that required by the main argument for the validation of authority.
The main argument cannot validate wholesale the authority of even reasonably just governments.
Nor can instrumental considerations validate consent to the authority of reasonably just governments.
They do not extend the scope of authority covered by the main argument.
Noninstrumental considerations do that because they show consent itself to be independently valuable.
Identification with one's community is, though not morally obligatory, a desirable state, at least if that community is reasonably just.
Of course consent to obey the law is not a necessary condition of such an attitude.
It can find expression in one's attitude to voluntary organizations, to the culture and traditions of the community, and in behaviour to its members when met in anonymous situations.
Identification with the community is even consistent with hostility to its laws, if those are thought to be oppressive or unfair.
All I have claimed is that consent to obey is recognized, and with reason, as one way of expressing such an attitude.
That is enough to add to its value and regard it as valid, if the other conditions for the validity of consent are met.
These considerations adumbrate the argument for the secondary role of consent in the justification of authority.
It is binding only if the conditions of the normal justification thesis are substantially met independently of the consent.
But the non-instrumental argument shows that consent does extend the bounds of authority beyond what can be established without it.
It is worth pointing out that it does so in accordance with the normal justification thesis.
Where identification is a morally valuable attitude which can be expressed by binding oneself to the authority, one has a reason to do so which is served by consent to the authority.
The whole point of the consent would be violated if, having given it, one proceeded to deny the binding force of the authority's directives.
Therefore, it is necessary, once the consent has been given, to accord the authority's directives pre-emptive force in order to be able to express one's identification with one's society by consenting to the authority of its law.
Since one has reason to express such an attitude in this way doing so enables one to conform to reasons which apply to one, which is the condition laid down by the normal justification thesis.
The argument establishes that by accepting that authority one follows reasons which apply to one anyway.
The normal justification thesis states that accepting authority is justified only if it improves one's compliance with reason.
This condition is met wherever there is value in people being able to express themselves in the way they choose, at least where acceptable alternatives present themselves.
They may not have a reason to prefer one way of going about things to another, but the fact that they chose to do it in a particular way gives them a reason to prefer that way from now on.
The issues raised by this point will loom large in Part Four, where the metaphor of people being part authors of their own moral world will be explained.
This argument brings out a further important point.
It would be wrong to regard consent as a one-off act of identification.
Since it gives one an additional reason to respect authoritative directives it affects all one's encounters with authority.
Even if it does not lead one to obey authority more often than one would otherwise, it affects one's reasons and the significance of one's actions.
Inasmuch as they are motivated by one's consent they become, in a small undramatic way, an expression of one's attitude to one's society.
This point will become clearer when we consider the nature of respect for law in general.
4.
Respect for Law
Consent theorists, correctly perceiving that consent to the authority of a reasonably just government does endow it with authority over the agent, and faced with the fact that few people actually consent to the authority of their government, have often tried to extend the notion of consent to cover more cases.
Similar temptations overcame philosophers concerned with establishing a secure base for individual responsibility (e.g. as in estoppel and in various forms of vicarious liability, such as conspiracy, agency, authorization or complicity) or for exemption from liability (e.g. in doctrines about the assumption of risk).
In many discussions of such issues consent is invoked and is understood to mean, roughly, the following: a person consents to an outcome if he performs an action which he believes to make that event more likely.
There is no denying that a person's beliefs about the likely consequences of his acts are relevant to his normative situation.
But the reasons for that are in the general principle that people are responsible for the consequences of their actions.
That is why if Jill knowingly leads Jim to expect that she will behave in a certain way she bears a responsibility to prevent harm to Jim as a result of this reliance, and so on.
Her duty is like the duty not to set fire to the forest which entails the duty to put out any fire one started.
One reason why this principle in its most general form was not thought to provide the foundation of a general doctrine of consent and voluntary obligations is the widespread belief that ‘causing’ another to act is, at least in the matter of individual responsibility, unlike causing a natural event.
This belief, expressed in the legal doctrine of novus actus interruptus , is that a person is responsible for his own actions, and others are not responsible even if they induced his action by suggesting that there are reasons for it, or by behaving in ways which led him to form such a belief.
To be sure it was always recognized that in certain circumstances, such as those involving deceit, or an intention to cause harm or to exploit, one is responsible for inducing another to act.
But only the paternalistic tendency to minimize the significance of action based on the agent's judgment of his situation led to the attempt to amalgamate all voluntary obligations into a generalized doctrine of duties arising out of responsibility for inducing others to act.
Whatever one's view of the tendency which led to the attempt, the attempt was doomed.
It essentially regards consent as existing whenever one's action brings about a natural event in the world or increases the likelihood of such an event.
It leaves out the whole class of voluntary obligations where no such change occurs, such as promises which are not relied upon, nor expected to be relied upon.
Such cases may be relatively infrequent, but they remind us that the core notion of voluntary obligations is the knowing undertaking of an obligation.
This is the reason why there is reliance when it occurs.
Or at least that is why reliance on a voluntary obligation is justified reliance, which the person having the obligation has to respect.
Nothing here said denies that one reason for holding voluntary undertakings to be binding is to enable people to encourage reliance by committing themselves to a course of action.
I am only insisting first that this need not be the only justification for the power (the normative power) to commit oneself, and second, that one encourages reliance through knowingly undertaking an obligation.
And not, as some would have it, that one undertakes an obligation by inducing reliance.
The foregoing remarks apply directly to some of the inflationary accounts of voluntary obligations and of consent, and have to be adapted to meet the challenge presented by others.
The same strictures can also be adapted to apply to less inflationary accounts of consent.
One particularly interesting example is Kleinig's conception of consent as ‘an act in which one person tends to facilitate the initiative of another’ in a manner which makes him a participant in that initiative who shares responsibility for it.
Small insights turn into small fallacies in this account.
For example, though normally consent is given in response to an initiative of another it need not be.
I may go to my son's room and say to him: ‘Since today is a special day you may play in my study while I work there.’
I have given my consent to his being in my study, but on this occasion the initiative was mine.
The example also serves to expose the major flaw in Kleinig's account.
While participation and consent overlap, they do not coincide.
My son and I do not participate in a game, nor in writing my paper.
Do we participate in being in a room together?
Nor do all who participate in a joint enterprise agree to its occurrence.
It depends on whether participation is voluntary and on whether it was known to involve normative consequences.
Kleinig is of course aware of this last point and considers further conditions required to establish the kind of participation which amounts to consent.
But only conditions which are tantamount to the definition of consent given in Section One above would be adequate.
Once they are included in the explanation participation drops out as an inessential part of many consent situations.
Kleinig's mistake is the familiar one.
He fails to spot that the core element of consent is action in the belief that it changes the normative situation, and that the justification of the binding force of valid consents is the desirability of enabling people purposefully to change the normative situation in certain circumstances.
He therefore confuses one common consequence of consent, i.e. that by consenting one becomes a participant in a joint enterprise, with its essence.
What we need, however, is not to stretch consent out of recognition but to examine whether the reasons that validate consent in general and consent to authority in particular cannot also be applied to some cases not involving consent.
I think that they can.
Many people regard themselves as under the authority of the state.
For reasons to be examined below this belief commonly expresses itself in a belief in a defeasible obligation to obey the law.
With some, this view does not cohere with their other beliefs, and one cannot attribute to them belief in any coherent justification of their acceptance of an obligation to obey.
Others think that the obligation is based on the sort of reasons that philosophers have adduced in support of an obligation to obey, which have been refuted by various writers in recent years, and will be briefly considered below.
There are others still who do not provide such fallacious arguments but regard the obligation as incumbent on them because they are citizens of the state or members of the society, because the government is their government or the law their law.
Whether this is the way they express themselves does not matter so long as we can establish that this is the substance of their view.
Such views are often condemned as blind acceptance of authority without any reason.
This is a mistake.
They indicate that their holders identify with their society and hold themselves to be under an obligation to obey the law which they regard as expressing that attitude.
This attitude is not consent.
It is probably not something initiated by any specific act or at any specific time.
It is likely to be the product of a gradual process as lengthy as the process of acquiring a sense of belonging to a community and identifying with it.
It need not, therefore, be related to any act performed in the belief that it has normative consequences.
But in a reasonably just society this belief in an obligation to obey the law, this attitude of respect for law, is as valid as an obligation acquired through consent and for precisely the same reasons.
It is instrumentally useful in the same way and it is an expression of the same worthwhile attitude of identification with the society.
Therefore, people who share it have an obligation to obey the law that they acquire through their conduct of their own lives, as part authors of their own moral world.
Assuming that this kind of non-instrumental justification applies to consent and can provide a foundation for the authority of the state over those of its citizens who have consented to its authority, can the same argument be used to base authority on the attitude of respect?
An obvious objection is that the attitude of respect is not regarded by those who display it as the source of their obligation.
It is thought of as a requirement incumbent on citizens in virtue of the independently established authority of the state.
The force of this point was recognized above.
It was conceded that where the attitude of respect is based on false assumptions and on nothing else, and where it does not cohere with the person's other attitudes and beliefs, it cannot be the foundation of authority.
But ill-articulated as many people's thoughts sometimes are in substance, they often amount to an assumption of semi-voluntary performative submission to an authority, because it is a morally worthwhile attitude to have.
Two features of the situation obscure its character.
First, because identification with one's community is morally worthwhile, and acceptance of the authority of the state an appropriate way (though not the only way) to express it, one may jump to the conclusion that one has an obligation to accept the authority of the state, or even that it has authority independently of such acceptance.
Reflection on the analogous case of promises dispels this impression.
There are times when making a certain promise (say to look after a friend's child if the friend dies before the child comes of age) are morally worthwhile but where one does not have an obligation to make them (remember that in this example too one may find other adequate ways to help one's friend).
Certainly one is not under an obligation to look after the child if one did not promise to do so just because it would have been a good thing to promise.
Second, if the attitude of respect is itself the source of the legitimacy of the authority then it is a self-referential attitude.
It respects the authority because it is legitimate, and it is legitimate because it is respected.
One respects the authority which is founded on the very fact of being so respected.
Again, self-reference, albeit of a slightly different character, is essential to the analyses of valid consent and of promising which are acts changing the normative situation because they are undertaken in the belief that they so change the normative situation.
5.
The Political Obligation
Our conclusions are modest.
They are so modest that some may find them disconcerting.
Those who consent to the authority of reasonably just governments or respect their laws are subject to their authority and have an obligation to obey their laws.
But not everyone does consent, nor do all have this attitude.
Those who do not are not necessarily guilty of any wrongdoing.
Obligations undertaken through consent or respect are voluntary or semi-voluntary obligations.
They bind those who undertake them.
Sometimes people have reason to undertake them, but only exceptionally does one do wrong in not undertaking them.
As was noted above, however much one may value identification with one's community, since it can be expressed by other means than respect for law it cannot be a foundation of an obligation to respect the law, nor a basis for the general authority of governments over all their subjects.
Those who do not voluntarily or semi-voluntarily place themselves under the authority of relatively just governments are under a partial and qualified obligation to recognize the authority of such a government in their country.
In particular its authority should be recognized to the extent necessary to enable it to secure goals, which individuals have reason to secure, for which social co-ordination is necessary or helpful, and where this is the most promising way of achieving them.
Considerations of this kind would lead to a good deal of common authority, that is they would legitimate the authority of a government over all its subjects regarding a certain range of issues.
Beyond that it will have authority regarding other issues which is based on other considerations, such as superior expertise, economy of effort, immunity from temptations and blackmail.
These may affect large sections of the population in predominantly the same way.
But here one may also expect a degree of individual variation.
The authority of the state may be greater over some individuals than over others, depending on their personal circumstances.
Indeed, it may vary for reasons which are in part a matter for individual decision and temperament.
One person may wish to dedicate more of his time to other pursuits and therefore accept the authority of a reasonably just and competent government over a whole range of issues regarding which another may prefer to decide for himself, and be willing to invest the time and effort it takes to enable himself to decide wisely.
The normal exercise of political authority is by the making of laws and legally binding orders.
That is why much of the discussion of the justification of political authority is undertaken by a consideration of the obligation to obey the law.
The two questions are one if we understand the obligation to obey the law as an obligation to obey the law as it requires to be obeyed.
This entails, as was pointed out above, that disobedience to a law is justified only if it is justified by an existing legal doctrine to that effect.
The law recognizes, through various defence doctrines and through the instruction to prosecutorial authorities to refrain from prosecution in certain cases where formally a person is guilty, that disobedience to law is sometimes justified.
But an obligation to obey the law as it is understood in political writings today is a mere prima facie obligation.
Such an obligation, usually thought of as nothing more than a reason to obey, may be based on reasons other than the authority of the law.
It need not import a recognition of authority.
When visiting a foreign country, for example, I may feel that I have reason to obey its laws on the ground that if I do not I may bring the reputation of my university into disrepute.
This does not amount to a recognition of the authority of that government.
It is consistent with denying its authority and doing my best to overturn it, including inciting its subjects to revolt against it.
I will engage in these subversive activities either only to the extent that they are lawful, or where the risk to the reputation of my university is overshadowed by the importance of my revolutionary activities.
This is unlikely to be the case in my relations with my hotel management, or in my relations with shopkeepers, bus conductors and the like.
It may well give me a reason to break the law when encountering the secret police, when coming up against censorship, or when confronting other forms of injustice or repression.
Is there a prima facie obligation to obey the law which transcends the limits of the state's authority?
The most often invoked argument to that effect relies on an obligation to support and maintain just institutions.
The argument can be divided into two stages.
First it is argued that where a state is relatively just one ought to support and maintain it.
This leads to the second stage of the argument, to the effect that disobeying the law undermines its authority, and is therefore contrary to the obligation to support just institutions.
It is this second part of the argument which is flawed.
It may entail an obligation to obey certain of the more politically sensitive laws.
But it is a melodramatic exaggeration to suppose that every breach of law endangers, by however small a degree, the survival of the government, or of law and order.
Many acts of trespass, breaches of contract, violations of copyright, and so on, regrettable as some of them may be on other grounds, have no implications one way or another for the stability of the government and the law.
While the duty to support just institutions fails to establish an obligation to obey the law, it may well provide reasons to obey the law in circumstances where the law transcends the legitimate authority of the government.
In many situations laws which violate human rights and oppress the population or sections of it cannot be broken without endangering the stability or even the very survival of relatively just institutions.
It should also be noted that the obligation to support and maintain just institutions is likely to entail duties far above those of obedience to some laws.
Lawful strikes may threaten the fabric of a society much more than many unlawful acts.
So may demonstrations, mass boycotts of elections and such like political activities.
The duty to support just institutions leads to a requirement of support in words and deeds, most commonly in a certain degree of political participation.
In spite of its importance, the duty to support and maintain just institutions fails to establish a general reason to obey even laws which the government is justified in making.
Does not this failure undermine the very possibility of government, however just?
It is important to remember that a government's power can and normally does quite properly extend to people who do not accept its authority.
They are subject to its power partly because those who accept its authority are willing to obey its instructions, even when they affect people who do not accept its authority.
In a rough and ready way we can divide the ways in which a government controls and influences people into three.
First, some accept its authority and obey its instructions because they are binding on them.
Second, the government can and does manipulate the environment, physical, economic and social, in which people live.
It constructs roads, flattens hills, digs canals, builds harbours, employs workers, contracts for services.
In all these and similar ways a government can exercise power and control over people without attempting thereby to exercise authority over them.
Finally, a government controls people by providing remedies for breaches of laws and for the violation of people's rights.
People who are not subject to the authority of the law may then obey the rules for prudential reasons, or because even though they have no duty to obey, disobedience will do more harm than good.
It is worth pausing here momentarily to observe that such legally provided remedies can be morally justified even when applied to people who are not subject to the authority of the government and its laws.
Consider for example the law of defamation.
Assuming that it is what it should be, it does no more than incorporate into law a moral right existing independently of the law.
The duty to compensate the defamed person is itself a moral duty.
Enforcing such a duty against a person who refuses to pay damages is morally justified because it implements the moral rights of the defamed.
One need not invoke the authority of the law over the defamer to justify such action.
The law may not have authority over him.
It makes no difference.
The importance of the law in such matters is in creating a centre of power which makes it possible to enforce moral duties.
It does so through the authority it exercises over government officials, and because the population at large is willing to see morality enforced, even in matters in which they are not subject to the authority of the government.
This point can be generalized.
Imagine a relatively just government ruling over a relatively morally enlightened population.
Such a government has authority over just about everyone in certain matters (those where individuals have reason to pursue goals requiring social cooperation which is more difficult to achieve in other ways) and various degrees of more extensive authority in varying measure over different people, either in virtue of other factors covered by the normal justification thesis or through voluntary submission by consent or respect.
Because it enjoys this authority it is capable of affecting the fortunes of people beyond the scope of its authority in the two ways mentioned above.
It manipulates the environment, and it is able to enforce moral duties on those who are inclined to disregard them.
The fact that such action transcends its authority casts no doubt on its justifiability.
In all such matters the government is in a position comparable to that of every private individual who can by his actions affect the fortunes of others over whom he has no authority, and who may, within limits, force people to obey their moral duty when they incline not to do so.
The misleadingly alarming appearance of our conclusions results from the fact that they show that where conformity is called for it is based only some of the time, and less often than is often imagined, on the legitimate authority of the government, and often on other considerations.
Theoretically the main conclusion of the foregoing discussion is in the emphasis on the separateness of the issues of (1) the authority of the state;(2) the scope of its justified power;(3) the obligation to support just institutions;(4) the obligation to obey the law.
Interrelated as these four issues undoubtedly are, they do each bring into play independent considerations.
In considering the core issue of the authority of the state the most important conclusion is in the relative independence of identification with one's community as a non-instrumental basis of authority, which is none the less subject to limits imposed by the normal justification thesis.
The puzzling aspect of our conclusions is in the refusal to give a yes or no answer to the question: is the authority of the government legitimate?
We concluded that it is legitimate to various degrees regarding different people.
We are used to thinking in such terms concerning tourists and temporary residents.
It is time we applied the same reasoning to all.
It is sometimes said that this is a novel view of the question, that until very recently all political theorists believed in a general obligation to obey the law.
But in fact the position here advocated is the traditional view which regards an obligation to obey as a result of a special relationship between an individual and his state.
This was traditionally expressed in terms of some organic relationship between an individual and his community.
Individualist theorists interpreted it as a social contract.
Only in recent times have political theorists imagined that an obligation can be founded independently of such a relationship.
The view supported in these chapters is closest to the traditional view emphasizing the so called organic relations between an individual and his community.
The conclusion that the attitude of respect for law is not universal, if new, is a reflection of the way modern societies have developed, and is not a philosophical novelty.
Gauthier has revived the Hobbesian argument that political authority and indeed morality generally can be founded on rational self-interest.
As chs. 8 and 14 will make clear, the very notion of self-interest on which that argument is based is greatly flawed.
See, e.g., D. Gauthier ‘Morality and Advantage’,Philosophical Review , 76 (1967), 460.
See ch. 3, pp. 000
Both types of consent arguments are based on actual consent and differ from the hypothetical consent theories recently made popular by John Rawls, which are a form of moral argument concerning the way a fair-minded person should reconcile his interests with those of others.
Hypothetical consent theories tend to share the instrumental attitudes of the Hobbesian tradition.
Theories of hypothetical consent discuss not consent but cognitive agreement.
It is the essence of consent that its actuality changes the normative situation.
One may ask what one would have had to do had one consented.
But this is in no way relevant to what one has to do given that one did not.
What one would have believed in certain circumstances is equally immaterial to what one should now believe.
But that one should have believed something in a hypothetical situation may and often is used as part of an argument to establish what one should now believe.
See A. Woozley,Law and Obedience , London, 1979, pp. 93–7.
Impersonal consent sentences are quantified sentences of the kind described: ‘You consented to your dismissal’ means ‘You consented to being dismissed by whoever has authority to do so.’
Simmons,Moral Principles and Political Obligation , Princeton, 1979, p. 76.
This case differs from the case in which the agent cognitively agreed, i.e. expressed a belief that a person has certain rights in a situation in which he should have known that the hearer may reasonably rely on the utterance to his detriment.
The liability of the agent may be the same in both cases, but the reasons for it differ in detail.
I agree with J. L. Mackie's comment that respect for law can express not identification but some other attitudes, such as acknowledgement on the part of tourists that each country is entitled to regulate its own affairs in its own way.
See Mackie, ‘Obligations to Obey the Law’,Virginia Law Review 67 (1981), 154.
I have focused attention on identification with the society as being the most characteristic attitude thus expressed by citizens.
See ch. 3 p. 000 above.
See D. N. MacCormick Essays in Social Democracy , Oxford, 1982, ch. 10; and P. Atyiah,Promises, Morals and Law , Oxford, 1983, for two of several analyses of promising which attempt to reduce it to what is in effect nothing more than the general principle of personal  responsibility for one's actions.
In particular my comments leave untouched the consent account of the assumption of risk.
See, for example, B. Friedman's report to the Canadian Law Reform Commission which surveys the writing on the subject, and endorses an analysis of consent as a knowing action for the purpose of developing a legal doctrine concerning the assumption of risk.
Here too, while not necessarily denying the merits of the account in other respects, I think it fails as an explanation of consent in leaving out of account its essence as a knowing authorisation.
’ The Ethics of Consent’,Canadian Journal of Philosophy suppl. vol. 1982, p. 91.
See R. P. Wolff,In Defense of Anarchism , New York, 1970; M. B. E. Smith ‘Is There a Prima Facie Obligation to Obey the Law?’,
Yale Law Journal 82 (1973) 950; A. Woozley,Law and Obedience , London, 1979; A. Simmons, op. cit.; J. Raz,The Authority of Law , Oxford, 1979, ch. 12.
For further explanation of the attitude of respect for law which is discussed below see Raz ibid., ch. 13.
Not all defence doctrines recognize the existence of justifications of disobedience.
Self-defence does, but the insanity defence establishes only an excuse.
Similarly discretion not to prosecute is sometime based on grounds irrelevant to our purpose, e.g. that prosecution will cause widespread riots.
P. Soper,A Theory of Law , Cambridge Mass., 1984.
II.
Anti-Perfectionism
5 Neutral Political Concern
‘A state or government that claims….[the citizen's]allegiance (as other individuals do not)’, writes Robert Nozick, ‘therefore scrupulously must be neutral between its citizens.’
Writers of an egalitarian liberal persuasion often join libertarian liberals in applauding the same sentiments, different though their interpretation of them usually is.
The anti-perfectionist principle claims that implementation and promotion of ideals of the good life, though worthy in themselves, are not a legitimate matter for governmental action.
The doctrine of political neutrality seeks to implement it through a policy of neutrality.
Government action should be neutral regarding ideals of the good life.
Such a doctrine is a doctrine of restraint.
Doctrines of governmental restraint are those which deny the government's right to pursue certain valuable goals, or require it to maintain undisturbed a certain state of affairs, even though it could, if it were to try, improve it.
As we shall see, many but not all liberal theories of political freedom are based on the endorsement of one or another of several principles of restraint, of which the principle of neutrality is one.
Principles of restraint restrict the pursuit of good or valuable goals, they exclude action for valid, sound reasons for action, or they enjoin the government to preserve a state of affairs which there are good reasons to change.
There is no need for a special principle to require action for good reasons, or to maintain valuable states of affairs.
The doctrine of political neutrality is a doctrine of restraint for it advocates neutrality between valid and invalid ideals of the good.
It does not demand that the government shall avoid promoting unacceptable ideals.
Rather, it commands the government to make sure that its actions do not help acceptable ideals more than unacceptable ones, to see to it that its actions will not hinder the cause of false ideals more than they do that of true ones.
The fact that anti-perfectionism is based on restraint, on not doing as much good as one can, lends it a slightly paradoxical air.
But there is no denying its great intuitive appeal.
At the intuitive level anti-perfectionism responds to a widespread distrust of concentrated power and of bureaucracies.
Any political pursuit of ideals of the good is likely to be botched and distorted.
The best intentions and the wisest council are likely to misfire if entrusted to the care of the machinery of state action.
Beyond that there is the deep-felt conviction that it is not within the rights of any person to use the machinery of state in order to force his conception of the good life on other adult persons.
Later in the book we will consider alternative responses based on these intuitions.
Here the mention of but one example will suffice.
A right of conscientious objection to military service, and perhaps to some other legal duties, combines a political pursuit of goals which may be justified by their contribution to a valid conception of the good with a refusal to ram that conception down the throats of people who are deeply opposed to it.
In other words, one alternative to anti-perfectionism is restrictions on the choice of means through which perfectionist ideals are pursued.
In a sense anti-perfectionism is merely a more radical restriction of the employment of means through which one may pursue conceptions of the good.
It denies the appropriateness of using any political means to pursue such ends.
I will first examine the meaning of political neutrality (Section One) and its possibility (Section Two).
Consideration of some of the justifications advanced for it will lead to casting doubts on its cogency.
The argument will not be concluded until the examination of the principle of the exclusion of ideals from politics in the next chapter.
1.
Forms of Neutrality
Nozick, in the quotation given above, writes of neutrality between individuals.
I referred to neutrality between ideals or conceptions of the good.
The two ideas are closely related.
Discrimination between individuals consists in making it easier for some than for others to realize their ideals of the good.
But it is important to distinguish between two principles of political neutrality:
Principles of Scope
A: Neutrality concerning each person's chances of implementing the ideal of the good he happens to have.
B: Neutrality as in A, but also regarding the likelihood that a person will adopt one conception of the good rather than another.
B is the more radical principle, and in the absence of any special reason to prefer A, and given that writers supporting neutrality say little that bears on the issue, I will assume that the doctrine of neutrality advocates neutrality as in B.
Another ambiguity concerns the level of neutrality.
Is politics generally to be neutral between conceptions of the good, or does neutrality apply to the constitution only?
The first, stricter, doctrine of neutrality allows that individuals may act to implement their ideals in their lives, and in the life of their community, but only to the extent that they can do so by non-political means.
They may found voluntary associations, buy neighbourhoods and impose restrictive covenants on the use of properties in them, secure conditions of employment, endow charitable institutions, and promote their conception of the ideal community in many ways.
Such activities, when successful, will make the pursuit of some ideals of the good easier, and that of others more difficult.
But no planning regulation may be passed, no law affecting the education of the young or the use of the highway, and so on, which will make it easier to realize one conception of the good or more difficult to pursue another.
The second, less strict, doctrine allows the use of politics in the pursuit of ideals.
It insists, however, that that will be done in a constitutional framework which allows everyone an equal chance to endorse any conception of the good and to realize it.
The constitution is neutral.
But the law is not necessarily so, and many people born today will find their chances to pursue different conceptions of the good affected by law as a result of the activities of our and previous generations.
Again it seems best to assume the stricter doctrine as background for our discussion.
It is important to realize what is involved in talking of principles of neutrality.
‘To be neutral…is to do one's best to help or to hinder the various parties concerned in an equal degree.’
This is the primary sense of neutrality, which I will call principled neutrality.
In this sense one is neutral only if one can affect the fortunes of the parties and if one helps or hinders them to an equal degree and one does so because one believes that there are reasons for so acting which essentially depend on the fact that the action has an equal effect on the fortunes of the parties.
One secondary sense of neutrality regards persons as neutral if they can affect the fortunes of the parties and if they affect the fortunes of all the parties equally regardless of their reasons for so doing.
When ‘neutral’ is used in this sense I refer to it as by-product neutrality, for here neutrality may well be an accidental by-product of the agent's action and not its intended outcome.
Principles of neutrality state that there are reasons to be neutral.
They are satisfied by any behaviour that affects the fortunes of the parties in equal degree (by-product neutrality).
They are followed by people acting neutrally in a principled way, i.e., because they believe that there is a reason not to help or hinder one side more than the other.
Our interest is in political theories that require neutrality, i.e., that are followed by acting neutrally in a principled way.
Some theories may be such that behaviour that follows them is also neutral as a by-product.
But those are of no special interest from our point of view.
Neutrality is sometimes conceived of as being necessarily at least prima facie desirable.
If so, the principles of neutral political concern are at least prima facie valid.
But the definition of neutrality adopted above is not committed to such a view, which is rooted in the confused notion that to act neutrally is to act fairly.
Montefiore gives a familiar example:
Two children may each appeal to their father to intervene... in some dispute between them.
Their father may know that if he simply ‘refuses to intervene’ the older one, stronger and more resourceful, is bound to come out on top…
In other words, the decision to remain neutral, according to the terms of our present definition, would amount to a decision to allow the naturally strong child to prevail.
But this may look like a very odd form of neutrality to the weaker child.
Does this show that the father would not be neutral if he remained aloof from the quarrel?
Even if(and I do not accept this at all ) neutrality could only be justified as a means to a fair contest, it should not be identified with action securing a fair contest.
An attorney representing a client before a court helps to make the trial fair, but the attorney is not neutral.
In his situation to act neutrally is to act unfairly.
All that Montefiore's example shows is that there are circumstances in which it is unfair to act neutrally, where there are not even prima facie reasons to be neutral.
The example is of a case where the father should not, not where he cannot, remain neutral.
The question of the justification of neutral political concern invites moral and political argument and cannot be settled by the inherent appeal of neutrality as such.
Supporters of the doctrine of neutral political concern differ on many issues.
But all of them endorse one or the other of the principles of political neutrality mentioned above and seek to implement it by some variant of the following principles of restraint which limit the political relevance of ideals of the good.
Interpretations of Political Neutrality 1.
No political action may be undertaken or justified on the ground that it promotes an ideal of the good nor on the ground that it enables individuals to pursue an ideal of the good.
2.
No political action may be undertaken if it makes a difference to the likelihood that a person will endorse one conception of the good or another, or to his chances of realizing his conception of the good, unless other actions are undertaken which cancel out such effects.
3.
One of the main goals of governmental authority, which is lexically prior to any other, is to ensure for all persons an equal ability to pursue in their lives and promote in their societies any ideal of the good of their choosing.
The first principle is offered by R. Nozick as an interpretation of neutrality.
To the argument that his State is not neutral, for its political organization, its property and contract laws, favour the implementation of some conception of the good, Nozick replies:
Not every enforcement of a prohibition which differentially benefits people makes the state non-neutral…
Would a prohibition against rape be non-neutral?
It would, by hypothesis, differentially benefit people; but for potential rapists to complain that the prohibition was non-neutral between the sexes…would be absurd.
There is an independent reason for prohibiting rape…
That a prohibition thus independently justifiable works out to affect different people differently is no reason to condemn it as non-neutral, provided it was instituted or continues for (something like) the reasons which justify it…similarly with the prohibitions and enforcements of the minimal state.
Nozick is certainly raising a point which supporters of the other versions of neutrality have to contend with.
According to their interpretation of neutrality, he is implying, prohibiting rape is not neutral.
But they have a ready answer to this challenge.
Supporters of the third principle may claim that the reason rape is prohibited is that its perpetration deprives the raped of their chances to live according to their conception of the good.
The limitation imposed on would-be rapists does no more than establish equal chances to pursue one's conception of the good.
It limits people's ability to pursue some conceptions of the good, but only in order to equalize the opportunity to do so overall.
Supporters of the second of the principles above will have a slightly different answer.
Conceding that the prohibition of rape is itself non-neutral, they will then require the government to take action to compensate would-be rapists by improving their chances to realize other aspects of their conception of the good.
Notice that the thought that in principle a would-be rapist should be compensated for giving up the right to rape is implicit in the answer of the supporters of the third principle as well.
They claim that the prohibition in fact merely equalizes people's ability to pursue their own conception of the good.
If it turns out that this is not the case, if it is discovered that the  prohibition denies the would-be rapists more of a chance to pursue the good life than it gives their possible victims, then one may have to adjust other features of the political framework to make sure that this does not result in inequality of ability to pursue one's conception of the good.
Many readers may join Nozick in regarding this as a reductio ad absurdum of the second and third principles stated above.
We will return to their examination below.
Whatever the force of Nozick's implied challenge to alternative interpretations of neutrality, the question remains whether his reply succeeds in its primary aim of defending his own.
Nozick's case rests on the view that so long as one is not acting for the reason that one's action will favour one of the parties or hinder the other, but for a valid independent reason, then one's neutrality is intact.
If so then on the assumption, surely acceptable to Nozick as to most people, that the prospect of a profit is a valid reason for most commercial activities it follows that selling arms to one of the combatants for profit does not jeopardize one's neutrality.
One is not free to deny that when one's action actually helps one of the parties then the profit is not a valid reason, for that is to abandon the case and adopt the view of neutrality espoused according to which neutrality is determined by the consequences of one's action.
Nozick's State is not neutral, and his principle (principle 1 above) is not a principle of neutrality, but it shares with the doctrine of neutrality an anti-perfectionist bias and will therefore be examined in the next chapter.
It may be thought that the same verdict applies to the third principle as well.
Ensuring to all an equal ability to realize their conception of the good is more likely to require acting in a non-neutral way, acting to improve the ability of some at the expense of others.
The principle is an anti-perfectionist principle but can it be regarded as a principle of neutrality?
I think that this objection is mistaken and that the third principle is a principle of neutrality.
I will call it the principle of comprehensive (political) neutrality to distinguish it from the second principle which will be called the principle of narrow (political) neutrality.
We can best examine their character as two competing principles of neutrality in the context of objections to political neutrality on the ground that it is impossible or even incoherent.
2.
The Impossibility of Strict Political Neutrality
The most serious attempt to specify and defend a doctrine rather like our principle of comprehensive neutrality is that of J. Rawls.
While our discussion in this chapter is of the doctrine of neutrality as such, Rawls' treatment of it will serve to illustrate the problems involved.
Rawls believes that principles chosen rationally but in ignorance of one's actual situation in society, one's natural endowments, and one's conception of the good , are bound to be neutral principles.
He believes that under these conditions of choice, which he describes as the original position, there is only one set of principles which can be rationally chosen to govern a society enjoying favourable social and economic conditions.
They are the principle of equal liberty, assuring everyone equal measure of an enumerated list of basic liberties (freedom of expression, religion, etc.) and the difference principle according to which everyone should enjoy equal allocation of the other primary goods (i.e. those desirable whatever one's conception of the good may be, e.g. wealth, income, opportunities, status) except in so far as deviation from strict equality would improve the prospects of the worst-off group in society.
Rawls' theory deviates from comprehensive neutrality in requiring equal ability to pursue ideals of the good only in so far as that ability depends on the principle of equal liberty.
For the rest, the difference principle allows deviations from an equal distribution of primary goods where the worst-off group will benefit from them.
Finally, Rawls is only to a limited extent concerned with correcting inequalities in the ability to promote the good which are due to one's natural endowments (the difference principle is about social, not natural, primary goods).
T. Nagel has criticised Rawls' theory of justice on the ground that it purports to be neutral between different conceptions of the good, but is not.
If Rawls' theory is based on a doctrine of neutrality it is a doctrine of comprehensive neutrality.
Hence the relevance of the objection to our purpose.
Nagel explains his position as follows:
It is a fundamental feature of Rawls' conception of the fairness of the original position that it should not permit the choice of principles of justice to depend on a particular conception of the good over which the parties may differ.
The construction does not, I think, accomplish this, and there are reasons to believe that it cannot be successfully carried out.
Any hypothetical choice situation which requires agreement among the parties will have to impose strong restrictions on the grounds of choice, and these restrictions can be justified only in terms of a conception of the good.
It is one of those cases in which there is no neutrality to be had, because neutrality needs as much justification as any other position.
(pp. 8–9)
The specific point that Nagel is making is that there is no way of justifying the conditions of choice in the original position except from the point of view of a certain conception of the good.
But later on he makes it clear that this is so, at least in part, because the supposedly inevitable outcome of that choice is not really neutral:
The original position seems to presuppose not just a neutral theory of the good, but a liberal, individualistic conception according to which the best that can be wished for someone is the unimpeded pursuit of his own path, provided it does not interfere with the rights of others.
The view is persuasively developed in the later portions of the book but without a sense of its controversial character.
Among different life plans of this general type the construction is neutral.
But given that many conceptions of the good do not fit into the individualistic pattern, how can this be described as a fair choice situation for principles of justice?(p. 10)
One should be careful not to misinterpret this point.
Rawls often writes of individuals' conceptions of the good as if they are their views of the good life for themselves.
But he is also aware that they may be conceptions of the good life for people generally and for society as a whole.
Individuals may use their primary goods to promote non-individualistic conceptions of the good.
To use Nagel's own words, individuals may use their primary goods to implement
views that hold a good life to be readily achievable only in certain well-defined types of social structure, or only in a society that works concertedly for the realization of certain higher human capacities and the suppression of baser ones, or only given certain types of economic relations among men.
(p. 9)
The individualistic bias that Rawls is accused of by Nagel is not that he rules out such conceptions but that he is not neutral regarding them because he makes their successful pursuit more difficult than that of individualistic conceptions of the good.
Nagel's reason for alleging the existence of the bias is that ‘the primary goods are not equally valuable in pursuit of all conceptions of the good’(p. 9).
They serve individualistic conceptions well enough but ‘they are less useful in implementing’ non-individualistic conceptions.
This point is valid.
Rawls is surprisingly brief and inexplicit on this issue.
He seems to take assessment of wealth to be unproblematic.
If some market mechanism, actual or hypothetical, is assumed, the value of primary goods is the function of supply and demand where the demand is partly determined by the usefulness of the goods in the implementation of conceptions of the good which are actually pursued in that society and by the number of those pursuing different conceptions.
Relative to any such evaluation of primary goods some conceptions of the good will be harder to implement, i.e., will require primary goods of greater value to realize, than others.
These need not be non-individualistic conceptions.
All conceptions involving the cultivation and satisfaction of the so-called expensive tastes are harder to satisfy, and the Rawlsian theory can be said to discriminate against them.
Nonindividualistic conceptions are likely to be among the expensive tastes since their realization depends on the cooperation of others, and they will take some convincing to come round to the agent's point of view.
Alternatively, it will take a lot of resources to buy their consent to his point of view.
This consideration points to the fact that the very restrictions imposed on societies by the Rawlsian principles of justice make the implementation of some conceptions of the good more difficult and their pursuit by individuals less attractive than that of others.
Furthermore, the implementation of some conceptions of the good is incompatible with the principles of justice and is ruled out altogether.
Neutrality, however, can be a matter of degree.
One can deviate from complete neutrality to a greater or lesser extent.
Can Rawls' principles be defended on the basis that they approximate complete neutrality better than any alternative?
The argument remains to be made.
Whatever our judgment of Rawls' principles on that account, at least if political neutrality is a coherent and desirable ideal then the impossibility of complete adherence to it need not undermine its force as a political doctrine.
So let us turn to two arguments challenging the validity of the idea in a way which makes even approximation to complete neutrality a chimerical notion.
Neutrality is concerned only with the degree to which the parties are helped or hindered.
It is silent concerning acts which neither help nor hinder.
This may lead some to suppose that any attribution or commendation of neutrality assumes that whereas one is morally responsible (i.e., accountable) for what one does, one is not morally responsible for what one does not do, or some similar distinction.
Those who reject this view may conclude that neutrality is impossible, or even incoherent.
The conclusion is, however, unwarranted.
No such assumption underlies the attributions of neutrality.
Commendations of neutrality, while consistent with such a view, do not depend on it.
They may be defended simply because in certain circumstances not helping is to be preferred to helping.
It is true, though, that valuing neutrality presupposes a distinction between not helping and hindering.
Consider a country that has no commercial or other relations with either of two warring parties.
This was true of Uruguay in relation to the war between Somalia and Ethiopia.
It may nevertheless be true that such a country may have been able to establish links with either party.
Would we say that Uruguay was not neutral unless the help that it could have and did not give Ethiopia was equal to the help that it could have and did not give Somalia?
This will not be the case if, for example, Uruguay could have supplied the parties with a commodity that, though useful to both, was in short supply in one country but not in the other.
Should we then say that Uruguay is not neutral unless it starts providing the country suffering from the shortage in that commodity?
If by not helping it Uruguay is hindering it, then this conclusion is forced on us.
But according to the common understanding of neutrality, Uruguay would have been breaking its neutrality if in the circumstances described it would have started supplying one of the  parties with militarily useful materials after the outbreak of hostilities.
It follows that the distinction between helping and hindering is crucial to an understanding of neutrality, as is the distinction between hindering and not helping.
But it does not follow that this distinction is always of moral significance (neutrality is not always defensible).
Nor does it follow that the distinction can always be drawn.
Neutrality is possible in some cases, but it may be impossible in others.
A second argument designed to show that neutrality is chimerical claims that whether or not a person acts neutrally depends on the base line relative to which his behaviour is judged, and that there are always different base lines leading to conflicting judgments and no rational grounds to prefer one to the others.
Imagine that the Reds are fighting the Blues.
We have no commercial or other relations with the Blues, but we supply the Reds with essential food which helps them maintain their war effort.
If we want to be neutral, should we continue normal supplies to the Reds or should they be discontinued?
If we continue supplying the Reds, we will be helping them more than the Blues.
If we discontinue supplies, we will be hindering the Reds more than the Blues.
(I am assuming that even if similar supplies to the Blues will help them, continuing not to help them is not hindering them.)
It may be said that this is just one of the cases where it is impossible to be neutral.
Without confusing not helping and hindering, such cases cannot be multiplied.
They form a special class where, in the circumstances of the case, not helping is hindering.
But the case invites a more radical rebuttal.
In it two standards of neutrality conflict.
The basic idea is simple.
Neutrality is neutrality between parties in relation to some issue regarding which the success of one sets the other back.
Various aspects of the parties' life, resources, and activities will be helpful to them in the conflict, but many of these are resources and activities that they will have possessed or engaged in or wished to posses or to engage in in any case, even if they did not take part in the contest.
Some of the activities and resources are such that the parties engage or wish to engage in them or possess them only because of the conflict.
We could therefore distinguish between comprehensive and narrow neutrality.
Comprehensive neutrality consists in helping or hindering the parties in equal degree in all matters relevant to the conflict between them.
Narrow neutrality consists in helping or hindering them to an equal degree in those activities and regarding those resources that they would wish neither to engage in nor to acquire but for the conflict.
’ Neutrality’is used in ordinary discourse to indicate sometimes narrow and sometimes comprehensive neutrality.
Sometimes various intermediate courses of conduct are seen as required by neutrality.
This reflects the fact that several kinds of considerations may lead to different and incompatible policies all of which are commonly regarded as policies of neutrality, because all of them demonstrate an even-handed treatment of the parties either by not helping one more than the other, or by not helping one more than the other to take special measures to improve his position in the conflict, and so on.
The difference between military equipment and food supplies illustrates the point.
To be comprehensively neutral one should supply the Reds in our example neither with arms nor with food.
But one is narrowly neutral even if one provides the Reds with normal food supplies.
Arms on the other hand are needed specifically for military use, and continued supply of arms to one side is incompatible with neutrality.
Several subsidiary points require further argument.
First, some arms are necessary for police action, some may be solicited and supplied in anticipation of a different possible conflict.
This may show that unequal supply of arms can be compatible with narrow (though clearly not with comprehensive) neutrality.
Second, some feel that no supply of arms to the combatants, however even-handed, is compatible with neutrality.
My response is, in brief, that no-supply is not more neutral than even-handed supply.
If it is thought to be preferable, this is for reasons having nothing to do with neutrality, such as a desire to bring the war to a speedy end or not to allow people to profit from wars.
Third, my example assumed that we are regular suppliers of food to the Reds.
This assures us that the continued supply is of normal quantities required anyway, but it also makes discontinuation of supply a positive harm rather than a refusal to help.
Thus a person who has no regular trading relations with the parties can provide the Reds with their ordinary requirement of food while remaining narrowly neutral, or refuse to sell them anything that improves their position and be comprehensively neutral.
We, being their regular suppliers, do not have the option of action that neither helps nor hinders.
Finally, it may be claimed that real neutrality is comprehensive neutrality, narrow neutrality being compromised neutrality which is sometimes all that is possible.
My point is merely that even if this is so, the fact remains that narrow neutrality is often all that is meant by ‘neutrality’.
This brings us back, at long last, to the choice between the narrow and the comprehensive principles of neutrality broached in the last section.
The conflict in which the state is supposed to be neutral is about the ability of people to choose and successfully pursue conceptions of the good (and these include ideals of the good society or world).
It is therefore a comprehensive conflict.
There is nothing outside it which can be useful for it but is not specifically necessary for it.
The whole of life, so to speak, is involved in the pursuit of the good life.
Can one be narrowly neutral in a comprehensive conflict?
Furthermore, within the range of duties which the State owes its citizens, failure to help is  hindrance .
If I owe a client a duty to increase the value of his investment portfolio then if I fail to take action which could enhance its value I am positively harming my client's interests.
A surgeon who fails to take action to help the recovery of a patient prostrate in front of him in the operating theatre is hindering his recovery.
So within the range of the state's responsibility to its subjects failing to help is hindering.
If the state is subjected to a requirement of comprehensive neutrality and if its duties to its citizens are very wide-ranging then the principle of comprehensive neutrality is a principle of neutrality indeed.
On those assumptions the state can be neutral only if it creates conditions of equal opportunities for people to choose any conception of the good, with an equal prospect of realizing it.
Egalitarian supporters of the neutrality principle such as Rawls endorse a variant on the principle of comprehensive neutrality.
Libertarian supporters of neutral political concern gravitate towards the narrow principle.
The difference is hardly surprising.
It reflects the underlying, and all too often unexpressed, differing assumptions about the responsibilities of states and the limits of their authority.
So much for clarifying the doctrine of neutrality.
In evaluating its credentials our prime example will again be Rawls' theory.
3.
Neutrality and the Social Role of Justice
Since in the original position no one knows his own moral ideals, his own conception of the good, Rawls concludes that no perfectionist standards will be adopted in it.
The principles of justice adopted in the original position are neutral between different conceptions of the good.
To vindicate Rawls' position one requires convincing reasons first for excluding moral and religious beliefs from the information available behind the veil of ignorance, and second for accepting that neutral or maximally neutral principles will be chosen in these circumstances.
A Theory of Justice contains hardly any explicit argument for the exclusion of moral and religious beliefs from the original position.
Such argument as there is turns on the need to secure unanimity, the need to have, in the original position, one viewpoint which can be the ‘standpoint of one person selected at random’ which excludes bargaining and guarantees unanimity.
Therefore, only non-controversial information can be available.
Otherwise there will be different standpoints defined by different informational bases, and it will be impossible to guarantee agreement.
The obvious reply to this argument is that we need a reason to accept a decision reached behind this veil of ignorance, and the claim that no decision would be reached behind a differently constructed veil of ignorance is not such a reason unless it has already been shown, as it has not in fact, that we are bound by the results of some veil of ignorance, whatever it may be.
The argument showing that no moral ideal of the good will be chosen as a principle of justice in the original position is the argument that Rawls uses for rejecting perfectionist principles:
For while the persons in the original position take no interest in one another 's interests, they know that they have (or may have) certain moral and religious interests and other cultural ends which they cannot put in jeopardy.
Moreover, they are assumed to be committed to different conceptions of the good and they think that they are entitled to press their claims on one another to further their separate aims.
The parties do not share a conception of the good by reference to which the fruition of their powers or even the satisfaction of their desires can be evaluated.
They do not have an agreed criterion of perfection that can be used as a principle for choosing between instructions.
To acknowledge any such standard would be, in effect, to accept a principle that might lead to a lesser religious or other liberty, if not to a loss of freedom altogether to advance many of one's spiritual ends.
If the standard of excellence is reasonably clear, the parties have no way of knowing that their claims may not fall before the higher social goal of maximizing perfection.
Thus it seems that the only understanding that the persons in the original position can reach is that everyone should have the greatest equal liberty consistent with a similar liberty for others.
They cannot risk their freedom by authorizing a standard of value to define what is to be maximized by a teleological principle of justice.
(pp. 327–8).
Rawls, however, claims more than this argument establishes.
He claims not only that the parties to the original position will avoid choosing any particular perfectionist principle as a constituent of their doctrine of justice, but that they will not even accept a doctrine of justice including an agreed process for determining which perfectionist principle should be implemented in the state.
Given their concern that only well-founded ideals of the good, and not any ideal one believes in, should be implemented, and given the general knowledge of human fallibility, it is not really surprising that the original position does not yield a commitment to any particular ideal.
But it may yield an agreement to establish a constitutional framework most likely to lead to the pursuit of well-founded ideals, given the information available at any given time.
Ignorance of one's particular moral beliefs will not exclude this possibility, since the parties in the original position know that they have moral ideals.
They accept, in other words, ‘a natural duty’ to pursue the best-founded moral ideal.
This argument presupposes that moral ideals are based on rational considerations, and Rawls is anxious not to deny this: ‘in making this argument,’ he says, referring to the passage quoted above, ‘I have not contended that the criteria of excellence lack a rational basis in everyday life’(p. 328).
An agreement on a method for choosing between perfectionist principles cannot be ruled out on the grounds that the methods of evaluating different ideals are themselves subject to evaluative controversy.
They are not more controversial nor more evaluative than some of the psychological facts available to the parties, such as the Aristotelian principle and the considerations concerning self-respect on which the priority of liberty is based (cf. sections 65, 67, and 82).
Nor has Rawls provided any argument to show that they are.
In his Dewey lectures Rawls regards the exclusion of beliefs about ideals of the good from the original position as part of an exclusion of all controversial information and forms of reasoning.
Moral and religious disagreements are seen as endemic to a democratic society, and the validity of the Rawlsian conception of justice is limited to such a society.
The justification for excluding controversial truths from the original position lies in the social role of justice, which is ‘to enable all members of society to make mutually acceptable to one another their shared institutions and basic  arrangements , by citing what are publicly recognized as sufficient reasons.’
The interest of subjecting one's society and one's life to such principles of justice is assumed to be everyone's highest interest.
It is of the utmost importance that the Rawlsian method of argument requiring unanimity behind the veil of ignorance should not be defended on the ground that otherwise the resulting principles would not be fair because unanimity is a condition of fairness, or by any other moral argument.
Rather, the reason must be that principles not generated by the Rawlsian method will fail to fulfil the social role of a doctrine of justice.
The essential point is that a conception of justice fulfils its social role provided that citizens equally conscientious and sharing roughly the same beliefs find that, by affirming the framework of deliberation set up by it, they are normally led to a sufficient convergence of opinion.
Thus a conception of justice is framed to meet the practical requirements of social life and to yield a public basis in the light of which citizens can justify to one another their common institutions.
Such a conception need be only precise enough to achieve this result.
Even if one accepts this view of the social role of a doctrine of justice, and gives it the priority Rawls assigns to it, his conclusions are not supported by his arguments for at least three reasons.
First , even though different people differ in their conception of the good, it does not follow that in a given culture (and Rawls' theory claims validity only within our culture) there are no common elements in their varying conceptions of the good.
Such common elements need not be excluded by the veil of ignorance since their presence does not jeopardize the social role of the doctrine of justice.
Second , in particular it is possible that there is a wide measure of agreement concerning the modes of reasoning by which ideals of the good are to be evaluated.
Third , and most important, is Rawls' blindness to the possibility that the social role of a doctrine of justice may be met by consensus concerning the second best, given that an ideal constitution is not feasible.
Rawls assumes without argument that the social role can be fulfilled only by a perfect doctrine of justice, i.e., one which establishes a perfect government for his actual society.
But there is no reason why the doctrine of justice actually reflected by the constitutional arrangements of a state may not be reached as a result of people realizing that their different ideals of the good, each leading to a different doctrine of justice, cannot be  implemented because of the widespread disagreement in society concerning their value.
Each will then agree, as a second best, to a doctrine of justice to which all or nearly all members of society could agree (as a second best) if they argue rationally each from his different conception of the good provided they are united in ranking the need for a public conception of justice very highly in their order of priorities.
Some people may feel that Rawls' original position is already a description of a process of compromise, of settling for the second best.
This, one may feel, is implied by the need to disregard one's conception of the good, thus jeopardizing one's chances of implementing it.
When so regarded the objection will be rephrased: there is no reason to think that people who know they differ in their conceptions of the good but do not know how will reach a compromise, whereas those who also know how will not.
In both cases one needs a common belief in the social role of justice and in its priority to be assured of a compromise.
And in both cases if these conditions obtain some compromise will be reached, or at least there is a good chance that it will.
A doctrine of justice reached in this alternative way is likely to differ from Rawls' two principles.
It will fulfil the social role of justice, but it will be agreed upon by a process of reasoning quite different from his.
First , different ideals of the good far from being excluded will form the starting points of the argument about a doctrine of justice.
Second , and as a result, supporters of different conceptions of the good will follow different routes in arguing for the doctrine of justice.
There will be unanimity in the conclusion but (given the different starting points) no unanimity on the route to it.
Third , the common feature of most routes will be the reliance on a rational reconstruction of a process of bargaining by which the common overriding goal of reaching an agreement leads the parties to compromise by accepting a less than perfect doctrine as the optimally realizable second best.
The resulting compromise will be fair by Rawls' own standards, in that each one of the parties conforms, while bargaining, to the principles of his morality.
By the moral standards of some of the bargainers the claims of some of the others may be immoral.
But this does not undermine the fairness of the outcome of the bargaining as long as all acknowledge the Rawlsian assumption of the overriding goal of achieving a common agreement concerning a doctrine of justice.
This overriding goal entails that the best constitutional arrangements each person can reach while acting in conformity with his own moral ideals are morally valid, and since the commonly agreed upon arrangements are so regarded by everyone, they are morally binding on all.
For reasons which are fairly obvious this procedure of bargaining may in some societies lead to the endorsement of highly wicked principles as that society's doctrine of justice.
This should be regarded as a reductio ad absurdum of the presupposition of Rawls' theory of justice and especially the assumption of the overriding goal to reach a doctrine of justice at whatever cost to one's conception of the good.
I am not advocating the bargaining procedure described above.
My purpose was merely to show that, though it is a perfectionist procedure, it is not ruled out by Rawls' arguments against perfectionism; and to suggest that the assumption that he relies upon against perfectionism leads to strongly counter-intuitive results.
4.
From Neutrality to Pluralism
Rawls' Kantian constructivist approach to ethics suggest an argument for political neutrality which is in part independent of the one criticised above and which turns on autonomy:
Kant held, I believe, that a person is acting autonomously when the principles of his action are chosen by him as the most adequate possible expression of his nature as a free and equal rational being.
The principles he acts upon are not adopted because of his social position or natural endowments, or in view of the particular kind of society in which he lives or the specific things that he happens to want.
To act on such principles is to act heteronomously.
Now the veil of ignorance deprives the persons in the original position of the knowledge that would enable them to choose heteronomous principles.
Rawls applies the Kantian insight only to the choice of the principles of justice.
But it seems that if it is valid for that purpose, it must be valid for morality generally.
In A Theory of Justice Rawls does not use the Kantian insight as an argument for the acceptability of his theory.
He merely points out that his theory is consistent with it.
But in ‘Kantian Constructivism in Moral Theory’ the Kantian insight is used to defend his theory against various criticisms by providing it with an epistemological foundation.
Applied to moral considerations generally, the Kantian insight yields a new argument for excluding the parties' moral and religious beliefs behind the veil of ignorance.
While not explicitly using this argument, Rawls comes close to doing so in saying that
the parties in the original position do not agree on what the moral facts are, as if there already were such facts.
It is not that, being situated impartially, they have a clear and undistorted view of a prior and independent moral order.
Rather (for constructivism), there is no such order, and therefore no such facts apart from the procedure of construction as a whole; the facts are identified by the principles that result.
In developing the Kantian insight along Rawlsian lines, several points must be borne in mind.
First , the fundamental idea which enjoys universal validity is that morality is the free expression of a person's rational nature.
The claim that principles chosen in the original position express this nature depends on a certain conception of the person which is among the deep common presuppositions of our culture but no more.
Second , Rawls is anxious to make clear that the choice of principles because they express human nature ‘is not a so-called ‘radical’ choice: that is, a choice not based on reasons…
The notion of radical choice…finds no place in justice as fairness.’
Furthermore: ‘The ideals of the person and of social cooperation…are not ideals that, at some moment in life, citizens are said simply to choose.
One is to imagine that, for the most part, they find on examination that they hold these ideals, that they have taken them in part from the culture of their society.’
The conception of morality as an expression of the rational nature of people is consistent with the view that people's nature is socially determined, thus rendering the concrete manifestation of morality equally socially determined.
Third , Rawls' conception of the person does not lead to unanimity of moral views.
Given this conception of morality, it is evident that the parties to the original position know nothing of their moral beliefs.
They are not excluded, as is knowledge of the particular circumstances of each participant's life, in order to ensure that choice in the original position represents people's nature.
They are in fact not excluded at all.
The parties to the original position have no knowledge of their moral beliefs because they have as yet no moral beliefs and because whatever moral beliefs they should have depend on the outcome of their deliberations in the original position and cannot affect it.
Thus extending the Kantian insight beyond political morality to morality as a whole explains the elimination of moral beliefs and ideals of the good from behind the veil of ignorance.
But this argument by itself does not justify political neutrality.
The argument for neutrality still rests on the further assumption that it is in people's highest interest to adopt principles fulfilling the social role of justice.
Without its support we still have no reason to believe that any agreement will be reached behind the veil of ignorance.
Rawls shows neither that this assumption follows from the Kantian insight nor that it leads to neutral political concern.
The counter-argument of Section Four above still holds good.
This reconstruction of Rawls' argument for the doctrine of neutral political concern attempts to found it on the notion of autonomy through the notion of moral self-determination.
The intuitive idea behind it seems to be this: since morality is an expression of one's rational nature, it is essentially self-determined.
Given the social determination of the concept of a person and the absence of unanimity in the the outcome of moral deliberation, the only proper course seems to be to endorse constitutional arrangements neutral between conceptions of the good in order to enable all individuals to develop and pursue their own conception of the good.
Since no conception of the good which expresses the rational nature of the person upholding it is better than any other, the constitutional arrangements should be neutral between them.
The role of the state is to enable all persons to express their nature and pursue their own autonomously conceived conception of the good and plan of life.
As noted, this intuitive idea relies on a plausible-looking but unfounded belief in the acceptance of a need for unanimously approved principles of justice as in everyone's highest interest.
This is enough to reject it.
Furthermore, this way of expressing the intuitive idea is unlikely to gain Rawls' approval.
It advocates not neutral political concern as a principle of restraint but neutrality between those conceptions of the good which greatly value an autonomous development of one's life in accordance with one's rational nature.
It is in fact not a doctrine of neutrality but of moral pluralism.
Moral pluralism is often thought to necessitate neutral political concern.
It will be the main task of Part Four of the book to explore the rationality of perfectionist moral pluralism, i.e. of pluralism of many forms of the good which are admitted to be so many valuable expressions of people's nature, but pluralism which allows that certain conceptions of the good are worthless and demeaning, and that political action may and should be taken to eradicate or at least curtail them.
For the present all we need do is point to the logical gap between pluralism and neutrality.
Moral pluralism asserts the existence of a multitude of incompatible but morally valuable forms of life.
It is coupled with an advocacy of autonomy.
It naturally combines with the view that individuals should develop freely to find for themselves the form of the good which they wish to pursue in their life.
Both combined lead to political conclusions which are in some ways akin to those of Rawls: political action should be concerned with providing individuals with the means by which they can develop, which enable them to choose and attempt to realize their own conception of the good.
But there is nothing here which speaks for neutrality.
For it is the goal of all political action to enable individuals to pursue valid conceptions of the good and to discourage evil or empty ones.
Or at least that is the argument of Part Four.
Our provisional conclusion can be no more than that Rawls and others arguing for neutrality in similar ways fail to establish their case, and that sometimes they assume too quick or simple a connection between neutrality and personal autonomy.
R. Nozick,Anarchy, State, and Utopia , New York, 1974, p. 33 (italics in the original).
This interpretation of the doctrine is silent on whether individual political action (voting in elections etc.) may rightly aim at the promotion of some conception of the good.
Little attention has been paid to this as a separate issue in ‘neutralist’ writings.
A. Montefiore in the book he edited,Neutrality and Impartiality , Cambridge 1975, p. 5.
Ibid. p. 7.
R. Nozick,Anarchy, State, and Utopia , pp. 272–3.
T. Nagel, ‘Rawls on Justice’,Philosophical Review 82 (1973) 220, reprinted in Reading Rawls , ed.
N. Daniels, Oxford, 1975, to which all page references refer.
J. Rawls,A Theory of Justice , Oxford, 1971, pp. 93–4.
This point raises a wider issue of some importance to the evaluation of Rawls' procedure.
Should one assume that the parties take notice in the original position of their own fallibility, and agree on constitutional  arrangements that will be self-correcting if it turns out that the fundamental beliefs concerning human nature, on which their substantive principles of justice are based, turn out to be wrong, or not?
One might think that they need not.
We could always engage in the Rawlsian form of argument and apply it to the new information once it becomes available.
This seems to be the way Rawls treats the problem (though he is sensitive to fallibility concerning applied principles (see pp. 195–7) But quite apart from the fact that by this one assumes that in the original position the parties discount a general fact of human nature, namely its fallibility, this procedure will sanction non-adaptable constitutions — a highly counter-intuitive conclusion.
Rawls, ‘Kantian Constructivism in Moral Theory’,Journal of Philosophy 77 (1980) 540–2.
Ibid. p. 517 and cf. p. 561.
Ibid. p. 525.
Ibid. p. 561.
Rawls,A Theory of Justice , p. 252.
Rawls, ‘Kantian Constructivism and Moral Theory’, p. 568.
Cf. ibid. p. 520.
It seems to me that Rawls is ambiguous on the crucial issue of whether the reflective equilibrium argument supports the fundamental Kantian insight or presupposes it.
I assume here that there is a sense in which the latter is the case, though the full story is more complex and cannot be explored here.
Ibid. p. 568.
Ibid. pp. 568–9