

PROLOGUE
‘Now listen, pal.’
The voice is threatening and his choice of the word pal is not meant as a term of endearment.
He uses it when he is angry or sarcastic, otherwise it is ‘babe’.
The eyebrows go up in an arch that would make a complete circle if they carried on down, the lids over those eyes, likened  to a cobra's by Candice Bergen, narrow to a slit; the gleaming white teeth flash through the pursed lips in what Vogue editor Diana Vreeland called a ‘killer smile’.
He shows his annoyance with some intimidating facial expression, backed up by a sparse selection of adjectival punctuation invariably using the ‘f’ word, which he uses with considerable effect.
He is capable of rages near to those on-screen moments when he can scare the living daylights out of a cinema audience.
Then the anger subsides, as quickly as it flared.
His speech goes back into a relaxed drawl, eyebrows half-cocked this time, and a mischievous glint makes the instigator of this flash of temper wonder whether he meant it in the first place.
He did.
He's talked enough about drugs.
That's it.
Why talk about it any more?
The scenes switches.
He's at a party in Toronto to honour his pal Warren Beatty; someone is always giving a party for Beatty and when they don't he gives one for himself.
There's a blonde approaching.
Beatty thinks he's got it made, but she turns to Jack.
She's a reporter and Jack knows it.
She tilts forward slightly, revealing an ample cleavage and brazenly says to Nicholson, ‘Hi Jack, would you like to dance?’
He pauses before answering, eyes going up and down, mouth narrowing to a leery smile.
‘Wrong verb, honey.
Wrong verb.’
That's the image.
Womanizer.
Is it true?
Of course, but exaggerated.
Does he encourage it?
Yes, or did once when it was important to him professionally, when there was still the lurking doubt that no one would call any more to offer him a great new role, an insecurity built on the fact they no one did call in the first fourteen years of his professional life.
It was always the other way round, and when he found overnight fame, he clung to it with both hands and worried sometimes that it would go away again.
And so the image is important: it keeps the punters on the hook.
What has also developed is a kind of unofficial contest between himself and Warren Beatty which is all about women, i.e., their famous conquests and their alleged insatiable quests to make it with the world's most attractive women, or some alluring beauty either may have encountered in a bar or restaurant.
For Nicholson, success in this quarter is doubly gratifying — displaying his ability to attract women by means other than looks.
Unlike Beatty, who always had the advantage of being the living image of the role-model Hollywood leading man with dark, mysterious eyes, classic features and a huge mop of hair, Nicholson is the unlikely romantic hero.
But then, it was not his good looks that made him famous.
When stardom struck, he was already in his thirties, the hair showed signs of receding and because it was brown Beatty taught him a trick with make-up shadow that reduced the emphasis of an enlarged forehead.
He was already having to watch his weight.
He could not be described as handsome, and, in later years, with his weight fluctuating to in excess of fifteen stone through his appetite for junkish food between pictures, he showed signs of a middle-aged spread; not being tall, at five feet, nine inches, it tends to be obvious.
Although there will be plenty of examples of his deep love of women, not merely for their sexual attraction but for their companionship, conversation and intelligence, he can be struck by an infatuation for women he has never met.
He invariably falls in love with his leading ladies.
Yet, while he considers his relationships to be ‘personal’ and not a matter for newspaper talk, he played the public role of superstud for years.
He, like Beatty, manipulates women just as they do the media.
Example: One day an interviewer is holding forth about Jack's latest film when the door opens and an aide calls in, ‘Jack, there's a girl on the phone.
Says her name is so-and-so.
Says you'll remember her.’
Jack says, ‘I don't remember the name.’
Aide says, ‘She met you in Aspen and you told her to give you a call when she got back into town.’
Jack says, ‘I don't remember.
I've met a lot of girls in Aspen.
Take her name and number and tell her I'll call her back.’
The reporter puts that little exchange into the first five paragraphs of his story.
Some time later, Jack's at home, for another interview to publicize a couple of films, including his appearance in Warren Beatty's Reds , at a time when Beatty was in a heavy romantic alliance with their co-star Diane Keaton.
The mood is relaxed.
Coltrane is blowing softly in the background.
The secretary interrupts and says, ‘Telephone Jack, will you take it now?’
Jack says, ‘Who is it?’
Secretary whispers indiscreetly, ‘It's Keaton.’
Jack says, ‘What does she want?’
Secretary says, ‘Dinner.’
Jack says, ‘Say yes…’
The interviewer knows a secret and naturally imparts it to his million or so readers in the next issue.
Jack the lad is jolly and jovial.
Life is good.
Every day of every week he becomes richer by more money than he made in his first ten Sixties films put together and then some.
But the Sixties gave him a background to emerge from; in fact, he wrote part of the script for the age and it never left him; he didn't allow it to leave him.
‘He is more hip than any man I know,’ says film executive Mark Canton, who helped to make Jack as rich as he is today, by persuading him to play The Joker in Batman .
‘I've never known anyone who enjoyed being himself more than Jack.
He brings out the child in himself and everyone else.’
Women have viewed him differently, and, even at fifty-three, his Batman co-star Kim Basinger gives witness that he is ‘the most highly sexed individual I ever met…he's just the devil.’
Women have also brought him trouble.
He's had a lifelong fight with feminists who accuse him of extreme male chauvinism and damaging their dignity.
His one-night stands and his expansive appetite for fun in the night clubs of Los Angeles, New York and London have been charted in the gossip columns for two decades.
Occasionally, there are other setbacks, though none as spectacular as the mess he got himself into during 1989.
Having only just made peace with his companion of fifteen years, Anjelica Huston, he was struck by the first kiss-and-tell in his entire life, and he was angry.
He knew it was coming because the girl who sold her story to Playboy magazine in America and the Sunday Mirror in London — British model and actress Karen Mayo-Chandler — warned him.
Her story was plastered all over the December issue of Playboy and every time he switched on the television, she was there repeating it all as a multitude of chat-show hosts clamoured to get her on their programmes.
Jack was mad and even madder with the American scandal magazine the National Enquirer , too, although that was nothing new.
Three weeks earlier they had devoted a page to the story that another of his girlfriends, actress Rebecca Broussard, aged twenty-six, was expecting his baby, revealing that he was ‘excitedly looking forward to playing daddy, but the bed-jumping Joker has flatly told Rebecca that he had no intention of marrying her.’
(This latter fact appears to be incorrect; at the time of writing his plans to marry Rebecca were announced.)
And Anjelica Huston returned to her own home saying that she had been humiliated for the very last time.
No wonder.
Karen Mayo-Chandler's allegations made lascivious reading: ‘When girls are asked what they look for in a man, they always talk about sensitive things, like intellect, kindness and a sense of humour.
Well that's all very nice, very nice indeed, but what I also want is a guaranteed non-stop sex machine and that's exactly what I got with Jack.
He's into fun and games in bed, all the horny things that I get off on like spankings and Polaroid pictures.
Now that's a man to die for!’
Nicholson registered his disapproval with a call to his pal, Hugh Hefner, owner of Playboy .
Then, there was nothing else to be done except get back to work in the cutting room at Paramount where he was working around the clock on The Two Jakes , for which the world of movie entertainment was waiting with bated breath; because even though all of the above makes fascinating reading for everyone intrigued by Hollywood's pop royalty, especially one so colourful and mercurial as Nicholson, it is the mere trivia, the overcoat of gloss and glitz, that hides the real Jack Nicholson…
Relative Values
There was always a danger that the legend would become larger than the man, just as it certainly has with his close friend Warren Beatty and thus it is easy to see why Jack Nicholson now guards himself well and repels invaders.
He likes his secrets and was impressed by his mother for the way she kept hers for years, that he was not her son.
He will happily talk about his films and what makes Jack the performer that he is, but now he rarely allows interviewers into his private territory.
But when, as his friend and director Mike Nichols asserts, an actor has inscribed upon popular history a character who has influenced the modern male personality, as did Henry Fonda, James Cagney, Spencer Tracy and Humphrey Bogart, his personal idiosyncrasies are worth more than a cursory glance.
That is especially so when the actor in question can be viewed as a contender for the title of number one in a profession well populated with aggressively chauvinistic egocentrics.
The search for the inspirational sources of Jack Nicholson the artist, and Jack Nicholson the man, takes us on a far more diverse journey than some of his contemporaries, like Robert Redford, Warren Beatty and Dustin Hoffman, who were born in the same year — 1937.
No one can deny that he is more exciting, excitable and unconventional, with a mix of old and new Hollywood rolled up into a package that mixes James Dean with Humphrey Bogart, though Nicholson insists that he does not want to be compared with anyone.
His range of roles has crossed many more adventurous and challenging boundaries, from the devil himself through to perhaps his now most famous portrayal of The Joker in Batman and when Nicholson insists that everything he does on screen is in some way autobiographical, delves into what makes him tick find contradictions and confusion at almost every turn.
In fact, when his colourful personal life is added into the equation, the line between reality and fiction becomes very blurred indeed, though that is nothing new amongst the elite in Hollywood history.
In Nicholson's case, however, it is more interesting and quite important to characterize the age in which he found fame — the drug infested anti-establishment set of the Vietnam era — as one of the advance guard leading the underground movements of the Sixties to the surface of American life in a cloud of head-spinning smoke, at a time when marijuana was the best cash crop in Southern California.
He stole the show and became the epitome of the American anti-hero, the spit-in-your-eye champion of counter-culture whose irreverence captivated and finally liberated his audiences from the time warp in which they had been trapped since Montgomery Clift, Marlon Brando and James Dean began it in a rather less volatile manner in the early Fifties.
The very starting point of his story, his birthdate of 22 April 1937, provides instant clues to the mystique and the aura.
Anyone with a passing knowledge of astrological influences will realize that he was born on the cusp, a Taurus caught in the influence of Aries, which makes him bullish and a bit of a ram.
Curiously enough, if we add in the Chinese system of horoscopes, he is an ox, which also rings true: ‘as stubborn as…’
All of this provides an imagery of a person who has lived his entire life with feelings of a split personality, to such a degree that Nicholson was moved towards a study of ‘cusp people’ in his own search for explanations.
Never one to occupy the psychiatrist's couch, he preferred deep, theoretical and practical explorations, even to experimentation with LSD.
And as students of the star signs will verify, the cuspate divisions help explain his ability to carve the characters he plays into different personality fragments to give them added depth.
With the careful selection of the roles, he is also one of the few major screen actors able to alter his identity from part to part — and one Jack Nicholson performance is usually vastly different to the next — yet retaining the kind of personal stamp that attracts the criticism: ‘Oh, it's just Jack Nicholson playing himself again.’
Opposing traits in his make-up were already evident during his last year at school, when he was voted both class optimist and class pessimist, though, at that time, he had yet to appreciate certain complexities of character on which he would draw for his screen creations.
It led him also to the study of existentialism, a popular discourse among fifties youth, made popular by the interest of James Dean, and whose definition seems to sum up what Nicholson has become: ‘a free agent answerable to no one in a deterministic and seemingly meaningless universe’.
Pre-determined astrological influences may have provided the outline.
Existentialism and all those other topical philosophies of the past three decades, which seemed important at the time, may have given him some guidelines.
Life itself added the boldest brush strokes and when, finally, he, Jack Nicholson in person, confronts the world, there is the most awesome feeling of encountering a man of unquestionable charm, intelligence and friendship, yet who possesses an indefinable menace that can only be compared with some of the roles he has acted.
And who was it who said that when he agreed to play the Devil in the Witches of Eastwick , it was because he had been practising for the role all his life?
He did!
His identity was a confusion even from conception.
His sister was his mother, only he did not know it until he was thirty-eight years old.
He appeared philosophical on being informed of this startling revelation but it wounded him, more than he would show.
According to his friend Peter Fonda, it gave him a ‘real deep hurt inside; there's no way of resolving it, ever’.
It also may have answered a few queries over which he may have pondered in his youth and then discarded to the rear of his mind for later consideration.
The boy Jack — it was John in those days — was born into an uncertain and rather gloomy world.
He was just another statistic, as was another recent arrival and pre-destined best friend, Henry Warren Beatty, who arrived not far away in Richmond, Virginia, precisely three weeks earlier.
The developing influences around them had bearing on their futures; there was evil and unhappiness in the air.
Hitler was breaking out and at the time his bombers, summoned up by Franco, were in the process of wiping out the Basques' spiritual and cultural home of Guernica.
The exiled Leon Trotsky was calling for the overthrow of Stalin, then engaged in his most murderous of purges.
A new king was about to be crowned in England, the previous one having decamped with an American divorcée.
George Orwell was warning everyone of the plight of poverty-stricken masses, whose only salvation was socialism and not the sort recommended by vegetarian cranks in sandals.
Churchill was telling everyone of the dangers in Europe but no one would listen.
And, Germany suffered a massive blow to its pride when the Hindenburg crashed in a ball of flames just a few miles from Nicholson's home town, Neptune, New Jersey soon after he was born.
The arrival of this bonny bawling boy had caused considerable consternation.
A baby born out of wedlock was a great sin, then, and a huge embarrassment to the family.
Jack appreciated that thirty or forty years later he might never have been born.
He would have become just another abortion statistic, and speaks almost bitterly of having his ‘own downtrodden minority.
The bastard.
I tell myself I've got the blood of kings flowing through my veins.’
Ethel May Nicholson, the woman Jack called ‘Mud’, short for mother which she wasn't, was a broad-shouldered woman, though not physically, who carried the family and occasionally her husband when he was too drunk to stand without support.
Hard times in the lower middle-class regions confronted her and she doggedly fought back to make sure her young family never suffered.
She was from strong and wealthy Dutch Protestant stock, a religious family from Pennsylvania who virtually cut her off when she met, fell in love with and married a handsome Roman Catholic, a rakish sign painter of Irish descent named John Nicholson.
He was initially a good provider and noted for his smart clothes in the post-depression days.
He won the local Easter parade a couple of times as the best-dressed man which, in the depressed Thirties, must have put him in the mould of something of an exhibitionist.
His liking for convivial company, found only in the male-dominated bars of New Jersey, a throwback from his forebears of County Cork, eventually forced them into a difficult matrimonial situation from which he occasionally evacuated himself and went off on a drifting reconnaissance of the world outside.
There were two daughters of the marriage: June, who was seventeen when Jack was born, and Lorraine who was two years younger.
They had proceeded through childhood and into their adolescence just like a thousand and one other families in the community.
In those days, it was a community and most people knew their near neighbours well.
Ethel May was well known and well liked, which stood her well when she was forced to support the family single-handedly, by opening a beauty shop in her own home.
Everyone came to her for advice, as if she did not have enough of her own problems to solve.
Daughter June had inherited some of her father's wanderlust and had a yearning for show business.
A one-time Italian band singer, Donald Forcillo-Rose, came out of the woodwork in October 1980 to claim that he and June were lovers when she was just sixteen and he was twenty-six, and that she became pregnant.
In 1980, Jack already knew the family secret but he had never known his real father, not even his name, and since June was no longer around to confirm Donald Rose's story, having died of cancer in 1965, his version of events remains a mere matter of record.
Jack's sister Lorraine said she knew that June had dated Don Rose around that time but no one could confirm that he was the father, or his secondary claim that he had married June before the baby was born (he said they had separated quickly and she'd later got a Mexican divorce, though apparently no papers are available to support his allegations ).
Jack, by then very famous, called him for a chat and asked if he needed anything.
It might be true that Rose was the father.
It might not.
Nicholson appeared to accept that it was possible, but no special relationship was formed between them.
By then, time and sadness had dulled the need for any new discoveries about the past.
In the spring of 1937, June went to Bellevue in Manhattan to have the baby, and returned quietly and resolutely to begin the charade that had been pre-determined, that the child had been born to her mother and father, Ethel and John.
If Donald Rose was the father, he was no longer around to become involved in his son's upbringing, and even June, masquerading as the sister, left home four years later to become an Earl Carroll showgirl in Miami.
Lorraine stayed in New Jersey and married a local boy, George Smith, to whom she remained devoted for the rest of his life, until he died in 1986.
At some point or other, though Jack has never discussed the possibility in public, he appears to have suspected that all might not be as it seemed in the Nicholson household.
He developed what psychologists might describe as a reluctance to address members of his family by their given names or titles.
Mother became ‘Mud’, father became ‘Jack’, Lorraine was ‘Rain’ and her husband George, the man who became the father-figure in his life, was nicknamed Shorty.
This continued into adult life and he had a habit of creating nicknames for his closest friends: Anjelica became Tootie, Beatty became the Pro, John McEnroe was Johnniemac, etc.
John Nicholson wafted in and out of their lives and Jack's recollections of the man he imagined was his father are tinged with a certain sorrow that he had become an alcoholic, with memories of scenes on the home front, and of the young Jack cooling his heels outside one bar or another with a fizzy drink while his ‘father’ stood inside drinking neat brandies.
And then he would be off again.
He remembers him as a melancholy figure.
Even schoolfriends in Neptune remember that John Nicholson's drinking occasionally caused the family some worry.
Salesman George Anderson, a classmate in high school, can recall a conversation about him, when Jack told him, ‘I saw my father yesterday’— as if it was an event to be noted —‘the poor old guy, I feel sorry for him because he can't help it.’
The relationship was obviously not a close one.
When he died in 1958 Jack, by then impoverished and attempting to gain a foothold in an acting career in California, did not fly east for the funeral.
There weren't many secrets in that neighbourhood and it is a wonder that Mud's own was kept for so long.
Mrs Nicholson meanwhile was doing rather well in her beautician business and when Jack was five they moved from the less-salubrious surroundings of Sixth Avenue in Neptune to Fifth Avenue in Neptune City which was, as Jack recognized years later, a slightly better position for a young boy.
In fact, he has continually made a point of recording that he was not a boy from the wrong side of the tracks, as some tried to indicate, but that his mother/grandmother made sure they were well provided for.
They were never rich, but neither were they poor.
He was still surrounded by woman, of course, mostly fat ones receiving Mud's beauty treatment and so his early life was dominated by the female presence rather than the male which may help explain his future attitude to women for which flocks of emerging feminists, and a few of his friends, would berate him.
In part, that may be explained by his own view of women formed from those days in Neptune: they should be independent, take their strengths from their inner self and not rely on men, except for moral support.
Mud was like that ‘…a tiny little elephant carrying everyone on her back’.
He was a fairly typical boy of his neighbourhood, well liked by his friends, and with facial features that remained pretty unaltered through youth and early life, except for a tendency towards puppy fat.
No harm was done by the apparent lack of male influence.
The heavy hand of a resident father would probably not have stopped him being suspended from school three times, once for smoking, once for swearing and once for self-confessed vandalism (breaking a rival basketball team's scoreboard because they played dirty, for which he took a part-time job to pay for the damage).
Nicholson recognized later that Mud had given him his head; he appreciated the responsibility and did not do anything too foolish; irresponsibility came later when he was well outside of any parental influence.
Stubbornness was an early characteristic, as was the way he would call a halt to any admonishment laid down by Mud.
He would storm off upstairs, banging his feet on the steps as he went, groaning ‘For cripes' sakes’.
Later he was sorry, and much later he was appreciative.
In one of his rare public reflective moments, he looked back on the three women in his early life, Mud, Lorraine and June, with gratitude because they gave him a good start, independence and the belief that he could always take care of himself, come what may.
Shorty was also a good guide and mentor for a growing lad, as good a father as any man could want.
He was a man of simple tastes who had a down-to-earth view of life that he passed on in an almost unconscious way with an innate goodness that is found among the local pillars of the community who never stray far from their birthplace.
True, he was an All-State footballer which gave him some excitement and fun; but he always stayed in Neptune with Lorraine and with Mud.
Jack progressed; school was no problem.
He had a relaxed attitude towards his learning.
He was one of those lucky children whose economy of effort never showed up in examination results which were invariably straight ‘A's, and he was particularly good at dashing off a 1000-word essay while others were still biting their pen-ends.
When he eventually became an overnight star after fourteen years of hard labour in Hollywood, the seekers of his past came knocking on the doors of his tutors and former friends.
They usually disappointed everyone by recalling that he was remarkable for his unremarkableness, just another kid on the block; not a hero, not a superstar at sports, not especially remembered for outstanding feats of school bravado nor had he made any particular impression on the girls.
One former teacher, Virginia Doyle who was to be discovered in retirement in Sherwood Forest, Toronto, remembered him as a clowning, cunning boy who was good enough to get high marks without apparently doing a lick of work.
She thought him a most responsible and sensitive young man and then reflected that for all his fooling around, it probably masked his unhappiness and disappointment over his ‘father’.
The jollity was a cover for hidden sadness.
An echo: Once in fourth grade, he was sent to stand in the corner, next to the blackboard; whilst there, he powdered his face with white chalk and when he turned around he was a clown, beaming a smile at the class like The Joker in Batman .
Jack's own assessment of his schooldays was covered in his own biographical notes as having ‘deportment problems’ which he later explained in more explicit terms as ‘fucking up, not in line or as with adolescents nowadays, making a big show they they don't give a fuck, that's bad deportment.
Harry Morris, Jack's principal tutor in his senior year, also remembered his clowning and had a vivid memory of him as always being late for history class, which followed games.
He was, said Harry, always interested in entertaining fellow students and he was a good dancer, always involved in after-school events.
Jack disagreed.
He only joined the drama group because the best chicks were in plays; he didn't especially like dancing in his mid-teens because he had become too fat; sports interested him, and he was fanatical about basketball.
He was never good enough to make the team, but he was always there on the sidelines cheering and managing.
He joined the Air National Guard in high school and just after his fifteenth birthday, became a part-time life guard at the beach; Mr Cool, with mirrored sunglasses and oxide on the nose.
Cool was the thing.
The DA and Tony Curtis haircuts were making their debut.
The beebop era was just fading, Presley had not quite arrived and the advance guard of popular Fifties music that the kids in Neptune listened to were Johnnie Ray, Ray Charles and Chuck Berry.
Somewhere off in the distance, the sound of Bill Haley was heard.
The rock ‘n’ roll years were just beginning.
That was the home-town boy.
He arrived at his final year at high school in good fettle and with enough good grades to get to university if he wanted.
His old classmate, Gil Kenny, who later became a local police chief, said no one thought Jack would set the world alight.
‘He was a clown, he wasn't serious about anything.’
He was offered a Dupont chemical engineering scholarship and might have become a captain of industry somewhere in middle America, balding, bloated and with a houseful of his own children, anonymously having pursued a largely uneventful career in that worthy but slightly boring structure of management in a giant US conglomerate.
He took a certain route leading to another kind of life and ended up famous.
Fame?
‘So what can I tell you?’ said Shorty to the umpteenth magazine interviewer who came to call, looking for the definitive analysis in the search for Jack Nicholson, once he had become a star.
‘You know, he was just a fine kid.
Loved his mother.
Loved peanut butter and jam sandwiches.
To be honest, I'm getting pretty goddamned tired of talking about Jack.
What more is there to say?…’
There was plenty, not about the past but what was to come in the future.
To get to that point, there was a quantum leap to be achieved, the proverbial turning point in a young man's life when fate or some other thing takes a hand, and it was at this point in time that June — whom he says he still believed was his sister — reappeared in the story as a catalyst to a decision that would ultimately prove to be the most important in his life.
In the seventeen years since his birth she had stopped being a dancer in Miami, become the straight lady to entertainer pinky Lee for a time and, during the war, done her bit for the American effort in the control tower at Willow Run, the central domestic sending centre for the military.
Through this work she met and married a dashing test pilot who was the son of a wealthy Boston brain surgeon, had two children and lived in some style on Long Island where Jack spent many holiday breaks, lapping up the upper-class luxury.
The marriage ended because of her husband's drink problem so June came back to Mud's house at Neptune with her two children and went back to work as a dance instructor, at Arthur Murray's highly popular dance centre in New York.
In the early Fifties she decided to branch out on her own; she moved west and drove with her two children across America to Los Angeles, where she became a secretary in an aircraft factory and later a fashion buyer at J.C.
Penney's.
To complete June's story, she remained to see Jack, her son, move into the higher echelons of Hollywood and stardom but she would never witness his greater achievements.
In 1963, she was diagnosed as having cancer, and died two years later.
But it was not until ten years later that Jack discovered she was his mother.
A magazine was preparing a cover story on the emergence of Jack the star and in their background investigations, which took them to Neptune in search of old chums, discovered the secret that Mud had kept from him since birth.
A reporter from the magazine telephoned him in Mexico where he was filming The Fortune with Warren Beatty.
Nicholson said he was stunned; he never knew and thus the magazine article did not include this item.
Only a few weeks before, he had said in response to a publicity interviewers' assertion that his father, John, had abandoned the family when he was born: ‘My father and mother separated when I was a baby.
I saw him extremely intermittently.
He was a nice man.
He's been dead for some time.
My mother is also dead, so I'm an orphan.’
He called Lorraine.
She confirmed he was June's baby.
Only June and Ethel knew who his father was and now they were both gone and they had not told anyone.
He appeared to shrug off the news but there is no question that it interjected some kind of identity crisis into his life.
There was also one piece of the jigsaw that now slotted into place: before June died, he took LSD in controlled circumstances with a therapist: ‘I became conscious of very early emotions about not being wanted — feeling that I was a problem to my family as an infant.’
It was quite coincidental that June, by her search for a new life in California, drew him towards what would be the hub of the rest of his life and it was touch and go whether he stayed or went back to Neptune.
Also, coincidentally, other rebels were gathering in that same year.
Jack went west for a holiday in the summer of 1954 while he contemplated his future.
James Dean had just arrived there for his first major role, having been brought from New York by the famed director Elia Kazan to star in East of Eden .
If Nicholson had strolled down Sunset Strip, he would have caught sight of Dean at Googies or one of the other coffee joints where Dean would meet with Natalie Wood and Dennis Hopper.
The Strip, at the westerly end of Sunset Boulevard and closest to the hub of the film industry, was the avenue for poseurs where every young hopeful — and plenty not so young — hung out to be discovered in one of the dozens of coffee bars that eventually gave way to rock ‘n’ roll clubs and then strip shows of the Sixties and Seventies.
Dean, an early influence on anyone of Jack's age, had little more than a year left of his life and was in regular attendance in 1954, which was also the year Marlon Brando made it very big indeed in another Kazan film,On the Waterfront .
They were both notorious for racing up and down the Strip on their motorbikes or in flash sports cars.
Warren Beatty was flitting in and out for visits, because his sister, Shirley MacLaine, was also there.
But that was a world that Nicholson had no thoughts about and nor prospect of joining.
In fact, Los Angeles scared him a little and for the first six months he barely ventured out of the house alone.
He was then still slightly shy in company, though sharp and confident in other areas and among his equals, like the pool halls where he would hustle for a few dollars.
In his late teens, there were still signs of puppy fat, and his rounded face sat under an unruly head of hair trimmed to the current style, though not especially trendy, and he could be lost in a crowd as being just another boy on the block; unassuming and unspecial.
What he did decide, and June did not try to dissuade him, was that he would not go back to school.
He'd had enough of learning.
A self-styled lazy student and with no wealth in the family to support a college boy, he decided that summer to quit.
Emerging in his mind was the thought that he might become a writer.
In the meantime, he earned his keep with a part-time job in a toyshop.
Nothing more exciting than that appeared on the horizon in his first six months in California, and he was already talking to June about going back to Mud and Neptune.
Out of the blue he had got a job as a mail boy in the MGM studios at thirty dollars a week, twice as much as he was paid in the toy store.
He was attached to the office dealing with Tom and Jerry, the MGM cartoon characters who were at their peak, and they needed an assistant to help handle their fan letters.
Well, it was a start.
More than that, it gave him the opportunity of laying on the grass at lunchtime, trying to catch sight of Lana Turner's legs…
Starting Out
At MGM, he saw all the famous movie stars that populated that most famous of studios, and to his friends he name-dropped a few like Grace Kelly, with whom he fell in love from afar before she ran off to marry her prince.
It was Hollywood's most glamorous studio.
Louis B. Mayer used to boast that there were more stars in MGM than in heaven and nowhere had they shone more brightly.
Garbo, Garland, Gardner, Garson and Gable were there — and that was just the Gs — but the old grey Mayer wasn't what he used to be, and he had been ousted from MGM by the time Nicholson arrived as a messenger boy.
The turmoil that emerged both immediately before and after Mayer's departure epitomized, perhaps more than in any other of the major Hollywood studios, the convulsions of change that were sweeping through the film capital, eventually spawning an underground of new, raw and raucous talent of which Nicholson was to be part.
A new Hollywood was being born, but no one realized it at the time.
New arrivals on the street scene were to be the stars of tomorrow and the mink-lined coffins that were the grand old studios were about to disappear for ever.
The money men, the purveyors of soft drinks, the bankers, the lawyers, the agents and the wheeler-dealers were taking over; the stars themselves, those in a strong enough position to negotiate strident new financial benefits, were demanding a bigger slice of the cake.
As Harry Cohn, head of Columbia, said shortly before a heart attack killed him in 1958: ‘The lunatics have taken over the asylum.’
There were many in the Screen Actors' Guild who would have agreed with him.
At least under that system hundreds of young actors and actresses found regular employment under contract which meant they were paid whether they worked or not, whereas in 1990 the figures from the guild showed that at any one time as many as eighty-five per cent of its Los Angeles membership were not working.
For better or for worse the studio system the moguls created, dubbed by its detractors as the slave trade, which had discovered and nursed the greatest names of Hollywood of three decades, and probably ever, was on the verge of collapse, though as Elizabeth Taylor put it so succinctly: ‘The death rattle seemed never ending.’
By the mid-Fifties, many of MGM's greatest stars were drifting away, either voluntarily or forced, as the accountants hacked away at costs.
It was not a fun place any more and doors were already slamming shut to the hundreds of young hopefuls hanging around outside the studio gates about the time when Nicholson began his search for work.
What emerged, as we now know, was a very different industry, less secure for the multitude, perhaps, but the replacement system was to provide the top stars with multi-million-dollar pay packets which they apparently feel disinclined to share with lesser-known mortals in their trade.
To discover the Hollywood roots of Nicholson and his contemporaries, it is necessary to go back in time for a moment, to get a glimpse of the prevailing wind immediately prior to their era.
One who had arrived there as the convulsions started was Charlton Heston who achieved almost instant stardom and became especially known for his appearances in the biblical epics.
He had one foot in the old camp and one foot in the new, and, incidentally, became Nicholson's neighbour when Jack struck gold and bought a big house.
‘When I came to Hollywood in 1950, the studio system was still in place but it was crumbling,’ he told the author.
‘I was only the second actor to get a non-exclusive contract.
The first was Brando.
Now, I didn't get it because I was the greatest thing since sliced bread.
Hal B. Wallis, who hired me, was a very shrewd man who recognized that the studio system was over and in five years' time it would no longer be there.’
Apart from the fact that the McCarthy purges of alleged Communists had left a bad scar on the film industry, two other developments were eventually to bear much of the blame for the demise of the glitterama of old Hollywood.
The first was television and the Hollywood moguls' abject refusal to have anything whatsoever to do with it.
The second was the decision of the American Supreme Court that they should divest themselves of monopoly control of the cinema chains which, as Heston said, was in hindsight a death blow which merely served to hasten the financial decline of each and every studio.
One of the several results was that it was very beneficial to fifteen actors like himself and eight directors who were ‘hot’, and five good writers.
For the rest, the good times were over.
Until then, every studio had a cast list of thirty or forty top-billing actors and actresses and dozens of contracted young people who were provided with their acting lessons, their dance lessons, their speech lessons, and the young directors were given their directorial tests, and they all went into bat often.
‘By the mid-Fifties,’ said Heston, ‘That was all coming apart at the seams.
Soon everyone was on non-exclusive contracts, or no contracts at all.
And with the advent of television, the cinema chains virtually abandoned the B-movies overnight; it was shattering for the younger actors and writers who cut their teeth on the second-string movies churned out by the studios.
Without this kind of back-up, you can't learn your craft, you can't get audience exposure, you can't get practice and more importantly, you can't fail…’
Jack Nicholson almost crept under the wire before the studio system was finally extinguished at MGM.
As mail boy, he had picked up the habit of addressing everyone by their Christian name, whoever they were.
Why not?
Everyone else did.
And when he saw producer Joe Pasternak, the renowned MGM star-maker, approaching him in the corridor one day, Nicholson spoke up: ‘Hiya, Joe.
What about giving me a film test?’
Pasternak was apparently impressed; far lesser actors than Nicholson would eventually become began their careers by similar bravado, and he arranged for him to be tested.
In earlier days, even that formality might not have been necessary for a contract.
Nicholson dreamed for a day or two.
Then Pasternak's office called him and told him that he had flunked the test.
He was not without talent, though, said Joe, and he advised him to join a local theatre group to get some experience now that the studio training scheme had been abolished.
Other things were happening in Hollywood that affected Nicholson, both in his outlook to the film business and to life itself.
He had become interested in the culture of the place as he ventured out and made new friends, youngsters in the industry who talked nothing else but films and stars, and was suddenly struck with the notion that he might become an actor.
There was much talk in the coffee shops about the new film James Dean was working on, called Rebel Without a Cause ; Brando was stunning everyone with his performance in On the Waterfront .
Talk was intense among the youngsters, and the young actors and actresses roaming Sunset Strip were no different to the youth of America, if not the world, in that they too were a disoriented bunch in search of idols; Clift, Brando and Dean were providing them with a whole new repertoire of sayings, postures, stances and gestures.
They were also rejecting the Great American Dream that had gripped their post-war acquisitive parents, who were stocking their homes with every electric device provided in the Fifties consumer boom.
And what else?
Rumour had it that if you went to a Norman Mailer party, you'd see people smoking marijuana, covertly passing around a joint behind the bushes at the bottom of the garden.
Well, that's nothing, said the jungle telegraph; Jimmy Dean was smoking dope heavily and seemingly without fear of arrest.
It was new.
Only jazz musicians had smoked marijuana before, and everyone was astounded about Dean because open use of drugs was virtually unknown and still carried heavy penalties; regular offenders were sent to prison and any public knowledge of even marijuana usage brought furore in the headlines, as Robert Mitchum discovered.
Down on Sunset Strip, some weird friends of Dean cashed in on his death and began holding court, relating tales of the Jimmy they knew.
Nicholson was now venturing into the haunts of the hopefuls and joined in.
Everyone was into existentialism, along with the beginnings of meditation, Zen and some other odd philosophies practised and preached by one of Dean's advisers, a male witch named Samson DeVreer, who was often in company of another of Dean's odd acquaintances, the television hostess named Vampira, because she looked like one, of whom Dean once said — when asked by Hedda Hopper if he was seeing her —‘I don't date cartoons.’
In a way they were the leftovers of the James Dean set, but a new pseudo culture was growing, and Nicholson became part of it, wearing the uniform of round-necked sweaters and jeans or corduroys.
DeVreer typified the kind of Los Angeles thinking at the time among the youngsters who listened to his vitriolic demolition of the Californian life.
These grass-smoking disciples flocked to his open house like moths to hear him reciting his life story, or his predictions with the tarot cards, or discussing Camus, or analysing Jean-Paul Sartre.
They were exotic, impoverished days for Nicholson and, above all, big experiences for the boy from Neptune who had by now left the protective custody of his sister/mother and was sharing an apartment with one of a group of friends who he met at the time and with whom he remained close when he became well known.
It is a characteristic of Nicholson that he displays and hopes for loyalty from a friendship and thus most of those he met and formed relationships with in the late Fifties and early Sixties were still in his life at the turn of the Nineties.
Several of them went to an acting class run by Jeff Corey, where other aspirants included James Coburn.
Corey was not especially impressed by Nicholson's acting.
He said it lacked poetry.
Nicholson responded that perhaps Corey hadn't seen the poetry he was showing him.
They were gathering on the Strip, in the coffee houses like the Unicorn, Mac's, Luan's and the Renaissance.
When they had no work, Which was often, they'd spend all afternoon sitting over one coffee or one coke trying to write plays.
Other new faces were arriving.
Steve McQueen had followed Dean west from New York after three or four years of casting-call line-ups.
Paul Newman had just secured his first major film role, with Pier Angeli in The Silver Chalice (which was so bad that when it was shown on television in the Sixties, he took out newspaper advertisements apologising to viewers for having to watch it).
Dennis Hopper, then a mere passing acquaintance of Nicholson's had, in comparison, made it big at nineteen, appearing with Dean in Rebel Without a Cause and Giant .
The less fortunate among them, like Nicholson and Robert Towne, Charles Eastman, the writers, and Monte Hellman, the director, got together in a play group and literally built their own theatre, stealing timber from building sites for their scenery; they ripped a toilet from a petrol station and lighting and electronics were similarly acquired.
When Jack left MGM to make a serious foray into acting, he took the advice of the cartoonists Bill Hanna and Joe Barbera and joined the Players Ring Theatre and began acting lessons.
The bug had caught him and he was a determined as anyone to make it.
‘It was a time of freshness and discovery of what acting was all about,’ he said.
‘It was about meeting new people and being inspired by other people's work, or watching an actor or actress who could hardly talk come into a class and then six months later suddenly do a brilliant scene.
That was part of the early days.’
Friends were important, if for nought else but moral support and sharing food and money.
They shared their women, too.
Jack reckoned he was known amongst his male friends of that era as the Great Seducer — his own words — but friend-for-life Robert Towne did not quite remember it that way.
There were plenty of girls around in Hollywood but no Hollywood girl wanted relationships with nobodies, and that's what they were still.
They worked occasionally and acted and wrote their plays and read Jack Kerouac like Dean had done a couple of years earlier.
When someone in the group became temporarily wealthy through employment, there would be a red wine party.
One day, in 1958, it was Nicholson's turn — and he had an acting job at last, and not just any part, but the lead in a new film.
True, it was in one of the cheap, filmed-in-a-fortnight (and sometimes two days) type of movie for which producer Roger Corman was to earn the dubious title of master of exploitation movies; other nicknames likes Schlockmeister and King of the Bs also stuck.
It was a start and a good one.
A word about Corman is necessary here because he became an important link in the Nicholson story; and not just Nicholson's either.
Corman, a young independent producer born of the post-Superior Court ruling when studios were cutting back on their own B-movie productions, did not know it at the time, nor did anyone else, but he was about to make a significant contribution to what later became known as the ‘new Hollywood’ through the personalities he gave work to on low budget films, either acting, writing, directing or all three.
Apart from Nicholson, Peter Fonda, Peter Bogdanovich, Francis Ford Coppola, Stephen Spielberg, Bob Rafelson, Martin Scorsese and Robert De Niro were among a long cast list of now famous names who found a toe-hold in Hollywood by working with him.
A graduate of Leland, Stanford and Oxford universities, he was a sharp, intelligent man from Detroit, Michigan, who has all too often been dismissed as the maker of low-budget movies which exploited a particular mood or event in time, heavily criticized for their voyeurism.
Such criticism was doubtless deserved at the time because his films were to Hollywood what some of today's tabloids are to the newspaper industry.
He made films that were designed basically for the drive-in movie, to be glimpsed between clinches.
In the course of the next three decades, however, he became a cult figure, though more for horror films with such titles as Swamp Women ,Attack of the Crab Monsters and Bucket of Blood.
His work became the subject of college analysis and European film festivals which, incidentally, were recognizing his work with retrospectives as early as 1964.
Nicholson, while rejecting Corman as his ‘mentor’ gladly acknowledges the start and subsequent ten years' work he gave him.
Corman was not consciously in the business of developing talent.
His job was to produce inexpensive movies for American International Pictures and, in doing so, hired cheaply, never paying more that the basic union rate.
He made available to the newcomers he employed all the mechanism required to make films.
They used it and prospered.
So did he.
And on that basis, the cult value of his early work was purely accidental.
A lot of his films were unpretentious junk, but they made money and Nicholson and others came along in the slipstream.
Corman admitted, ‘I did one film really more as a joke to see if I could do it; filmed it in two days and a night.
I did it, though I vowed I would never work that fast again.’
The film for which Nicholson was chosen as the lead was typical of the late-Fifties genre, called Cry Baby Killer , one of dozens that sloped in on the back of Rebel Without a Cause , exploiting the cause and increasing the violence.
While parents and local burgermasters were complaining about Elvis' swirling hip movements, the jiving in the aisles at Bill Haley concerts, the sexual implications of Chuck Berry's movements and increasing violence in the American classroom as depicted more responsibly in Blackboard Jungle , the Corman film went straight for sensationalism with advertising which read ‘From Teen Rebel to Mad Dog Killer.’
The link with Dean's Rebel was deliberate, so that it could be seen almost as a sequel.
Nicholson believed he had arrived: ‘I said to myself, ‘This is it.
I'm meant to be an actor.
It was a thrilling feeling.
The movie, however attracted such critique as ‘vapid…mob voyeurism to which the movie pandered.’
It was so down-market that many cinema chains refused to take it.
It was filmed in eleven days and cost $7000 to make.
There would be many more to come when Roger Corman got into his stride in the early Sixties turning out back-to-back movies, using the same set and actors in two weeks or less, with self-imposed budgets of under $30,000.
Cry Baby Killer did not bring Nicholson any new offers and he did not work again in films for nine months.
Nicholson returned to the bosom of his friends, somewhat dejected but still determined.
Martin Landau, friend of James Dean's when they were both in New York and again when they came to Hollywood, was running acting classes between jobs.
Like Dean, Landau had studied the Method approach to acting devised by Stanislavski and modified for the Actors Studio by Lee Strasberg.
With Brando and Dean mumbling their way through the currently most talked about pictures, it was very much in vogue, passionately discussed and used among the younger actors.
Many more established figures were none too sure about it, probably because the exercises might involve the exposure of one's private parts, the display of secret and personal habits and the use of expletive expressions in the passionate search for one's inner self.
When, for example, establishment actor Raymond Massey saw James Dean in action for the first time on the set of East of Eden , emitting as he did a stream of sexual and genital adjectives, Massey stormed off the set declaring, ‘I have never experienced anything like this in my entire life.
I just cannot work with this man.’
Nicholson's exercises, devised by Strasberg and taught by Landau — who was nominated for an Oscar in the 1990 awards — were rather less shocking.
He had to sing ‘Three Blind Mice’.
‘I sang that song in Marty's class for two years.
It's an exercise Lee Strasberg invented, the song exercise, for what he called ‘the diagnosis of the instrument’.
I guarantee I can tell what kind of actor a person is if I hear them do ‘Three Blind Mice’.’
The exercise was designed to make a student stand in front of class, sing his song and force each syllable out in an elongated manner so that it had a beginning and an end; this, Landau explained, ought to enable the student to go into neutral, physically and mentally, so that tensions could be released and what was happening inside could be heard through the voice changes.
It was one of many Method exercises taught to help the actor to reach inside of himself, unleashing personal emotions in an effort to heighten realism.
Over the next few years, Nicholson went from one teacher to another in his quest for knowledge of all acting techniques.
Eventually, he rejected the Method as a personal technique, developing his own style and approach, which he insisted had no set parameters such as those required if the Method was followed to the letter.
In between acting class and all-night parties at one of the homes of one or another of the inmates, Nicholson slotted in some compulsory service as a fireman, attached to an air-crash fire-fighting crew, which some have used to suggest was a draft dodge on his part.
He, in turn, said it was not; he merely regarded national service as a waste of time.
Back to acting, he found occasional work in television drama but nothing substantial came along, nor would it for some time to come.
There were one or two escapees from within his group, however.
Michael Landon was plucked from the Ring Theatre Group to instant stardom in the television western series, ‘Bonanza’; Eddie Byrnes went into ‘77 Sunset Strip’ and Robert Fuller was selected for ‘Laramie’.
Gradually most of the group began to get work, though for Nicholson it was, as he put it, still a time of preparation.
Emerging with Horror
‘People who haven't seen my (early) movies are better off than I am…but like all actors I needed the work.
I did all those movies because they were the only work I could get,’ Nicholson said in a frank assessment of his next few years of acting roles on the fringes of Hollywood, appearing almost entirely in low-cost, quickly made horror films, and what were then called teenage exploitation pictures, mostly with Roger Corman.
They gave Jack the chance to practise some of the underhand humour that eventually became part of his mystique.
Everyone needs practise and Jack got the opportunity for more than most.
With the old B-movie system virtually gone, there was no other place for mediocre talent to apply and that was how he would be brutally classed.
Overnight stardom was largely a myth, though some climbed higher up the ladder more quickly, and quite often suffered as a result.
Dennis Hopper, who was to become an important figure in Nicholson's eventual break into major films, came in on James Dean's coat-tails and was devastated by Dean's death, as were Natalie Wood and their other close friend, Nick Adams.
Nicholson saw them around Sunset Strip and for a time they were joined by Elvis Presley, who had seen Rebel Without a Cause forty-four times and could speak Dean's lines word perfect.
They smoked marijuana and talked about suicide.
‘No cancel that,’ said Hopper.
‘Jimmy wouldn't want that.
Let's have an orgy instead.’
Someone suggested they should all bathe in champagne beforehand and the bath was filled with some cheap bubbly.
The orgy had to be aborted, however, on account of Natalie's screaming with pain in a tender place, inflamed by the alcohol.
She had to be taken to hospital for treatment.
That was a story Hopper liked to tell, to demonstrate how they were all good friends who were creating a new style of acting; later, when Nicholson arrived, they had long discussions about this era and the influences it had on all of them.
Hopper thought he was another Dean, and then became outcast from Hollywood within three years because he acquired a reputation for being a mean-like perfectionist.
‘To me, Dean was the most talented and original actor I ever saw,’ said Hopper.
‘He was a guerilla artist.
He once pulled a switchblade on his director because they couldn't agree on the way to do a scene.
I imitated his style and it got me into trouble.’
Notably, he ran up against director Henry Hathaway who was known as one of the toughest directors in the business, and Hopper had a minor role in From Hell to Texas .
Hathaway wanted the scene played one way, Hopper wanted to do it another; they battled for seven hours and eighty-six takes before Hopper finally bowed to the director's wishes to do it straight.
At that very moment, Jack Warner, having heard what was going on, walked on to the set and barred Hopper from ever working for Warners again.
Persona non grata in Hollywood, he moved to New York, appearing in plays and television, and becoming a well-respected stills photographer; he would return later to make Nicholson a star.
Warren Beatty also discovered a route to instant fame, co-starring with Natalie Wood, one of the world's most glamorous young actresses in 1959, in Elia Kazan's Splendor in the Grass .
It was Beatty's first movie and he was sprung from nowhere into the superstar bracket.
As Hopper, a nice guy but slightly mad discovered, there is always the danger that after such auspicious beginnings, it might be downhill.
Nicholson on the other hand was taking the pretty route, basically because he had no choice; no one was making him any offers.
He was looking and learning and perhaps there is no better early example of his ability for natural, laid-back humour than in Little Shop of Horrors in which Nicholson plays Wilbur Force — they all had names like that in Corman films — who is a sadomasochistic patient of a sadistic dentist.
‘This is going to hurt you more than it's going to hurt me,’ says the dentist in true written-in-ten-minutes dialogue.
Wilbur replies, ‘No Novocaine; it dulls the senses,’ and then, as the dentist begins his drilling and pauses for a moment, Wilbur screams out, ‘Oh my God, don't stop now.’
At the end of the session, he thanks the dentist and says ‘I can truly say I've never enjoyed myself so much.’
Corman's Little Shop of Horrors became a cult classic largely through its star — not Nicholson, but a plant that thrived on human flesh.
It devoured demised or murdered human bodies, of which the sadistic dentist was one.
Reviewers who took it all too seriously said Corman's movie and Nicholson's part in it was bad film-making, bad acting, bad taste and quite undeserving of consideration.
But soon the colleges came to grips with Little Shop of Horrors as a topic for campus debate the world over, and they decided that Corman was telling them that he was not trying to hide the fact that it was a cheaply made film — this was the one he shot in two days — but he wasn't trying to pass it off as serious movie-making either.
It was all intended as a subtle joke.
Corman naturally agreed with this assessment and is not saying whether or not it was the way he and Nicholson intended it.
It matters not; within a few years and many fast and furious films later, he was being heralded not as the king of exploitation but as something of a genius, to which description he again did not object.
It was true that as he progressed, with Nicholson and his soon-to-be-famous contemporaries on hand for adventurous collaboration, Corman did attack social issues involving drugs, homosexuality and the ever-popular parental generation gap.
Only he truly knows whether they were cheap pictures produced with one aim, to make as much money as possible from the least amount of effort, or whether he had other more high-flown artistic notions in mind.
It seems hardly worth posing the question.
The next few films in which Nicholson appeared, however, had none of Little Shop's subtleties.
Too Soon for Love was, like Cry Baby Killer , straightforward sensationalism of the still current topic of youth rebellion and teenage violence, yet another sequel to Rebel Without a Cause with Nicholson playing a secondary role in a gang of second-rate, cut-price actors who had clearly been chosen to look like the originals in the Dean film.
Two other roles secured in that year, 1960, held better promise but in the end brought him no further progression in his career.
The first is worth mentioning only because it gave him his debut in a major studio, for a United Artists production of Studs Lonigan , one more Dean-like character taken from a successful trilogy of novels by James T. Farrell.
As with a number of similar literary-based projects around in Hollywood at a time when mainstream studios were trying to discover what to do next after the demise of musical and religious epics, it was not a success.
Studs Lonigan dropped through the floor into a bottomless pit, never to re-emerge, even for a moment's campus debate; the United Artists film that was supposed to become the moving blueprint of life for the new decade of Sixties youth caused but a ripple in the thoughts of these sensitive young souls and vanished without trace.
As Hollywood kept on discovering at its own expense — and this was a relatively costly movie compared with Nicholson's previous works — good and successful literature does not necessary transfer easily to the big screen.
The recent box-office calamity of Marjorie Morningstar , was another example; the big-budget Warner Brothers adaptation of Herman Wouk's best-selling novel, starring Natalie Wood and Gene Kelly, ended up so dismally after such a huge build-up that Natalie began seeing her analyst at lunchtimes as well.
Tail between legs, Nicholson returned to the Corman factory for another in the psychotic youth genre,The Wild Ride , with a cast of three and running a mere sixty-three minutes.
Served up as B fodder, at least it provided him with a salary, albeit on rock-bottom union rates of around $300 for a full working week, which assured him a place barely above the poverty line.
Financial security became something of an issue at the beginning of the new decade.
At the time, he was sharing a house with two friends, writer-to-be Don Devlin and producer-in-waiting Harry Gittes on Fountain Avenue, a few streets from Sunset Boulevard.
It was, in his own description, the wildest house in Hollywood for a time, until he moved out to set up home with actress Sandra Knight, a slender, auburn-haired girl of striking appearance whom he met in Martin Landau's acting class.
Sandra joined the Nicholson crowd in the B-movie circle and was to become something of a model for future long-term relationships.
She was an actress who, like the rest of them, had high hopes.
But she was not in the flighty, dumb-blonde mould.
She was intelligent, quietly responsible and could hold her own in the group's endless meaning-of-life conversations.
Slightly dominant, she slotted admirably into the mother-substitute figure that Nicholson seemed to require for stability — as opposed to the more sexually desirable women who figured in his life with frequency.
He was smitten not especially by Sandra's looks, but by her whole demeanour, and those who were around at the time must have thought he had understated his feelings when he said later, ‘It was a no-big-deal act for me.
I got married not thinking about it one way or the other; I just loved the girl.’
It was actually something of a momentous decision — and one which it seemed thirty years later was never to be repeated.
Days of wine and roses, and wild, wild parties with Devlin, Gittes and fellow nightowl Harry Dean Stanton — another of his big buddies from acting class who remained a friend and co-star for ever— became temporarily less important to him and, for a couple of years, he settled into the life of a happily married man, with Sandra seemingly intent on becoming the loving wife at home.
A year after their marriage she produced his only legitimate child, a daughter whom they christened Jennifer.
In between minor television roles, in series like ‘Divorce Court’, Jack took to practising script writing for a time, while waiting for work.
Nothing came along immediately and ahead were a couple of lean years.
Sandra had virtually given up her career to devote herself to the task of keeping house and raising a family, though, in that respect, the relationship did not mature as she had hoped.
The studious intensity of learning a craft together, the long and fanciful discussions about the philosophies of life that were prevalent topics, and the unorthodoxy of their nightlife did not easily transfer to a happy-families home.
They grew apart.
Some blamed Jack for wanting to continue the way he had before marriage which, of course, meant occasional flings with the abundance of available women.
It was also in this period of the early Sixties that he experimented with LSD and, like most of his contemporaries, used marijuana.
Sandra, who once saw a bad LSD experience, became fixed to what he called a firm mystical path, seeking enlightenment even before it was fashionable.
God was not a subject he could handle with any real heart, nor compete with.
Her religious leanings and slightly Presbyterian view of life did not match Jack's own.
And, towards the end of their marriage, he was also trying many things in his efforts to bolster his career, writing furiously and trying hard for the elusive break.
The marriage had been good, he said, for two or three years and then they drifted towards the rocks until they were agreed on only one thing, their incompatibility.
A mirror image of the way their marriage had developed was captured in that typically frightening Nicholson scene in The Shining in 1980.
He recalled, ‘I was under the pressure of being a family man with a daughter, and one day I accepted a job to act in a movie in the day-time and was writing another movie at night.
And I'm in the back in my little corner and my beloved wife Sandra walked in on what was, unbeknownst to her, this maniac, writing furious and tired.
I told Stanley Kubrick (his director in The Shining ) about it and we wrote it into the scene.
I remember being at my desk and telling her, ‘Even if you don't hear me typing it doesn't mean I'm not writing….’
Separation and divorce became inevitable; it was a ‘good divorce — non-violent and non-tumultuous…we had come to a real separating of the ways and it was obvious there was only one thing to do and we did it very simply.’
Sandra moved away, eventually to Hawaii taking their daughter with her.
Jack agreed on her having custody of the child, and an amicable arrangement was made regarding visiting.
He continued to see Jennifer on a regular basis and over the years; she would come for holidays and weekends, and he did the loving-father duties, which he treated seriously, and never shirked his responsibilities.
A strong bond based on a frankness about his own lifestyle was formed between father and daughter as she developed into a quietly studious girl who enjoyed her excursions to visit her father at work on the film sets.
At the time, though, the Nicholson legend was slow to take off, especially in comparison to that of his chum Warren Beatty, who became a Hollywood name even before his first picture was released.
At local parties he was known not so much for his acting ability but for his great talent as a jazz pianist especially his impression of George Shearing.
He also, through his sister, had the ‘in’ to some of the posher places in town, way ahead of Nicholson's current social station, which was still restricted to the cheap red-wine class.
Nothing so common for Warren.
He was already into the champagne and mansion bracket up in the hills and very soon began his first famous relationship, setting up home with Joan Collins.
But here, in these two contrasting worlds of Hollywood social strata — Beatty among the establishment and Nicholson well beyond the fringe — were the beginnings of two legends, Warren and Jack, leaders of the pack, whose stories would reverberate around this village community, overlapping and intertwining in their relationships and romantic conquests, for years to come.
Beatty was rocketed to stardom by Elia Kazan — the director who brought Dean to stardom in East of Eden — and, unlike Nicholson, he had influential friends and relations.
Anyone who suggested that his rise to fame was undeservedly achieved by nepotism and favouritism, would be referred by Beatty to a piece in Time magazine which read, ‘With facial and vocal suggestion of Montgomery Clift and the mannerisms of James Dean, he is the latest in the line of hostile, moody, sensitive, self-conscious, bright, defensive, stuttering, self seeking and extremely talented actors who have become myths before they are thirty.’
With acclaim like that, Beatty's agent immediately put a pricetag of $300,000 a picture on his head — and was getting it.
Jack's average fee at the time was several noughts less.
He had little of Beatty's on-screen charisma — yet.
The difference showed in other ways, too.
Before and after his marriage, Nicholson could date happily without fear of a single solitary piece of salacious writing in any newspaper or magazine —‘complete anonymity in social exchange’ was the way he described his situation — or, as a further succinct explanation, ‘I was able to go around picking up stray pussy.’
Beatty, as befitted his newly acquired status in life, was in the high profile dating league and prime fodder for the gossip columnists.
Miss Collins spoke very highly of him, praising his prowess and insatiable three-, four- or five-times-a-day appetite for sex.
Thereafter, he promptly ran off with Natalie Wood, his co-star in Splendor in the Grass .
‘They became lovers whilst I wasn't looking,’ said Kazan.
Natalie's distraught husband, Robert Wagner, found temporary but platonic comfort with Miss Collins.
The young stars were all over the newspapers and fan magazines, and Nicholson loved to read and hear about their adventures.
The full force of being public property and pop royalty had not hit him — whereas Beatty, who was being chased by the news hounds from New York to Florida to the South of France, with Natalie in tow, had suddenly become the talk of the town.
Beatty had a good five-year head-start on him, and most of the other male leads with whom they would both be compared in the forthcoming age of the anti-hero.
Paul Newman, older, of course, and Steve McQueen arrived in the big time, too.
Dustin Hoffman, Robert Redford, Gene Hackman and Robert De Niro were still a long way from making even their first films.
Dennis Hopper came back to Hollywood in that year of 1961 and shocked everyone by marrying into one of the most exclusive Hollywood families.
Brooke Hayward was the daughter of actress Margaret Sullivan, who had been Henry Fonda's first wife, and producer Leland Hayward.
The omens were bad from the start.
In the same year, the Hoppers' Bel Air mansion was all but burnt down in a fire and virtually the whole of Dennis's collection of poems and paintings were destroyed.
Peter Fonda was, in that year, also heading towards Hollywood, without the slightest encouragement from his father.
They were difficult times for all of them.
In 1962, Jack was surely wondering what it would take to get a bigger, more important film role.
His next was a western,The Broken Land , for Roger Corman again.
It did not light any new fires for Nicholson and died a quiet death.
Even so, Jack was not ungrateful to Corman.
‘He was giving me work when no one else would and without him I would not have survived.
For that we would be eternally grateful.
He also underpaid us and for that he will be eternally grateful.’
Corman returned to horror and Nicholson went with him.
Some years earlier, Corman had inspired the onset of his cult following with idiosyncratic adaptations of Edgar Allan Poe classics like The Tomb of Ligeia, The Masque of the Red Death and The Pit and the Pendulum.
Now, he came back to the theme with a script loosely based on Poe poem,The Raven , but the connection was so loose that no one could discover what it was.
There were a number of horror stars looking for work who would not want the earth in salaries, and he assembled a notable team of players which included Vincent Price, Boris Karloff and Peter Lorre.
Corman added Nicholson in the lead role and a couple of attractive females, and the result was another Corman classic, a comic-strip horror tale, silly in conception but wittily funny.
And, with those arch-weirdos speaking their lines with magnificent mock-seriousness, poor Jack looked sadly dull.
But there was an interesting sequel, which gave him his first, insightful, small stab at directing.
Corman called ‘It's a wrap’ on Friday evening, and realized that he still had almost forty-eight hours' usage left on the warehouse and sets he had rented for The Raven .
That left two days of filming available before the sets had to be taken down and returned to the owners.
He had a brainwave: to make another picture over the weekend.
He asked Karloff, who was on the payroll for another three days, if he would do it.
Yes.
He cast Nicholson in the lead role and all he needed was a female.
What about Sandra Knight?
(She and Jack were still married at the time.)
Jack called Sandra and asked if she would appear in a Corman film that weekend.
Yes.
‘What is the play to be called?’
Boris asked his producer.
‘And where is the script?’
There was no script.
Not even a title.
Overnight, Corman wrote the start of a screenplay for a piece of nonsense entitled The Terror and hurriedly the cast went to work the next morning to make use of the sets before they were torn down.
It was his intention to shoot what they could, mostly the scenes involving Karloff because his were the only words Corman had written.
Karloff recalled the chaos that was going on around him: ‘When we started filming, the removal men came to take away the sets.
As they were knocking them down, Corman was following me around with the camera directing my speaking parts.
It was a fiasco.
But the film got made.’
Corman directed most of the picture but then had stop because union rules, to which he adhered religiously in terms of actors' and technicians' payments, made it impossible to continue with a fully fledged production team.
He came to an arrangement with two more actors, gave the camera crews some private pocket money and turned the film over to his assistants.
Francis Ford Coppola, then an AIP assistant producer, directed some and Monte Hellman did some more.
On the last day of shooting, Nicholson chirped up: ‘Look, everybody else in town had shot part of this picture.
I want to shoot the final sections.’
He did and they all edited it together a week later.
The film was a mess, naturally, but Jack, Coppola and Hellman all had their first try at directing.
The saga of the The Terror was not yet concluded.
In 1966, Peter Bogdanovich, by then an assistant director and part-time scriptwriter for Corman, was given his chance to direct a thriller called Targets in which Boris Karloff was cast because he still owed Corman two days' work.
Bogdanovich shot the footage with Boris and booked other actors to complete the film, shooting over the succeeding ten days.
Then, a print of The Terror was cut up and plagiarized to fill out Targets which was made in fourteen days at a cost of $125,000 of which Karloff was paid $22,000 and Bogdanovich as director received $3000.
All of this racketing around with has-beens and yet-to-bes, filming on rented sets in disused warehouses, ought to have been doomed to failure, even laughed off the screen.
Often they were.
It was chaotic, true, but Corman's pictures always made money and that was the way everyone was judged.
In his first eighty films, only two went into the red.
Yet the chances of failure in the legitimate side of the business were even greater, as Nicholson discovered with a new role which on the surface seemed a godsent opportunity — to appear in Ensign Pulver , the much-discussed sequel to Mister Roberts .
The original film, with Henry Fonda, James Cagney and Jack Lemmon based on Thomas Heggen's novel of the same name was applauded worldwide.
Lemmon won an Oscar for his magnificent portrayal of the coward who becomes a hero.
Warner Brothers producer Joshua Logan and author Thomas Heggen wrote the play for the sequel, entitled Ensign Pulver (released in 1964).
Jack Lemmon was asked to return but adamantly — and wisely — refused.
The rest of the cast looked strong, with Robert Walker jnr., Walter Matthau, Burl Ives, Larry Hagman, Tommy Sands and, albeit a minor role, Jack Nicholson.
It flopped, badly.
Universally panned by the critics, the film fans who were already vanishing in their droves from the theatres by the mid-Sixties, were given further encouragement to stay away and heads rolled at Warners.
Nicholson was left smarting and wondering why he had ever strayed to the glamour side of the business from the safe haven of Corman's mini-budgets and rented sets.
Although Nicholson's part in Ensign Pulver was small, being attached to such a poor movie depressed him intensely.
It was also a bad time personally.
It was while filming Ensign Pulver that he received news that June, the sister who was really his mother, had cancer.
It was a time for reflection in 1964, when the film was released.
He was coming up to his twenty-seventh birthday and his face had already acquired some of the lived-in look that became one of his characteristics later in his career.
He was not what might be described — in comparison with Robert Redford, say — devastatingly handsome or outwardly charismatic.
His appearance and demeanour were fairly average and he was not a head-turner for female fans.
He kept his hair — at this stage — fairly short and neatly trimmed across his forehead to hide the evidence of recession.
He had filled out, too, with broad shoulders and strong though not overly muscular arms.
In other words, he was still developing the characteristics that would eventually make him a character actor.
In his move towards the latter, perhaps at that time he did not quite appreciate how influential to himself and others Roger Corman had become in providing the schooling for some of the most important film-makers of the second half of the twentieth century.
Nicholson's interest in writing was re-awakened by his scriptwriting assistance on The Terror , and his next project was a screenplay in which he was encouraged by Roger Corman, who thought it was a good idea because though he personally felt Nicholson showed great potential as an actor, others around him did not always agree.
Nicholson teamed up with his friend and former flatmate Don Devlin to write the script for a film called Thunder Island , a thriller which was to be shot with a tiny budget on a Caribbean island.
The plot had a topical theme; it was about a corrupt dictator who had been exiled from his Latin American country.
Once more, the critics placed his work where it honestly belonged, in the basement of B-movies, as were his next two,Back Door to Hell and Flight to Fury , both directed by Monte Hellman.
They provided interim employment and on the second, a further chance for Nicholson to hone his writing talents, since he both acted in it, and wrote the screenplay.
The collaboration between Nicholson and Hellman was to continue for two more pictures.
Hellman recalls that they were both toying with the idea of a western and talked to Corman about the finance.
Naturally, he said, ‘Well, if you are doing one western you might as well do two.’
They agreed and he agreed; so, with an advance cheque from Corman's company deposited in their bank, they formed their own company, Proteus films, rented an office, bought a couple of typewriters and began work.
Nicholson had an idea already; other friends were asked to submit outlines for a screenplay and one of those was Carol Eastman, who wrote under the pen-name of Adrien Joyce.
None of their ideas were really in tune with what Corman had suggested — as Jack described it, ‘plenty of tomahawk numbers and a lot of ketchup’, which was the popular requirement of westerns then, especially with such popular television series such as ‘Bonanza’, ‘Rawhide’ and ‘Bronco’.
Nicholson's own idea was, in fact, to write the first existentialist cowboy story, which was something of a departure from the current genre; he was surely right in his assumption that Corman might not see the potential, if such existed.
His tale was based on the Camus essay, ‘The Myth of Sisyphus’ which demonstrates man's ‘dignity is his return down the mountain after pushing up the stone’.
The title was Ride the Whirlwind .
Carol Eastman, meanwhile, had written her screenplay on the inspiration of a Jack London story, which was similar moody vein to Ride the Whirlwind and she called hers The Shooting .
It was a slightly more complicated plot, with similar undertones of mythical melancholia which were written to drift off the screen rather than by means of an actual ending to the story.
So they collected their actors and actresses, a film crew of twelve and their livestock and moved off to the Utah desert to begin filming.
Nicholson had an acting role in both.
Eight weeks later, they returned with their two films in the can and Hillman began the cut, with Nicholson by his side.
Eventually, they were ready for viewing by the backer, Roger Corman.
‘Interesting,’ said Corman, as he sat back in his chair and banged his feet down on the row of seats in front of him.
‘You've done something with a western that I've never see before.
You've made the characters intelligent, and life isn't like that.
There's no beginning, and there's no end.
Audiences won't like that.’
And raising his voice, he shouted, ‘There are no Indians.
Where are the Indians?’
Hellman cautiously observed, ‘Does this mean you don't like them?’
‘Oh sure.
They're different.
I like them for being different,’ said Corman.
‘But who is going to buy them?
Tell me that?
They just aren't commercial enough.
No theatre booker in the land is going to take them.’
That prediction was proved entirely correct.
No one did want the films, not in America, at least; Nicholson and Hellman had tampered with the popular view of western history and had taken it to deeper levels, failing totally to appreciate that mass audiences enjoyed westerns purely because they provided escapism.
They did not want arty philosophical essays.
Three, four months went by until only two routes for selling them remained unexplored.
One solution was to cut their losses and sell to television.
The other was to try Europe, which Nicholson decided he would do.
He arrived in Nice full of hope and, indeed, managed to secure a showing for both at Cannes.
Almost immediately a French company made an offer for the European rights.
Nicholson accepted and flew back to Los Angeles in better spirits.
Bad news followed in his wake; the French company went bankrupt before it could pay out the cheque.
So, even moderate fame still eluded him, and Nicholson remained unknown outside of a small Hollywood clique.
He was now approaching thirty years old and, as the year turned, he wanted desperately to get an audition for the new movie they were all talking about, in which the star was to be a young man playing opposite an older woman.
It was called The Graduate and, said Nicholson, they were ‘auditioning everyone I was having lunch with’.
Another completely unknown actor, also thirty but looking much younger, named Dustin Hoffman, impressed director Mike Nichols so much in his off-Broadway plays that he was running favourite, despite his lack of experience.
The night it was announced in Variety that Hoffman had the role, Nicholson swore violently and went out and got drunk.
Bike Trippers
He was working hard, yet he was hard up, and when he became an overnight star, he had appeared in close on twenty films, written six, co-produced three, and edited or assistant edited five.
Numerically, it was an impressive record but it did not bear too much scrutiny.
Nicholson's contribution to the film industry had been, to this point, almost entirely tied to Roger Corman's own eccentric career.
There wasn't much to be proud of in a mixed bunch of movies which were largely exploitation of current trends, regardless of how Corman tried to disguise them with socio-explanations.
But, at last, there was a light at the end of the tunnel.
It was the headlamp of a large Harley Davidson motorcycle roaring towards the cinema audiences of the mid-Sixties as the biker movies suddenly came into vogue, along with all the other fashions and fads of the emergent, decadent age.
The underground revolution was coming up to the surface, although it was nowhere near breaking through.
The beatniks, the bomb banners and campus peace groups were still a fairly intense crowd, dressed in their turtleneck sweaters and jeans, and using Jack Kerouac's On the Road as their symbol, their bible and guide to escapism and backseat sex.
Kerouac himself, meanwhile, had resorted to alcohol to seek oblivion in his pursuit of Buddhism, nonviolence and love for all creatures.
He was a disturbed man.
Something was happening amongst the youth movement that so admired him and he couldn't quite put his finger on it.
Neither, sometimes could his disciples understand their master, rambling when drunk, as observed one evening by British novelist Kingsley Amis when they shared a college platform in Boston debating new liberalism.
Amis joined the popular front of rising protest and who, in those days of rebellious literary figures, could have imagined that he would become a knight?
This was immediately prior to the Nicholson ‘star’ era; the wave of which he rode the crest was beginning to build and it is interesting to chronicle for a moment some of the events leading up to his ‘discovery’as a major Hollywood personality — a hero of the age and one who, as we have seen, was much influenced by the existentialist prophecies of Kerouac, which were now, finally, coming home to roost in middle-class America and elsewhere.
These early influences were to extend well into his career.
It was a vague but important time in the cultural and social history of the western world, a good time for those who were in it and enjoying themselves, a bad time for those who were dismayed at ‘young people today’.
Time magazine had long ago been berated by Kerouac and his compatriot American poet Allen Ginsberg for its repressive attitude to the surging movement of youth inspired by these literary figures and by the likes of Brando and Dean on screen.
If society had been worried about the juvenile delinquency problem of the Fifties, as portrayed in The Wild One ,Blackboard Jungle and Rebel Without a Cause , it was now on the precipice of sheer panic about drug-crazed beatniks and hippies whom the establishment and Time regarded with derision, as did its stablemate Life .
It scorned the ‘beat’ movement with a staged photographic layout under the headline: ‘THE ONLY REBELLION AROUND: But the shabby beats bungle the job….’
And Ginsberg wrote, ‘Are you going to let your emotional life be run by Time magazine?’
In other words, Ginsberg and his followers were campaigning against the establishment, the Luce family who controlled Time and Life , school, parents, the police — anyone in authority just as, in Britain it was emanating from Liverpool, the Marquee and Carnaby Street.
In a way, the revolution had been a long time coming and somewhat contained in America, despite the reactions of the mass media which had been — like all conservative America — horrified, if not titillated by the lurid images of beat youth.
Britain was much less shocked by it.
All that strange ‘beat’ talk of the late fifties and the avant-garde personality of the earlier Sixties that had become the language of kids in the coffee bars and campuses throughout the English-speaking world, was giving way to a more cynical view of life and the much harsher realities of the rock ‘n’roll years.
The coffee-bar era — twee and tame in hindsight — was all but gone, and the great new wave of stylism was heralded by rock stars, Indian mystics and Dr Timothy Leary, the high priest of the marijuana and acid society.
The open air theme, eventually to become epitomized by visions of Woodstock and the Rolling Stones performing live in Hyde Park, was itself a throwback from Kerouac's On the Road : because the road became the central symbol of his disciples' lives — hitting it in search of new horizons when the local scene became dull.
Dropping out meant taking to the road, hitchhiking or biking far away from home, and the landscape became dotted with the beat replacements, the hippies.
By the end of 1965, the first beginnings of a mass shift, and movement, in the young was being signalled.
The young Robert Zimmerman had changed his name to Bob Dylan and had been wailing away for a couple of years or so, and Nicholson was among the first of his fans who listened to and studied the words of his anti-establishment anthems, ‘The Times, They Are A-Changin’ and his ‘Mr Tambourine Man’which was a taunting, haunting song with a very hard edge that white middle-class youth took to be an ode to a dope dealer, which Dylan denied.
‘We listened to the song and drew our own conclusions, but it didn't matter what it meant,’ Nicholson recalled, ‘because everyone was so stoned they couldn't remember the words.
This was it, babe.
I mean this was the scene we were all at, to use the then terminology.
Dylan, Shankar, the Stones.
And it was terrific.
Terrific.’
Finally, even Time magazine had to give some credence to the arrival of this remarkable undercurrent in the motivation of young people, but preferred to blame London influences rather than American.
In its cover story of the 15 April 1966 issue of Time said, ‘In this century, every decade has its city and for the Sixties, that city is London.
In a decade dominated by youth, London has burst into bloom.
It swings; it is the scene.’
The era was further epitomized by the Beatles' number one hit at the start of the year, ‘Day Tripper’, and the Rolling Stones' new album,Aftermath .
Dylan upset his traditionalist fans by adding electronic backing for his new tour in the wake of the weird and wonderful sounds being emitted by two underground bands called Pink Floyd and Soft Machine.
Underground?
Marijuana, liberalism, wild living and protestation had been around for a long time.
The Dean crowd and their successors had been smoking as a regular habit ten years earlier but only now, at the height of the Vietnam crisis, when the futility of the war was beginning to dawn with the return of disillusioned young soldiers prepared at last to tell the truth, were drugs beginning to appear on the American campus scene and in London streets in any volume.
Encouraged by the words of the pop songs and those who were already well established users of various natural and manufactured mind-expanding substances, youth took a wrong turn — or the right one, depending on your stance at the time.
The drug age was in its infancy; there would be many dead and injured in its wake and as we all now know in the wiser Nineties, the knock-on effects would reverberate in much more sinister and sordid terms not just for the rest of the decade but the rest of the century.
Users fell basically into two groups: there were the milder peace-loving ‘Smile on your brother’ types, whose philosophy was invoked by Jefferson Airplane's hit record using that phrase, or the far more violent set who were emerging with hard rock and the free-as-the-wind Hell's Angels, the unkempt, unwashed, tough and brutal rabble who were the built-in bad guys of the counter-culture; they made the gangs in Rebel Without a Cause and Brando's The Wild One look like a Sunday school gathering.
In the middle of this explosion of pop culture, Nicholson had also become a free agent again, having parted from his wife in 1966, and moved in with his actor friend Harry Dean Stanton at Laurel Canyon.
The Great Seducer was on the loose and quietly and anonymously returned to a more vigorous social exchange.
Money was still short and days were long, and parties were often and red wine was cheap.
Thrill-seeking impulses led them to many momentary and immediate adventures, and it was this period of his life he referred to when he said he had never been in an orgy of more than three people, although he tried ineffectively to promote it a time or two.
His parties certainly looked like orgies.
‘I guess you could call them orgies in the strictest definition,’ he admitted.
‘There were a lot of rooms in my house and people could take their private little trips.
I don't know what they were doing and I guess that could be called an orgy.
But it wasn't where everybody's naked and fucking one another all over the place.
I've never been into that scene.’
Meanwhile, he was writing and acting, but still he was dogged by the need to continue working in cheap exploitive films, in between do-it-yourself repair jobs on his beloved Karmann Ghia out on Stanton's front lawn (like a massive brake-job to save fifty dollars).
Two films gave him temporary solvency and cast him straight into the seedier end of the youth market, the biker movies which were at the beginning of a craze that would last four or five years.
Everyone was making bike movies after Roger Corman's runaway success with The Wild Angels , starring Peter Fonda, Nancy Sinatra, Bruce Dern and Diane Ladd, released in 1966.
Corman brushed off accusations that it was total exploitation — which it was — of the California  motorcycle gangs, full of disgusting gang bangs, orgies, sadism and drugs.
He preferred to think of it as a meaningful social comment, which it certainly was not, otherwise the dialogue and plot might not have been so banal.
Friends of Fonda's father said Peter should be ashamed of himself for linking a ‘great name in movies’ to such disgraceful junk.
The American critics quickly despatched it to the second-string scrapheap, but young cinema fans weren't put off.
Nor were they in Europe, where it took off in a big way as the cult movie of the moment, especially in countries where the dire American dialogue could be dubbed over or subtitled with more viable prose.
Fonda was rocketed to stardom, and posters of him astride his bike were quickly outselling star portraits of Brando, Newman and McQueen.
The film became the American entry, by invitation, into that year's Venice film festival and the New York Times' critic, Bosley Crowther, summed up his nation's embarrassment when he described it as a ‘brutal picture which caused diplomats to mop their brows — a vicious account of boozing, fighting, pot-smoking, vandalizing and raping done by a gang of sickle riders who are obviously drawn to represent the swastika-wearing Hell's Angels, one of several disreputable gangs on the west coast.
Mr Corman has shot the whole thing in colour and in a  cinema-verité  style that makes it resemble a documentary.’
Nicholson did not appear in the film and was used as a production assistant by Corman; but it is worth mentioning because it was a significant moment in Hollywood history, inspiring as it did a succession of similar films when other producers noticed that The Wild Angels grossed eight million dollars in no time at all, and had been made on a shoestring budget.
Nicholson was caught up in the aftermath and became Hollywood's hottest property to emerge for two decades.
Unfortunately, his initial contributions to the biker craze were insignificant and forgettable.
Two films,Hell's Angels on Wheels and Rebel Rouser were supposed to follow in the wake of The Wild Angels , even to the point of including some of the cast of that film, like Bruce Dern and Diane Ladd.
Not much needs to be said about either, except perhaps to record two aspects: in the first film, a critic said Nicholson's acting consisted more or less of variations on a grin.
In comparison to his contemporaries in 1967 he had completed a lot more films than most; the difference was that his were a succession of B-movies that paid him little.
Beatty, on the other hand, was making $450,000 a picture by then and was shooting Bonnie and Clyde with Gene Hackman and Faye Dunaway which turned Beatty into a multi-millionaire overnight because he also prised some percentage points from the backers.
McQueen had starred in such epics as The Magnificent Seven .
Robert Redford and Paul Newman were about to start Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid .
Hoffman was on the verge of international fame and $200,000 a picture after The Graduate .
Yet, when Nicholson crossed the street to the legitimacy of a major studio, 2Oth Century-Fox, to join an all-star cast for The St Valentine's Day Massacre, to be released in l967, he had only a minuscule role, which had one speaking line consisting of twelve words, courtesy of Roger Corman who, for once, had landed a big-budget contract with a major studio and wanted Jack to share his momentary joy of being able to spend it.
Bruce Dern said Corman did him and Nicholson a favour by getting them a part because they both needed the money at the time; Corman arranged it so that their shooting schedules would require them to be available for the first and last weeks of the four-week stint, thus, under union rules guaranteeing them a salary cheque for the full four weeks.
Nicholson got nothing out of it except a few good pay days and suffered occasional touches of melancholia about his work; he was getting ‘old’ and anything substantial was nowhere in sight.
He was his own critic.
He kept telling himself that he was as good as anyone around.
‘But unless someone else says that about you, there's no way of believing in it totally,’ he said.
While working on the two biker films and his one sentence in The St Valentine's Day Massacre , undemanding as they were, Nicholson was also writing another film script for Corman who was once again ahead of the field in latching on to the latest craze sweeping through the world: the children of the post-war baby boom were coming out to play and nothing could stop them now.
From the early Sixties break-out, psychedelia was upon them with Sergeant Pepper, painted VWs and Dr Leary, extolling the virtues of LSD and eating strange mushrooms.
The revolution was here at last, and social commentators spoke with alarm about the march of freedom, and said the youth of all nations appeared to be abandoning traditional values to embark on journeys into the unknown, pushing out into previously unexplored and destructive avenues of life.
Even Dr Leary, after his highly publicized experimentation with the psychedelic mushrooms, said he was moved to agree with the arch right-winger of American politics, Governor George Wallace, on one thing, that nothing less than western civilization was at stake.
For the benefit of those who were not part of this scene, there was enormous and very real concern among the ruling classes that the whole of the young generation had fallen into a degenerative backslide which, of course, it had not.
The media and politicians joined the bandwagon and lumped hippies, Hell's Angels, dope-takers and black militants together in a crescendo of reaction.
There were great discussions especially among show business and literary figures, about the legalization of pot.
And politically, the young were becoming much more aware, and campaigning.
In December 1966, police had to evict anti-war demonstrators from the Berkeley campus, and, as student leaders called for a campus strike, they started singing the old student favourite ‘Solidarity Forever’.
Few knew the words, so they sang ‘Yellow Submarine’ instead.
Thus the Beatles' song became the anthem for hippie activists, and a mock-up submarine was built to head a peace parade of 10,000 through New York City.
In January 1967, there was the famous Human Be-in at Golden Gate park in San Francisco, and Allen Ginsberg, now suitably converted to Buddhism blew on a conch shell and chanted Hindu sayings and recommended that every healthy American over the age of fourteen should try LSD once.
Timothy Leary led a chorus of ‘Tune-in, Turn-On, Drop-Out’.
This brief excursion through the advent of rock ‘n’ roll, drugs and sex — in that order — is an over simplification of serious underlying trends and tensions that gripped western youth, but more especially, American youngsters faced with the prospect of being drafted.
It was certainly significant to the next stage of Nicholson's career, and indeed what was happening in Hollywood itself at a time of changing tastes which made it almost impossible to predict what next year's cinema audience would go into raptures about.
So Roger Corman said to Jack Nicholson, ‘I want you to write me a screenplay called The Trip , about this psychedelic craze and LSD, put someone on an acid trip.
No film has yet been made about LSD.
It will be the first.
Will you do it?’
Jack said he would and twenty-three years later, in May 1990, Roger Corman named it as being among the best pictures he had made, and by then the total had exceeded 200.
Peter Fonda and Dennis Hopper were to co-star and Nicholson wrote a part in it for himself but Corman refused to cast him and Bruce Dern played the role instead.
Dern said Jack was ‘very pissed off’ about not being allowed to play the role.
In reflection, Nicholson remembers that apart from the task of writing a film about a new subject on which there was very little in the way of written research material, it also came at a time when he was going through his divorce.
‘Most of the trauma I was going through at the time is written into that film,’ he admitted reflectively.
But there was also much more.
Because of the subject matter, Nicholson could draw on his own experiences with LSD.
It was familiar ground too for Fonda and Hopper — who were already good friends.
They came to Corman's office to establish what would become a lifelong, though intermittent, friendship between them and Nicholson.
Fonda was able to say that he had first tried LSD a couple of years earlier, and had also been a spasmodic user of marijuana — in between more prolific bouts of drinking vodka or scotch — since 1962 when he was turned on by Jim Mitchum at the Carlton Towers Hotel, in London.
He was introduced to LSD in September 1965, when he was twenty-five.
A friend administered the drug and supervised the trip ‘because he knew my head was really fucked up.’
Fonda claimed that this first experience began the halt of a downhill slide into alcoholism, acquisitive, habitual spending on fast cars, Cessna airplanes, fine suits and provided him with the insight to revoke his staunch conservative opinions and adopt a liberalistic, casual, ‘don't-give-a-fuck approach to life’.
These changes and realizations, he credited to his experiences with LSD though conceded that it might not work for others in the same way.
He was able to pass on to Nicholson authoritative recollections of seeing huge worms crawl out of biscuits, eating a plum that was alive, seeing his wife sitting beside herself and all that kind of hallucinatory experience.
Hopper — crazy, mixed up, Dean-possessed Dennis — had already carried out a pretty full testing programme on several available substances and it was often a gamble to assess his behavioural pattern: lovable, sexual, violent or zonked out.
Nicholson had taken LSD, but he had first done so, he said, as a quest — an adventurous actor seeking experiences to file away for the future.
He went to a qualified medical practitioner for his first experience in 1963 and, according to himself, became one of the first people in the country to take the drug.
He spent four hours with the therapist who administered it to him and supervised his acid trip, and he remained under a structured hallucinatory influence for a further five hours at home.
He was blindfolded for part of the time, which had the effect of making him ‘look inside of himself’ and he admitted that he was not ready for the experience and some of the discoveries he made.
At one point, he was screaming at the top of his voice; he also relived his own birth, met his fears of homosexuality and had the most terrifying fright ‘that my prick was going to be cut off’.
He said it was all highly graphic visually, especially the part when he was inside his mother's womb.
When he got out, he had the feeling he wasn't wanted and that as an infant he was a problem to his family — a feeling which he expressed publicly long before he became aware that his sister was really his mother.
He began writing these experiences for a film and when he produced his manuscript it was partly autobiographical.
The central character, Fonda's part, is a writer of television commercials who cannot stand the pressure of the effect it is having on his wife Sally (played by Susan Strasberg) and their marriage.
He begins to experiment with LSD in an attempt to obtain more understanding of his problems.
In the beginning, it is serene and peaceful, with lots of idyllic scenes and brilliant colours, but it ends with him being confronted by the nightmare of attending his own funeral.
These elements were inspired by his own experiences during the break-up with Sandra after she had suffered a bad LSD experience in her search for enlightenment.
Fonda thought the play was brilliant.
He took it home with him that night and sat reading the words.
Susan, his wife suddenly noticed he was crying.
‘What's the matter, baby?’ she asked.
‘This script…it's so beautiful, you have no idea.
Listen to this…’
Fonda read aloud a page of words to her and though his wife had never joined him in his LSD excursions, and marijuana made her sick, she understood from her husband's descriptions of expanded-mind experiences and images the intensity of his feelings.
He said, ‘I don't believe it.
I don't believe that I am really going to have the chance to be in this movie.
This is going to be the greatest film ever made in America.’
The statement was probably a bit of an exaggeration but it demonstrated just how strongly Peter Fonda felt about the Nicholson play.
In this he was joined by Dennis Hopper, who was equally ecstatic.
So was Bruce Dern.
‘The original script was just sensational,’ said Dern.
‘He injected into it some really way-out visual ideas that no one had ever tried before.’
Fonda finished reading and drove around to Nicholson's house.
They weren't yet close friends, more acquaintances.
Nicholson was surprised to receive the visit, and more surprised when Fonda told him, ‘Listen.
That is the greatest script I have ever read.
I think Fellini wrote it.’
‘Are you serious?’
Nicholson replied.
‘You really understand it?’
I understand every single word,’ said Fonda.
‘It's right on the nose.’
Corman, who was both producer and director of The Trip , was unsure about Nicholson's script.
He wanted certain scenes spelled out; he could not understand some of the subtleties.
Fonda, Hopper and Nicholson all knew what they meant and they knew that most of the youngsters in the audience would know what they meant.
Corman remained unconvinced, especially in the way that the multi-coloured fantasy scenes were to be portrayed.
Fonda exploded.
‘Now it's going to be just a predictable film with a beginning, a middle and an end.
The ending's a cop-out.’
Corman wasn't arguing.
That's the way he wanted it and his own bosses at American International Pictures made further changes through the difficulties they anticipated in getting the film distributed to the cinemas; it was quite probable that it would arouse backlash over its drug content, although, as John Baxter wrote in his review of Sixties films, it was one of those films that exposed with skill the psychological moral pressures vexing society.
It was, nonetheless, a film that tried to solicit an understanding of the emerging drug culture, and, for good or evil, persisted with its apologist tone that acid was OK when used with caution.
Corman, however, never permitted the final conclusion and left an ambiguous ending in which suicide seemed the only answer for the Fonda character.
Reviews were mixed but largely went the way of those who saw it as a one-and-a-half-hour commercial for LSD.
Even Corman publicity later admitted that The Trip attracted a ‘small but loyal group of enthusiasts’.
Film and Filming magazine said the film had given everyone an insight into the thinking of Corman and Nicholson.
It appeared that the former was hung up on sadomasochism and the latter high on sex, leaving little for Fonda and Hopper to do but punctuate every word with ‘man’.
Nicholson failed to make a name for himself once again, though because of some inspired controversy he had at least achieved a wider circle of critics.
Fonda made his feelings about the picture known by blaming the producers.
As he cleared off to lick his wounds in Canada he spoke of his displeasure —‘by trusting AIP (Corman's parent company) to make a beautiful flick, I put my balls on the table and they got lobbed right off.’
Then, in a light haze of vodka in a Toronto hotel room, came the moment that would finally lead to recognition for Nicholson as an actor.
Fonda suddenly had the idea for another film.
It came to him, just like a flash of lightning and he was so excited that he picked up the telephone and rang Dennis Hopper in Los Angeles.
‘Wow, I'm glad you called, man,’ said Hopper who thought his friend had telephoned to patch up a quarrel they'd had before Fonda left for Canada.
‘Fuck that,’ said Fonda.
‘Listen to this, man.’
He outlined his idea for a movie plot, which was basically the story of two Californian friends who decide to make a once-and-for-all fortune by selling a consignment of cocaine, and then setting off across the country for a marijuana-cum-motorbikes adventure.
‘Whaddaya think?’ asked Fonda.
‘We'll take the two leading roles.’
‘Wow, man that's great.
Jesus that's great, man.’
‘I'm going to produce this movie and I want you to direct it.’
said Fonda.
‘Will you do it?’
‘Gee whiz, man.
Are you kidding me?
Wow, babe.
Jesus that's great.
Of course, I'll fucking do it.
What's the title?’
‘Easy Rider .’
‘Wow…’
Easy Rider
In 1968 Jack Nicholson was thinking of giving up acting altogether.
He was approaching thirty-two and the elusive big break and rainbow's end that is the goal of everyone who ever set foot in Hollywood seemed no nearer to achievement.
He was like a gold miner, chipping away at the rocks and occasionally discovering tantalizing little nuggets that spurred him on towards his dream of striking a rich seam.
The Klondike and Hollywood had much in common.
True, the word star could be loosely applied to him on the basis that he had ‘starred’ in more than a dozen films.
The reality was that he could walk into any bar or restaurant anywhere in the world and no one would give him a second glance.
Occasionally, there might be a glimmer of recognition by a student or a horror-film fanatic and in Hollywood itself he was known — according to his friend, the Polish director Roman Polanski — to about fifty people.
This, for a man whose entire working life had been devoted to making it big in the movies, came as a depressing, frustrating fact as he surveyed his position that year.
What was it all about?
Why did he spend his life making films that would be forgotten almost as quickly as it took to make them?
How could he change his life, which seemed irretrievably set on a course of obscurity?
Admittedly, he was not driven by the same devoutly mercenary ambitions of some of his colleagues and sought artistic satisfaction wherever possible.
At the end of the day, however, recognition as an actor was also inexorably linked to becoming rich and famous — Warren Beatty's words — and even a modest hope of that seemed as far away as ever.
He had been talking about giving up and concentrating his efforts entirely on writing and directing and, like the discovery of another little nugget, was spurred on by reaction to The Trip which, in spite of a critical mauling on the grounds of promoting drug abuse, was still seen as a gifted piece of writing.
Two other similar projects were already lined up and, again, his career was being pulled in a certain direction by events of the moment.
In the months Nicholson had been involved in the writing and filming of The Trip , flower-power had reached its peak and the Haight-Ashbury district of San Francisco had become the Mecca of hippiedom, where all the children with flowers in their hair were at; naturally enough, this prevailing situation provided AIP with the backdrop for another psychedelic experience called Psych-Out .
Only the title and script changed.
The actors were pretty much the same as for The Trip — Susan Strasberg, Bruce Dern and, this time, there was a role for Nicholson, for whom that ever-popular name of Stoney was resurrected.
The central character in this story of the times is a seventeen-year-old runaway from New York City, who is taken by the whole current youth philosophy and ends up in California, where she tries to locate her brother who also headed for San Francisco.
There, she is befriended by Stoney, a sexy rock ‘n’ roller who rescues her from a world of LSD that she has dropped into.
It gave the producers the chance to create some enticingly colourful kaleidoscopes, largely by Lazlo Kovaks' cinematographic wizardry; otherwise there was little about the film that either Nicholson, Dern or Strasberg would admit to being proud of.
It was notable in one respect, in that it saw the development of Nicholson's romance with the stunningly attractive former model, Mimi Machu, who appeared in Psych-Out well down the list of credits under the pseudonym of I.J. Jefferson.
He had met her previously when she was given a similarly small part in Hell's Angels on Wheels and now they were both unattached and deeply attracted to one another.
An invigoratingly stormy relationship was in the making and if Nicholson had been gossip-column fodder at the time, the writers would have had a field day.
She was tall, dark-haired and strong-willed, characteristics which were largely repeated in all of Jack's long-term relationships.
She was a little like Sandra Knight in looks, and, in some respects, temperament.
She was also slightly taller than himself.
His friends viewed the affair with interest as it gathered a fair head of steam.
Mimi's sexuality captivated The Great Seducer.
Jack, they said, was in love again.
As their relationship progressed, it was apparent that Mimi had the upper hand in terms of authority.
He did pretty well what she wanted with their lives, which caused some occasional irritation.
She was with him, also, at the very time his career began to take off and this, with her own hopes for fame as an actress, can be the cause of unintentional jealousy.
As the year drew on, their affair became more and more fractious…
On the work front, he took a step nearer to what he thought would be a move towards transferring his energies to the other side of the camera and his next work was so outlandishly eccentric that perhaps in the year 1998 it will be rediscovered and offered as a superb example of long forgotten pop art of thirty years earlier.
It was a film called Head , which he wrote and appeared in as himself; it deserves to be brought out and dusted down.
It said a lot about the times and included some witty — but strangely unwieldy — material in Nicholson's script.
Few saw it like that at the time.
In fact, few saw it, period.
It was dreamed up for the Monkees and its original conception was supposed to loosely parody the Beatles' films A Hard Day's Night and Help .
Nicholson's offering, in his first working partnership with director Bob Rafelson, was more than that.
Between relentless, disjointed images of everything from cowboys and Indians to real-life Vietnam clips and even an off-colour star of a former age, Victor Mature as the Jolly Green Giant, he managed to write the obituary for that totally plastic group, created from nothing as NBC's teenybop answer to the Beatles and who were a pale shadow in terms of comparative talent.
Bob Rafelson, whose later acclaimed directorial skills were — like Nicholson's acting — still largely undiscovered in 1968, had an interest in the Monkees.
He and James Frawley had been their virtual creators for the television network and they had seen some excruciatingly successful years.
By 1968, the clean-cut image of lads in suits and neatly trimmed hair was definitely for the birds, but not the Byrds, and the Monkees had all but swung from their last branch; the exploitation of four young men who were plucked from audition lines and manufactured into an internationally famous foursome was all but over.
Their infantile antics were even making the perpetrators sick.
Still, they might have had a few more years left in them yet, and so in that respect, it was rather courageous of them to accept Nicholson's script and Rafelson's apparent decision that all good things must come to an end.
It virtually put them out of business and had Mickey  Dollenz calling out to Rafelson, who also appears as himself, ‘Bob, I'm through with it.’
Which he was; they all were.
They themselves had been exploited for the purposes of exploitation and although they made a stab at the psychedelic scene, it hadn't really come off.
In Head , Nicholson had kindly provided them with a suicide note for which Mike Nesmith was eternally grateful.
Not many reviewers really saw the point he was trying to make.
In fact, a lot of them could see little point in the movie at all.
Renata Adler sat down at her typewriter at the New York Times and scolded Nicholson for a ‘dreadfully written script’.
Nicholson was naturally defensive and protective of his own work: ‘I saw it a thousand and one times and I loved it.
It was the best rock 'n' roll picture ever made because it was anti-rock 'n' roll.
It had no form, no structure and believe me that's a difficult, unique thing to achieve in movies.’
And, by the way, it was also Nicholson's own goodbye to the Roger Corman school of movie-making.
Jack could have no complaints.
He had learned his craft and had lingered too long.
The forked road which every star, perhaps every person, faces at least once in a lifetime lay dead ahead.
For one brief moment, it seemed as if there might be a conventional route to fame, through the young director Roman Polanski who had just entered the fast new Hollywood crowd of which Nicholson was a member, as was his friend Robert Evans, who had been recently appointed vice president of Paramount and in charge of all new production projects.
Polanski arrived in Hollywood from Europe on the back of a spoof horror film called The Fearless Vampire Killers , a parody of the horror genre, which he directed and in which twenty-three gallons of imitation blood were used.
The film starred Sharon Tate, whom Polanski thought was only fourteen years old.
He became besotted, and one day after filming, he asked her ‘Would you like to make love to me?’
She smiled sweetly and replied.
‘Yes.
I would love to…’
He discovered she was no teenager and Sharon moved into Polanski's mews house, just off Eaton Place, London.
Polanski was also known to some of the Hollywood crowd through its inter-connection with the swingers of London and the skiing crowd who populated Gstaad and Aspen, notably his friendship of one of the men at the hub of the English scene, Victor Lownes, the cool, urbane and towering figure whom Hugh Hefner had appointed vice president of Playboy International and despatched to London to oversee the new playboy Club in Park Lane.
Polanski used the club as his base and as an access point to its abounding supply of beautiful women; just as Hefner's Playboy mansion in Los Angeles was a magnet for the bright young things of Hollywood, so Lownes established a social whirl that attracted the cream and the elite of off-beat London society, plus some very famous names, eventually to include Nicholson himself.
Robert Evans contacted Polanski in the London Playboy Club one afternoon and inconsiderately invited him to stop what he was doing and come to Hollywood immediately.
Polanski replied that he could not rush matters of a sexual nature.
However, he flew to Los Angeles and went to Paramount to discuss the new project, a horror-thriller called Rosemary's Baby .
They selected Mia Farrow as the lead and Polanski asked Warren Beatty to read the script for the co-starring role of Rosemary's husband, Guy.
Beatty turned it down as not being a big enough role, and so Polanski went for Robert Redford.
In fact, he was already discussing it in his office when he discovered that Paramount were in the middle of a feud with Redford and were just about to serve him with a writ.
Evans said they should get Jack Nicholson for the role and he was invited in for a try-out.
Polanski's assessment was not encouraging.
He recalled, ‘Nicholson was a complete unknown at the time.
He'd played in some eminently forgettable horror movies and I felt I could not seriously consider him.
For all his talent, his faintly sinister appearance ruled him out.
The part called for a clean-cut, conventional actor.’
John Cassevetes got the part and thus ended Nicholson's brief hope of a major starring role, and provided further incentive to the prevailing thought that he should get out of acting.
His friendship with Polanski developed, and he and Robert Evans were to have major roles reserved for them in Nicholson's life, personal and career.
Nicholson, by now, had already heard of Easy Rider .
Who hadn't?
Hopper and Fonda were looking for finance, although all that existed at the time was an eight-page outline for the plot, which Fonda had been toting around.
Corman's ALP had already turned it down because although they liked the idea of another biker film, the prospect of Hopper — bearing in mind his recent reputation — bringing in the picture without problems hardly seemed worth the gamble.
Their reaction was pretty typical of Hollywood.
What's Dennis the menace up to now?
There were other imponderables.
They were talking about having no other actors apart from the three main characters to be played by Hopper, Fonda and Rip Torn — in between Hopper's directing and Hopper's scriptwriting and Fonda's production and Fonda's co-scriptwriting work.
Apart from a few bit parts, the rest would be real people.
Whoever heard of putting real people into a film?
Spirits dashed, Fonda and Hopper came up with another idea for a picture called The Queen , starring themselves and Jack Nicholson as Robert McNamara, Dean Rusk and Lyndon Johnson apparently plotting the assassination of John F. Kennedy.
They took this idea to BBS, a new production company formed by Bob Rafelson, Bert Schneider and Steve Blauner (thus BBS — Bob, Bert and Steve) to produce intelligent low-budget pictures — the thinking man's Roger Corman movies, someone said.
‘Needless to say,’ said Fonda, ‘they wouldn't touch it, but Bert Schneider asked what else we'd got.
I said ‘Well, we got this great story for a motorcycle picture….’
And his eyes lit up.’
Nicholson, who was spending a good deal of his time in the new BBS offices, which he hoped would be the starting point of his own aspirations towards directing, chipped in with the observation that his biker pictures had all grossed respectable money and made very handsome profits from a low outlay.
‘How much will it take to make it?’
Schneider asked.
‘Half a mill, maximum,’ said Fonda, but he was ready to negotiate because he desperately wanted to make the picture.
‘OK.
I'll give you $375,000.
Go and do your picture and come back and show us, said Schneider.
Dennis Hopper was even more determined than Fonda to make it work.
He saw it as his main chance to regain some respect.
They both had something to prove.
Like most others who managed to remain — tolerantly and understandingly — friends of Hopper's, Fonda and Nicholson were well aware that he had suffered disappointment after disappointment during the mid-Sixties.
He and his wife Brooke Hayward were on the verge of divorce — they finally split up in 1969.
She had suffered during long bouts of Hopper's depression, rages and his obsession with James Dean.
It tormented him and tested his sanity to breaking point.
Through Brooke and his own contacts, he had entry to the cream of Hollywood parties and the cream of Hollywood society.
It could and should have led him to great opportunities.
Dennis invariably ruined his own chances by his complete anti-establishment stance.
He would start the evening in his quiet, sometimes moody, Kansas drawl and would end up in ranting fashion, telling them all that things would be different when he and the rest of ‘new’ Hollywood were running things, and they would all be clapped in irons, which was hardly the brightest way to inspire confidence at a time when you were seeking film money.
His most bitter disappointment came when the music entrepreneur Phil Spector pulled back from financing a screenplay Hopper had written called The Last Movie (it was eventually produced in 1970) about Hollywood's exploitation and destruction of South American Indians.
Everyone he had shown it to had described it as brilliant, and by all accounts it was; rejection hurt.
It destroyed him and for a time he was engulfed by a deep chasm of despair, drinking heavily, taking amphetamines and LSD — and he was in his sixteenth year of smoking marijuana.
Easy Rider was like an ambulance arriving to perform an emergency resuscitation on his ego.
Added to the volatile, almost certifiable, personality of Hopper was the ambition of Peter Fonda, who would never admit it but was wanting — at that point in his life — to really show his father and sister, not to mention a whole legion of critics, that he could act — a considerable undertaking in itself.
He had made money from his movie The Wild Angels and now he wanted to prove he could do something worthwhile.
Alongside Hopper, Fonda was a very stable character, loved his wife and wanted for little, except self-fulfilment, which gnawed away at his mind and caused him to drink and trip occasionally on LSD.
The third element that made Easy Rider the runaway, roaraway success that it became in the counter-culture movement was Jack Nicholson, angry and surely envious — though he denied it — at seeing some of his flash contemporaries and some younger actors making it very big indeed in the legitimacy of more sumptuous surroundings of Warners, Paramount, MGM and the rest.
The disappointment of not being selected for Rosemary's Baby had merely made him more determined to change his life.
In a way, the three of them were like moles, digging their way to the surface looking for freedom, coincidentally at the same time that counter-culture was doing the same and searching for heroes.
It was purely by chance that Nicholson was cast for the film.
At quite an early stage, there were reports of trouble from the location work in New Orleans.
Rip Torn, who was first choice for the part that Nicholson eventually played had finally rejected the pleadings of Fonda and Hopper and pulled out of the project.
He wanted $4500 for the job — once he had seen what it entailed — whereas because of the limited budget everyone else was on scale, amounting to a few hundred dollars.
There were rows between him and Dennis, who could become exceedingly tired and emotional and was already shooting in New Orleans without a script.
BBS seriously considered firing Hopper; the pressure of moving a production team of twenty-three people from state to state, writing the script on the run and persuading innocent citizens of the United States of America who just happened to be passing at the time to appear in the movie, was a heavy burden for all.
Hopper will probably agree that he — and the movie — were saved by Nicholson who was sent down by Rafelson as a trouble-shooter in the role of executive producer and ended up playing the third man, the part reserved for Rip Torn.
Nicholson brought instant stability to the production and introduced some of the rigid controls he had learned from the Corman modus operandi .
He was also responsible for bringing in Lazlo Kovaks, the cinematographer whose filming of the American landscape brought untold dimensions to the movie itself; he also joined later in the selection of another of the film's major plus-points — the magnificent scoring and numbers performed by Steppenwolf, the Byrds, the Jimi Hendrix Experience, the Electric Prunes, Electric Flag, the Band, the Holy Mondal Rounders, Fraternity of Man, Little Eva and Roger McGuin.
Easy Rider was the motivation for a lot of things and for those not familiar with the story, it is one of free love and excessive drugs and of American society as perceived by Hopper in 1968, with some moralistic warnings about drug use and undertones about the consequences of such a lifestyle — but only if you were actually looking for them.
Otherwise, any tendency towards moralizing was overshadowed by the exciting, humorous, tragic and horrifically violent elements.
The two central characters played by Hopper and Fonda are Wyatt, nicknamed Captain America, and Billy — Billy the Kid — who embark on a drugs deal, selling cocaine in California, to provide the finance to purchase a pair of magnificent Harley Davidsons for a journey across America and to the Mardi Gras at New Orleans.
It was the ultimate biker-drug-sex film, which also owed a lot to Kerouac's On The Road .
Unfortunately, Jack Kerouac never lived to see the success of it, ironically passing on to that great hippie gathering in the sky on 21 October 1969.
They see all America and its split personality; the American Dream and the American small-mindedness, which are typified by the two bikers confrontations with hippies on the one hand and red-neck American bigots on the other.
As Hopper said, ‘Don't be scared.
Go try and change America, but if you're gonna wear a badge, whether it's long hair or black skin, you'd better learn to protect yourself.’
The New Orleans sequences were filmed first, even before Fonda, Hopper and screenwriter Terry Southern had finished writing.
They moved back to California, on to Arizona, New Mexico, Texas and Louisiana.
Then, they stopped for two months to write and prepare the rest before taking to the road again.
Nicholson, Fonda and Hopper had become the best of friends.
As he watched Hopper work, Nicholson came to the conclusion that he was working with a genius, flawed perhaps, but a man whose artistry was, and still is, quite awesome.
Hopper's direction of Easy Rider had much to do with his own appreciation of historical art and his painting skills.
Nor can the quality of his writing be denied, though it often needed the expertise of Terry Southern to translate the confusion of Hopper and Fonda's joint (no pun intended) efforts into filmable dialogue.
The script they came up with was trendy and repetitive, rather naive but tuned directly to the youth of the moment.
There was a Dylan Thomas in Hopper, not just in his abilities but in his self-destruct mechanism and it was a great pity in many ways that he spent so many years in James Dean's gloomy black shadow, because he is talented and perhaps even more diverse.
He did not realize it in the Sixties, nor the Seventies.
Perhaps in the Eighties, it began to dawn on him and he cleaned up his act but by then some of the early potential had passed.
There was a moment in the shooting of Easy Rider that typified Hopper's abilities.
It had to do with his insistence on using ‘real’ people, which was seen as a daunting prospect by many of the crew.
However, when they arrived in a town called Morganza, Louisiana, looking for locations, they came across a little café with a sign outside which read ‘Homemade pies and Coca-Cola’, Dennis spotted the place and fell in love with it.
When they returned with cameramen, the advance production team had picked up some local teenagers for the film.
When Hopper and Fonda arrived — Hopper looking rough and hippyish with his long hair and wild beard and stetson hat — some other youths who did not know what he was about began crowding in on him, saying, ‘I can smell him.
Can you smell him?’
Another said, ‘Yeah, I smell him.
It's his hair.
Have you ever seen hair as long as that?’
Hopper insisted that he wanted these lads in the film, not the one the production people had selected.
He and Fonda retired to their trailer, smoked some marijuana and then came out and told the crowd of local youths that they should imagine that the two of them had just arrived in town, and, on the way, they had picked up a local girl of fifteen, and raped and left her in the bushes.
‘They began growling, man,’ said Hopper.
‘Straightaway they got the mood of what we wanted.’
He used other personal experiences in the script.
Once in Montrose, Colorado, when he was on location for a small role in John Wayne's True Grit , he was standing in a bar, scruffy and long-haired, and for no reason at all, one of the locals took a swing at him.
‘He was screaming at me, ‘Get outta here, my son's in Vietnam’ and then the local sheriff came in and he shouted that his son was in Vietnam and why wasn't I in Vietnam?
It got real heavy, man.
So I put that kind of experience in the play.’
Nicholson entered the scheme of things when Captain America and Billy the Kid are put into jail when a police force regards then, as mere undesirables.
There, they meet a naive, alcoholic young lawyer named George Hanson — played by Jack — a once good-intentioned liberal who is now equally at odds with the heartland of American society.
He awakes from a bender, slow and bleary, and introduces a sardonic charm that jolts the film to a sudden halt and he is a star, instantly.
He decides to join them as he springs them from jail and they continue their journey.
That night, they filmed the most memorable and supposedly dramatic scene in the picture, the one in which Nicholson does his monologue on what is wrong with American society, for which he became famous.
If only the great wide world of cinema audiences knew exactly what happened…
It was the campfire scene where the three of them were sitting around talking, discussing the problems of the world and they introduce Hanson to marijuana.
It started well, but Hopper, who was acting, directing, and smoking, could not get the take he required.
Did anyone out there, when they saw the movie, realize that they were smoking for real?
And could anyone imagine that in order to get those few minutes of screen imagery in the can, the three of them inhaled 1O5 real joints of excellent quality Mexican grass?
Each time they did a take, or reshot to get an angle, it was necessary to smoke almost an entire joint.
This in itself created a double problem because the action of this scene moves from a point where Nicholson is talking normally right through to the point where he is stoned and slurred through smoking marijuana.
There were so many takes and retakes for angles that the reverse situation was occurring for Nicholson, the actor.
Because by then he was stoned before the scene began, and instead of having to play normal and act stoned, he was having to act normal and play stoned.
There was an added difficulty that the three of then, would break into convulsions of laughter, verging on hysterics, with Hopper somewhere off camera rolling around in the bushes and, according to Nicholson, ‘totally freaked out’ while Jack was forcing himself to be relatively straight, do his serious acting and hold the whole thing together: ‘This used to be a helluva good country…’
The trio of actors became close off set, though with Fonda a committed monogamist, Hopper and Nicholson often went off into the night; on one occasion they shared a memorable experience with LSD, so memorable, in fact, that both men have chosen, separately, to recall it in detail, as best they could.
In Nicholson's case, the description came with the ever-present prefix that on the occasions he has tried acid, it was used properly to avoid bad trips; thus, he had ‘come to terms with things that you perceive would be otherwise impossible — things that help you understand yourself…plus, if used properly, it can means quite a lot of kicks.’
On this particular day, they had been shooting at Taos and at the end of it they dropped some acid and took off with two other friends to visit the nearby tomb of D.H.
Lawrence.
The descriptions of their hallucinatory images as they lay at the foot of Lawrence's grave are too visual and complicated to do justice to and are no longer relevant, anyway.
Later, as dusk began to fall, they got sentimental about each other and began to cry.
Jack said, ‘We're geniuses.
You know that?
Isn't it great to be a genius?’
Dennis agreed that it was.
Somehow, and from somewhere, a beautiful young woman appeared — this was no imagined vision — and she took them to some hot springs where they all ended up naked.
Dennis eventually went off with her on his own, leaving Nicholson to return alone to their hotel where he acted out some kind of ritual guarding of their rooms, ready to forewarn of an attack he was expecting at any moment from some non-existent Red Indians.
None came and still under the drug's influence at dawn, he found himself looking out from the top of a forty-foot tree — he had no memory of climbing it — and looking down on a vast meadow, flecked with patterns of multi-coloured light and rocks which turned into horses, all of which filled him with ‘tremendous emotions’.
That was a real-life experience, not acted for a film.
Meanwhile,Easy Rider , itself, began to take on more menacing tones as it neared its climax.
Nicholson had completed his scenes, having been kicked to death by two marauding red-necks, leaving Captain America and Billy the Kid to continue their journey to New Orleans for the Mardi Gras, their adventures in a brothel and the LSD scene which took a week to shoot because no one could focus on what they were supposed to be doing.
As they finally leave the city and head out for the open road, Billy the Kid says, ‘We made it, didn't we?’
Captain America is pensive and is about to deliver the film's conscience, the message to the counter-culture, the moral of the story: ‘You know, Billy, we blew it.’
Now there was no explanation for that in the film.
Hopper wrote the line and Fonda could not understand it.
‘Why did they blow it?…’
‘Well, they were criminals,’ said Hopper.
‘They smuggled drugs and used criminal ways to buy their dreams and get out of the system.
Fonda began to get Hopper's point.
‘So they gained their freedom from an illicit source.’
‘Correct,’ said Hopper.
‘That's why they blew it.’
Fonda examined the premise and eventually saw that they were making a much broader statement about the American Dream and the state of the nation itself at that precise moment in time.
It was not just about hippy society, it was about society at large.
Captain America and Billy the Kid had blown it when they believed they could make a lot of money and retire, but life was not simply about economics; they had, according to Fonda, found their freedom but their liberty was like the statue in New York harbour, surrounded by polluted waters.
That's why Nicholson's character had to die; he was the innocent and the only reason he was killed was because he was with two undesirable characters.
If he had not been with them, he would have gone through that town quite safely.
The wider issues were to show that politicians had blown it, for dragging America into Vietnam, germ warfare, ABM and all those other starting points of peace protesters.
Worldwide governments had blown it for different reasons.
These were the discussion points.
And now, the film turns on the two escapists and finally delivers its punishment.
Out on the road, they become involved in an argument with a trucker who shoots Billy and then Captain America.
The film ends with the two Harley Davidsons going up in flames….
Few people paid much attention to Easy Rider until the previews, and slowly word got around that Fonda and Hopper had produced a very good film.
The establishment magazines began by deprecating the film's free and easy attitude to drugs and sex, and especially to violence.
It promoted the use of marijuana, they said, although it started with an anti-drugs message.
The underground and radical publications more readily saw some of the intentions of the script and the overall concept.
In fact,Easy Rider was rather slow to catch on but when it finally caught the attention of the counter-culture, even the establishment newspapers and magazines began to offer up praise.
Nicholson especially won some excellent notices although Fonda reckoned that Dennis Hopper's performance had been the best of the three.
Fonda himself once again suffered the attribution of the word ‘wooden’.
His father had other comments.
Henry Fonda was apparently heard to say of his son, ‘That little bastard…he and some other punks have produced a movie out of nothing and have made more money from that piece of crap than I have made in a whole lifetime in Hollywood.’
There was praise in that statement somewhere but more for his son than the film.
Hollywood did not especially like it.
It was one of those pictures that went totally against the grain of everything that the movie industry believed it stood for.
To generalize and say that it stood for anything at all was self-delusion and deceit.
The truth was that they were just jealous they had not thought of it before and made all of that money.
That was the key — the final arbiter of success or failure.
Easy Rider took $45 million worldwide for an outlay of less than $400,000 and there are few comparable profit-to-cost examples in the history of Hollywood.
For once, when Hopper said ‘Wow!’ it was an understatement.
The stardom sort of crept up on Nicholson over a period of weeks.
He knew he had performed well and he was able to present himself in the best possible aura, that of self-satisfaction, because Hopper gave him carte blanche to edit his own part on film.
The result was that in spite of some misgivings about the script and the incessantly repetitive dialogue about them doing their own thing, reviewers spoke glowingly of ‘an actor named Jack Nicholson…is magnificent’ and ‘he gave a brilliantly witty performance’.
It was an odd fact that they spoke of him in terms of discovering a new talent — a new star who had emerged quite suddenly — and apparently unaware that he was a veteran of a string of past films.
The New York Times demonstrated how he had made little impact on the movie world, until that point in time, with the observation that the lawyer Hanson was ‘…played by Jack Nicholson whose sharp, regular features may be vaguely familiar to kids who go and watch drive-in movies.’
Easy Rider also gave a new edge and meaning to the phrase ‘anti-hero’.
There were plenty of examples of performances which fall into this category in cinematographic history, most notably those of James Cagney and Humphrey Bogart dating back to the Thirties, and the more lovably roguish role, in Bogart's case, in The African Queen .
Hollywood's modern-day anti-heroes appeared that year in the shape of John Voight and his smelly companion Dustin Hoffman in the 1969 Oscar-winning film,Midnight Cowboy .
While that was a brilliant evocation of living by your wits in or near a New York gutter, which pushed out several boundaries — largely sexual — in relation to the old Hollywood code of conduct, there was a degree of tameness in comparison to the anti-heroes created in Easy Rider ; Fonda, Hopper and especially Nicholson were used as role models for many future films, and thus it broke new ground.
The very fact that Nicholson should be nominated for an Oscar as Best Supporting Actor spoke for itself.
With hindsight, of course, it is now possible to question the glamorizing of drug-taking in such films as Easy Rider , Psych-Out and The Trip and others; the in-built health warnings were seldom noticed and there was a certain drugs bandwagon rolling, anyway, largely created in the pop industry where drug usage was not only referred to, even poetically eulogized in song, but physically demonstrated by some of its more tragic exponents like Brian Jones, Jimi Hendrix and Janice Joplin, to name but three in a long line of fallen idols and heroes.
Nicholson was always quite adamant in his own mind that his films did not encourage drug taking.
If anyone was to blame, it was the anti-drugs policy of successive governments, and especially president Richard Nixon's, but that's another talking point on which he would hold forth at the drop of a hat.
What Easy Rider and Nicholson did capture was the mood in America and elsewhere at that time.
It was not a ‘brilliant’ movie; the script was flawed and the premise was suspect, but the underlying presence that Fonda, Hopper and Nicholson caught, perhaps without even realizing it, was an air of tension that prevailed among youth right across the world in 1969.
Headlines of that period will recall some of the concerns: the assassinations of Bobby Kennedy and Dr Martin Luther King (the previous year); Black Power and the police shoot-outs with Black Panthers; the continuing Vietnam War, claiming its 40,000th American victim; fever-pitch anti-war demonstrations and the symbolic burning of draft cards; draft-dodgers escaping to Canada; massive public demonstrations for peace in every major western city; and two million acres defoliated in South Vietnam by the beginning of 1969.
Then there were the Paris student riots, the Biafran conflict and scenes of devastating suffering and starvation; Yasser Arafat became head of the PLO and enlisted thousands of young people into his army; Muammar Gaddafi threw out the Libyan monarchy and installed himself as his nation's leader and hero of terrorist factions everywhere; the streets of Ulster became a battle zone with troops, fire bombs and unbelievable scenes of street-fighting; Jan Palach, a twenty-one-year-old Czech student set fire to himself in Wenceslas Square to protest at the Soviet invasion of Prague.
And, soon, in this great new age of student protest, the National Guard — in a repetition of the horrific violence ordered by Chicago's Mayor Richard Daley only a few months before — used bayonets and tear gas to disperse anti-war demonstrators at Kent County University, Ohio (in May 1970).
Two nights later, in the grounds of the same university, four students — two of them girls — lay dead, shot by the bullets of fellow Americans in the National Guard.
It hardly seemed credible, whichever side you were on, that such events could occur.
More incredible was that all of this violence, all of this blood and gore, all of this inhumanity and human sacrifice was being conducted in the corner of our living rooms, because suddenly it was also the nightly fodder of the television stations, who were only just realizing the potential of on-the-spot coverage of such despicable yet compelling viewing matter.
In that respect, Hollywood had a lot to beat.
Some of the lighter moments around the time of the release of Easy Rider and Nicholson's coming-out party, provided contrasting and bizarre elements which were all relevant to the age in which he would become established as their hero.
For example, in London, stage censorship ended the previous December, and the all-nude musical Hair was enjoying packed houses.
Myra Breckenridge , the sizzling exposure of sex in Hollywood by Gore Vidal had just made its appearance in London, along with Norman Mailer's The Armies of the Night , about the invasion of the White House the previous October of pacifists and hippies protesting at the war.
John Lennon and Yoko allowed the world's media into their hotel suite in Amsterdam for their bed-in, a honeymoon to epitomize the institution of love not war.
Mick Jagger put on a charming little Greek skirt and gave a free performance to thousands in London's Hyde Park, while Bob Dylan headed down to the Isle of Wight for a three-day festival of dope, sex and rock ‘n’ roll attended by 150,000 fans.
It was the wildest party Britain had seen, and the media had a field day with a revelling of nude and painted bodies, cavorting to fine music under a dense cloud of cannabis smoke and punctuated by the occasional screams of an acid drop gone wrong.
For those in the middle of these events, there was in addition to the tension and the menace, a certain air of unreality; this raises the part played by drugs, not merely in the emergence of a forceful counter-culture, but in the attitudes of plain straightforward young people to whom any kind of illicit substance a couple of years earlier would have been a complete mystery.
Drugs provided the wherewithal for the actual suspension of reality — a route so desperately sought, for instance, by those young men wearing American uniforms in that far-off land of Vietnam.
As young people were being encouraged, if not forced, to raise the stakes of involvement, by the pressures of the wars, brutal police, terrorist causes and other assorted hostilities, violence suddenly became an integral part of the youth movement as the feeling of the impending apocalypse heightened.
Is this all too serious a scenario to attach to one simple biker movie called Easy Rider and a biography of one supporting actor in it?
Of course; the film was just one minuscule component of a particularly significant period of the last half-century, at a time when many millions of people still viewed film and pop stars as providers of some kind of visionary lead.
What happened next in Hollywood shocked it to the core and brought Nicholson and Hopper to the heart of one of the great tragedies of this drug-infested era…
Brave New World
Charles Manson was not merely a symptom of the drug age; he was the epitome of a certain sickness that gripped some sections of society, by whom he was exalted as the inspiration for the killing of so-called pigs, the word daubed in blood on the living-room walls of director Roman Polanski's home, after the so-called Sharon Tate murders, for which the bearded prophet of the drug age is still serving life.
Polanski, on the other hand, was, in Jack Nicholson's view, the recipient of Western justice: ‘His situation is a very interesting case of what notoriety can do to you.
I always felt that Roman was exiled because his wife had the bad taste to be murdered in the newspapers.’
Irony seldom works in print and this blunt appraisal of the troubles that had beset his friend was made to Nancy Collins and published in Rolling Stone some fifteen years after the Tate murders at Polanski's rented home in Beverly Hills in August 1969.
It barely represented the true drama of the moment, though Nicholson was better informed than most on the subject because apart from being a friend of Polanski, he gleaned first-hand accounts by attending the trial of Manson and his disciples, whose story proved to be more gruesome than even Hollywood could either manufacture or exploit in a movie.
Five innocent people lay mutilated and dead in Beverly Hills.
Real bodies; real blood — and with 115 very real bayonet wounds and six gunshot wounds between them.
What the murders did reflect in an odd way was the convulsing extremism — at both ends of a polarized spectrum — that existed between right and left, counter-culture and establishment, in 1969, when Easy Rider was released.
It was demonstrated by the fact that even after her death Sharon Tate was listed among the enemies of one extreme group, along with Lyndon Johnson, Richard Nixon, Mayor Richard Daley of Chicago and the Governor of California, Ronald Reagan who had just instructed his forces of law and order to ‘take whatever action necessary’ to quell campus riots.
The killing of Polanski's wife — who was in her last month of pregnancy and carrying a ‘perfectly formed’ baby son, also murdered — along with three friends and a totally unconnected young man of eighteen who had been visiting a caretaker living in the grounds, naturally caused Polanski extreme mental torture, made worse by the knowledge that he had promised to return to the house himself and had not made it in time.
It was the start of a series of events that led finally to his fast exit from America, never to return, and many close to him believe to this day he was eventually ostracized by powerful Hollywood money for bringing the film industry into such disrepute.
Thus, a few years later, when Polanski was accused of drugging and raping a thirteen-year-old girl in Jack Nicholson's home, it was — some said — time for him to go, and he has been exiled in Paris ever since.
Nicholson has remained a devoted defender of his rights for — at the very least — a fair trial, which, it appeared, was going to be rather difficult to achieve.
In 1969, Polanski and Nicholson were party acquaintances, friends of friends who shared common interests; it was Polanski who claims to have introduced Nicholson to one of his passions, skiing.
Their friendship developed soon afterwards, to the point that they shared each other 's homes and became very close chums.
They were also both to become heroes of the counter-culture movement.
Counter-culture, it might be said, was no loose term applied to a bunch of idle west coast hippies, whose philosophies were being trendily copied the world over.
It was a strong and diverse movement which originally had its roots in the hippie communes and the pop lyrics of the earlier Sixties, but had, by the end of the decade, encompassed so many political and social causes — particularly in America — that governments had a full-time spy network, through the likes of the FBI, the CIA and Scotland Yard's Special Branch, keeping tabs on its leaders.
In the summer of that year, Jack and Roman had a common interest in the talk in Hollywood, which was, as Polanski recalled in his autobiography, largely about the drugs and sex culture, a topic fanned through their own recent and separate films, and then by the tragic events in the Polanski house.
The topic was pretty universal, in fact.
Britain had its own discussions, spurred on by the Wootton Report on Drug Dependency, published in July 1969, which recommended substantially reduced penalties for pot-smoking.
In Los Angeles, discussions centred not merely on drug usage as a topical exploitation subject for movies but also on the widespread and varied substances which were readily available, being increasingly used and largely blamed for the incredible recent upsurge in violence within the protest movement.
Very quickly, Polanski and Nicholson became darlings of the west coast film and rock-music communities, who were also selecting the new heroes of the screen — anti-heroes in fact — because it was old values that had kept those handsome, pristine hulks of the last generation at the top and old values were now strictly taboo amongst the young and trendy.
The likes of Polanski, Nicholson and Hopper all talked freedom — even if it was at the movies — and that was music to the ears of those who followed the anti-war, hippie-inspired trend of throwing off inhibitions, of which there were plenty of public demonstrations when the beautiful people gathered, be it Los Angeles, New York, London or Paris.
Nicholson, at this point, was in the news through the acclaim being bestowed upon him for Easy Rider , and his first taste of stardom was received with some apprehension; his on-screen connections with marijuana and LSD also attracted a great deal of media coverage; serious press interviews, with him personally as the focus and centre of attention, were also unfamiliar territory into which he ventured nervously, almost unsure of what he was going to say and how he was going to express his feelings and opinions; he had plenty, and serious ones at that.
No one had ever asked his opinion before for the specific purpose of putting it into print in a newspaper article that might be read by millions of people.
It was happening in the summer and autumn of that year, and having now established who he was, people in the movie business were asking if this was going to be his big break, while out there in the communes and on the streets, the rebels were electing him and Hopper, and, to a lesser degree, Fonda, their champions.
The sudden success and appeal of Easy Rider was not without its critics; indeed, there were some heavy broadsides launched against the film in the media.
An example was written even before the Sharon Tate murders by Stephen Farber for the winter issue of the respected journal,Film Quarterly , in which he examined the reasons why young audiences responded so passionately to Easy Rider .
It was almost prophetic in its wisdom: ‘There is really something morbid about the film as a whole — a fascination, almost a wallowing in death and suffering that represents one of the least appealing tendencies in the audience as well as the film-makers.
The people who conceived this film and the people who applaud it take certain masochistic fascination in casting themselves as the martyrs, poor innocents slaughtered by barbarians.’
Polanski had received notices of similar disquiet over his films.
Rosemary's Baby had done well, financially and critically but the American Catholic Office for Motion pictures, the former Legion of Decency, gave it a ‘C’ rating, meaning condemned, for its explicit sexual content and its perverted use and distortion of fundamental Christian beliefs.
In London, the British Board of Film Censors insisted that the rape scene should be cut because it contained elements of ‘kinky sex associated with black magic’.
Sharon Tate's own artistic contribution to this current genre was in her starring role in the film adaptation of Jacqueline Susann's true-life novel,Valley of the Dolls , about pill-popping, sex-crazed Los Angeles womenfolk, and that was an exploitation movie if ever there was one.
When that was done, she and Polanski flew to London to be married in high profile, with the London Playboy boss, Victor Lownes, having arranged everything.
And so, the media was not kind after Sharon's slaughter by the Manson disciples, hence Nicholson's remark about Sharon having been murdered in the newspapers.
Hollywood was scared, not simply because of the threat to personal life and limb, but by the implications being meted out in the press which followed two distinct inferences: first that Polanski through his and his dead friends' involvement with drugs had brought this tragedy upon his own house, and, second, that the ‘new’ Hollywood in general must accept some guilt through its current fascination with violence, drugs, sex and the lifestyle of what appeared — in the eyes of the establishment — to be a mortally sick section of society.
Though the moguls had gone, there were still plenty of people left from the old school to lay down some pretty awful accusations.
Time magazine, as always reflecting the  indoctrines of the Luce family and assuming the mantle of the responsible voice of America, recorded that: ‘it was a scene as grisly as anything depicted in Polanski's film explorations of the dark and melancholy corners of human character…and the most likely theory is that the slayings were related to narcotics.’
Newsweek went further: ‘Almost as enchanting as the mystery (over the deaths) was the glimpse the murders yielded into the surprising Hollywood sub-culture, in which the cast of characters played.
All week long, the Hollywood gossip about this case was of drugs, mysticism and off-beat sex, and for once there may be more truth than fantasy in the flashy talk of the town.’
These were the milder forms of speculation.
The wilder ones were rampant about black magic, the gruesome style of the mutilations, of kinky sex videos starring Polanski and his wife found at the house, and of the deep drug involvements of three of the victims.
Once again, the fiction of Hollywood merged with fact; scenes of fantasy portrayed on celluloid for entertainment — like those in Easy Rider had become, it was said, the acted-out realities of a group of people whose minds had been expanded to breaking point, until they performed deeds so indescribably vile that it barely seemed possible that one human being could inflict such wounds upon another for no apparent reason.
Did Hollywood and the underground film-makers, in particular, hold any responsibility for such behaviour?
Nicholson has always strongly denied the view that his films could have influenced anyone in their decision whether or not to indulge in drugs.
Easy Rider happened to become the film of the moment because it reflected the mood of the moment.
It also was perhaps a trifle ironic that when Charles Manson wanted to have his life story told on film, he instructed his lawyers to get the Easy Rider team.
Nicholson himself had been attending the Manson trial, taking copious notes, and was especially keen to observe the machinations of a non-sequestered jury.
‘I just wanted to see for myself,’ said Nicholson.
Dennis Hopper went to the meeting with Manson and sat face to face with him for two hours in a room on the eighth floor of the Hall of Justice.
Hopper listened, and was clearly taken by some kind of presence while in Manson's company because when he recalled the meetings, he made some frank comments about the murders.
He said, ‘The people at the Tate house were killed because they were into some bad shit.
What goes around comes around .
The people in the Tate house were victims of themselves because they had all fallen into sadism and masochism and recorded it on video-tape.
The LA police told me this.
I know that three days before they were killed, twenty-five people were invited to that house for the mass whipping of a dealer from Sunset Strip who'd given them some bad dope.
And Jay Sebring, one of those killed, was an old friend of mine….’
Easy Rider made its name in the middle of this melée and specifically at a time when the whole counter-culture movement had taken on an explosive, manic air.
Some treated Charles Manson as a hero, and the underground newspaper, the Los Angeles Free Press allowed Manson to write a column for them while he was in jail; another, called Tuesday's Child depicted him on a cross.
Life magazine put him on the cover and that single photograph of Manson, with his evil, hypnotic stare, became for the hysterical mass media, the face of a violent, drug-crazed substrata of society: the monster hidden in the heart of every hippie and longhaired supporter of a culture which seemed certain to encompass an increasing section of youth and  bandwagonners .
Sixties author Todd Gitlin, appalled, wrote a piece called ‘The end of the age of Aquarius’, in which he asked: ‘If there is so much bad acid around why doesn't this contaminated culture, many of whose claims are based on the virtues of drugs, help its own brothers and sisters?
Why do the underground papers leave it to the media narcoticizers to deplore the damaging possibilities of drugs…’
Nicholson remained as philosophic as ever.
He was and is extremely honest about his feelings towards the use of drugs, and he did not hold back when questioned on this highly emotive topic.
His answers would return to haunt him.
A couple of years later, when he did the Playboy interview, he fuelled the controversy by saying exactly what he thought.
He could have side-stepped the issue completely, but he chose to give a frank response, dismissing as ‘garbage’ a Federal Bureau of Narcotics' pamphlet which described marijuana as ‘a powerful narcotic in which lurks murder, insanity and death’, words that might well have been taken as a reference to events in Hollywood, because they were almost identical to words used by the mass media in descriptions of Manson.
He reaffirmed the belief he held then, that the use of soft drugs did not necessarily lead to a progression to hard drugs, although he conceded that he would never have encountered any other drug if he had not become involved with smoking marijuana.
‘I started smoking grass around 1957.
I'm a social smoker but I can go for months at a time without even thinking about it.
But, I think it's insane making criminals out of a huge percentage of our population, particularly when it is something that involves morality.’
He said his was perhaps an ‘old-fashioned’ view — that he did not want to see the entire world addicted to drugs, like the synthetic existence described in Brave New World — but it was an enormous leap, he thought, from ‘smoking a little grass to that grim picture’.
He admitted having tried cocaine but said it did not seem to do much for him; cocaine was in ‘because the chicks dig it sexually’.
He referred unashamedly to certain usages, as recommended by Errol Flynn: ‘The property of the drug is that it inflames the mucous membranes, such as those in a lady's genital regions.
That's the real attraction of it.
In his book,My Wicked, Wicked Ways , Errol Flynn talks about putting a little on his dick as an aphrodisiac.
But his conclusion is that there isn't such a thing as an aphrodisiac.
I sort of agree with him, though if you do put a numbing tip of cocaine on your cock because you're quick in the trigger, I guess it is considered a sexual aid.’
Later, he made some corrective statements pointing out that although he had made these observations, he was certainly not advocating the use of any drugs, although he continued to ridicule some of the US government's attempts to stem the tide as being the wrong way to deal with the problem.
Although by his own admission, Nicholson had ‘done all the drugs’ he did not become addicted to any.
Twenty years later, he was still, in his own words, an ‘old pot head’, smoking marijuana occasionally.
Unastounding today, his openness shocked and perplexed the establishment and anti-drug abuse authorities at the time, especially in the panic-stricken aftermath of Sharon Tate and other horrendous drug-related deaths of that time, including Brian Jones, Jimi Hendrix, Janis Joplin and Jim Morrison.
Purely for his admitted views on drug abuse, the FBI had him watched but the authorities never found cause to have him arrested.
Despite the fact that he was personally on only the periphery of the Polanski affair, he was caught up in the backwash, in the resultant discussion of the wider issues of the counter-culture, and it was in this category that the critics had firmly placed their new star as the analysis of his role in Easy Rider continued through the run-up to the Oscar presentations and beyond.
Each critic and each interview discovered and reported the uncanny fact of what had happened in the production of the film, that it was one of those once-in-a-generation happenings, bringing together the right story, the right people and the right tone at exactly the right time.
Two years previously it would have been just another biker film, and two years on it would have been dated in terms of attitudes.
Importantly for Nicholson, this quirk in the social order was all that was needed to give him the kick-start he required, and it also provided him with more money than he had ever earned before.
Even though he was on salary for the film, and not a huge one at that, when it began to take off and the weekly gross takings at the box office began mounting in millions rather than thousands, Hopper arranged for Jack to get a percentage.
As Nicholson pointed out, he need not have done that, since most percentage deals are struck at the time of pre-production contracts.
Nicholson was obviously very grateful and benefited from the continuing rewards as the film made its way to Europe, where Dennis was voted the best new director of the year at Cannes.
When Jack was given the accolade of Best Actor by the New York Critics' Award for his performance, he responded by sending them all a polite thank-you letter; those critics who had mentioned him in the past had not been especially kind.
Those who were kind now would remember him in future — if for nothing else than the thank-you letters.
It was an inspired piece of public relations, though more motivated by sheer pride and genuine gratification than any other motive.
Nicholson and Hopper suddenly became the flavour of the month.
Nicholson made the mistake of telling someone, ‘My phone number's in the book.
Anybody in the world can get me’, and very soon they were all trying.
Dennis Hopper, meanwhile, was resurrecting his own very personal project,The Last Movie , which again had as its theme an attack on the great American Dream.
As the box-office grosses mounted, establishment Hollywood was beginning to talk in less insulting terms about him, and, one day out of the blue, he called Nicholson.
The Last Movie was finally going into production.
Hopper was showing all the emotions possible in his delight.
‘I got the money,’ he squealed.
‘Universal are putting up.
How much?
I'll tell you how much.
$850,000 — that's half a mill more than we got to do Easy Rider .
Gee whiz, man.
You know how much this means to me; that's four years of my fucking life.
And, wow man, I've gotta show them that I can produce.
If I foul up now, they'll all laugh and say Easy Rider was a fluke.’
Jack said was he really sorry, but he couldn't do it.
He had already committed himself to more work than he could handle because he was inexperienced at making deals and having to turn down work.
‘And anyway,’ said Nicholson, ‘You know you want to play the lead yourself.’
‘True,’ said Hopper, ‘but I thought I'd give you the chance of testing for it…’
They laughed and called each other foul names, and Hopper cleared off to Peru to begin filming The Last Movie , with an assembled group of friends who included Peter Fonda, Jim Mitchum and Michelle Phillips, of the pop group Mamas & Papas, whose former husband John Phillips had been involved in some bitter activity to gain custody of their child.
As it turned out, this rejection of Hopper's advances was the wisest career move Nicholson ever made.
Quite apart from the fact that Hopper's movie was eventually virtually sabotaged by the studio (or himself, depending on which side you were on), director Bob Rafelson had a good script which would without question consolidate Nicholson as the finest exponent of counter-culture appeal available anywhere in America in that year.
Before that, however, there was a postscript to Easy Rider .
In March 1970, he flew to New York, with his girlfriend Mimi Machu for company, to receive his New York Critics' Award.
The relationship with Mimi had survived its stormy months, though it was not destined to last much longer.
She wanted, still, a career of her own to match her partner's and, unlike Jack, the break eluded her.
They checked into the St Regis Hotel and when some people discovered who he was, they called at his hotel room and asked for autographs.
It had never happened before.
Mimi did not appreciate what this meant to him and sent them away, but Jack went downstairs looking for them and signed.
Someone, and not just one, asking for his autograph.
Wow!
And then, later on in the evening, he began to get agitated as the presentation neared.
He was pacing about the room, pulling at his collar, and eventually he asked Mimi, ‘Do they let you into Sardi's without a tie?’
Mimi didn't know.
‘Well, they'll have to,’ said Nicholson pulling the necktie from his shirt and flinging it across the back of a chair.
It was perhaps one slight rejection of the conformity that was expected of him that night.
Divided Loyalties
‘Restraint,’ Nicholson in the aftermath of Easy Rider , ‘is my favourite characteristic in art.
It has taken me a while to be successful and I've had a good time in arriving.
But a character (in one of his films) states that clawing your way to the top is very bad for the fingernails…and, basically, I am very laid-back person, anyway.’
His next film was very laid back and one, he admitted, which was the clearest-cut job of acting for the money he had ever done…and he vowed he would never do that again.
‘I needed the money then, and I spent it on whatever I needed it for.
I can't even remember what it was; I should have known better.’
It also presented him with an interesting little self-discussion about his future prospects because it came when he was on the cusp between low-key acting roles and moderate fame.
Vincente Minnelli, a director of the old school and greatly renowned and respected for such classics as The Band Wagon and An American in Paris , was looking for a touch of modernism to attract a young audience to a rather old-fashioned film called On a Clear Day You Can See Forever .
On paper, it seemed a very bankable prospect, based as it was on a successful stage musical by Alan J. Lerner and Burton Lane.
Easy Rider had not yet burgeoned when he cast Nicholson to co-star alongside Barbra Streisand.
Minnelli had seen Jack while studying the film Psych-Out for some lighting effects at about the time he was in the pre-production stage.
He decided to write an additional part into his movie especially for Nicholson.
This surprise offer of a legitimate job with a very famous star, a very famous director and a lot of money caught Jack on the hop.
It came out of the blue, before he knew he was famous.
‘It was not an uninteresting character,’ said Nicholson, ‘but it was a sort of aside from the film itself because the part wasn't in the original script.
They added it, I should have known, to try and get a younger audience and it wasn't well understood by the people who wrote it.
The role was that of a sitar-playing hippie-type character.
He also had a singing part — he had to sing ‘Don't Blame Me’— which was eventually left on the cutting room floor, along with about twenty minutes of Nicholson's spoken dialogue.
He had not done any singing — apart from in the bath — since Marty Landau's acting classes when he did those ‘Three Blind Mice’ exercises; he wasn't much of a crooner then and he had not improved with age.
So much of his part was cut there seemed hardly any point in leaving him in at all.
Nicholson was in awe of Minnelli; this was, after all, his first experience of a mainstream director of Minnelli's vintage, and he began to worry after the first day when it was suggested he might get his hair cut.
Whoever heard of a hippie with short hair?
His nervousness about working with Minnelli was also tinged with optimism and, for a moment, it looked as though he was going to cross the bridge into the establishment camp.
Rex Reed, a writer for the New York Times saw Nicholson when he had just finished making On A Clear Day and thought that Jack was starting to make establishment noises, cleaning up his image, shaving his stubble and ditching the sandals and hippie clothes.
It seemed that he had a foot planted firmly on both sides of the generation gap.
A few weeks later, when the film was released, Nicholson's nervous optimism was shattered by the severe cuts made in his role on film.
Rex Reed said that Nicholson was ‘wasted so criminally, that he should have stayed in bed.’
More disappointment followed when he did not receive an Oscar for his ‘best supporting’ role in Easy Rider .
He hoped for one, earnestly, and looked forward to these accolades and people telling him he was good.
If he had won, he would certainly not have snubbed the Oscar-night celebrations as did that year's recipient of the Best Actor Award, George C. Scott, for Patton .
The lure of big money was on the way and director Bob Rafelson had fortunately obtained Jack's signature for another BBS film before the price went up and put him back on track as a counter-culture player, a route which Nicholson analysed in terms of the way he wanted his career to go.
There were plenty of promises of big money, fame, glamour, fast cars and all the trappings that any actor might lust towards.
It was all on offer as scripts began arriving almost daily.
Nicholson simply turned away from the great open doors that lay before him.
There was no question that he could have gone into some major productions and worked with some of the more notable directors; he refused point blank, especially after seeing On a Clear Day .
He seemed to want to try to remain in the underworld while still reaching out for life's little comforts and luxuries.
He felt it was possible and he opted to at least try to stay out of the glitterama; and, as the movie industry would soon learn, this cool-headed assessment of the way he hoped his career would pan out would soon include his rejection of many scripts including The Godfather ,The Sting and The Great Gatsby .
Any one of them would have promoted him instantly into mainstream Hollywood and even some of his friends thought he was mad.
He insisted that he did not believe that any of them was right for him, in spite of the huge money that would be on offer.
He was not a mercenary actor.
He had made that mistake already, by accepting Vincente Minnelli's offer and he knew, at the end of the day, it was not right; that Sixties way of thinking that rejected anything that had the stamp of establishment on it was also his philosophy.
Nor did he agree with the tag that the media had given him, that of anti-hero.
‘If there's a constant in my work, it is the principle of affirmation.
It's the little guy, and sometimes he may be moved back, squeezed own by the system, but he tries to creep back up, move forward, affirm his life.
That's where the vitality and sense of adventure has to come from, that affirmation of basic human values.
It's not anti-anything; it's pro, it's positive.’
With quotes like that, Nicholson also became tagged as a ‘thinking’ actor, and, in 1970, as some of the stronger influences of the Sixties began to fall away with remarkable speed, was another influence that could be troubling any actor: the state of Hollywood itself.
During the past decade, cinema audiences had evaporated like snow on a hotplate.
The old Hollywood was in trouble, almost bankrupt of money and ideas and in disarray; they were closing down the back lots, demolishing the massive stages and selling off the vacant land for shopping malls and car parks.
There was still enough money and enough going on for a ‘hot’ property like Nicholson to walk in and begin making fortunes immediately.
He calmly turned away their offers and chose to remain with BBS, where all his friends were working.
As with most projects in Hollywood, there was always an overlap between one and another, sometimes of a year or two simply because of the time it takes to get an idea, or a script or a novel, written, financed, budgeted and into production.
Bob Rafelson had been toiling with Nicholson's friend and associate Carol Eastman on a script for a new film and as it came towards completion, they began to see it as a perfect vehicle for BBS to capitalize on its success with Easy Rider .
Nicholson went down to Rafelson's office where he had a room made permanently available to him.
The company had acquired the trappings of one which was doing very nicely.
Rafelson, Bert Schneider and Steve Blauner had smart quarters and were seeing very substantial returns on Easy Rider and other films, and BBS was growing with it.
Their well-equipped offices in Los Angeles came complete with a fifty-seat private theatre, and producers, writers, editors and directors walked determinedly around the corridors, calling each other‘babe’ and ‘doll’.
The mood of the place, and an indication of what they were about, could be gleaned instantly from the huge posters around the reception office walls of blow-ups of the 1968 French student riots.
It was as if they had read F. Scott Fitzgerald and were acting out Crazy Sunday .
More than that, BBS was populated with his pals.
‘Bob and Carol are among my friends whom I had very familial feelings for; it's like we grew up together, said Nicholson.
He had read the script of Five Easy Pieces , whose title, it did not need a genius to work out, was designed to link back to Easy Rider (though there were no physical connections whatsoever, apart from Nicholson himself, and the thematic stance of Easy Rider .)
Also challenging American values as the new decade turned, the themes of Easy Rider were repeated with considerable success, and mercifully Five Easy Pieces was devoid of drugs, which were becoming a bore.
Carol had written it specially for Nicholson; he could read some of the special nuances that would mean something to him and no one else, nuances that could only come from a friendship and working relationship spanning fifteen years.
This is another reason why he likes working with people he knows, because they also know him and his quirks, and Carol knew what to write for him.
At this stage in his life, this was as important to Nicholson as searching for the character he was playing.
In Five Easy Pieces , the biographical elements were there to be discovered, slightly falsified, perhaps, and for those who did not notice them, Nicholson made a point of mentioning them in interviews.
It made good copy and helped with the film's publicity; they also gave an insight into what others thought of Nicholson and the way he saw himself, then.
He played Bobby Dupea with explosive sensitivity, as a promising musician who rejects a career to become an oil-rigger; a rebel who, like Nicholson himself, had the chance of taking a particular course in life which would have provided him with comfort and stability, but chose a different route to that which might have been expected of him.
His own description was, ‘Dupea was an extraordinary person posing as a common man’.
So it is another road movie, with a Kerouac-style character, depicting a man who had ‘auspicious beginnings’— a line he wrote himself — searching for fulfilment and running into some harsh realities of life.
There were other similarities in character which could be applied then and later in that Dupea was to be portrayed, in many ways, as the bastard who walks out of his family and a pregnant girlfriend, refuses to tell the girl he lives with that he loves her or to play the role of a caring son.
Dupea did not want to be tied down by anything or anyone — which seemed Nicholson's own philosophy — and he wanted above all to keep on the move.
Deep down, however, and reading his own comments about always having to fight for employment and never being superbly successful, one can't help feeling he actually yearned for the stability that steady and better paid work would bring.
Carol Eastman had also written in some other characteristics of Nicholson himself, such as his directness, his honesty and his ability to cut through hypocritical jargon.
It was also in this film, when he had a long and exacting monologue at the end, that he finally saw it as what he termed an allegory to his own career: he had the chance of taking a university scholarship but instead chose to take to the road and share his life with some interesting characters, though by this stage of the story in the film itself, Dupea's liberation is being challenged.
He is unable to stick to stable relationships and finally he breaks down in front of his father and admits to disappointment with the life he has chosen.
It all seemed important at the time, but notwithstanding the subterranean implications,Five Easy Pieces established Nicholson beyond doubt as the most effective actor of his kind around, and he was immediately rewarded with a second nomination for an Oscar; he did not win it but his very inclusion meant two in a row for a relative unknown, a situation unheard of in recent Hollywood history.
Critical acclaim also had a pleasant ring to it, with phrases extolling his virtues such as‘one of the few gifted movie actors we have’ and ‘a superb performance’.
Time magazine still regarded him as a bit of an upstart, stating that his attempts at humour made him look like a third Smothers Brothers, and his laconic manner appeared to be a handy substitute for acting.
His audiences were clearly defined, perhaps more so than any actor around, and they appeared to be generally under thirty, longhaired, with bearded males in the predominance, and ‘intelligent’— what a silly description that was — females, usually blonde.
They were quite different in perspective to the followers and reaction of the more conventional actors like Newman and Redford, as the romantic anti-heroes of Butch Cassidy and The Sundance Kid , also released in 1969 and which turned Redford into what was termed as a ‘bona fide’ box-office star.
Karen Black, herself blonde and Nicholson's co-star in Five Easy Pieces fell in love with him, but they never managed to get together.
She was, however, able to describe and explain the scenario that would be repeated in most of Nicholson's most spectacular films — where he personally falls in love with his co-star.
‘I was going with someone and he was going with someone so we never made it,’ said Karen.
‘I think working with someone like Jack, an actor of that quality, turns you on.
A lot of leading ladies end up marrying their leading men, simply because they mock-up that guy as their husband while they are working with him.
The next thing you know they are getting married.
That doesn't happen when someone works with you as a director, and Jack was like a director, too.
So we had gotten to be friends and it stayed like that.’
Jack's ‘going with someone’, as Karen Black put it, was still Mimi, a relationship which had survived all predictions; and, though it may have stopped a few magic moments between him and Black, it did not prevent an entanglement with another of his co-stars, Susan Anspach.
She fell momentarily under his spell and into his bed.
Some time later, she said Nicholson had left her with a permanent reminder of their relationship during the making of Five Easy Pieces — a son.
She gave birth in 1970 to a boy whom she named Caleb James, but it was not until five years later that she said Nicholson was the father.
He said he wanted to be pleased at this news, but had been unable to confirm whether it was true or not, since Susan had not requested assistance in the boy's upbringing, nor did she intend to call on him for support.
Nicholson remained fairly ambivalent about the thought of having a son, mainly, he explained, because of Anspach's attitude.
He said she was an avant-garde feminist who — when he first met her — was proud of the fact that she already had a child whose father no one knew.
‘It took her six years to mention the second child to me, and because of the way she's been towards me, I've never had an avenue to find out whether he was my son or not.’
Susan said that she had no intention of letting him into her life; she did not trust him or his relationships with women, ‘from what I observed of him, and I don't think he felt very secure with me because of my straightforwardness’.
If they had been on an island, in a one-to-one situation, they would have fallen deeply in love, said Anspach.
But they weren't on an island; he had other relationships and she did not wish to complicate her life with his inadequacies and hang-ups.
That was why she did not tell him about her pregnancy.
Soon after Five Easy Pieces and his affair with Anspach, his own personal life fell into disarray.
Mimi found out, of course, that there were other women.
There was now the added problem of his huge work schedule, and she was being viewed as the girlfriend of a very successful actor — when time allowed.
So Mimi walked out, and suddenly he faced a kind of emotional turmoil he had never before experienced.
Now, it was his turn to be hurt.
Mimi Machu, who had been in his life for longer than any other woman, apart from Sandra Knight, left him quite suddenly for pastures new, which some said was due to his own attitude to their relationship.
Whereas his parting from Sandra had been ‘sensibly negotiated’, this time Nicholson was left with what was, for him, an odd feeling of what he termed being ‘dumped on’.
He said, ‘I had been with her for three years, in love.
After she left I couldn't even hear her name mentioned without breaking out into a cold sweat.’
It played on his mind for a time and eventually he had to work out a kind of therapy to get her out of his brain.
At thirty-three, he was like a lovesick teenager, which was a strange way for a man of so many experiences to be struck.
Nicholson was also preparing another project from which he hoped he would emerge as a recognized director, and again it was in part an overhang from that period in 1968 when he seriously considered giving up acting, and moving into writing and directing.
It was a story close to his heart and dated back to 1964, before the Vietnam War was being viewed with quite the same violent passions it was arousing in the late Sixties.
He had read a novel by Jeremy Larner called Drive and there was talk of the book being made into a film, with himself in one of the leading roles.
Nothing came of it until 1968, by which time Larner had achieved additional fame as speech-writer for the anti-war Democrat Senator Eugene McCarthy, as he made his challenge against Lyndon Johnson for the Democratic presidential nomination.
In the furore that followed in its wake, Larner targeted McCarthy's speeches towards the campuses and the young of America.
He wrote lines like: ‘…whether they came with beards to shave or not, these are kids who react against the violent anti-Americanism of the New Left whom they far outnumber.
Though they hate the war and they hate the draft, they still believe America can be beautiful if it lives up to its own principles.’
And he got Peter Paul and Mary to sing ‘This is Your Land’ at McCarthy rallies.
The speed at which McCarthy gathered support stunned America and had the campuses screaming with delight, especially when, on 31 March, their arch-enemy Lyndon B. Johnson announced he would not stand for re-election.
This also placed Robert Kennedy in a dilemma.
Though he was, like McCarthy, anti-war, he believed Johnson to be invincible; now he too entered the race, much to the chagrin of the McCarthy camp who accused him of muscling in on their act.
The months that followed were, of course, some of the most emotional, turbulent, violent and traumatic in recent American history.
At the end of it, Robert Kennedy was dead and McCarthy was defeated in the nervousness that engulfed American politics, leaving Hubert Humphrey to battle for the White House with Richard Nixon.
By then, Jack Nicholson had, after a lot of heart-searching, agreed he was going to make a movie out of Larner's book for BBS, with Larner himself as joint scriptwriter.
Nicholson could not now appear in the film because he was too old for the original role which had been designated for him, and anyway he wanted to give it his fullest attention as director.
He chose two untried actors for leading roles and recruited some of the BBS ‘family’ for other parts, including Karen Black, Robert Towne and Bruce Dern.
It was to be entitled Drive, He Said which was taken from the Robert Creely poem:
Drive, he sd, for
christ's sake, look
out where yr going
The basic story is the conflict between two college students: Hector, the basketball star who starts out with no political convictions, and Gabriel, a radical anti-war activist.
Underneath some fairly violent anti-war protest, the interaction of the two students' lives are played against each other and include some explicit sex.
Hector was having an affair with a professor's wife, whose demands begin to affect his basketball.
Gabriel, meanwhile, received his draft papers and begins to take large quantities of drugs to make himself medically unfit, until he verges on insanity.
In this state, he attacks the professor's wife and tries to rape her, while she, in turn, has discovered that her former lover had venereal disease and has also made her pregnant!
Apart from the political overtones and undertones, Nicholson knew he was breaking new ground with one specific sex scene in which he showed full-frontal nudity and a fairly complete filming of the sex act itself, still unheard of in the movies, in spite of the musical Hair .
The sexual content would not, Nicholson always believed, guarantee that the film would become a major commercial success; nonetheless he thought it was a film worth making, one which would make a statement and provide BBS with a good return.
When he screened it privately for the director of the Cannes Film Festival, he was delighted with the reaction and was duly invited to exhibit Drive, He Said at the next festival in May 1971.
He eventually flew to Europe, nervous and not knowing what to expect.
The lights went down and he sat at the back, trying to gauge the reaction of a packed audience.
Word had already gone around about the sex sequence, and there was also some interest in the political content, coming as it did shortly after the attempts at peace in Vietnam and Nixon's pledge to end the war.
As the film ended and the lights went up, Nicholson got a surprising reaction.
First there was cheering, then jeering.
Blows were exchanged between members of the audience somewhere at the front and the whole scene developed into a riot, with others not wishing to get involved in a fight scrambling for the exit.
Nicholson said that the level and violence of the response at Cannes surprised him, then flattered him.
Then, when he thought seriously about the reaction, it left him puzzled, because he did not see it as being especially controversial.
It was only later when he saw that the comment seemed to centre around the sexual scene that he realized the riot would hurt the picture.
He reflected, ‘It was a disaster, this movie, and I knew then it was going to set me back.’
The publicity the film attracted in Cannes followed Nicholson back to America where it was due for New York opening in July which, as Karen Black told me later, was an odd time: ‘It was a college film and so it goes on release at exactly the same time as the colleges are closing down for the summer and everyone is going home.’
This technicality was a minor one.
Jack now discovered that the Motion Picture Association of America had given it an ‘X’ rating and Columbia — who were to release the Movie for general distribution — had a policy at that time that they would never release an X-rated picture.
That, complained Nicholson, was because of the full-frontal nudity, and the fact that it had someone who ‘was fucking and having an audible orgasm.
The rating system was corrupt; they said they were protecting the family unit and thus you got ‘X’ if you suck a tit and ‘GP’if you cut it off with a sword.’
Columbia fought the rating by hiring a major law firm and produced several hundred affidavits from psychiatrists, social experts and church men to support their view that the film should be seen by audiences under eighteen, because it was a realistic look at social behaviour.
We were seriously examining an event of social consequence,’ Nicholson still maintains, ‘and it was in no way meant to be exploitive.’
Eventually, the rating was revised in America, but Nicholson still faced problems in Canada and Europe.
The British censors refused to allow it to be shown unless he removed the sex scene in the back of a car — or, as Nicholson put it, ‘they didn't mind the fucking so much, it was the coming they objected to.
You could have someone saying ‘Screw me’ but not ‘I'm coming’which was a fascinating reaction.’
The Canadian authorities, in the meantime, asked for forty-five cuts to be made, which Nicholson refused to do, and so by the end of 1971 the film had been shown only in selected cinemas in America and even there, the reaction had been mixed.
Even the highly cosmopolitan and very trendy audiences of New York City did not know quite what to say about it; a typical reaction was from May Okon, of the New York Sunday News who wrote: ‘Jack Nicholson's Drive, He Said is how it read on the marquee of the Third Avenue movie house.
The audience was predominantly under thirty, dungareed and apparently predisposed to like the film, despite the controversial reviews.
The single explicit sex scene elicited deep silence, the full-frontal nude scenes, mostly of males, were greeted by raucous/embarrassed laughter.
When it was over, and the house lights went up, there was a sort of bemused smile on the collective face of the audience.
I felt it on my own…’
The sex scene apart, there was another more fundamental reason why the film was a commercial disaster.
The extremes of the anti-war protest movement, which was very central to the film itself, had had their day.
When the script was being written, when the film was being filmed, the violence was still very much in vogue; suddenly it had disappeared.
The Beatles sang: ‘Let it be…’ and had switched allegiance from the Maharishi to Mother Mary and then shocked the world by their final break-up, with John Lennon denouncing and renouncing all the Sixties had stood for, from Kennedy to the Beatles themselves.
Simon and Art sang Bridge Over Troubled Waters, and the fads that had been the preserve of counter-culture spread into the young middle classes of America and Europe.
The reasons for violence were disappearing and with them went the appeal of films like Drive, He Said .
Quite simply, the movie had been overtaken by events.
Dennis Hopper fared no better with his masterpiece,The Last Movie , and the outcome, especially in his personal life, would hold some interesting developments for Nicholson.
Hopper's film, which he first began writing four years earlier, had now also become a touch dated but that was not the major problem.
Universal, who had advanced him the $850,000 were even prepared for the fact that it challenged the American Dream and attacked American society for ‘destroying itself’, told through its hero — played by Dennis — who is a Hollywood stunt man devoured by his quest for big cars, swimming pools and gorgeous girls.
It is set in Peru where the stunt man has been making a movie.
When the film is complete and the company has pulled out, he stays behind and watches with awe as the local Peruvian Indians — who had been watching the film being made — begin to re-enact it.
Into this somewhat bizarre plot, Hopper built in his odd interjections designed to remind the cinema audience that it was only a movie they were watching, that nothing was real.
‘Every time I got them involved with the story,’ Hopper explained, ‘I'd come back at them and say, ‘Ha, ha, it's only a movie…’’
The usual kind of mayhem followed Hopper, as was expected in Hollywood, who noted that his cast included some of the most conspicuous individualists in the business.
On the first day the film was already assuming some real-life events which were remarkably similar to those which the script itself called for, as some 10,000 local residents turned out to watch.
They were fascinated by the arrivals: Peter Fonda turned up in a huge sheepskin coat and carrying an ivory-handled .44–40, which had once belonged to Tom Mix.
Sylvia Miles, fresh from her role as the bleach-blonde prostitute in Midnight Cowboy flashed in wearing a dazzling chrome catsuit.
Russ Tamblyn appeared in cowboy boots and a fully grown Afro hairdo, and actor Severn Darden, who had just learned his next job was to play the lead in a revival of Dracula , was going around practising vampire attacks on every female member of the cast.
Writer Brad Darrach, who had flown down for an interview with Hopper, described the scene that developed: ‘By mid-afternoon, the games became serious.
Somebody made a cocaine connection and a number of actors laid in a large supply at bargain prices — seven dollars for a packet that cost seventy dollars in the States.
By ten p.m. certain members of the company were sniffing coke or had been turned on by acid or speed or grass.
By midnight, much of the cast had drifted off to bed in twos and threes.
At two a.m., I was awakened by screams.
A young actress who had taken LSD was having a bummer.
At three a.m,.
I heard rapping at the window beside my bed and another young woman whom I hadn't met was standing on the window ledge of the hotel.
It was raining and her nightgown was drenched.
‘Do you mind if I come in?’ she asked vaguely…’
It got worse.
One actor took so many drugs in quick succession he almost died.
Then, during a scene involving horses, a beautiful chestnut stallion was scared by gunfire, bolted, fell off a twenty-five-foot wall and broke its back.
One of the crew pulled out a Colt .45 and shot the beast through the head to put it out of its misery and a group of local Indians gleefully pulled out their knives and instantly began butchering the stallion for its meat.
Two of the cast fainted and most of the rest repaired to the nearest bar.
Hopper pressed on.
Having had the bloody debris removed, he called the cast to order and began work.
He appeared calm and cool-headed.
That night to Michelle Phillips he broke down and cried like a baby.
To the cast, he gave no outward clue to his inner feelings and on the final day when he completed a particularly difficult scene in two takes and called ‘Cut and print’, everyone on the set cheered.
Those who had been watching him work believed that in spite of the traumas, Hopper the actor was a star, and Hopper the director had completed an extraordinarily good film which, according to one description, included some ‘hauntingly beautiful footage’.
He spent weeks editing and was personally convinced it was a work of art; he made gross statements that he had the movie that would end all movies.
The reality represented the truth about movie-making itself, and a final shattering of all the illusions that had ever been presented to a cinema audience, for, seemingly, he had not realized that he had built into his masterpiece a piece of self-destruct mechanism.
He returned to Los Angeles and then caught a plane to Europe where he had been invited to show the finished article at the Venice Film Festival at which The Last Movie was voted the best picture on exhibition.
He came back to Hollywood glowing, and totally unprepared for the reaction he received from Universal.
‘They wanted me to change the ending, of course,’ said Hopper.
‘They wanted a dramatic ending where I kill off the central character and they also didn't like me making fun of the audience.
They didn't care how I did it, but just kill him off.’
He refused and Universal countered that they would merely give it a limited showing.
Hopper went on television to denounce Universal for suppressing his film and The Last Movie became his last for a long, long time.
He upset Lew Wasserman, head of Universal, and one of Hollywood's heavyweights, which did not augur well for his future as a director.
Nicholson sympathized but was not entirely supportive.
‘You don't take someone's bread,’ he said, ‘and then walk across the street and say ‘Fuck you’.
There has got to be some kind of responsibility to deliver what they think they are buying.’
Hopper was in deep depression again — his personal life had once again foundered, and it worked to the benefit of Nicholson.
In October, Hopper married Michelle Phillips who had been living with him for some months.
She and Hopper were convinced they were in love, but between engagement and marriage her passion for him began to cool.
Nevertheless, the wedding went ahead with two hundred or more of their Hollywood friends attending.
At the same time, Michelle also wanted to return to singing and Dennis found her a job backing Leonard Cohen.
She flew up to Nashville for two weeks' work and called Dennis from her hotel room exactly eight days after their wedding.
‘I'm not coming back,’ she said.
Dennis was distraught.
He had not for one minute, he said, imagined this could happen and they had even planned to move to Mexico where he was in the process of renovating a house for them; the bedrooms were complete and he had made a nursery for Michelle's daughter, China, never to be occupied.
He was proud of that house, a sprawling ranch in Taos.
It was, after all, the place where D.H.
Lawrence spent his final days in the company of Mabel Dodge Luhan — the heiress whose home in Greenwich Village had been the spawning ground of some of America's most famous pre-World War I radical and literary figures — and, thus, provided an oddly suitable setting for the desolate position in which Hopper found himself.
‘I just can't live with you any longer,’ said Michelle, who could not handle his swings of temperament and, coupled with her own desire to find a career in films, she had resolutely determined not to return to Dennis.
The marriage was over and so, for the moment, was Hopper's career.
He had burned his bridges in Hollywood and took off for the seclusion of Taos to hide away, his life having come to another dead end, cursed by his own self-destructiveness and sheer bad luck.
Michelle moved on and soon was to be seen around Los Angeles with Nicholson, who had been a friend for years.
She was depressed and Nicholson, who had similar feelings himself offered her a shoulder.
It developed.
One day not long afterwards, Hopper got a call from Nicholson; he was telephoning, he said, out of politeness to tell him he and Michelle were together.
Dennis said.
‘Best of luck, man…it's over between her and me anyhow.’
Although he was made exceedingly wealthy by the proceeds of Easy Rider , Hopper was still brooding and bitter, but life had taken several new turns for Nicholson.
Michelle, in many ways, was like Sandra and Mimi in terms of their sophisticated looks.
She, too, was a determined character with a personality to match.
What she wanted more than anything was the relaunching of her career, which had flagged since the Mamas & the Papas split up.
Mama Cass had done better than any of them with her solo career, but then tragically died so soon afterwards.
Michelle wanted to break into films and was prepared to accept Jack's help.
They talked about a project together with director Hal Ashby, who was trying to raise finance for a film based upon a remake of The Postman Always Rings Twice (which Nicholson later made with Jessica Lange), but MGM pulled out because they did not think Michelle Phillips was a big enough name, not apparently appreciating that she was once a starring member of a world-famous singing quartet.
Ashby was keen because of the sparking relationship that existed between Nicholson and Michelle — but eventually the script was put on the back burner.
Nicholson's close friend Bruce Dern saw this as one of the developing problems with what seemed to be heading towards a husband and wife relationship; with two people in the same business — as had been the case with Sandra and Mimi — the pressures on their life together were aggravated by the success of one member of the partnership, while the other was still struggling.
It was a rather one-sided affair.
With the income from the three films he had completed in eighteen months, he had stretched himself to buy a house in Beverly Hills.
It was located on the twisting Mulholland Drive, on top of Hollywood's highest hill in a compound of properties, one of which was owned and occupied by his idol, Marlon Brando, with whom he shared the security gate.
Charlton Heston lived on the other side and Warren Beatty was also a near neighbour.
The stunning two-storey villa of stucco construction was carved into a cliff overlooking not merely Beverly Hills but all of greater Los Angeles.
From a vantage point directly across the road, there was a spectacular night-time vision of a 100-mile carpet of lights in the San Fernando valley.
He cherishes the house to this day, and it would become the scene of some of the most private and exclusive Hollywood parties.
He installed his ornamental collections of symbolic pigs, and began his art collection and, of course, his library.
Reading was and is one of his absorbing pleasures and on the bookshelves in the winter of 1971 and 1972 were:The Complete Works of Marcel Duchamp , Shakespeare, Jules Feiffer's Harry the Rat with Women ,The Primal Scream , a selection of Hermann Hesse,Edgar Cayce on Reincarnation and The Group Sex Tapes .
His substantial album collection contained a varied selection, including the Rolling Stones, Dylan, Cat Stevens, George Harrison's All Things Must Pass , Strauss waltzes recorded by Fritz Reiner, and Rimsky-Korsakov's Greatest Hits .
He parked a Mercedes 600 on the driveway, although the battered VW was not discarded, merely put away for occasional use for fear of being accused of reverse affectation.
Michelle Phillips moved in; according to Bruce Dern, Jack seemed to want to believe that they were the couple, made for each other; he saw them as having it all, on his own terms.
Jack Nicholson, movie star, had at last arrived.