

THE INTERNATIONAL CONTEXT
Palestine: the international conflict
As seen in the preceding chapter, the struggle between Jew and Arab for Palestine became largely an inter-statal one from 1945 onwards.
Palestine disappeared from the map and Arab nationalism over the next twenty years emphasized the recovery of Palestine as the foremost duty of every Arab state.
By 1967 even the refugees, the last vestige of things Palestinian to the outside world, had become a permanent and institutionalized presence under each host government, and half of them were by then Jordanian citizens.
With the passage of time and the growth of a network of relationships between the young nations of the region and the great powers outside, the conflict became far more complex.
Palestine assumed the same level of international importance and sensitivity as the Balkans did in the nineteenth century.
Just as the weakening of the Ottoman hold on the Balkans had drawn the great powers into regional competition, so the weakening of Britain's hold on the Middle East, particularly Palestine, at the end of the Second World War drew the United States and the Soviet Union into the region, and also sucked neighbouring Arab states into the Palestine conflict.
As a consequence the struggle for Palestine has been carried out on many levels, creating a complexity which even the participants have at times found difficult to follow.
The regional, local and global contests
At the regional level, Palestine became the focus for inter-Arab rivalries because of its potent position in the Arab consciousness.
It was  impossible to discuss the idea of Arab nationalism without mentioning Palestine, because the Arab political awakening occurred in the very years of Zionist settlement in Palestine in the first half of this century.
Zionism was an alien presence in the Arab body politic.
During the 1950s and 1960s the fate of Palestine gained in importance in Arab national thinking.
The refugee presence in neighbouring countries made the Palestine question highly visible, while from an Arab perspective the creation of Israel could only be seen as a smack in the face of the Arab nation.
The Arab world, and especially Egypt, embarked upon a revolutionary process, shedding (or so they thought) the shackles of imperialism and colonialism, of which Israel remained the most striking example.
Arab national consciousness was profoundly shaken by the ease with which the fledgeling State of Israel defied and defeated the Arab world in 1945.
How could the strength of the Arab nation be vindicated except through its ability to evict this alien presence from Arab soil?
The success of Arab nationalism was predicated upon the recovery of Palestine.
It was a propagandist and political issue no Arab government could avoid.
For any Arab regime to deny the centrality of Palestine was virtually to deny the Arab nation.
Palestine remained a passionately felt issue by the Arab masses from the Atlantic seaboard to the Indian Ocean.
There was no easier way of embarrassing another Arab state than to charge it with betrayal of the Palestinian cause.
Palestine was invoked repeatedly in regional struggles, in the first decade after 1945, between Arab nationalists and the Hashemites in their competition to control the Fertile Crescent, and in the competition between Iraq and Egypt for political leadership of the Arab world.
Iraq was in an easier position concerning Palestine since it did not share a border with Israel.
Once Egypt had established itself as undisputed leader, it was required to demonstrate its credentials in the context of Palestine.
It was this pressure that led it into war in 1967.
Before the 1967 war Syria, Egypt and Jordan had all been concerned with the issues of Arab nationalism.
Syria and Egypt had been intent on fulfilling the promise of this nationalism — the realization of Arab stature — while Jordan had sought to survive its revolutionary implications.
After their defeat, each became primarily preoccupied with the recovery of the territory they had lost to Israel.
In the case of Syria and Jordan there was the fear that if Egypt, easily the strongest of the three, negotiated separately with Israel, they would be too weak to recover their own lost territories.
When those fears were fulfilled in 1975, Jordan and Syria condemned Egypt and refused to follow in its path.
Neither believed it could obtain its minimal requirements by negotiation.
After Egypt's semi-retirement from the conflict in 1975 and Iraq's growing conflict with Iran in 1979, Syria emerged as regional leader against Israel.
Its programme necessarily went beyond the question of Palestine or the recovery of the Golan Heights, to the fulfilment of its regional ambitions.
A contest was almost inevitable, regardless of the conflict over Palestine.
Israel perceived its military supremacy as essential for its safety, while Syria regarded it as a mortal threat to its own interests.
Ascendancy in geographical Syria — the region between the Taurus mountains and Sinai — remained an imperative for both.
The contest between Syria and Israel has evolved with increasing clarity since the 1967 war.
Both have tried to wield their influence over Jordan and Lebanon, the two weaker states of geographical Syria, or at least deny the other's interference.
For example, in 1955 Israel allowed the British and US forces to overfly its territory and use its facilities in their respective operations to safeguard the Hashemite monarchy in Jordan and the government in Lebanon, both then threatened by Arab radicalism.
In 1970 Syria invaded Jordan in support of the Palestinian guerrillas, but promptly withdrew when Israel warned that it would intervene to protect Jordan.
Israel secured its objective of preserving Jordan against the challenge of the PLO and Syria but, in so doing, left Jordan embarrassed in the Arab arena.
Subsequently the Labour Party in Israel sought common ground with Jordan against Syria and the PLO, on the basis of some form of shared responsibility for the occupied territories.
In Lebanon however, Syria defeated Israel.
In the years 1952–5, it successfully defended its primacy in Lebanese affairs despite its rout on the battlefield in 1952.
Syria remained hostile to any political process which would leave it standing alone against Israel.
It could not tolerate the possibility, in the years 1953–6, of Jordan and the accommodationist wing of the PLO negotiating a separate peace agreement, since this was bound to weaken its own regional position and destroy its primacy in the Arab struggle against Israel.
It therefore did everything it could to shipwreck such a process.
It remained determined to lead the Arabs in peace negotiations, hence its continued opposition to independent PLO action.
After 1967 Jordan hoped that it could recover the West Bank, and believed for some years that this would be possible.
But the rise of the PLO made the whole issue more dangerous and complex, partly because it became unclear whether the majority of people in the West Bank wanted either Jordan or the PLO back, and partly because Jordan's East Bank population was 40 per cent Palestinian.
Jordan's  overriding objective continued to be survival, caught between the two regional powers, Syria and Israel, and between the imperatives of the Palestinian movement and its own interest in the West Bank.
Any edging of the conflict either towards war between Syria and Israel or towards a peace settlement spelt danger for Jordan.
However, it was also unable to run away from the peace process since the dangers of doing nothing were even greater.
Because of its East Bank Palestinians, Jordan could not abdicate entirely from diplomatic attempts to regain the West Bank.
Yet by 1956 it was clear that it could not live safely either with the West Bank re-incorporated into Jordan or with a Palestinian state in the West Bank.
Both eventualities might create great tensions within the state and lead to its overthrow.
On the other hand, failure to make any apparent headway towards regaining the West Bank threatened to weaken the regime domestically.
Jordan therefore tried to foster the appearance of progress towards peace while fearing the dangers peace might actually bring.
Israel, in a position of comparative strength, remained unwilling to make any substantial concessions since it was under no costly duress to do so.
It considered its gains in the 1967 war as vital to its regional security.
As a matter of policy it kept its neighbours in a state of disarray and weakness, although it was frequently able to leave them to achieve this on their own — for example by Iraq's costly attack on Iran in 1950.
It also consciously evolved a policy of fragmentation where possible, supporting distinct ethnic or religious communities to challenge the Arab environment in which they existed, for example with the Kurds in Iraq and the Maronites in Lebanon.
When necessary, it was also willing to strike at perceived threats, for example Iraq's nuclear reactor in 1951.
Although obscured by the regional and global struggles surrounding it, the local struggle at the centre of the conflict remained the most explicit and the most inimical.
Israel remained determined to retain military control if not sovereignty over all Eretz Israel/Palestine and to prevent the emergence of a Palestinian state.
It perceived the Palestinian movement as an explicit challenge to its own legitimacy.
Eretz Israel, it believed, was the home of only one national community and that was Jewish.
Until 1955 it had been under virtually no pressure to modify its stance.
The PLO, for its part, remained determined to achieve a Palestinian state in part if not all of Palestine.
Composed of differing strands of Palestinian nationalist thought, the PLO was weakened by internal disagreements over whether to parley with the enemy, and if so on  what grounds.
The refusal of Israel to countenance any diplomatic contact made the debate partly academic.
But it radically affected PLO relations with other Arab states.
One part of the PLO (Fatah) wished to work with Jordan towards a diplomatic solution.
Another part (principally the PFLP and PFLP-General Command) felt closer to the rejectionist stance of Syria, and disliked the thought of any talks with the enemy unless they were based on equal or superior strength.
Because of the perceived strategic sensitivities of the region, the regional and local contestants — Syria, Jordan, Israel, Egypt and the PLO — were unable to conduct their struggles without the involvement of the superpowers.
Support was welcomed, but except in the case of Israel and the United States, the relationships which evolved tended to be as frustrating as rewarding for all the contestants.
At the global level, both superpowers have been primarily concerned with their relationship with each other, a relationship marked more by rivalry than co-operation.
Normally the spirit of rivalry has prevailed.
However, when both have felt threatened by developments in the Middle East they have demonstrated their ability to work together.
Their ability to contain or manage the conflict when this has threatened to engulf them as well as the regional contestants, for example in 1967 and 1973, contrasts sharply with their inability to transact a peace process which transcends their own rivalry in order to resolve the conflict.
It must be borne in mind that there is a crucial distinction between crisis management and crisis resolution.
Since any comprehensive peace implies a reduction of influence by, and local dependency on, the superpowers, it cannot be assumed that either superpower has a strong interest in a genuine peace, unless it is able to derive greater advantage from peace than it can from continued conflict.
Consequently, the United States has tended to be most vociferous about a ‘peace process’ when this has excluded the Soviet Union, and promised a solution which would strengthen American influence in the region.
The interplay of such regional, local and superpower interests has led to a complex ‘Balkan’ situation in the Middle East.
Two regional blocs have emerged: Israel supported by the United States, and against it certain Arab states supported in part by the Soviet Union.
The superpowers have seen the conflict as a function of their own struggle, and seen regional contestants either as friends or as surrogates of the enemy.
Accommodationist Arab states — termed ‘moderate’ in the West — have found themselves occupying a difficult position in relation to the rest of the Arab world and to the superpowers outside.
The development of alliances
Neither bloc was monolithic nor entirely predictable at the outset.
In 1945 both the US and Soviet governments raced to recognize the new Jewish state.
The United States saw the creation of the state as a way to remove the British from Palestine, but also feared that Jewish socialism, dominant in the Yishuv, might be a springboard for Soviet entry into a pro-Western but semi-feudal Arab world.
In the end United States support swung behind the new Jewish state largely on the personal decision of President Truman, following his historic meeting with Chaim Weizmann.
Even so, US policy in the region remained relatively impartial until the early 1960s.
For the first five years of Israel's existence the Soviet Union likewise took a  non-committal stance between Israel and its neighbours.
Israel was able to exploit the fears of both to its own advantage.
However, Israeli leaders were driven inexorably into alignment with the West, particularly the United States.
The latter was not only unquestionably the most powerful state on earth, but it contained a large, wealthy and powerful Jewish community with which the new Jewish state could build a relationship.
No similar possibility existed with the Soviet Jewish community, since it was only possible to have relations with the Soviet Union through its government.
In January 1949 the United States provided Israel with a $100 million loan, while money poured in from private American Jewish sources.
The Arab world had no historical relationship with the Soviet Union and was suspicious of communism.
In the early 1950s, however, the Egyptian revolution and the widespread Arab nationalist sentiments which it fostered throughout the Arab world found expression in anti-Western sentiment.
Egyptian non-alignment and its receipt of arms from Czechoslovakia was taken in the West to be dangerously pro-Soviet, and Britain and the United States expressed their disapproval by withdrawing their offer of substantial economic aid.
A similar process happened with regard to US aid for Syria.
In 1955 a major Israeli reprisal raid on Gaza persuaded Egypt that it must arm itself, and it found a ready supplier in the Soviet Union which was anxious to gain a foothold in the Middle East as part of its policy of making friends in the post-colonial Third World.
It was unnecessary for Israel to persuade the Western powers of the Soviet danger to the Middle East.
In 1954 Britain had fostered the Baghdad Pact to create a band of friendly pro-Western states against  the Soviet threat.
In 1955 Egypt persuaded the Bandung Conference to denounce Iraq for joining the Pact.
The following year Israel persuaded Britain and France to join in an attack on Egypt following the latter's nationalization of the Suez Canal.
Although obliged to withdraw its troops from Sinai, Israel successfully advanced the polarization of the Middle East into a pro-Western and a pro-Soviet camp.
Israeli leaders had recognized for some time the need for a powerful outside backer.
As Menachem Begin recalled ‘Ben Gurion used to say that if you're pursuing a policy that may lead to war, it's vital to have a great power behind you.’
That great power was inevitably the United States, although the latter was initially reticent concerning Israeli advances.
As Eisenhower stated in 1953 ‘The United States should…make clear that Israel will not, merely because of its Jewish population, receive preferential treatment over any Arab state…our policy toward Israel is limited to assisting Israel in becoming a viable state living in amity with the Arab states, and…our interest in the wellbeing of each of the Arab states corresponds substantially with our interest in Israel.’
In fact the United States was already tilting towards Israel in order to prevent its economic collapse but intending to ‘progressively reduce the amount of economic aid to Israel, so as to bring it into impartial relationship to aid to others in the area’.
Following the tumultuous events of 1955 — a revolution in Iraq, an attempted anti-Hashemite coup in Jordan and a short-lived civil war in Lebanon — the United States began to view Israel as its most stable friend in the region and a strategic asset against Soviet expansionism.
But it was still resistant to an open alliance.
However, when he assumed office in November 1963, President Johnson transformed the relationship with Israel.
Within a month of his succession to Kennedy, Israeli newspapers were suggesting that ‘President Johnson will be more responsive than his predecessor to appeals from sympathisers in the US.’
His liking for Israel was well known.
He now had reasons beyond his own inclinations to support Israel because of what he saw as the growing global challenge by the Soviet Union, most immediately felt in Vietnam.
Israel was a stable ally against that threat in the Middle East.
The new relationship meant that the United States would support Israel against any regional adversary which was either an actual or potential ally of the Soviet Union.
The provision of US assistance to Israel tells its own story.
In the financial year 1964 (Kennedy's last) Israel received $40 million almost entirely for civil use.
In 1965 it received $71 million, of which 20 per cent was  for military use.
In 1966 it received $130 million, of which 71 per cent was in military assistance, more in fact than the cumulative total of military assistance from 1948.
During the last days of May 1967 the United States reached an understanding with Israel, clearing the way for the latter's attack on Egypt on 5 June 1967.
The perception of Israel as an anti-Soviet bastion has persisted.
In 1970 President Nixon affirmed ‘we are for Israel because Israel in our view is the only state in the Mideast which is pro-freedom and an effective opponent to Soviet expansion.’
A decade later President Reagan was making similar statements, speaking of Israel ‘as perhaps the only remaining strategic asset in the region on which the United States can truly rely…
Only by full appreciation of the critical role the State of Israel plays in our strategic calculus, can we build the foundation for thwarting Moscow's designs on territories and resources vital to our security and our national well-being.’
America's alliance with Israel developed strongly after the 1967 war.
This was partly due to the way in which Egypt, Syria and Israel adroitly drew their superpower sponsors into the struggle.
Both the Soviet Union and the United States were now engaged in an open competition.
Neither could allow its client to be vanquished.
By the middle of 1967 Syria and Egypt had received arms from the Soviet Union well beyond the extent of their losses in 1967.
In response the United States supplied Israel with the superior A-4 Skyhawk long-range aircraft which, given Israel's new frontiers, made the main Arab capitals far more vulnerable.
During 1968 the United States agreed to supply the F-4E Phantom which would, as The New York Times warned, ‘set off a new round in the Middle East arms race’.
In an attempt to change the balance, Egypt embarked upon a war of attrition, on the assumption that Israel could tolerate casualties less than Egypt.
But Israel used its newly acquired Phantoms to strike at civilian targets deep inside Egypt.
Egypt persuaded the Soviet Union that neither could afford another humiliating defeat.
In April 1970 the Soviet Union commenced the shipment of 15,000 soldiers and missile crewmen, 50 SAM-3 missile launchers with 160 missiles, and 150 MiG–21s in order to protect Egypt adequately.
By September there were at least 5,000 missiles deployed along the Suez Canal.
Israel lost overall air supremacy for the first time since 1948.
The October 1973 war was the result of Egyptian-Soviet efforts to change the balance in the Middle East, but it was the United States which became the prime beneficiary.
The latter airlifted $2.2 billion worth of weaponry to prevent Israel's defeat but on condition that it did  not press home a counter-attack.
It was then able to negotiate a disengagement in Sinai which removed the Soviet Union from the field, granted Egypt the use of the Canal again, and guaranteed Israel its strategic and tactical support.
The United States' open support for Israel was formalized in 1975 in a joint memorandum of understanding whereby ‘threats to the security and sovereignty of Israel by a world power would be seen with special severity by the United States government.’
It promised to consult with Israel during Middle Eastern emergencies in order to determine the degree of assistance that could be offered: ‘the U.S. government will make every effort to be fully responsive…on an ongoing and long term basis to Israel's military equipment and other defense requirements, to its energy requirements and other economic needs.’
Furthermore, it ‘will not join in and will seek to prevent efforts by others to bring about consideration of proposals which it and Israel agree are detrimental to the interests of Israel’.
Ten years later, in 1954, President Reagan took co-operation further with the formation of a joint political-military group to strengthen the strategic alliance.
Reagan's presidency may prove to have been the high watermark of the US-Israeli alliance, combining an unprecedented commitment to military co-operation with an almost wholly uncritical view of Israel.
‘Harking back to his career in Hollywood, he [Reagan]held a romantic view of Israel as a vibrant democracy.’
He also held a simplistic visionary view of Israel: ‘You know, I turn back to your ancient prophets in the Old Testament, and the signs foretelling Armageddon, and I find myself wondering if, if we're in the generation that's going to see it come about.
1 don't know if you've noted any of the prophecies lately, but, believe me, they certainly describe the time we're going through.’
The Soviet Union, for its part, tried to build relationships within the region in the hope that it could displace the Western powers on the tide of Arab nationalism.
Soviet support for the Arab world, however, proved weaker than America's for Israel for several reasons.
The very weakness of the Arab states, economically, militarily and in terms of political stability, made it dangerous for the Soviet Union to support them unconditionally.
In 1970 and 1952 the Soviets provided missiles and manpower to protect Egypt and Syria respectively from the devastating impact of an Israeli attack.
On both occasions the Soviet Union made up for the extreme weakness of its client but, by providing the personnel to operate missile sites, it was consciously limiting the ways in which these missiles could be used against Israel.
Moreover, while the Soviet Union welcomed the chance to help Egypt and other revolutionary Arab states to evict their old colonial masters, it did not wish to make them strong enough to become independent of itself.
Furthermore, it recognized that because it could not supply such high quality weaponry as the United States, and because communism did not commend itself to most Arab regimes, the Soviet-Arab bond was bound to remain weaker than the American-Israeli one.
The soviet Union and the Arab states knew that the United States promised to remain a substantially stronger player in the region.
When the opportunity presented itself some Arab states, for example Egypt (which formally repudiated its treaty in 1976) and Iraq (1952–3), discarded or downgraded the Soviet Union in their foreign relations and cultivated the United States.
Accommodationist states like Jordan and Kuwait only dealt with the Soviet Union because of favours withheld by the United States.
Even the PLO, were it able to, would have put relations with the USA before those with Moscow.
It was the United States' adamant policy with respect to the PLO that made the latter's relations with Moscow so robust.
By 1980 the Soviet Union was left with only two substantial associates in the region, Syria and the PLO, themselves uneasy allies against Israel.
By contrast, although there have been disagreements Israel's bond with the United States has been rock-solid, built upon agreement ‘concerning the nature and extent of the Soviet threat to the region’.
It is also built upon shared cultural, religious and political values, which take the relationship beyond a governmental one — the only relationship possible between the Soviet and Arab governments — into the democratic constituency of both states.
This cultural relationship is manifest in the pro-Israeli American lobby, composed both of Jewish American groups and non-Jewish Zionists.
Such is its influence that no congressman can be strongly critical of Israel and hope to advance his political career.
Resolution 242 and the pursuit of peace
Alongside the rivalry which characterized foreign relations in the Middle East, most governments desired peace if they could achieve it without weakening their own position.
After the dismemberment of Palestine and the failure of the Palestine Conciliation Commission at the Lausanne Conference in 1949, most governments concluded, however, that a negotiated peace agreement could not be achieved.
They hoped that the  division of Palestine into Israeli and Jordanian parts could become permanent and that in time the reasons for war would slowly fade away.
The 1967 war swept such optimistic assumptions aside.
Israel wanted to keep some if not all of her gains.
The Arab states, on the other hand, were devastated by the scale of their loss and this profoundly affected their political consciousness.
Whereas before the 1967 war most of the bellicosity had been verbal, after 1967 it was expressed in greatly intensified rearming.
The international community could no longer hope that the reasons for war would fade away.
Given the actual situation following the 1967 war, it was natural that the Security Council, in consultation with the belligerents themselves, should cast its prescriptive Resolution 242 of November 1967 in inter-statal terms: a return (more or less) to the pre-June 1967 frontiers, implying that the 1949 Armistice Line should now become a substantive and internationally recognized inter-state border, and an end to the state of war and full recognition for every state in the area.
The only non-statal element was the call for ‘a just settlement of the refugee problem’.
Resolution 242 became the corner-stone of almost every peace initiative that followed.
UN Special Representative, Gunnar Jarring, and the US Secretary of State, William Rogers, both made it the foundation of their peace efforts before their failure led to the October 1973 war.
This war, too, came to an end with a call (Resolution 335) for the immediate implementation of Resolution 242.
The United States, the Soviet Union and other leading member states, all adhered to 242, disagreeing only over whether Israel should withdraw completely or could insist on minor border rectifications.
The United States accepted the idea of minor border rectifications, while the Soviet Union insisted on an absolute withdrawal.
In subsequent initiatives US Secretaries of State Henry Kissinger, Cyrus Vance, and George Schultz all upheld the centrality of 242 in ‘the peace process’, a term used particularly in the Middle East conflict.
There are good reasons why insistence on Resolution 242 persisted.
The 1949 Armistice Line is an internationally recognized benchmark in any solution.
The territory captured by Israel was recognized by the whole international community as ‘occupied’ and therefore protected by the provisions of the 1949 (IVth) Geneva Convention.
More than anyone else, the inhabitants of the occupied territories were anxious that this benchmark and the protection of the Convention should not be removed.
Most UN member states shared that anxiety, and for that reason the preamble to Resolution 242 included an affirmation of the inadmissibility of acquiring territory by war.
The Security Council members wanted to reach arrangements with the existing states of the region.
After the rise of the PLO and its acceptance by the Arab states as sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people in 1974, there was still a natural reluctance, even among some Arab states, to accord it negotiating authority for the Palestinian people.
Any non-governmental movement might be suspect in such circumstances, untried and lacking in those essential relationships and assets by which inter-state bargains can be struck.
In the PLO's case this was compounded by its mercurial and ambiguous policy statements, and by the acts of terror committed by members of the Palestinian movement.
Jordan, well-disposed to the West but with relations with the Soviet Union, seemed a more reliable front runner for striking a durable bargain with Israel.
Finally, there was the fear that a solution based on any principle other than the 1949 Armistice Line would have destabilizing repercussions on Jordan and Israel.
Such considerations disregarded key factors in the conflict, above all the will of the Palestinians themselves.
Since in 1967 no coherent Palestinian movement existed, it was natural that the international community did not accord Palestinian interests the consideration they deserved.
Resolution 242 did not foresee the possibility of the Palestinian people acquiring their own voice, distinct from those of Jordan and Egypt which had governed so many of them.
Yet even as 242 was being drafted.
just such a voice was emerging.
By 1974 the people of the occupied territories clearly did not wish to return to Jordanian or Egyptian control and wanted self-determination, something which 242 did not propose, as the PLO began to complain.
Even the requirement of ‘A just settlement of the refugee problem’ begged the question of the 1949 Armistice Line as a practicable international border.
Where would the refugees go?
No one, apart from the Palestinians, seriously thought of a return to the (Israeli) part of Palestine from which they came.
But it was unlikely that the Palestinians would accept anything else as a just settlement.
Least noticeably but perhaps most dangerously, the Palestinians living inside the 1949 Armistice Line, barely 11 per cent of the Israeli population at the time, were nevertheless growing faster than the Jewish community and were expected to exceed 20 per cent by the end of the century.
The international community clung to Resolution 242 despite its growing obsolescence, as the only agreed basis for a solution.
During the period 1967–73 the difficulty of finding sufficient common ground between the belligerents, even within the terms of 242, became glaringly apparent.
As an ambiguous statement of that common ground  Resolution 242 was a triumph, but it was insufficient to bring the parties together.
Israel demanded bilateral and direct negotiations.
The defeated Arab states, fearful of being picked off one by one, insisted on indirect and collective negotiations.
Israel only accepted Resolution 242 without qualification in 1970, but acceptance did not reflect its true position for it was already opposed to the return of substantial territory in return for peace.
When discussion of a reconvened Geneva conference was in the air in December 1973, the government stated that ‘Israel will not return to the lines of June 4, 1967, which were a temptation to aggression.’
In the meantime, its decision to settle Jews in the occupied territories also brought the practical validity of the 1949 Armistice Line in any negotiated agreement into question.
From the outset, it was doubtful whether Israel could be persuaded to relinquish its gains.
As early as September 1967 the US government had cabled its ambassador in Tel Aviv to make clear to Abba Eban, then foreign minister, that
There is growing concern among governments friendly to Israel at indications Israeli objectives may be shifting from original position seeking peace with no repeat no territorial gains toward one of territorial expansionism.
Israel's refusal to authorize the return of all refugees desiring to resume residence on the West Bank, reported breaking off of West Bank banking negotiations and statements by senior Israeli officials quoted in American press gives rise to impression that Israeli government may be moving toward policy of seeking security simply by retaining occupied areas rather than by achieving peaceful settlement with Arabs.
Each act of Jewish settlement was a repudiation of 242 as understood by every member of the Security Council.
The United States told Israel that the establishment of Jewish settlements in the territories was a violation of the 1949 Geneva Convention.
Yet it was incapable of acting with resolution.
On 1 March 1950 it voted for Security Council Resolution 465 calling on Israel to dismantle its settlements (including East Jerusalem).
Two days later, after pro-Israel lobby protests, it retracted calling its vote ‘a mistake’, a ‘failure of communications’.
Neither the United State– nor any other Western government which censured Israel took any effective action to stop the settlement process.
None of Israel's Western friends considered its innovations sufficiently serious to require concrete  preventive measures or penalties.
They simply repeated their censure periodically while Israel continued to destroy almost every facet of Resolution 242's validity by land seizures, illegal settlements, and the annexation of both Jerusalem and the Golan Heights.
They all felt constrained by Israel's proximity to the Western bloc, and this took precedence over the enforcement of the 1949 Geneva Convention.
Despite their far longer involvement in the Middle East, the members of the European Community felt inhibited from acting with more resolution than the United States.
This was partly because of their sensitive relationship with Israel arising from the Jewish Holocaust in Europe.
It was also partly because of a sense of loyalty to the United States as leader of the Western alliance.
The Community followed a muted policy, based upon declaratory statements of principle rather than pro-active diplomacy.
It agreed with the United States that Resolutions 242 and 338 were the benchmarks for a peaceful solution, but sharply disagreed over their interpretation.
The primary area for disagreement lay in Europe's recognition of the ‘legitimate rights of the Palestinians’ first enunciated in 1973.
But it also lay in the European view, at a time when Kissinger was hard at work with his piecemeal diplomacy, that a comprehensive approach rather than a step-by-step strategy was the essential road to peace.
Europe continued to follow where the United States led.
It felt it could not oppose the Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty brokered by the United States in March 1979, but at the same time viewed it with ambivalence.
On the one hand it expressed its unease, recalling the need for a comprehensive solution which ‘must translate into fact the right of the Palestinian people to a homeland’, but on the other hand certain members of the Community — Britain, Italy, the Netherlands and France — agreed to help implement the treaty militarily.
Europe had a tendency to make bold forays but then retreat from them.
In June 1980 its Venice Declaration advocated full self-determination for the Palestinian people and the involvement of the PLO in peace negotiations, given its acceptance of Resolutions 242 and 338.
It was viewed as worthy but inadequate by the Arab world, as intrinsically hostile by Israel, and as dangerously wrong-headed by the United States.
Europe's failure stemmed from the dissonance between its relations with the Mediterranean world and its security dependence on the United States.
Each European member was bound to find its own point of balance between these two concerns.
However, since Europe's guiding principles for resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict were closer  to those of the Soviet Union than to those of the United States, the latter was bound to request Europe not to obstruct implementation of its own version of the peace process.
During the 1980s Europe retreated even from its declaratory policy.
The risks of peacemaking seemed too great.
In part, this retreat reflected a natural contraction in foreign policy concerns by a number of members.
However, Europe made it clear that it would continue to defer to the leadership of the United States in the ‘peace process’, as it had done in the 1970s.
The limitations of power
From 1967 onwards, the United States and Israel enjoyed unassailable political and military strength in the region.
It was inevitable that this strength, particularly when confronted by such weakness, generated the belief in both countries that they could transact a peace settlement which safeguarded their respective concerns.
For the decade following the October 1973 war the United States conducted its policy (but for a brief moment in 1977) on the assumption that it could exclude the Soviet Union from the political process.
At the time there seemed good reasons for this assumption, the United States being irreplaceable as mediator with Israel.
In Sinai and on the Golan Heights, Henry Kissinger carried out his step-by-step disengagement plan.
Kissinger's peace process eventually ran into the ground.
Egypt's 1977 peace initiative and entry into direct negotiations with Israel brokered by the United States at Camp David reinforced perceptions of American influence in the region.
Once again the United States seemed to be the arbiter of war and peace in the Middle East.
President Reagan came to power with greater hostility for the Soviets than any of his predecessors, and he quickly reached an understanding with Israel concerning those it saw as the Soviet Union's regional proxies, Syria and the PLO.
In June 1982 Israel's invasion of Lebanon provided an opportunity to destroy the PLO and mould a new Lebanese state free of Syrian, Palestinian and Soviet influence and by implication dependent on the United States.
However, although the PLO was removed, the United States and Israel failed to remove either Syrian or Soviet influence from the country, still less to create a new pro-American Lebanese state.
The Israeli-Lebanese Withdrawal Agreement of 17 May 1983, brokered by the United States, collapsed as soon as Syria refused to co-operate.
The major US aid programme to restore  the Lebanese economy and to rebuild the armed forces disintegrated in January 1984, with the collapse of the US military presence following suicide attacks on US Marine barracks and the collapse of the Phalangist government.
America's close association with Israel led to expectations that it enjoyed indirect control over the behaviour of the latter.
Indeed, it had supported Israel in its wars of 1967 and 1982 in the belief that Israel could create a situation in which a peace settlement that met American and Israeli interests would be possible.
This proved not to be the case, partly because the relationship between the two countries underwent a transformation in the period 1966–70.
By the end of the period the United States had become as dependent upon Israel in its Middle East policy as Israel was dependent upon the United States.
Also, the United States and Israel had different considerations for a settlement.
While committed to a strong and secure Israel, the United States remained a consistent advocate of the return of virtually all the territories captured in 1967 in exchange for peace.
This is how it understood Resolution 242.
Israel, strongly disagreeing with this interpretation, thwarted all American attempts at a diplomatic settlement.
‘I ask Rabin to make concessions,’ Henry Kissinger wrote in 1975, ‘and he says he can't because Israel is weak.
So I give him more arms and he says he doesn't need to make concessions because Israel is strong.’
Israel repeatedly and successfully obstructed America's will, at no particular cost to itself.
It felt no difficulty in repudiating the Reagan Plan of 1982, nor of thwarting President Carter's understanding of the Camp David Accords by intensification of its settlement programme in the occupied territories two years earlier.
The United States' experience with its ally is not unique.
One of the features of the conflict which has made its resolution so difficult has been the inability of any of the protagonists — internal or external, powerful or weak — to mould events or other players to its will, and the ability of even the weakest players to throw a spanner into the works of both allies and adversaries.
Just as Israel at times has thwarted United States' regional objectives, so also the PLO has at times thwarted the policies of Jordan and Syria; Egypt has reneged on its commitment to the Soviet Union and a defeated Syria was able to destroy the Israeli-Lebanese Withdrawal Agreement virtually overnight.
Furthermore, repeated wars have demonstrated the inability of outsiders to contain the virulence of the conflict once they felt this was desirable,except when the superpowers were both agreed on the  necessity to rein in their clients.
The United States was unable to restrain Israel even when it felt it was necessary to do so against Syria in June 1967 and against Lebanon in 1982.
Twelve years earlier, in 1970, the Soviet Union had been unable to restrain the PFLP from provoking a showdown with Jordan.
It has been assumed that the superpowers acting in unison can bring sufficient pressure to bear on their respective clients to enable peace negotiations.
Events so far have not borne this out.
When American diplomatic efforts included détente and co-operation with the Soviet Union, Israel skilfully used the human rights issue of Soviet Jewry as a jemmy to prise the superpowers apart in 1973 and 1977.
Nothing more clearly demonstrated the unreliability of this assumption than the Joint Soviet-American Statement of 1 October 1977.
This was an attempt to secure the reconvening of the Geneva Conference on terms mutually agreeable to the superpowers, both of which intended to expose their clients to some pressure, but not at the cost of a damaging political reverse.
The United States accepted for the first time the phrase ‘legitimate rights of the Palestinian people’ and called for the participation of the ‘Palestinian people’, a major concession to the Soviet Union, in return for Soviet retraction of its previous insistence on the participation of the PLO, the establishment of an independent Palestinian state, and the total withdrawal of Israeli forces to the 1949 Armistice Line.
It seemed a reasonable bargain in which each superpower could exert restraint over its regional allies.
However, within four days, Israel and its lobby in America had forced the US administration to backtrack, abandoning its entire policy.
Israel has benefited more from competition than co-operation between the superpowers in the region.
The key to Israel's success, and to a lesser extent Syria's, had been its ability to prey on the strategic anxieties of its superpower patron.
However, Israel discovered, just like the United States, that it too could be thwarted by the weaker and more vulnerable contestants in the conflict.
In August-September 1982 it proved unable to clinch a peace treaty with its Maronite ally, having effectively installed it as the new Lebanese government.
Most frustrating of all, Israel was unable to persuade the weakest contestants, the civilian population of the occupied territories, to comply with its own version of the Camp David autonomy plan.
Israel has proved highly successful at achieving regional predominance in association with the United States but this has been at the price of increasing economic and military dependence on its outside patron.
It  has placed its diplomatic future in the hands of one outside power, and this may eventually prove more dangerous than adopting a less aggressive policy towards its neighbours.
Arab weakness and Palestinian strength
A major reason for the failure of the peace process lies in the weakness of the Arab world.
Ever since 1948, the Arabs have found it difficult to agree among themselves.
The accommodationist states were inhibited by the rejectionist ones and were not strong enough militarily without the latter to be credible.
As a result they have been weak in the diplomatic arena.
The rejectionist states which have viewed Western, particularly American, influence in the region as an inherent part of the problem, have also been characterized by weakness.
All these regimes, accommodationist or rejectionist, have had one flaw in common.
Not one of them has enjoyed internal political loyalty and they have therefore lacked the strength or authority to transact formal negotiations in which controversial concessions might have to be made.
At the heart of the conflict, the Palestinian people have been particularly familiar with political weakness.
Following the June 1967 war the Palestine Liberation Organization replaced the Arab states as the focus for Palestinian hopes.
However, like the Arab states the PLO was unable to establish sufficient military strength to threaten Israel, or even to obtain diplomatic recognition with the more influential Western powers.
By the early 1980s ‘PLO nationalism’ was declining in credibility as Arab nationalism had done in the 1970s.
Yet the PLO enjoyed what every Arab regime lacked and needed most of all, the heartfelt loyalty of the people it represented.
It remained the most powerful card the PLO had to play.
Paradoxically the PLO and the Palestinian people have drawn strength from their military and political weakness.
Particularly after 1982 they had no independent power base, no military forces of any consequence on Israel's borders, no diplomatic position in the West and no apparent way of halting Israel's integration of the occupied territories into the Israeli state.
They had little more to lose.
They preferred undisguised military occupation to self-administration and refused to co-operate with Israel's attempts to create an accommodationist Palestinian leadership in the territories.
Palestinian stubbornness has become a major stumbling block to the peace process as conceived by the United States.
Jordan dare not move  without PLO approval.
As Prime Minister Peres ruefully remarked in 1986 ‘the Palestinians alone can prevent a solution.’
They have consistently refused to co-operate with any venture that has fallen short of the promise of self-determination.
By the end of 1987 the furthest that they had gone was to accept ‘non-PLO’ Palestinians to represent them in a Jordanian-Palestinian delegation, but they drew the line at renouncing violence or recognizing Israel's right to exist.
They claimed the right to liberate themselves by armed struggle and they saw any recognition of Israel's legitimacy as contingent on Israeli and American recognition of their own right to self-determination.
Thus, the Palestinians, the weakest of all contenders, showed themselves able to render the peace process ineffectual until they were granted participation on acceptable terms.
The Palestinians have also successfully challenged America's assumption that it was pre-eminently qualified to act as peace broker, an assumption that had underscored US policy in the Middle East since 1967.
President Reagan's claim that ‘No other nation is in a position to deal with the key parties to the conflict on the basis of trust and reliability' jarred with assessments in early 1982 that no more than 0.5 per cent of Palestinians in the West Bank considered the United States was ‘helpful’ to the Palestinians in the search for a solution, and only approximately 2 per cent in the territories believed the United States was serious about a peaceful solution to the Middle East.
Until 1988 there had been nothing to indicate an increase in Palestinian confidence in the United States.
The collapse of repeated initiatives by Secretary of State George Schultz was welcomed by a growing number of Palestinians in the territories.
The Uprising was primarily a rejection of Israeli rule and an affirmation of Palestinian identity, but it was also a rejection of American interference.
Participation by the United States was recognized by Palestinians only as an unwelcome necessity.
Only after the Uprising had established new political realities did the PLO feel strong enough to concede the demands made by Western nations — renouncing terrorism, accepting 242 and recognizing Israel more explicitly than before.
Even so, the decision of the 19th Palestine National Council in November 1988 to take this highly accommodationist road was not an easy one, and was only possible because it had become apparent that the world now recognized that no substantive peace negotiations were likely to materialize without formal PLO participation.
The PLO felt able to play what had been for fifteen years its ‘last card’— recognition of Israel — because it had gained a stronger one through the Uprising.
The United States found the implications of these new political realities harder to accept than the rest of the international community, which had almost unanimously welcomed the PLO's clarified accommodationism.
Indeed, it only recognized the PLO as a substantive interlocutor for the Palestinian people after world condemnation of its decision to bar Arafat from entry to the United States to address the United Nations in New York in December 1988, and after he had addressed its General Assembly in Geneva instead.
The United States decided that isolation with Israel from the consensus of the whole world community was too high a price to pay.
In order to prove it was not composed of ‘patsies’, as Reagan put it, the United States insisted that Arafat repeat specifically worded concessions concerning terrorism and recognition of Israel, and when he failed to do so verbatim , it required him to repeat the authorized US version.
These statements added little to what Arafat had already said but such casuistry, the decision to limit official contact with the PLO to the US embassy in Tunis, and the warning that any terrorist incident attributable to a PLO faction would render US recognition of the PLO void, suggested that the outgoing US administration had acted with considerable reluctance.
Its expressed view, that the Uprising was part of that violence which the United States now wished the PLO to bring to an end, indicated it wished to eliminate the source of the new political reality, against which it had laboured so long through its preference for negotiations through Jordan.
In this way, the weakest contestants demonstrated that even they could influence the course of international diplomacy.
But it remained uncertain whether they were strong enough to create conditions in which peace could be negotiated even on the most minimal of their terms.
A valid peace process?
No one can underestimate the difficulties implicit in achieving a negotiated settlement.
Nevertheless, the lack of genuine progress toward peace in the region during the period 1967–88 casts doubt upon the validity of the peace process as it has been conceived.
Has it in fact been a peace process at all?
Its defenders claim that to create the impression of progress is in itself a vital part of crisis management.
The justification for crisis management, to those who argue the case, lies in the self-evident desirability of avoiding instability or open war.
The  impression of diplomatic progress, so the argument runs, has a quietening effect on the region.
However, it is ingenuous to suppose that peace process brokers do not have their strategic interests first and foremost in mind.
Their ‘peace process’ is likely to be, primarily, an avenue for those strategic goals, and therefore remains an alternative method to war, whereby rivals may be worsted and allies strengthened.
This may seem a jaundiced view, but the evidence is disturbing.
The United States crowned its greatest diplomatic triumph in the region, the peace treaty between Israel and Egypt, by distributing to both parties swords as well as ploughshares.
With Egypt out of the fray, Israel and the United States felt stronger while Syria and the Soviet Union felt more threatened.
In 1982 Israel invaded Lebanon with greater self-confidence than in any previous war, safe in the knowledge that the Egyptian front was quiescent.
The United States saw this war as an opportunity to change things in the Middle East, and celebrated the Lebanese-Israeli Withdrawal Agreement by lifting its year-old ban on the sale of seventy-five F-16 jet fighters to Israel.
The same day the US Senate approved the Administration's $251 million military and economic package for Lebanon.
Military supplies to Lebanon's Maronite government were seen by many Lebanese (as well as Syria) as a contribution to conflict, not to the restoration of order.
Inevitably, US support for a Lebanon dominated by the Phalangists was violently challenged by other Lebanese groups.
Just as inevitably, the Soviet Union and Syria both felt compelled to redouble their efforts to fortify their respective positions in the conflict, to offset the damage this agreement had done them.
As in 1970 with Egypt, so after 1982 the Soviet Union gave Syria its most sophisticated air defence system and missile system, and tactical ballistic missiles capable of reaching Tel Aviv.
The conclusion must be drawn that at the end of the period 1978–83, when America's peace process was at its height, the dangers for the Middle East, particularly Israel, had increased rather than receded.
The same, of course had been true of the period of intensive ‘peace efforts’, 1967–73.
Each round of war and ‘peace process’ drew the superpowers into yet more sophisticated rearming of their clients and increased the tactical and strategic threats to the participants.
Superpower involvement has raised the stakes rather than lowered them.
Furthermore at the local level, although the international community still conversed ‘in a dead language, the Latin of the Middle East: 242 and 338’, it was difficult to ignore the fact that the conflict was increasingly inter-communal, crossing the 1949 Armistice Line — with  growing numbers of Israeli Palestinians to the west and Israeli Jewish settlers to the east of it.
It was impossible to disregard the fact that King Husayn's renunciation of the West Bank in July 1988, too, undermined the inter-statal approach of Resolution 242, and emphasized the inter-communal aspect of the conflict inside Palestine.
In November 1988, the 19th Palestine National Council passed a resolution specifically recognizing 242, and all other relevant United Nations resolutions on Palestine.
It did so as a gesture towards the United States, that it was now willing to accept this resolution as the basis of its participation in an international peace conference.
By its declaration of Palestinian independence the PNC filled the inter-statal void left by Jordan's abdication of the West Bank, though it was doubtful that the United States would accept it as such.
Does PNC acceptance of Resolution 242 validate the latter as a basis for peace?
One must be doubtful.
Because of international insistence on it, Resolution 242 is undoubtedly the entry ticket to an international peace conference.
To that extent it still has value.
However — with the loss of Jordanian sovereignty — until the United States accepts the Palestinian claim to sovereignty over the occupied territories, Resolution 242 is bound to remain bereft of meaning, since there is no US-recognized state to which the West Bank and Gaza can be returned.
It must be remembered, too, that Resolution 242 was deliberately ambiguous.
It recognized through its wording that the superpowers, the regional contestants and the local ones, had differing interpretations of what it meant.
Did it mean a return to the 1949 Armistice Line?
Did ‘a just settlement of the refugee problem’ imply implementation of Resolution 194 of 1948 (confirming the right of return), as an innocent might assume?
The fact is that Israel, the Arab states, including the new State of Palestine, the United States and the Soviet Union have different interpretations.
Resolution 242 may get them around the same table but it leaves the real bones of contention untouched.
Furthermore it does not deal with the long-term inter-communal aspect — Israel's own growing Palestinian population (an issue discussed in chapters 6, 7 and 11).
This ingredient is vital to the continued stability of the region.
If there is regret over the failure of Resolution 242 as a blueprint for peace, which had seemed so promising in 1967, there are grounds for even greater regret that the 1949 (IVth) Geneva Convention has not been vigorously upheld by those who claimed to be seeking a basis for peace.
In November 1988 the new Likud-dominated government resumed the process of settling the territories with Jews, rendering the implementation of Resolution 242 more remote than ever.
In view of such evidence the peace process seems much less convincing than its proponents have suggested.
That it has been ‘the only game in town’, as many have argued, has not meant that it has necessarily been worth following, either from an Israeli or a Palestinian view.
As the Israeli writer, Amos Kenan, observed, ‘The big powers need an arrangement, not peace.
So we will get in the Middle East the kind of solution there is between East and West Germany, or North and South Korea…it rests on a kind of status quo, a state of expectation, until something happens or something dies, or something changes, and life goes on, that's all.
It is not peace and not war; it is the modern solution.’
For Israelis and Palestinians such a solution is highly unsatisfactory.
The climate for peace
It is natural to ask what circumstances are desirable for an effective peace process to come into being.
The idea that the superpowers are vital to the success of the peace process is based upon the influence they exert on the regional contestants, but in reality they have helped to perpetuate regional conflict and global competition in the area, with the encouragement of local clients.
The superpowers' activity has resulted from the importance they attach to the region.
A decline in activity may now come about if both accord the region less strategic value than they have given it hitherto.
Fifty years ago the region seemed critical to British imperial interests.
Then Arab oil became the focus of Western concern, particularly following the 1973 war.
In the 1980s the Iran-Iraq war demonstrated that the supply of oil to interested clients was possible in even the most threatening and unstable situations.
Moreover, the threat to supplies brought the two superpowers closer together.
The idea of one global power holding the other to ransom seems less credible now than it has done previously.
There are grounds therefore for believing that superpower activity in the Middle East may now be in a phase of decline.
Furthermore, it is now becoming increasingly apparent that neither superpower can afford to sustain the level of economic and military aid that has been provided hitherto to allies and client states.
The servicing of perceived strategic needs is outrunning economic capacity.
This is clearly implicit in the major reforms introduced by President Gorbachev.
The United States may also be approaching the same conclusion, for  between 1980 and 1988 it moved from being the world's largest creditor to being its largest debtor.
Although much of this is attributable to the tax cuts policy of the Reagan era, it also results from the military expenditure Reagan believed was consistent with his view of a strong America.
The greatest contribution outside powers can make in creating a climate for peace lies less in the field of diplomacy than in that of law observance.
So far, the Western countries have shown far greater enthusiasm for applying law to international terrorism than for enforcement of the (IVth) Geneva Convention.
Fulfilment of their legal obligation, would send a powerful message to the contestants: to the Palestinians of the occupied territories that they can hope for protection, and to Israel that it cannot disobey international law with impunity.
If the United States wishes to be an effective peace broker, it must accept the fundamental need for law enforcement, uphold the illegality of Israeli settlement and abandon its policy of appeasing its ally.
The European Community has already made a modest start in this direction.
At the regional and local levels, Israel has never been seriously challenged.
Another prerequisite therefore may be a closer matching of political and military strength which would oblige Israel to think in new ways.
This may now be taking place.
No state in the region is now invulnerable to attack by another.
Syria and Iraq have advanced rocketry systems and in the case of the latter — if not Syria also — a chemical and biological warfare capacity.
Given Israel's inability to sustain large casualties this must be seen as a weapon of similarly fearsome proportions to Israel's own nuclear capacity.
On the conventional battlefield Syria's unprecedented programme of militarization may put pressure on Israel to reassess the respective costs of war and peace.
If it chooses war it may deem it necessary to attack Syria before the latter becomes more powerful, but in doing so it risks incurring unacceptably high casualties.
Or it may sit tight in the reasonable hope that either the economic strain proves too great and Syria's military strength is sapped by political and economic instability, or that Syria will dissipate its strength against its eastern adversary, Iraq.
If the danger increases, Israel may seek an easing of tension with Syria by a new agreement based upon the abandonment of the Golan Heights on condition of permanent demilitarization.
Currently this may seem unacceptable as well as unlikely, but may no longer be so if Israel itself experiences military and economic recession.
However, the most important ingredient missing hitherto from the  peace process — international acceptance of the Palestinians' choice of representative — was dramatically fulfilled at the time of the first anniversary of the Uprising.
This international acceptance was emphatically less the result of the peace process than of the Uprising.
The United States, the most loquacious exponent of peace, had also been the most reluctant member of the international community to accept the PLO as representative for the Palestinians.
At the beginning of 1989 it remained uncertain whether this unenthusiastic recognition would survive the vicissitudes of negotiation.
The United States required continuing evidence of PLO acceptance of Israel and repudiation of violence as the price for diplomatic contact, but it was unclear whether it was yet willing to encourage Palestinian accommodationist tendencies by granting the PLO anything more than a hearing.
There was no evidence yet of the even-handedness necessary in a true peace-broker, for it did not demand of Israel recognition of the PLO, let alone recognition of the Palestinian right to self-determination, something the United States itself was not yet ready to concede.
Nor did it demand that Israel, like the PLO, abandon the use of violence in its treatment of enemy civilians either inside or beyond the territories under its control.
But a modest start had been made.
Only Israel continued to reject any recognition of the PLO, a position of isolation which was becoming decreasingly defensible.
After all, one can only make peace with one's enemies.
It is only when the United States persuades Israel that it cannot continue to deny the choice of representative that the Palestinian people have made — however reprehensible that representative may seem — that any meaningful international dialogue towards peace can take place.
At the beginning of 1989 it remained a hope awaiting fulfilment, that the incoming Bush administration would undertake that role of persuasion which previous administrations had eschewed.
In the midst of such uncertainties one thing was clear.
The dramatic political and diplomatic developments of 1988 — of more importance to the achievement of a substantive peace than anything else since 1967 — owed nothing to the peace process.
They were a direct result of the Uprising.
Furthermore, future international progress towards peace seemed likely to remain contingent on the strength and durability of the Uprising.
THE JORDANIAN DIMENSION
The fallacy, so long espoused by the United States, that any political settlement for the West Bank must primarily involve Jordan was sharply exposed by the Uprising.
On 31 July 1988, after eight months of unrest in the territories, King Husayn formally relinquished his claim to the West Bank, and initiated the administrative steps necessary to sever all those links which implied sovereignty or responsibility for the fate of the territory.
For the Palestinians and the PLO, King Husayn's announcement was a tremendous victory, for he had formally renounced the claim he had refused to concede after Rabat in 1974.
There was a bitter tinge to the triumph, however, for he neither warned nor consulted the PLO before his announcement.
His precipitate action was clearly calculated to make life harder rather than easier for the PLO as he abandoned responsibility for civil servants in the West Bank.
The suspicion remained that he might be hoping that the PLO would fail to meet the challenge, and consequent disaffection in the West Bank would lead perhaps to his eventual reinstatement.
But such a calculation could only be a gamble.
In the meantime Palestinians were exultant.
King Husayn's decision was a major blow for Israel's Labour Party.
For it came barely three months before Israel's general election, in which the fate of the territories was the central issue.
Labour had maintained ever since 1967 that the foundation of any settlement of the territories was an arrangement with Jordan.
Husayn had now removed the central plank of Labour's electoral manifesto to the delight of Likud, which rejected negotiations with Jordan as irrelevant to the kind of autonomy it envisaged for Palestinians living in Eretz Israel.
The United States was similarly dismayed, for it still hoped for a Labour electoral victory and an eventual political settlement with  Jordan.
In June 1988 Secretary of State Schultz was still discounting any idea of Palestinian independence, insisting that any Palestinian representation must be under Jordanian auspices.
Until the Uprising even the PLO leadership — albeit with a great deal of hesitation — was ready to accept the formula of a joint Jordanian and Palestinian delegation, it being understood that the Palestinian component, even though not PLO leaders themselves, would be a genuine and equal partner with the Jordanians.
In the West Bank and Gaza Strip, the two areas most immediately affected, this had been the subject of heated debate.
In April 1983, for example, an opinion poll indicated that while 32 per cent favoured a joint team, 43 per cent considered the team should be solely Palestinian.
One year before the Uprising another poll indicated that only 6.3 per cent of the population would accept Jordanian sovereignty even on an interim basis.
A confederation between two sovereign states, Jordan and Palestine, might have been acceptable, but not a federation under King Husayn.
This had been the position of the most accommodationist end of the PLO, led by Yasser Arafat.
In its anxiety to transact a settlement, the international community, particularly the United States, seriously misjudged Palestinian feelings towards the Hashemite monarchy.
There was a tendency to ascribe residual ill-feeling to the East Bank civil war of 1970–1, and to the comparative neglect of the West Bank under Hashemite rule before 1967.
Such explanations overlooked the history and depth of tension between the Hashemites and Palestinians, and ignored the continuing disparity of purpose between the two parties over the past half century.
The Amir Abdallah of Transjordan
This tension originated in the political ambitions of the first ruler of Transjordan, the Amir Abdallah, grandfather of King Husayn.
Abdallah and his brother Faysal had hoped to benefit from the alliance made in 1915 between their father Husayn, Sharif of Mecca and ruler of the Hijaz, and the British.
That alliance promised the prospect of a kingdom in the areas which they wrested from Ottoman control.
Having led the Arab revolt, Faysal briefly became King of Syria before French forces expelled him in July 1920.
He was compensated by Britain with Iraq.
But Faysal's brother, Abdallah, advanced from the Hijaz through the territory east of the Jordan — under British nominal control but for which no political arrangements had been made — with  the avowed intention of ejecting the French from Syria.
Britain bought him off by offering him the sovereignty of this area, ‘Transjordan’.
Abdallah never abandoned his ambition to rule Syria.
Over his remaining thirty years of life he tried to fulfil the Hashemite ambition to rule the whole Arab Levant.
With his brother in Iraq, a Hashemite-ruled Fertile Crescent remained a realistic objective.
While France remained in Syria any hope of recovering it was pointless.
But Palestine was a different matter since it was under British rule.
Britain favoured the Hashemites and might consider Abdallah a suitable ruler in due course.
The acquisition of Palestine would greatly increase his economic and political power, which was marginal given the poor resources of Transjordan.
Palestine, even without the new Jewish settlers, was more populous and more advanced.
As ruler of both banks of the Jordan Abdallah's position would be greatly enhanced.
Unlike the Arab inhabitants of Palestine, Abdallah welcomed the prospect of economic development which the Zionist programme promised.
Palestinian nationalists became suspicious, since there were soon rumours that he was seeking recognition as Amir of Palestine in return for support of Zionist policy.
By the early 1930s it was clear that Abdallah intended to develop friendly co-operation with the Jewish Agency.
In 1934 he proposed to it that Palestine and Transjordan should be united under his crown, the Arabs recognizing the Mandate, including Jewish rights, and each state keeping its own political status with the respective prime ministers reporting to Abdallah.
He also suggested special terms for Jewish immigration and land purchase, and told the Jewish Agency that he hoped Syria would later join this ‘united kingdom’.
When the Palestinian revolt broke out in 1936, Abdallah secretly urged Britain to exile Palestinian leaders, and offered to work with the Jewish Agency to sabotage intervention by other Arab states.
When the Peel Commission proposed partition in 1937, Abdallah was virtually alone in the Arab world in his support for it contingent, however, on the incorporation of the Arab portion into his Amirate.
‘I consider it my duty to strive to ward off the calamity by bringing about the union of Palestine and Transjordan’, he told the Palestinians.
The Zionists were interested in Abdallah's plans, partly because uniting Transjordan and Palestine might renew Zionist opportunities east of the Jordan.
Ben Gurion had strongly favoured Abdallah's support of partition in 1937.
Britain, too, favoured the association of the proposed Arab state with Transjordan, but backtracked in the face of  widespread hostility which made Abdallah unpopular throughout the Arab world.
Abdallah nursed his ambitions for Palestine.
Following the declaration of the Biltmore Programme in 1942, he approached the Zionists with the idea of a four state federation.
Palestine (with proportional representation), Transjordan, Syria and Iraq, with the question of Jewish immigration being contingent not upon Palestinian Arab consent but upon the economic absorptive capacity of the country.
But the Zionists were not interested.
They were gripped by anxiety over the fate of European Jewry.
Once Britain decided to relinquish the Palestine mandate, Abdallah, now king, renewed his work for partition.
Along with every other Arab state he officially opposed the partition, but the others knew his intention was the opposite.
In July 1947 he agreed with the Jewish Agency to support partition and the establishment of a Jewish state in return for Jewish financial help for Transjordan.
A few days before the vote on partition in the UN General Assembly, Abdallah secretly met Jewish Agency officials.
‘I am prepared for a partition that will not put me to shame before the Arabs’ they reported him as saying, and he assured me of them, Golda Meir, ‘that he would not attack the partitioned Jewish State but that he would annex [Arab]Palestine.’
Golda Meir replied that ‘if he was ready and willing to confront us and the world with a fait accompli [i.e. annexation of Arab Palestine]— the traditional friendship between us would continue and we would certainly find a common language in arranging matters of interest to both sides.’
This was confirmed in April 1948. when ‘it was agreed that Abdallah would control Arab Palestine if he did not interfere with efforts to set up a Jewish State.’
In March he had secured British assent for his plans.
Britain then obtained United States agreement too.
Palestinian nationalists remained opposed to Abdallah's plans but had few alternatives.
If the proposed partition led to fighting, the Arabs who were bereft of any coherent leadership (the Mufti and other Palestinian leaders had been exiled since 1939), would depend wholly on the armies of their Arab neighbours, of which Abdallah's was not only unquestionably the best but also stood to capture most territory.
When the United States proposed a truce plan on 8 April 1948 to stop the fighting between Jews and Arabs, it was Abdallah who was most hostile to it.
He warned that even if the Arab League accepted the truce proposal, he would still send his army into Palestine after  15 May.
Syria, Egypt and the Palestinians were all, for different reasons, extremely uneasy.
Syria feared this was the fist step in his long-awaited Greater Syria project.
Egypt feared the Hashemites intended to control the land from the Mediterranean across the Negev to the Gulf, and the Palestinians feared that foreign Arab armies spelt the end of Palestinian hopes to determine their own future.
Abdallah honoured his understandings with the Jewish Agency.
On 14 May, on the eve of the Arab forces' entry into Palestine, he changed the invasion plan to prevent the Syrians from attacking south of the Sea of Galilee.
This kept Syrian troops away from the West Bank area which Abdallah wished to incorporate into Transjordan, and undermined the Arab League plan to cut off east Galilee, which had been allocated to the Jewish State.
On 15 May, the day after Britain's withdrawal, Transjordanian troops entered Palestine, taking up defensive positions around Jerusalem, the key to the central uplands.
Here they fought bitterly with Jewish forces for control of the Jerusalem area, which had been allocated to neither side under the Partition Plan.
Egypt, more concerned with countering Abdallah's ambitions in the Arab-designated areas than with defeating the Jews, moved its troops to Beersheba, Hebron and towards Jerusalem.
In the central sector, the Transjordanians abandoned two large towns, Lydda and Ramla, to their fate, in the belief that they were tactically indefensible.
The Jewish forces could hardly believe their good fortune.
To the Palestinians the loss of Lydda and Ramla remained symbols of Hashemite betrayal.
Further south, Abdallah's troops quickly occupied Bethlehem and Hebron when the Jews pushed Egyptian forces out of the central southern sector in October.
Their first act was to disarm all armed elements in the area, both Egyptians and those belonging to the Mufti's irregular forces, for Abdallah's chief aim was to remove Egyptian forces from Palestine, and prevent any Palestinian entity emerging.
Abdallah was outmanoeuvred by the Zionists.
He had served their purpose by supporting partition and keeping the Arab armies divided.
He wanted to annex the West Bank formally and conclude an armistice with Israel.
But Israel resisted this until it was in a much stronger position by concluding one with Egypt in February 1949.
It then adopted a far less conciliatory approach, demanding the evacuation of the small Transjordanian force from the Negev, access to the Wailing Wall and Mount Scopus in Jerusalem, and refusing to recognize Transjordanian sovereignty over the West Bank.
In March Israeli  troops outflanked Abdallah's forces in the Negev to capture the whole area and reach Eilat.
His forces withdrew without king a shot.
Militarily stronger by ten to one, Israel made Abdallah agree to an armistice in April 1949 whereby he ceded thirty villages in and near Wadi Ara, in the area which became known inside Israel as the Little Triangle.
In 1948 Abdallah had moved quickly to establish his legitimacy in those areas of Palestine under his control.
In October he summoned to Amman the local notables favourable to his rule, where they asked him to put all Arab-occupied Palestine under his protection.
Two months later he convened a major conference in Jericho, choosing as its president the mayor of Hebron, Shaikh Muhammad Ali Ja'bari, his long standing supporter.
This conference called for the unity of Palestine and Transjordan, and declared Abdallah king of all Palestine.
Pro-Hashemite figures were quickly installed in key positions in what became known as ‘the West Bank’.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
Abdallah erased the identity of Palestine.
In March 1949 the official name of his enlarged state became the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.
When a Palestinian delegation asked to participate in the armistice negotiations, its request was rejected and the armistice was signed only by East Bankers.
In March 1950 Abdallah instructed that the word ‘Palestine’ be removed from all maps and official statements.
Hashemite political control was established by division of the local administration of the West Bank and by incorporation of the local notable class.
Jerusalem, which had become politically pre-eminent during the Mandate, receded in importance compared with Amman, to which all its government offices were transferred.
The civil governor of each governorate, Nablus, Jerusalem and Hebron, was usually an East Bank Jordanian.
Popular participation even in local government was limited by the direct control of Amman through its governors, the local notable class, and through the low number of those eligible to vote.
The Jordanian Chamber of Deputies was now composed of forty deputies, twenty from each side of the river.
In view of the overwhelming Palestinian demographic preponderance, this arrangement was a good deal less equitable than it at first seems.
Most of the families which had supported Abdallah were represented.
Many notables and landowners benefited from incorporation into Jordan.
The increased demand for agricultural produce, not only for the  refugee population but also for the new markets to the east, which replaced the previous west-facing economy, brought government in Amman and the landowners of the West Bank closer together.
In order to market successfully across the river, West Bankers needed to work with associates in government in Amman, and with those able to transport and market goods on the East Bank.
Notable families were better able to do this than small farmers.
The Hashemite regime neglected the West Bank as a matter of deliberate policy.
It did not want the political centre of gravity to shift across the river.
Nor did it want the more advanced economic state of the West Bank, which was itself backward compared with the coastal areas of Palestine, to continue.
The agriculture of small farmers remained undeveloped, while the industrial sector which was small but had considerable potential with the influx of the coastal refugee population received no single investment of more than about $28,000 in the whole period.
The East Bank was consistently preferred when it came to investment, for irrigation, land reclamation, electricity, transport and communications.
Throughout the 1950s newspapers continued to report the complaints of West Bank traders at the economic stagnation which resulted.
The chambers of commerce of West Bank towns complained of their inability to obtain import and export licences, let alone the capital they needed to develop both industrial and agricultural potential.
By 1967 the industrial sector of the West Bank had not only shrunk from 12 per cent to 9 per cent of the gross domestic product, but was now smaller than in any neighbouring Arab area, and in particular in comparison with industry in the East Bank, which had been virtually non-existent before 1948.
Annexation and the incorporation of both the indigenous and refugee Palestinians created a fundamental instability in the new kingdom.
Jordan was now integrated into the Palestine conflict, with its regime controlling, rather than supporting, the Palestinian people.
This has committed it to an inevitable struggle with the Palestinians for control of policy on the Palestine question and, by extension, for control of Jordan itself.
Before the 1948 war the population of Transjordan had been 430,000.
After the war and the acquisition of the West Bank, the population rose to 1,280,000, of whom 850,000, or 66 per cent, were Palestinian.
Of the Palestinian population a slight majority, 450,000, were refugees, while 400,000 were indigenous to the West Bank.
Transjordan's capital, Amman, became predominantly Palestinian almost overnight.
Today it is about 75 per cent Palestinian.
Inevitably the Hashemites faced an acute political difficulty.
Widening political participation in the life of the new state risked the creation of a Palestinian opposition to Hashemite policy.
While the regime tried to incorporate the notables into the ruling establishment, the refugee camps on both the West and East Banks became a focus for the activities of the Jordan Communist Party (the Arab rump of the Palestine Communist Party), the Muslim Brotherhood and the Islamic Liberation Party, all of which were hostile to a settlement with Israel unless it included the right of the refugees to return to their homeland.
King Abdallah was assassinated by a Palestinian in Jerusalem in July 1951.
Following the accession of his grandson, Husayn, in 1953 (after his son Talal had abdicated on account of mental instability), anti-Hashemite demonstrations and riots broke out.
These expressed hostility to Britain's pre-eminent position, the demand for greater democracy in the country, and a widely held belief that the Hashemites had an understanding with Israel not to attempt to recapture any of Israeli Palestine but to punish severely any Palestinian who violated the Armistice Line.
The immediate cause was an Israeli reprisal raid in October 1953 on the village of Qibya in which 66 villagers were killed.
Qibya symbolized the political as well as military failure of the Hashemites to uphold the Palestinian cause.
Throughout 1954 there were a number of anti-Hashemite demonstrations, culminating in serious riots in Jerusalem, Ramallah and even Amman.
In the mid-1950s there was a short-lived chance that Jordan would develop into a parliamentary democracy.
Many young notables were attracted to the new ideologies then current in the Arab world, notably the Communist Party (the only party of any significance to have opposed the erasure of ‘Palestine’ from the Jordanian maps), and the Ba'ath.
In 1956 a newly formed party, the National Socialists, who sought greater economic as well as political freedom, were able to form a coalition with the Ba'athists and Communists to assume government.
Within a month the new government faced the political implications of the Suez campaign, and the vehement anti-Hashemite feelings it provoked.
It abrogated the treaty with Britain, affirmed its support for Arab nationalism, and turned to other Arab regimes for the subsidies necessary for the Jordanian economy.
King Husayn reluctantly gave the government his support.
The crisis soon developed into open disagreement between government and king over their respective powers.
In April 1957 Husayn backed his prime minister.
Three days later army elements, apparently with the knowledge of the outgoing government, attempted an unsuccessful coup d'état .
Husayn suspended  the constitution, declared martial law, banned all political parties and arrested hundreds of politicians.
When Arab governments refused to provide the subsidies promised to the late government Husayn turned to the United States, which provided a $10 million emergency grant, and a further $30 million during the course of the year.
Thus ended Jordan's brief experiment in democracy, with the country firmly within the United States' growing political orbit in the region.
For the next decade, until June 1967, the Palestinians watched with envy the triumphs of Arab nationalism under Nasser's leadership, but remained politically passive.
Anyone who sought to translate their feelings into political activity soon found themselves in jail.
Jordan without its West Bank
The loss of the West Bank in the June 1967 war created an entirely new situation.
About 300,000 Palestinians, largely though not exclusively 1948 refugees, crossed the river Jordan.
While the loss of the West Bank reduced the demographic preponderance of the Palestinians in the state, the flight of so many eastwards and the drift of many to the economically more prosperous East Bank in previous years, left Jordan with at least 40 per cent of its population Palestinian.
Furthermore, the convulsion of 1967 concentrated yet more Palestinians around the most sensitive parts of the kingdom, Amman itself and the towns running northwards to the Syrian border.
Jordan did not abandon its claim to the West Bank.
During the months after its loss, it felt compelled to maintain solidarity with Egypt and Syria.
However, the United States persuaded it to accept UN Security Council Resolution 242, giving an assurance that it would ensure that the critical wording ‘withdrawal from territories captured’ would mean no more than minor border rectifications.
On the ground Husayn worked to maintain the loyalty of the municipal structure, which remained in place after Israel's occupation, through subsidies and through Israel's open bridge policy, which in addition to relieving the pressures on the West Bank population, gave him considerable control over a large proportion of that population.
Since they held Jordanian passports, it followed that those wishing to work or travel outside the West Bank had to pass over the bridge.
Only a fool or a very determined and principled Palestinian was ready to jeopardize that crossing by openly opposing Husayn's claim over the West Bank.
On the East Bank, King Husayn had a more immediate Palestinian  threat to deal with in the meteoric rise of the Palestinian resistance movement.
Although the mainstream group, Fatah, made clear that it ruled out any question of subverting the Hashemite regime, other groups, of which the PFLP was the most notable, made equally clear their view that the overthrow of the Hashemites was a necessary preliminary to the recovery of Palestine.
Both Fatah and the more radical groups like the PFLP enjoyed widespread support in the camps on the East Bank.
By its hijacking and destruction of Western civil airliners, the PFLP forced Husayn to move against the guerrilla groups in September 1970.
The whole Palestinian resistance was evicted from Jordan within a year, amid widespread bloodshed in which perhaps as many as 3,000 refugees perished.
It left people feeling deeply embittered.
This civil war had also created bitter feelings on the West Bank, but an eventual return to Jordanian rule was expected.
As time passed, politicians began to hedge their bets, creating uncertainty both for Jordan and the PLO, which was not yet wholly accepted in the West Bank.
In March 1972 King Husayn proposed a federation of Transjordan and the West Bank as a United Arab Kingdom.
Pro-Jordanian leaders sought Israeli consent to form an assembly to negotiate a settlement on the basis of the king's federation scheme.
It was probably the best chance for the ‘Jordanian option’, but Israel turned it down, and the United Arab Kingdom proposal died.
The October 1973 war changed the balance strongly in favour of the PLO in the West Bank, for Jordan's passivity reflected its weakness.
At Rabat in October 1974 and a month later at the United Nations, the PLO routed Jordanian claims to represent the West Bank population.
In practice Husayn did not accept its implications.
The PLO's triumph both in the Arab arena and internationally was underestimated by Jordan and by Israel, which called for new municipal elections in 1976.
These swept most of the old pro-Jordanian figures from office, and brought in younger more radical men who recognized the PLO as their national leadership.
Jordan hoped to recover its position on the West Bank, paying subsidies for loyalty and continuing functional co-operation with Israel, as if the growth of political awareness in the area could not only be contained but diminished.
Jordan's hope of containing the PLO challenge lay in Washington's decision in 1975 not to recognize the PLO unless it accepted the legitimacy of Israel and Security Council Resolution 242.
Since the PLO, composed of both accommodationist and rejectionist groups, could not accept either without damaging its internal unity, Jordan seemed pivotal to any settlement for the West Bank.
Recognition of this fact led Jordan and the PLO to co-operate despite frosty relations.
Neither forgot that they co-operated as rivals rather than as potentially mutual beneficiaries of a settlement.
They were driven closer together by President Sadat's political initiative of November 1977, and the subsequent peace negotiations between Egypt and Israel.
The accommodationist states including Jordan, in order to satisfy domestic opinion — in Jordan's case its East Bank Palestinian population — felt obliged to move into a common ‘steadfastness’ stance with the more radical Arab states, most of which agreed to pay money into a Jordanian-PLO Joint Fund for Steadfastness.
‘Steadfastness’ meant helping the population of the occupied territories financially to stay put.
Despite PLO-Hashemite co-operation, Jordan did not abandon its claim to the West Bank.
In 1983 the PLO seemed to be falling apart, following Syria's move against it in Lebanon.
Husayn stated that if the PLO fell under Syrian domination there was a legitimate question as to whether it would continue to speak for the Palestinian people.
In other words Jordan would have to act for the Palestinians.
This idea was reiterated by US Secretary of State, George Schultz, reflecting US determination that any settlement for the West Bank should exclude the PLO and restore Jordanian sovereignty, in theory if not in practice.
As a result the Hashemite monarchy was confirmed in Palestinian minds as the chosen client and instrument of the United States.
The Palestinian need for Jordan seemed to be borne out during the years 1983–6 when the PLO lived on the edge of political extinction.
King Husayn used this situation to persuade the PLO to embark upon its risky alliance with Jordan in pursuit of a peace solution, which finally collapsed in early 1986.
Husayn proceeded in the belief that he could discard the PLO, which was in a weaker condition than at any time since 1967.
He hoped that the people of the occupied territories were so desperate for an end to Israeli rule that they would respond to his overtures.
During spring 1986 his government arranged for a number of ‘spontaneous’ demonstrations of support in the West Bank, and a series of newspaper articles appeared confirming popular support for his efforts and denouncing the PLO's betrayal of an historic opportunity for peace.
Such efforts merely demonstrated a lack of support for Husayn and the depth of commitment to the PLO despite its weakness.
When the mayor of Nablus, Zafir al Masri, was assassinated in March 1986, his  funeral turned into the largest pro-PLO demonstration the territories had seen for years.
This was hardly surprising.
A poll in 1982 had suggested that 72 per cent of the West Bank felt that Husayn in no way represented them.
Only 17 per cent felt he was acceptable even as a co-representative.
A year later another poll suggested that 65 per cent of the population of the occupied territories considered him to be insincere and hostile to Palestinian interests.
By 1986 support for Husayn had fallen to 3.3 per cent.
Despite such indications, Husayn pressed ahead with efforts to wean the West Bank away from the PLO.
His long-term aim was to foster a new leadership which would be more sympathetic to Jordan.
During the summer months of 1986 it became clear that this approach enjoyed strong backing from the United States and Britain.
He closed PLO offices in the East Bank, expelling Arafat's deputy, Abu Jihad.
He also froze all West Bank funds in Jordanian banks, and suspended aid to West Bank institutions.
West Bank Palestinians crossing the bridge came under close scrutiny.
Those known for PLO sympathy were interrogated, harassed or turned back.
Some had their passports seized.
Husayn enjoyed the active support of the Israeli government, which proceeded to deport or detain activists identified not only with the left (who had been the target of stringent measures before), but also those of the mainstream PLO.
In June 1986 he unveiled a five year development programme for the occupied territories, proposing to spend $1,200 million, which depended upon funding from Jordan's Western friends, particularly the United States and the European Community, and was focused on the development of the rural and commercial sectors, the two areas deemed least supportive of the PLO.
‘We need to consider how the economy of the West Bank can one day be integrated with that of the East Bank’, declared Jordan's minister for the occupied territories, ‘We are drawing up a West Bank five year development plan aimed at integrating what we do there with what we have here.
Everyone must be made to remember that this is one country, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.’
Israel welcomed the plan as a placebo to Palestinian restiveness, a subsidy to its own administration of the territories, and a useful accessory in Israel's own policy of reward and punishment.
By the end of the year Husayn had only obtained a fraction of the funding he sought.
Husayn's efforts to persuade the West Bank to abandon the PLO proved counterproductive.
Almost every action by Israel against Palestinians was attributed to ‘Jordanian requests’.
In spring 1987 he  suffered a further blow when the constituent members of the PLO — split since 1983 — were reconciled at the 18th PNC in Algiers, and formally renounced the 1985 accord with Jordan.
On the East Bank Husayn's moves against the PLO exacerbated existing tensions concerning how the state was run.
In July 1986 violent demonstrations occurred at Yarmuk University in which thousands were arrested.
Many were Palestinians.
It had long been understood that, while the refugee camps of the East Bank had remained pro-PLO ever since the events of 1970–1, the wealthier Palestinians had incorporated themselves into the Jordanian establishment.
While this was true for the adult population, Yarmuk indicated that the younger of the bourgeois Palestinian class felt deep unease over their identity.
The fact that almost half his people in the East Bank are either pro-PLO or are ambivalent in their loyalties remains a crucial factor in Husayn's Palestine policy.
His attempt to woo the West Bank has definitively failed.
The Uprising has shown beyond all doubt that King Husayn cannot represent the Palestinian people.
His concern now must be to protect what remains of his kingdom.
Husayn was aware of the dangers long before the Uprising.
By 1986 it was clear that an actual return of the territories to Jordanian sovereignty would threaten his long term authority on the East as well as the West Bank.
An independent Palestinian state, however, would increase restiveness among the Jordanian Palestinians of the East Bank.
Husayn could only contemplate this option with equanimity if most of the Palestine refugees moved out of his territory — presumably back to Palestine, an issue considered in the next chapter.
The third possibility of no solution, but a progressive deterioration in the territories remained the most dangerous.
His greatest fear was that the intensifying cycle of Israeli repression and Palestinian unrest would encourage Israeli hardliners in their view that only expulsion of the Palestinians would solve the problem of the occupied territories.
The Hashemite monarchy would be unlikely to survive this eventuality.
While his involvement in the affairs of the West Bank, in co-operation with the PLO or with Israel, could prevent things boiling over, he had good reason to remain involved.
By July 1988, however, the Uprising had reached a stage where he felt constrained to erect a constitutional (and physical) barrier to protect the East Bank of Jordan from what might happen.
After half a century, the Hashemite adventure in Palestine seems to be drawing to its close.
Unless the Palestinians suffer a dramatic reverse Jordan cannot conceivably negotiate for them.
It still has an  important part to play but as a secondary negotiator possibly as an underwriter to any arrangement Israel may reach with the Palestinians.
A Palestinian state would depend vitally on good relations with Jordan.
Even so, Jordan's importance in a peace settlement may now be secondary not only to the Palestinians, but also to Syria.
GOING HOME?
THE REFUGEE ISSUE
A key security problem facing Jordan's future is the presence of a large number of Palestine refugees, by 1988 numbering over 862,000 out of a total of 2.25 million UN-registered refugees.
Although Resolution 242 affirmed the need for a just settlement of the refugee problem, few in the international arena believe that this will mean a return of refugees to the part of Palestine that became Israel.
A contradiction exists between the pragmatic view that there will be no return, and the legalistic one calling almost yearly for repatriation or compensation of the refugees.
There is, of course, no secret at all to this contradictory position.
Technically, according to almost every human rights convention or legal instrument on refugees and displaced people, the Palestine refugees enjoy an unassailable moral right to return.
However, Israel has consistently refused a return of refugees except within the framework of an overall settlement with neighbouring Arab states.
It was, of course, linking two issues with no moral connection.
The question of the refugees' return was a direct obligation of Israel towards the refugees, not towards the Arab states.
Israel did not want the refugees to return because it desperately needed their land and villages to absorb Jewish immigrants.
Nor did it want the return of a population that would dissent from the Zionist identity of the state and threaten it demographically.
For a nation which had fought a costly war of survival and independence to invite back the very presence which threatened national existence was, and remained unthinkable.
At the time, many Israelis believed their government's explanation that the Arabs had left either of their own free will or at the behest of their leaders.
Had they been given a more accurate picture of what was actually taking place, would they have reacted differently?
Some Israelis   believe that the adherents of Socialist Zionism would not have accepted the idea that Arabs driven out , either directly or by the pressures of circumstance, had no moral right to return.
This may have been so.
Most Labour Zionists were of German or at any rate European origin, and tended to be the better educated of the Jewish population in Palestine.
A poll conducted among Jewish Israelis in 1949 indicated that 73 per cent opposed the return of the Arab refugees but 27 per cent did not.
However, the poll revealed a sharp difference between German and Arab Jews.
While 45 per cent of German Jews agreed to a return, Arab Jews were 100 per cent opposed.
Furthermore, the lower the level of education, the more likely the respondent was to oppose the return of the refugees.
Possibly, then, Jewish Israelis with a fuller picture might have reacted differently.
While this must remain conjecture, it should be remembered that 1949 was a critical juncture.
Thereafter the chance of a refugee return became more remote.
The 1949 failure to solve the refugee question
The international community realized by the autumn of 1948 that most refugees would be unlikely to return home.
Its call to Israel to facilitate repatriation or compensation was an affirmation of the human rights of the situation, but did not reflect the pragmatic expectation.
Nevertheless, efforts were made to persuade Israel to accept back at least some of the refugees.
Some of those in the Palestine Conciliation Commission (PCC) did recognize, like Mark Ethridge, the United States member, that ‘the developing impasse over the refugees was lethal to any possibility of peace in the Middle East.’
Ethridge realized that both Israel and the Arab states were using the refugees as political pawns.
He believed that a generous gesture by Israel to accept back a large number might break the impasse, and generate an atmosphere conducive to an overall settlement.
Under pressure from the PCC and the United States, Israel toyed with two possibilities.
The first was to incorporate the Gaza Strip into Israel, including its refugee population who might possibly be returned to their original villages.
In May 1949 Israel informed the PCC that it ‘would be prepared to accept…all Arabs at present located in the Gaza area, whether inhabitants or refugees, as citizens of Israel’.
However, it retreated from this position, partly because it feared strong adverse reaction particularly from its political Right, and also because it had seriously underestimated the number of Arabs in Gaza, at 100,000–150,000 when it was nearer 280,000.
While Israel retreated, Egypt also repudiated the proposal.
It could not afford the political cost of conceding yet more Arab territory to the new Jewish state.
So, on both Israeli and Egyptian sides the Gaza Plan died.
Had it been accepted, Israel's population would be one-third Palestinian Arab today, with the prospect of being one-half Arab by the year 2020, and the Israeli government would already be facing a demographic crisis within the State of Israel which is currently still some thirty years away.
Under United States pressure also, Israel made one further offer in July, to accept the return of 100,000.
But publication of this offer caused a major political explosion in Tel Aviv, even within Mapai (Labour) itself.
Nor did it impress the Arab states, which pointed out that if Israel was able to absorb hundreds of thousands of Jews it could certainly absorb more than 100,000 Palestinian returnees; or the United States, which did not think the Israeli offer ‘provide[d] a suitable basis for contributing to solution of Arab refugee question.’
With the failure  of the 100,000 plan the chances of any kind of conciliation between Israel and the Arabs died.
Almost everyone, with the exception of the refugees themselves, accepted that a return was not feasible.
It was felt that a political settlement involving agreed borders and arrangements for non-belligerency, a view later echoed by Resolution 242, was more important, since these issues affected the security of Israel and the Arab states more directly.
However, the Arab states also wished to escape the political impact of the refugee presence upon their own internal stability.
This was no idle fear, for Palestine already had a potent effect on popular opinion throughout the Arab world.
Quite naturally, therefore, each Arab government was guided by its own considerations rather than the best interests of the refugees.
Syria secretly offered to resettle 300,000 refugees as part of a comprehensive settlement.
As the Egyptian representative to the PCC told a leading representative of the Palestinian refugees at that time, Egypt was more interested in its own problems in the Sudan, in Suez, and in the receipt of American aid and arms.
He also pointed out that the Nile, if it flooded, might well drown a greater number of people than all the refugees.
Egypt had already secretly proposed that Israel should set up a Palestine Liberation Committee to pursue a solution to the refugee problem in the form of a small Palestinian state in the Arab-held parts of Palestine.
In this Egypt not only wished to remove the refugee problem as a political issue, but also to encourage Israel to deny the West Bank to Jordan, Egypt's enemy over the fate of Palestine.
Egypt had no great wish to hang onto Gaza and its refugee population.
The granting of a Palestinian state in Gaza by Israel would protect Egypt from the ignominy of surrendering Gaza to Israeli sovereignty, its principle objection to Israel's Gaza plan offer.
As for Transjordan, it indicated that the more occupied territory Israel was willing to cede, the more refugees Transjordan would be willing to absorb and resettle.
In the end, all the Arab states dug their heels in and demanded refugee repatriation as an essential element to peace, thereby joining Israel in linking the refugee issue to an overall peace.
In a sense they had little alternative on account of Israel's refusal to accept the return of the refugees and the refugees' own outright refusal of resettlement.
As a result, the 1949 Lausanne conference was a failure.
In retrospect, this period offered the best chance for a settlement.
The Arab states, with the exception of Lebanon and possibly Egypt, might well have resettled the bulk of the refugees, had Israel accepted  the principle of the right of return by receiving back about one-quarter of them and had the international community generously funded resettlement.
A refugee delegation had proposed to Eliahu Sasson, the head of the Israeli Foreign Ministry's Middle East Department at Lausanne, that Israel should annex the Gaza Strip and also the area subsequently known as the West Bank, while granting these areas local autonomy and absorbing another 100,000 refugees from surrounding Arab countries.
Had such a plan been feasible, it would have achieved the complete withdrawal of all Arab armies and preserved the integrity of Palestine.
Sasson himself believed it would ‘complete resolution of the Palestine question’ and possibly hasten peace between Israel and the Arab states.
However, while most Arab states might have gone along with this (if only to worst Abdallah), it was clear that Jordan would not contemplate the loss of the gains for which it had gone to war.
With the end to any possibility of repatriation at the Lausanne conference, towards the end of 1949 the United Nations authorized the creation of a special agency, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
This began operations in May 1950, taking over responsibilities from the Red Cross and from the American Friends Service Committee.
It was still believed, or at any rate hoped, that the refugees would in due course come to terms with their situation and accept resettlement.
In January 1952 the General Assembly endorsed a three year development programme for the refugees, ‘without prejudice to the provisions’, concerning their rights to repatriation or compensation.
It was recognized that ‘the absorption, even temporarily, of one million persons into a community of five and a half millions (excluding Egypt) requires a digestive capacity far beyond the economic possibilities of the area as they exist today’, as UNRWA reported in 1953.
In the mid-fifties UNRWA committed itself to two major development schemes which offered the prospect of resettling between 200,000 and 300,000 refugees.
In Jordan, a Yarmuk Jordan valley development proposal to irrigate 500,000 dunums and to generate hydro-electricity; in Sinai another irrigation project, this time using the Nile waters, promised self-supporting agriculture on desert land.
Both were thwarted by political considerations.
In any case, UNRWA's resettlement plan coincided with the rise of Nasserist Arabism, the desire for strength to defeat the pervasive influence of foreign powers in the Arab body politic, of which the existence of Israel was the most potent manifestation.
Arab nationalism  came within an ace of overthrowing King Husayn in Jordan, and the latter's acceptance of UNRWA's resettlement programme, which also implied agreement with Israel over the Jordan waters, might have tipped the scales against him.
UNRWA remained permanently compromised with the refugee population it served as a result of these resettlement efforts.
Every time any rumour sprang up concerning some kind of resettlement at any refugee camp, it reawakened old suspicions that UNRWA was an accomplice in the liquidation of the problem.
In one way these fears were justified, for UNRWA had no will of its own but was the servant of the international community.
There were grounds for believing that only fear of the consequences of dismantling UNRWA for the stability of the host governments guaranteed the perpetuation of its services, pending a solution to the refugee problem.
The principal and at times sole opponents of refugee resettlement were the refugees themselves.
Committees sprang up in the refugee concentrations around Israel's new borders.
Of these the most important was the Ramallah Congress of Refugee Delegates, which provided relief services in the West Bank with help from the Red Cross and Jordanian authorities.
Meeting in March 1949, these delegates demanded the return of the refugees ‘without awaiting the ultimate settlement of the Palestine question’(i.e. a political settlement).
The Congress soon found its desire to implement a return, regardless of political considerations, opposed not only by Israel but by the Arab states, and even the Palestinian Arab Higher Committee itself, which did not welcome this challenge to their authority in the management of negotiations with the enemy.
At Lausanne, the Ramallah Congress delegation discovered that without a representative government the refugee community had no standing, except as the subject of the deliberations.
Even so, it presented its case with such cogency that the other Arab delegations agreed to meet to co-ordinate presentation of the Palestinian Arab case to the PCC.
It persuaded the Palestinian delegations (each Arab state marshalled its own Palestinian representation) to focus the debate on the refugee issue.
Two options were to be put to the Arab states, the first was to make their demands to Israel concerning borders, the return of the refugees, and so on, on the basis of determination to prosecute the war if Israel did not comply.
The alternative option, clearly the one it favoured, was ‘to accept Israel as it existed on the condition that each refugee be allowed to return to his home,whether it was under Arab or Israeli jurisdiction .’
The Ramallah Congress delegation argued ‘it should first be decided to allow the refugees to return, and once that is decided their actual return should not be affected by the discussion on the border question…
The refugees would necessarily be subject to whatever authority and jurisdiction control the area in which they live, be it in the Arab area or within Israel.’
The Israeli representative at Lausanne knew this position, for a Ramallah delegate had proposed that Israel should agree to the repatriation of 400,000 refugees ‘who would live in peace with Israel and act as a ‘peace bridge'’ between Israel and the Arab states'.
But such proposals had little chance.
Israel did not want the refugees back under any conditions and Jordan did not want a refugee body acting independently.
The hardening of attitudes
In 1967 many more lost their homes in Palestine.
By December, 245,000 had fled from the West Bank and Gaza Strip across the Jordan, 116,000 had fled from the Golan further into Syria, and 11,000 had left Gaza for Egypt.
Of these 145,000 were UNRWA refugees uprooted for the second time.
Many more left in the following months, either forcibly expelled by the occupying authorities or choosing not to live under Israeli military government.
Over 300,000 probably left Palestine as a result of the 1967 war.
Most of these were 1948 refugees, but some were indigenous to the West Bank.
Once again, Israel demonstrated its determination not to allow the refugees to return.
Until 1967 roughly half the Palestinian people had still been somewhere in Palestine.
From 1967 onwards the majority was outside.
Before 1967 Israel assumed, as did many others, that since the Palestinian Arabs had not achieved nationhood they would soon assimilate into the Arab host countries neighbouring Israel, if the latter had half a mind to allow it to happen.
Today that assumption no longer really exists, but it also no longer needs to.
The increasingly accepted argument in Israel today is that Eretz Israel in any case belongs primarily to the Jews and that all the Palestinian Arabs, refugee or otherwise, have a lesser claim upon it.
This change of perception may be discernible in the hardening of attitudes since 1949.
Polls in 1971 and 1974 suggested that between 60 and 70 per cent of Jewish Israelis were wholly hostile while a further 21 to 27 per cent were moderately unfavourable to any return of the 1948  refugees.
Only about 10 per cent of respondents favoured a return.
Furthermore, 66 per cent of respondents were against the return or even the 1967 refugees.
By 1980 only about 5 per cent seemed to be favourably disposed towards a return of the 1948 refugees, and this may have declined to 3 per cent during the 1980s.
Even among the more categorically accommodationist Jewish Israeli proponents of Palestinian self-determination, there is unwillingness to brook a return of the refugees.
In his case for a Palestinian state Mark Heller explains why, even with the recognition of Palestinian rights to self-determination, the right of return is wholly unacceptable to Israel: ‘The return of the Palestinians…is impossible…because their introduction into Israel would derange the basic character of Israeli society and thus negate one of the primary purposes of Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank and Gaza.’
For another accommodationist, General Aharon Yariv, Director of the Tel Aviv Centre for Strategic Studies, ‘Palestinian refugees would not be repatriated to Israel…but would be dealt with during gradual implementation of self-determination, presumably within the Palestinian territory or in other Arab states.’
Similarly, the leftist politician, Meir Pa'il does not foresee a return in the sense intended in UN Resolution 194: ‘Clearly, the mere establishment of a Palestinian state in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip would not provide a concrete solution for the problem of the Palestine refugees in Lebanon and perhaps not even for those in the Gaza Strip…
Part of the refugee problem will be solved by granting them the right of return to Palestine (i.e. the West Bank and Gaza Strip) or to the Jordanian-Palestinian federation.’
He proposes that the Lebanon refugees should be resettled in Syria.
Because of Israel's rigid stance, even the most sympathetic international proposals for the refugees, for example those advanced by the American Friends Service Committee, see the West Bank and Gaza as the only Palestinian destination for the refugees.
Even this would be conditional and limited: ‘the right of these groups [refugees]to move to the West Bank and Gaza Strip would have to be established through negotiations…
It is unrealistic to assume that all the Palestinians currently living in the Arab states, whether still in refugee camps or integrated into their host society, could or would want to return to a West Bank-Gaza Palestinian state.’
Given such a broad international consensus, shared by the more accommodationist Israeli and Western liberals, it is hardly surprising that since 1974 the PLO has played down the refugee issue, and concentrated on the only acceptable diplomacy concerning a territorial  return to the 1949 Armistice Line.
The right of refugee return remained firmly part of the rhetoric but it was less clear whether it was still as firmly a part of policy.
Everyone felt that even the attainment of a small portion of Palestine for the Palestinian Arabs would be a triumph.
Furthermore, if such an event occurred, everyone recognized that the PLO would be under intense external pressure to sacrifice the refugee right of return.
Even if the PLO did waive refugee rights, it is questionable whether it would be able to maintain such a waiver.
As in 1949 at Lausanne, so the probability is that many refugees would oppose any surrender of their claim and would continue to struggle for a solution which goes a substantial way towards meeting both their physical needs and their sense of grievance.
Imperatives for the ‘Return’
Refugee feelings concerning the right of return are intense.
This is a key aspect of the refugee question which has so far received inadequate attention.
The issue is not so much whether or how far the sense of grievance or of legitimate right can be justified objectively but rather its potency as a force in the equation, just as an unwavering Jewish belief in the right to all Eretz Israel has proved indispensable to the achievements of Zionism.
Not every Zionist or Palestinian needs to be a fervent believer in this kind of credo for it to have a force and tenacity which cannot be ignored.
There is a second equally important facet of the refugee question which has also been underrated.
Quite apart from the question of the right of return, or even the strong feelings which this issue engenders, there are compelling physical and economic reasons for at least a partial return.
This, too, has its mirror image in the Zionist experience, when Jews found themselves endangered in Europe.
The scale may be different but the ‘push factor’, albeit less intense, is nevertheless persistent.
Unless this is understood and addressed, it is difficult to see how a durable peace can be achieved.
Of all the host countries, there is the greatest possibility in Syria, as in 1949, that the Palestine refugee population could be resettled and persuaded to accept its lot as a permanent part of the host country.
This is partly because of the tight political control exercised by the state, but also because in Syria refugees have always enjoyed equal  rights with Syrian citizens while maintaining their own identity.
They have been able to work in government service, even in the army, and there has been no need for work permits.
Even so, the refugees themselves are likely to resist any settlement unless it is forced upon them by the Syrian government itself.
Syria is in a strong position since the refugees number 258,000, only 2.5 per cent of its population.
Although by the end of the century their numbers are likely to rise to approximately 350,000, their proportion to the whole Syrian population is unlikely to change.
In theory Syria could resettle many more, including the refugees in Lebanon, which Meir Pa'il proposes it resettles in return for Israeli acquiescence in Syria's incorporation of Lebanon.
Such an idea is unlikely to commend itself to Israel (for strategic reasons), or Lebanon, Syria or the refugees themselves.
Syria will determine whether to accept any resettlement, or whether to continue its support of the refugee demand to return to Palestine, as a function of its own regional objectives.
It remains determined to achieve regional parity with Israel in order to compel the latter to make peace on terms favourable to itself, including a return of the Golan and possibly the 1949 demilitarized zone along the eastern edge of the Sea of Galilee to allow access to its waters.
So it is likely to use the right of return as a bargaining chip over territorial concessions, unless it believes it is strong enough to obtain both territory and a return.
Either way, the issue remains an important component of any Israeli-Syrian settlement.
In Lebanon there can be no prospect of the refugees accepting permanent settlement, regardless of the political circumstances.
By 1988 there were almost 300,000, just under 10 per cent of the estimated population of Lebanon.
The size of their presence, even after any political recovery in Lebanon, is bound to affect the country's stability.
The relationship between Lebanon and its Palestinian guests has always been difficult.
The refugees who arrived starving and thirsty in 1948 do not have happy memories of their reception.
On the contrary, their recollection is embittered by the cruelty, exploitation and official oppression which they recall.
With the rise of the Palestinian resistance movement following the 1967 war, refugee areas asserted their independence from the Lebanese state.
In the short run the Palestinian revolution acted as a magnet for those Lebanese, mainly Muslims, who wanted to redefine Lebanon's identity in terms of pan-Arab nationalism and as a focus of  hostility for those, mainly Maronite Christians, who feared just such a process.
Polarization led to civil war, marked by major massacres in which the Palestinian refugees were the prime victims.
The Palestinian movement also drew Israel onto Lebanese soil in response to guerrilla raids into Israel.
These reprisals set out specifically and successfully to drive a wedge of animosity between the Palestinians and their increasingly resentful hosts in south Lebanon, the Shiite community.
Following Israel's 1982 invasion, the latter began to assert itself, hoping to become the chief arbiter in Lebanon's future.
Between 1985 and 1987 the leading Shiite militia, Amal, attacked the south Beirut refugee camps with the same ferocity which had characterized attacks by the Maronites in the preceding phase of civil war.
Amal acted not only on its own behalf, but for its patron, Syria, which also wished to remove the PLO from Beirut.
After the failure of Amal's assaults, Syria's own subordinate Palestinian units drove PLO forces out of its Beirut strongholds of Shatila and Burj al Barajna in May 1988.
The continued armed presence of Palestinians, defending the camp areas but also renewing their attacks on Israel's northern border, destroyed much of the remaining solidarity offered by the Sunni Muslim and Druze communities.
In the years after 1982, these began to reassess the balance of Lebanese, sectarian and pan-Arab identities.
By 1988 the majority in both these communities were moving back towards greater emphasis on Lebanese identity, albeit hoping for a new constitutional basis, and they increasingly viewed the Palestinian presence as an undesirable one.
Only the small secular Lebanese parties, particularly the Communists, and also the visionary Shiite party, Hizballah, still expressed solidarity with the Palestinian movement on Lebanese soil.
During the period since 1975, Palestinians have fled from repeated assaults upon almost every refugee camp in Lebanon.
It is inconceivable that they can now have a secure future in Lebanon, whether or not state authority is restored.
Any re-establishment of government authority, be it under the old confessional dispensation or under a new Syrian-sponsored one, would not be comfortable for the Palestine refugee community, which by the turn of the century will number roughly 390,000, given no significant population movements.
Consequently, these refugees are not merely attracted emotionally to return to Palestine but live under the pressure of a hostile environment which will continue to encourage them to leave Lebanon.
The problem is sufficiently acute that its political implications cannot easily be ignored.
Even in the event of Israel's relinquishing the occupied territories this political problem is likely to continue, partly because the absorptive capacity of the West Bank is limited but also because the vast majority of refugees in Lebanon come from Galilee, Haifa and Acre, and consider these places to be home.
If the West Bank could absorb them, these refugees might conceivably settle and call it home.
But if the West Bank cannot accommodate them, will they accept a political settlement which does not allow at least a substantial proportion to return to Galilee?
This is the kind of question which has no answer, since no difference between commitment and rhetoric will be discernable until refugees are faced with a real choice between some kind of a settlement falling short of the ideal and holding out for the ideal itself.
Jordan's stability is also threatened.
It gives refuge to the largest single concentration of Palestinians, almost 900,000 of whom were registered with UNRWA in 1988, and about another 210,000 who were displaced across the Jordan river as a result of the 1967 war.
Given a number of unregistered refugees, the total of Palestinians on the East Bank is probably in the order of 1.1 to 1.2 million.
These form just over 40 per cent of the East Bank population.
The refugee presence in Jordan is two-edged.
A comprehensive settlement, whether or not this encompassed the return of the refugee population, would leave Jordan marginalized in the Middle East.
If its greatest danger lies in the Israeli threat to push yet more Palestinians across the river Jordan and in a consequent revolution, Jordan's greatest asset lies in the support it receives from the West, anxious to bolster Jordan as a ‘moderate’ in the Arab world so long as the Middle East conflict persists.
If a comprehensive settlement included the repatriation of the refugees (admittedly a wholly inconceivable eventuality at present), Jordan would cease to have either economic or political importance, and would probably be absorbed eventually either by Syria or by the Palestinian state.
If, on the other hand, following a political solution to the West Bank, Jordan were left with the current refugee population but without substantial Western support, its future economic and political stability would be in question.
Unless they demonstrated their loyalty, Jordan would be keen to be rid of most of the refugees before they became a source of sedition.
Without substantial economic development, there is also little prospect that Jordan could offer a reasonable living for its refugee population.
Currently a substantial proportion of Jordanian Palestinians seek a living as migrant workers elsewhere, overwhelmingly in the Gulf states.
In the early 1980s an estimated 228,000 Jordanian nationals  worked in the Gulf and it must be assumed that East Bank Palestinians, with a large number of dependants on the East Bank, are a majority of these.
But from 1983 opportunities in the Gulf were substantially reduced when the region experienced a severe economic downturn as a result of both an oil and a world-wide recession.
Moreover the situation is likely to remain insecure, since in the longer term nationals of the Gulf countries will be preferred for better paid employment.
Consequently, in spite of the currently tolerable situation, the outlook is economically unsatisfactory for East Bank Palestinians.
This can be welcome neither to the Jordanian regime nor to themselves.
Such factors are to do with where the refugees currently find themselves, not with the urge to return to Palestine.
This urge is not merely the nostalgic ‘village patriotism’ of a dwindling breed who remember Palestine before 1948, as is widely believed in Israel.
It is a yearning for Palestine which permeates the whole refugee community and is most ardently espoused by the younger refugees, for whom home exists only in the imagination.
Virtually every camp, in Lebanon, Syria, Jordan, and also in the West Bank, is organized according to a refugee family's village or place of origin.
The first thing a refugee child learns is the name of his or her home village in Palestine.
The belief in ‘return’ is fervently held.
It is worth reiterating that this yearning to return is a potent mirror image of Zionist belief and aspiration earlier in the century, and is likely to have the same tenacity.
Like the Zionist experience too, this yearning is reinforced by repeated exposure to legal and physical vulnerability.
A proper understanding of all this is long overdue, for the blend of dream and necessity for a place in Palestine will not disappear.
To suppose that Palestinians' emotions concerning their identity in exile have weakened, or will weaken, over the years ignores the way they have responded to exile even where this has been relatively comfortable.
Almost anywhere where a substantial Palestinian community exists it has generated its own institutions for social, economic as well as political activity.
Such institutions are the envy of many Arab countries for they reflect a commitment to national identity that one will seek in vain in most parts of the Arab world.
Furthermore, there is a lively interest in events inside Palestine, creating its own political dangers for Lebanon, Jordan, and elsewhere in the Arab world.
The international consensus seems to be that any return will be only to the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Will such a return be adequate?
The capacity of the occupied territories to absorb part or all of the refugee population will be considered in chapter 9.
THE CHALLENGE TODAY
THE OCCUPIED TERRITORIES: FROM CONTROL TO REVOLT
For many years before the Uprising a level of Palestinian protest in the territories had been normal, comprising occasional violent attacks on Jews, stone throwing and occasional shutdowns and demonstrations.
During the mid-1980s there had been a decline of organized violence inspired by the PLO but an increase in individual acts, a register of growing popular frustration at the situation and, in retrospect, a register of the growing internal pressures.
The most significant characteristic of this unrest, however, was the impression that it could be contained almost indefinitely by a skilful and manipulative military government.
Normality consisted of permanent occupation, with the limitations and restrictions implicit in such a process, punctuated by occasional outbursts of anger.
The Uprising destroyed this normality, and one must ask why it occurred, and why it occurred when it did, twenty years after the territories fell under Israeli rule.
When Israel captured the territories in 1967 it was unsure what to do with them.
There was no national consensus except over East Jerusalem, which was annexed in July, and over the Golan Heights, which was also declared non-negotiable by the end of the year.
Pending any agreement with the Arab states, particularly with Jordan which hoped to secure the return of its lost territory, Israel's Defence Minister, Moshe Dayan, established a pattern which remained the bedrock of Israel's occupation policy.
The creation of normality
Dayan determined to retain a strong but relatively invisible grip on the territories while also creating an impression of normality for the  residents.
Military forces were deployed mainly in the Jordan valley along the new frontier with Jordan, while the Arabic-speaking and mainly Druze Border Guards and the plain clothes General Security Service (Shin Bet) exercised control over the population through a large network of informers.
Both Dayan and the deputy prime minister, Yigal Allon, established nahal (agricultural/military) settlements along the floor of the Jordan valley, as a permanent presence.
There was no intention ever to remove these, nor the few that were established on the central ridge dominating the West Bank.
Under Dayan, Israel took a series of measures to make its occupation permanent.
It normalized daily life with access for the population across the ‘open bridge’ to Jordan.
It refused to let back the 300,000 or so who crossed to the East Bank during or after the 1967 war, but it allowed 100,000 ‘summer visitors’ to cross each year to maintain contact with their families.
In the administrative sphere it decided to operate through the traditional élites which had worked for the Jordanian government.
It reactivated the municipalities and initiated a process of integration between Israel and its newly captured territories.
This was intended to make Gaza and the West Bank wholly dependent on Israel and frustrate any efforts to build a community power base.
At the infrastructural level, the highways and transport system of Israel, Gaza and the West Bank were developed in such a way that it became increasingly easy to drive from Israel direct to one of the West Bank Jewish settlements without passing through Arab population centres.
By the late 1980s the main arterial routes of the West Bank primarily reflected the transport and communications needs of the Israeli State and its settler population.
Even the main Arab towns, like Nablus and al Bira-Ramallah, were bypassed by these highways, which provided ready and quick access between the coastal plain and the new settlements high in the West Bank hills.
These settlements were established on public and private land progressively seized by Israel from 1967 onwards, declared ‘state land’ and given over to Jewish rather than Palestinian use.
By 1987 52 per cent of the West Bank and approximately 30 per cent of the Gaza Strip had been transferred to Jewish control.
Israel also took control of the water sources of the West Bank and integrated them into its national water system.
It restricted the use of water by proclamation, and introduced meters to ration water consumption for agricultural use at its pre-1967 level, thereby limiting the amount of expansion possible in the most important sector of the   territories' economy.
It also integrated the supply of electricity into the national grid curtailing and, in 1987, finally taking over the only independent Palestinian energy supplier, the Jerusalem Electricity Company.
Thus, Israel took direct control of two vital ingredients of economic activity, water and electricity.
It also proceeded to control and use the people of the occupied territories economically by allowing them to work inside Israel.
This policy had several advantages.
It absorbed a number of otherwise unemployed Palestinians, thus reducing the potential for political ferment.
By offering better wages in Israel it placed an obstacle in the  way of local industry, which did not benefit from subsidies or other forms of assistance enjoyed by Israeli industry.
In the absence of local employment alternatives which might otherwise have developed, it made between one-third and one-half of the Palestinian work-force dependent for its livelihood upon employment by Israeli enterprises.
This labour policy also gave Israel important economic and social benefits.
Arab labour had none of the securities which Jewish labour enjoyed through its trade union federation, the Histadrut.
Rather, it constituted an almost limitless pool of cheap labour which could be hired on a casual basis in response to the expansion or concentration of the economy.
The influx of cheap Arab labour from the occupied territories allowed the Israeli economy to expand rapidly after 1967, pushing unskilled Jewish labour into higher grade work.
The shift in the labour pattern significantly reduced the tensions between the European and non-European and largely unskilled Jewish elements in Israel which during the 1960s was becoming a serious social and political issue since the latter grew faster demographically than the former.
Overall, Israel's absorption of over 100,000 Palestinians as casual labourers created a feeling of weakness and helplessness in the Palestinian community, and of success and power within the Israeli economy.
Since the territories were captive, Israel could develop them as its second largest export market (after the United States), with an export value of $800 million annually by 1986.
This amounted to 10.9 per cent of Israel's overall export of goods.
The territories constituted an outlet for surplus or substandard production, with the same elasticity for the economy which Arab labour afforded.
At the strategic level of integrating the territories into the Israeli economy, the competitive edge of Israel's highly developed and heavily subsidized productive capacity in industry and agriculture destroyed the Palestinian sector almost in its entirety — although there was not an enormous amount to destroy because of the Jordanian legacy of economic neglect.
Israel did not have to do much more than open the area to its own produce and place obstacles in the way of anyone trying to develop enterprises or co-operative ventures.
The struggle for control
Israel profited from Arab attitudes towards the political future of the territories.
Arab regimes, particularly Jordan, welcomed Israel's  reappointment of the old élite to provide municipal services, for it created the impression that the occupation was not permanent and that Jordanian authority was still recognized through the employment of its municipal and civil servants.
While Israel's policy was directed towards the normalization of life under occupation, Jordan's prime preoccupation was to prevent political developments among the people of the West Bank which it would be unable to control.
Israel allowed the old élite to travel to Amman freely so that, despite the loss of physical control of the territories, Jordan was still able to direct much of what happened.
In Amman Jordan was able to remind these notables of the benefits of the Jordanian connection and their continued loyalty.
It provided the West Bank mayors and notables with financial disbursements and economic favours.
In 1968 Israel allowed Jordan to establish a Council of West Bank Chambers of Commerce, to facilitate the export of Palestinian goods across the open bridge.
Jordan was able to exercise considerable control of the West Bank's agricultural economy through this Council.
Jordan's nervousness concerning local initiatives was well founded.
Immediately after the war the Muslim religious leadership and then the communists and leftists, as a National Guidance Committee, attempted to organize a political resistance together.
Both were cold-shouldered by Jordan and suppressed by Israel.
Even Jordan's closest supporters were tempted by the opportunities which the Israeli occupation offered.
The best known mayor of the time, Shaikh Muhammad Ali Ja'bari (who had led the West Bank notables to accept Hashemite rule in 1948), offered to act as an intermediary between the Israelis and Amman — a role which, as Amman was quick to perceive, greatly enhanced Ja'bari's standing as ‘the leader’ of the West Bank population.
He secured the support of mayors south of Jerusalem, and clearly hoped to extend his influence northwards.
He even sounded out the Israeli authorities on the chance for local autonomy, making (for him) the dramatic statement that ‘Jordan is not authorised to decide the future of the Palestinian population on the West Bank’.
Evidently Jordan could not trust even its old clients, unless they were bound to the East Bank by powerful economic considerations.
For the first five years of occupation the PLO, too, feared that it would lose its modest foothold in the territories.
Either Jordan would completely eliminate its influence, as seemed likely following the 1970–1 war in Jordan, or the West Bank élite might fill the leadership vacuum, or a local national liberation movement might develop over which it had no control.
It had grounds for such fears, since it was  struggling to legitimize itself as the Palestinian representative and did not wish this to be challenged by any independent local movement.
Furthermore, it had been alarmed at local initiatives taken in the immediate aftermath of the June war.
Of these the most dramatic had been taken by a Ramallah lawyer, Aziz Shehadeh, who had already demonstrated his independent thinking in 1948 as a leading spirit in the Ramallah Congress of Refugee Delegates (see above pp. 83–5).
Within days of Israel's victory, Shehadeh had suggested to senior Israelis that they should permit the West Bank to declare an independent Palestinian state forthwith, without waiting for a political settlement with the rest of the Arab world.
In Palestinian circles Shehadeh's proposal was highly controversial, since it dealt directly with the enemy, was implicitly ready to accept the reality of Israel and disregarded the pan-Arab dimension of the Palestine struggle.
Quite apart from any ideological objections it may have had, the PLO found such initiatives very threatening.
It even opposed independent local attempts to send West Bank representatives to Arab countries to discuss political problems.
It found itself in unanimity with Jordan in warning people like Ja'bari against any unauthorized initiative with the enemy.
This unanimity encouraged local leaders to abstain from political initiatives and to concentrate on local and day-to-day issues.
It also encouraged them to resist any change whatever in local institutions or in elections for community representation, except with the specific approval of the Jordanian government and the PLO itself.
The duty of the people of the West Bank was to await liberation through armed struggle.
As a result, the concerns of the outside contestants, Israel, Jordan and the PLO, ran along parallel lines.
Israel's immediate reappointment of the mayors and municipal structure was a deliberate measure not only to ensure normality but also to thwart the emergence of any all-West Bank leadership.
Had West Bank society been industrialized, with the social transformation this implies, the Israelis would have had difficulty preventing these mayors from producing a united national leadership.
West Bank political, economic and social life had been notable throughout the period since 1920 for its localism.
Whatever Ja'bari's strength in the area south of Jerusalem, it was probable that any growth in his power would be strenuously opposed in, say, Ramallah, Nablus or Tulkarm.
This suited Israel, Jordan and the PLO.
The lack of national coherence also suited the old élite.
By and large they fell in happily with the exhortations they received from the Arab  world not to take any unauthorized political initiatives.
They were encouraged to believe that external agents would tackle the problem of a territorial settlement.
They were free to pursue their loyalist goals unhindered, while making strong-sounding nationalist statements which authenticated their leadership among the local community where they had economic or family status.
This posture of nationalistic utterances but pursuit of only localist goals was natural in the Arab nationalist atmosphere of the late 1960s and early 1970s.
Palestine was still an all-Arab question and few believed that it would be recovered save through the united endeavours of the Arab states.
PLO attitudes changed following Husayn's defeat of its forces, his announcement of a United Arab Kingdom plan in March 1972 (which challenged PLO ambitions) and the outcome of the municipal elections of April 1972.
These elections, the first to be called since 1963, had been opposed by both the PLO and Jordan.
but neither had sufficient influence to ensure an effective boycott.
However, the electoral result largely reinstated the existing mayors, effectively a victory for Jordan, which accorded most of them post facto recognition.
In order to win West Bank allegiance in the face of Israeli and Jordanian competition, the PLO had to find a local partner.
In 1973 it confirmed its support of the Palestine Patriotic Front (successor to the short-lived National Guidance Committee), which had been established by the Palestine (previously Jordan) Communist Party.
It was not a natural choice for the PLO, but its options were very limited.
Only the Communists and radicals, who had been outlawed in pre-1967 days, had the established underground networks through which to operate.
At first relations between the PLO outside and the Patriotic Front inside were cordial, but as time went by the PLO leadership became increasingly uneasy about the Patriotic Front taking its own initiatives.
While PLO constituents, Fatah, the DFLP and independents.
were given representation in the Patriotic Front, the PLO refused to reciprocate by granting the Communist Party representation on the PLO executive.
In the end the PLO tried to replace the Patriotic Front with a right-wing alternative of its own.
Despite this tension the Patriotic Front and the PLO had a deeply politicizing effect on the inhabitants of the territories during the period 1973–5.
Although they privately felt that they themselves would properly decide the fate of the territories, even the most conservative mayors began to acknowledge the PLO.
The PLO, dominated by Fatah, reaped the fruits while the Patriotic Front fell apart as a result of  the undermining effect of the Palestinian right, the enormous surge in PLO power following the Rabat summit of October 1974 and Arafat's address to the General Assembly of the United Nations the following month.
The PLO's capture of the hearts and minds of those under occupation was the first great blow to Israel's policy of normalization.
In December 1975, during an upsurge of national feeling in the territories, the defence minister, Shimon Peres, ordered new municipal elections to take place in April 1976.
With a substantial widening of the franchise, Peres hoped to head off what he saw as PLO-inspired recalcitrance and allow the accommodationist vote to prevail.
One must doubt whether it was the Israeli ‘government's intention to introduce into the West Bank the Israeli norm of democratic elections’ since the authorities deeply regretted the outcome, and did not repeat the experiment.
The accommodationist vote proved to be largely imaginary, and radical new candidates swept away most of the old guard, to become mayors of most of the West Bank's towns.
The PLO's victory removed neither Jordan nor the traditional élite.
from the scene.
The new mayors were summoned to Amman and reminded of the value of good relations for marketing agricultural produce to Jordan.
Each was helped to assess the balance of loyalty by the offer of financial assistance to his municipality.
Although the new mayors tended to be younger men, they did not represent a new class of people.
They were, almost without exception, young scions of old notable families of the towns they now represented, persuaded by their families to stand for election in order to maintain the family interest.
Many of these families carefully weighed the balance of pro-PLO and pro-Jordanian sympathy locally, and chose from their ranks a suitable candidate to reflect opinion in the voting population.
In this way what appeared as politically radical to the outside world, was perceived locally as social traditionalism.
The most radical of these new mayors, like Bassam Shak'a of Nablus and Karim Khalaf of Ramallah, found themselves facing almost as much difficulty from Jordan and the PLO leadership as they did from the Israeli authorities.
The autonomy plan for the occupied territories embodied within the Camp David Accords of 1978, however, brought the different strands within the West Bank and Gaza leaderships together.
Autonomy was seen in the occupied territories as a denial of the demand for self-determination, not a step towards it.
There was also unease that an implicit judicial separation from Jordan implied a change in the status of the territories.
They would cease to be ‘occupied’ and therefore cease  to enjoy the legal protection of the 1949 (IVth) Geneva Convention and the withdrawal requirement in Resolution 242.
To confront these dangers, the mayors and other leading individuals established a new National Guidance Committee (NGC).
Their attempt to create effective liaison and co-operation with the PLO leadership outside, however, led to unease when the latter called for restraint since the Camp David accords were ‘under serious scrutiny and assessment’.
In the view of the NGC, the PLO did not appreciate either the seriousness of the Camp David threat or the strength of feeling in the territories.
The scale of demonstrations throughout the territories quickly persuaded the PLO to reject the autonomy plan, Once again, as in 1973–5, a serious debate arose concerning local or external control.
Within the PLO leadership the dominant group, Fatah, wanted to retain a firm external hold on local activity.
Its rivals, the PFLP and DFLP, wanted to allow local leaders to oppose the autonomy plan as they thought best.
Like the NGC, the PFLP and DFLP suspected that Fatah was toying with the peace process.
It was not long before disagreements emerged between Fatah and the NGC, particularly once the radical mayors Shak'a and Khalaf emerged as leaders of the NGC, to the detriment of a more accommodationist tendency.
When Israel decided to expel Shak'a in 1979, the PLO cautioned against a mass resignation of mayors proposed by the NGC.
In the event thirteen mayors submitted their resignation to the Israelis, totally rejecting the PLO directive.
As Mayor Muhammad Milhem of Halhoul, himself no radical, remarked: ‘We have the true picture.
Our friends outside do not.’
The radical Palestinian factions outside supported the NGC in its decision, partly to reduce Fatah influence in the West Bank.
Fatah now feared that the NGC and the radical factions would wrest leadership of the Palestinian movement in the territories completely from its grasp.
Tensions increased when the NGC sought the right to disburse steadfastness money instead of the Jordanian-PLO Joint Committee set up in Amman.
This was money voted by the Arab states in Baghdad in 1978 to confront the implications of Camp David and assist the inhabitants of the territories to stay put and be ‘steadfast’.
It was not long before the Joint Committee began to starve the NGC and associated radical elements of financial support, while fostering rival groups and individuals.
Fatah and the Jordanian authorities started to work co-operatively against the common threat of radical nationalism in the territories.
The Jordanians opened passport offices to bypass mayors who had previously renewed travel documents, and established  co-operative associations in the villages around Nablus for the marketing of agricultural produce to Jordan.
Fatah was not particularly regretful when the Israeli authorities finally closed the NGC down in 1982.
The struggle between the NGC and the PLO leadership was one of several important developments which persuaded the people in the West Bank and Gaza that neither the Arab states nor the PLO were capable of liberating them militarily or diplomatically and that it was pointless to continue to hope for a solution from the outside.
It proved a painful lesson.
First, there were the Camp David accords which promised an autonomy they neither wanted nor received.
Israel began to integrate elements of the military government into its own civil ministries, proving that the kind of autonomy it had in mind implied less rather than more Palestinian control over their affairs.
It also set up Village Leagues, an attempt to create a co-operative Palestinian structure in the less politically active villages of the West Bank.
In 1982 Israel invaded Lebanon to remove the PLO from the battlefield.
The following year the PLO fell apart, under attack from Syria as well as its own dissidents.
Inside the territories the NGC was dismembered by Israel, its leaders expelled, imprisoned or confined to their home town.
Elements of both the Jordanian government and the PLO seemed undismayed by the expulsion or detention of leftist or independently-minded members of the NGC.
From 1984 to 1986 the people of the territories watched uneasily as the mainstream PLO tried to recover its position by uniting with Jordan in an initiative intended to rescue the territories from occupation.
Many people in the territories felt that Arafat was sailing too close to the wind and were relieved by the collapse of his accord with King Husayn.
The collapse of the Husayn-Arafat accord led to a new phase of cooperation between Israel, the United States and Jordan aimed at objectives similar to those of the early seventies: the erosion of support for the PLO in the territories, the reinforcement of the normality of occupation by a programme to improve ‘the quality of life’, a term coined in this context by US Secretary of State George Schultz.
The United States announced the availability of increased USAID funds to develop the occupied territories.
Israel made it clear that such development would be primarily in social and welfare spheres, and would not include any kind of economic development which ran contrary to its interests.
Jordan also announced its $1.2 billion development plan.
In the autumn of 1986 Jordan and Israel demonstrated their practical cooperation with the opening of the Cairo-Amman Bank branch in Nablus, and the appointment of jointly selected mayors for Hebron, Ramallah and al Bira.
Proposals to improve the quality of life coincided with the tenure of the National Unity Government under the initial premiership of Shimon Peres, widely regarded outside the territories as the most promising Israeli proponent of a peace settlement.
However, the return to partial Labour rule did not usher in a period of optimistic progress towards a settlement.
The emollient international posture of Prime Minister Peres contrasted sharply with the toughest crackdown the West Bank and Gaza Strip had experienced since the period 1969–72.
From 1985 there were demolitions of homes, arrests and expulsions on a scale unsurpassed during the more explicitly doctrinaire tenure of Likud, 1977–84.
For Palestinians this was not surprising.
Labour implemented a more repressive policy on the ground than Likud while pretending to greater moderation in the international domain.
In its control of the territories, it had been more interfering and manipulative with Palestinian social institutions, recognizing that all social institutions, even kindergartens, were potential bases for community solidarity and resistance.
The final blow in a decade of reverses, 1977–87, was the apparent abandonment of the Palestine cause by the Arab world.
In November 1987 the heads of most Arab states met in Amman for a summit conference.
Their most pressing concern was the seven-year-old Iran-Iraq war, and the Palestine question was pushed to the bottom of the list of priorities for the first time in the history of the Arab League.
Arafat was snubbed by his host, King Husayn, while Syria tried but failed to achieve a conference resolution which omitted the PLO as a participant in a future international peace conference.
For the people of the territories it was a reminder that Jordan, Egypt and Syria were all more concerned with their own national and regional priorities than with the recovery of Palestine.
By the closing weeks of 1987 the population of the occupied territories had concluded that they faced not only the prevarication of Israel and Jordan but also the acquiescence of the other Arab states.
They also saw that, bereft of a power base or allies, the PLO was powerless.
After twenty years of struggle it seemed less likely to liberate any part of Palestine than it had in 1967.
The people could look for deliverance to no one but themselves.
The sinews of solidarity
Developments inside Palestinian society in the territories over the same decade had been less obvious but more significant.
Without them it is questionable whether the Uprising would have happened and if it had, whether it could either have embraced the total population or sustained itself for so long.
These developments stemmed from the growing awareness among political cadres, intellectuals and development workers from 1978 onward that the community under occupation had to learn to take power into its own hands.
Fundamental to the thinking of this comparatively small group of people was the ease and skill with which Israel had been able to exert its will, control dissent, and remove local leadership as soon as its challenge to the authorities necessitated this.
It had happened repeatedly, from the short-lived first National Guidance Committee of 1967 to the second NGC established in response to Camp David and suppressed by Ariel Sharon in early 1982.
The harsh lesson was that visible leaders, even journalists, were an easy target for either the Israeli or Jordanian authorities whose interest in containing Palestinian radicalism coincided.
Palestinian activism began to spread institutionally, through various strands of society.
A profound transformation took place, one which was far from obvious to the casual outside observer.
Crudely put, authority and leadership began to move from traditional leaders, be they the old pro Jordanian élite or the post-1976 pro-PLO mayors (most of whom had been eliminated by the authorities), into new but less visible hands.
The new leadership proved more diffuse — beyond the narrow confines of the traditional élite and professional classes — and younger.
The constituent groups of the PLO, Fatah, PFLP, DFLP and the Communist Party, all had their cadres in the territories which maintained their outward anonymity to avoid arrest.
These built up their strength through youth organizations, clubs and activity centres in the refugee camps and towns.
These youth centres increasingly became targets of Israeli harassment and closure.
After the outbreak of the Uprising there was considerable discussion of its youthfulness, as if this itself was a revolution in Palestinian society.
In part it undeniably was, for younger Palestinians displaced traditionally older leaders, and young women participated more fully than ever before.
But it also reflected the demographic composition of  Palestinian society.
Sixty five per cent of Palestinians were under twenty, genuinely ‘children of the occupation’.
Almost 80 per cent were under the age of thirty.
It was natural that the youth, who grew up with the failure of the Arab world and of their elders (and social superiors) to recover Palestine, should become a leading political force in the country.
Only six months before the Uprising a leading Palestinian journalist presciently noted
These young people who have grown up under Israeli occupation take a much more radical approach than the PLO leadership.
Having grown up under the nose of the Israeli war machine, young Palestinians have come to the conclusion that, in the world they inhabit, might is right and the only way to survive and flourish is to be strong and violent.
Diplomatic missions and political initiatives don't mean anything to these young people who have seen only more oppression as Israel speaks of peace.
Although for the present time this generation has strong feelings for the PLO and its chairman, Yasser Arafat, they have grown impatient with the niceties of political diplomacy.
As a result of the youthfulness of society, higher education institutions became a barometer of political currents.
By 1985 there were eight colleges and universities in the territories, and four UNRWA vocational training centres.
Both on and off campus students demonstrated against Israeli and Jordanian interference and fought bitter internal representative elections which were closely followed by the community, since they reflected the moods and internal conflicts which so fragmented society.
These contests were between the various components of the formal Palestinian movement, Fatah, the DFLP, the PFLP, the Communist Party, and also the Islamic Tendency, which was strong in Hebron and Gaza and enjoyed substantial support elsewhere.
A fierce struggle developed between NGC and Fatah supporters in the period 1978–82.
In elections at Birzeit University in December 1980, Fatah in association with an Islamic Bloc (see below) began to reduce the overall power of the radicals, taking one-third of the seats on the student council.
In those at Hebron and Nablus in mid-1981 the Fatah/Islamic Bloc coalition actually won a majority over the NGC supporters.
The struggle between these groups reflected events outside Palestine as well as within.
Following the great unity forged in adversity in 1982, fragmentation of the PLO the following year  triggered bitter feuds on every college campus.
After four years of strife reconciliation of the PLO factions in Algiers in April 1987 was reflected on the ground, as the various groups found it easier to accept their differences and to agree on the importance of national unity.
As one Palestinian remarked: ‘Many splits of the past few years have already been forgotten.
Certain labour unions belonging to the PFLP, the DFLP or the Communist Party, have joined ranks with the Fatah labour unions.
As much as you Israelis are split between Likud and Labour, we Palestinians in the territories have become united during the past two months, more united than ever before.’
The geographical pattern of political loyalty in the West Bank had also changed.
During the early 1970s Palestinian nationalism had affected villages less than the urban areas.
After 1976 both Jordan and Israel made conscious efforts to detach rural society from the leadership offered by local towns, the former through the landlords and merchants who controlled agricultural marketing, the latter through its Village Leagues, a network aimed at maintaining dependency and destroying the credibility of the nationalist urban leadership.
The Village Leagues posed a serious threat since they affected many West Bank villages.
Jordan warned Village League followers that they risked the charge of treason.
The PLO supported Jordan against the Village Leagues, since its own legitimacy was directly challenged by them.
Jordan and the PLO defeated the Leagues, and in the process made the villages more politically aware.
The PLO rather than Jordan reaped the fruit, so much so that after the collapse of the Jordanian-PLO accord in 1986 many Village Leaguers were rehabilitated in Jordanian eyes.
By the end of 1987 West Bank villagers were hardly less politically aware than their urban counterparts.
The significant difference was that in rural areas Fatah tended to rule alone, whereas in the camps and towns, the radicals posed a strong challenge.
Israeli land seizure also politicized the rural population.
This was not merely through the intrinsic loss but also because family status and honour were intimately linked to possession of land.
The spread of nationalism into rural areas also reflected the economic transformation that had taken place since 1967.
The shift from the main traditional occupation, agriculture, to unskilled labour, was considerable.
Three-quarters of village income by the mid-1980s was earned outside, either elsewhere in the West Bank, or more usually in Israel, which might account for 60 per cent of village income.
The transformation of the peasantry into a rural proletariat weakened hamula (patrilineal extended  family) ties, and strengthened class ones.
One clear sign was the growing rejection of village headmen, or mukhtars , as village leaders.
The appointment of a mukhtar , introduced by the Ottomans for taxation and conscription purposes, had reinforced family power.
Britain and Israel both used the system.
It was inevitable that with the unpopularity of Israeli rule, the use of mukhtars to enforce unwelcome regulations and the exposure of the village workforce to a less traditional culture in their place of work, the system lost credibility.
By the mid-1980s mukhtars were frequently considered collaborationist.
It was natural that this growing rural proletariat should turn to trade unions for support.
Those who worked legally inside Israel paid compulsory dues to the Israeli union, the Histadrut, but received no benefits or support from it.
As a result, Palestinian migrant workers routinely earned a fraction of what their Israeli counterparts were paid inside Israel.
Some workers turned to Palestinian unions, although these had had a chequered career.
Six small unions in Gaza had been closed down by Israel in 1967, and only allowed to re-open in 1979, on condition they neither held fresh elections nor recruited new members.
As one unionist remarked, ‘they gave us the key, but forbade us to open the door.’
In the West Bank there had been twenty-six unions in 1967, belonging to a West Bank federation.
These grew in number, many existing solely on paper, but remained weak.
Their services were modest, and collective written agreements with employers remained exceptional.
Towards the end of the 1970s these unions began to revive, in response both to labour needs and to frustration at the failure of the conventional political process.
Some unions, and union blocs, reflected the political outlook of component groups of the PLO.
It was not long before the authorities began to harass the unions, and to maintain an aura of fear to keep their membership dormant.
Organizations with a political outlook, such as the Workers' Unity Bloc, the Progressive Workers' Bloc and the Workers' Youth Movement all became targets for harassment.
In the mid-1980s Israeli control of the unions began to fail.
In 1986 when young activists decided to revive the six Gaza unions, the leaders were arrested and the unions temporarily closed down.
Early the following year, however, two of these unions defied Israeli bans and organized new elections.
Despite further arrests, defiance of Israeli authority had an electrifying effect on labourers throughout the territories.
Although membership remained low, only about 20 per cent of the West Bank labour force, the resurgence of the union movement  symbolized a new national populism which the authorities seemed unable to stifle.
Trade unionism became a key element in national solidarity and social education.
The Islamic revival
A more controversial element in popular feeling was the religious one.
Open Islamic expression began to revive from 1978.
Islam traditionally held an important place on the political stage or the West Bank.
However, religious identity had taken second place to secular nationalism for a whole generation.
This was partly because of the idea of national unity between Muslim and Christian Palestinians, but also because the Muslim dimension was masked during the heyday of Arab nationalism, from the 1950s until the mid-1970s.
With the decline of secular Arabism as a credible ideology in the late 1970s, some Palestinians began to affirm their religious loyalties.
For many there was a substantial overlap between religious and national identity.
Moreover, there were long-standing and intimate links between the Muslim Brotherhood and Fatah.
In Gaza there was an old relationship between poor Palestinians and the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt.
Islam was firmly woven into the warp of Gazan life.
In the twenty years 1967–87, for example, the number of mosques in Gaza doubled from 75 to 150.
Like the secular movements, the Islamic tendency was expressed in university life.
In the 1978 student elections at Birzeit the Islamic bloc won only 3 per cent of the vote but a year later, inspired by Khomeini's victory, it won 43 per cent.
At al Najah and Hebron universities, it won the 1981 elections in association with Fatah.
In 1987 it won 27 per cent of the Birzeit student vote, 85 per cent of the Hebron University vote, and over 40 per cent of the vote at al Najah, where the threat of violence between secular and religious students provoked the voluntary closure of the university until feelings had sufficiently abated.
Many Palestinians found the Muslim revival shocking.
Growing up in the more liberal atmosphere of secularist nationalism in the 1950s and 1960s, it was easy to forget the vigour of Islam.
As secularists, they saw the Islamic resurgence as retrograde, leading away from the kind of society they hoped to create.
For Christians it defined a national identity from which they were excluded.
Israel exploited the tension between secular nationalism and Muslim fundamentalism as far as it was able.
There was also a tendency to treat the Muslim revival as a single extremist development.
In fact it had diversities similar to those in secular nationalism.
There was a large conservative establishment of senior Muslim divines in the territories, which had tried to fill the political vacuum in June 1967.
In Hebron Sheikh Ja'bari established a Centre for Islamic Studies (later, Hebron University) in 1971 but his motive was less religious than political.
He established it as an alternative power base in Hebron as his mayoral leadership came under increasing challenge from secular nationalists.
The Muslim Brotherhood was less concerned with the liberation of Palestine than with the establishment of an Islamic state by peaceful means, possibly as a part of Jordan where its activities were tolerated by the authorities.
The Brotherhood provided the moral climate in which more strident cultures could flourish.
Some were small but violent, like Islamic Jihad, which had broken from the Muslim Brotherhood in the 1960s.
Inspired by the Iranian revolution, Islamic Jihad launched attacks on the Israeli occupation.
Although it remained small, its attacks — the murder of two Israeli taxi drivers in Gaza Market in October 1986, a hand-grenade attack on troops at the Wailing Wall the same month, and the murder of IDF Captain Ron Tal in September 1987 — attracted attention.
In October 1987 the army clashed with an armed group in Gaza and later arrested over fifty Islamic Jihad suspects and uncovered a large arms cache.
Other non-violent groups, like al Mujama'a (The Community) which commanded a large following in the refugee camps of Gaza and the Islamic Association inside Israel (see p. 152), posed a different kind of challenge to the authorities.
By 1988 al Mujama'a had an active following of about 2,000 working mainly in the refugee camps.
As a movement for social organization and mobilization, it threatened Israel's long-term hold on the territories more than isolated attacks by guerrilla cells.
This potential danger became apparent with the emergence eight months after the beginning of the Uprising of a new group, the Islamic Resistance Movement, better known by its acronym,Hamas (zeal).
Hamas was widely believed to draw its inspiration from the spiritual leaders of Mujama'a in the Gaza Strip.
In any case it soon demonstrated its reluctance to accept the discipline of the Unified National Leadership of the Uprising, by organizing a major strike on the twentieth anniversary of the arson attack on the al Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem on 21 August.
It also declared its own political position in a thirty-nine page charter which stated: ‘Initiatives, peace proposals and international  conferences to solve the Palestine problem run counter to the principles of the Islamic Resistance Movement, since giving up part of Palestine is like giving up part of our religion.’
The rise of the popular movement
Of far greater significance than the Islamic resurgence, however, was the rise of ‘the popular movement’.
This movement was a direct response by intellectuals, both men and women, to the failure of the community under occupation to translate sumud , the idea of steadfastness, into a more active concept of taking control of as many areas of human existence as possible under occupation.
Student activity and the resurgence of trade unionism, already discussed, were obvious facets of thus new version of steadfastness.
In part the popular movement was a response to the damaging effect of external assistance, in particular the money which entered the territories from outside.
This had generally taken three forms, of which the largest was remittances to their families by the large number of Palestinians from the territories working in the Gulf and elsewhere.
It was not unusual for a West Bank or Gaza household with one or two family members abroad to receive as much as $10,000 annually.
There was also steadfastness funding from the Jordanian-PLO Joint Fund.
And thirdly, international funding through international, governmental and non-governmental agencies.
All these forms of economic assistance encouraged passivity and unconsciously shifted people's priorities away from the quality of human resources to the quantity of financial ones.
Family remittances led to a massive increase in conspicuous consumption, largely in the form of modern villas and expensive cars rather than investment in local economic activity.
The Joint Committee gave millions of dollars to various institutions, and this soon acquired a political and moral significance.
In Amman, Jordanian and largely right-wing PLO representatives controlled these funds.
The latter agreed that the Jordanian secret service should screen potential recipient institutions and individuals.
As a result left-wing groups or those hostile or dangerous to Jordanian influence in the territories were starved of funding, while groups which co-operated with Amman (both the government and the PLO officials there), were rewarded.
In this way the chambers of commerce, co-operatives, trade unions and other structures felt the corrosive, divisive and corrupting effect of money which, far from strengthening resolve to resist the  occupation, was used to advance one political viewpoint over another.
In the aid field also, the sheer quantity of funds in search of development projects had a distorting effect, encouraging dependence on outside help.
A substantial proportion of the population, the refugees, had been dependent on international help since 1949.
The services provided by UNRWA in health, education and relief, were in many ways superior to what was available to non-refugees.
However, the manner in which these services were administered by largely non-camp refugees of higher social status and supervised by an international cadre had already created a profoundly damaging sense of dependency.
Refugee recipients had very little say in the administration of services and were insufficiently encouraged to do so.
Furthermore, there was a tendency for many decisions to be made not in proximity to the camps but in UNRWA's headquarters in Vienna.
Other UN agencies started to throw money at the problems of the territories, for example both Unicef and UNDP provided money for activities selected and overseen by the Israeli authorities, thus — however innocent the intention — allowing aid to become an instrument of control rather than support for independent development.
Likewise, USAID funding was routed to American non-governmental organizations,via the Israeli authorities and subject to their approval.
The comparatively large sums involved conferred on all these agencies a substantial power of patronage over recipient institutions.
Even the most well-intentioned and politically sensitive non-governmental organizations found themselves supporting projects which in the long term strengthened individuals rather than communities, unrealistically raised expectations or created unintended dependency relationships.
A fierce debate arose among those trying to respond to the unfavourable economic and social effects of occupation.
Broadly speaking, one argument asserted that any improvement in the adverse conditions of life was inherently desirable and should not be withheld from a needy community.
It believed politics should be kept out of aid work and that any relief of suffering was beneficial.
The other point of view was that the origin and route of funding, whether it be via Jordanian or Israeli authorities, or from an external funding agency — even Palestinian nationalist sources — necessarily implied a kind of patronage which was bound to strengthen external control over the community.
This, they argued, was the antithesis of their definition of development, the process whereby a community learns to stand on its own feet.
Furthermore, this argument continued, the quantities of money available corrupted expectations and encouraged people to think  development was essentially material advancement rather than community organization.
It was natural that the latter point of view was associated with leftist thinking.
The argument came to a head in 1986 following the US Secretary of State's programme to ‘improve the quality of life’, when a number of American agencies receiving USAID funding began to be shunned by many Palestinian development workers.
The damaging effects of external assistance were, ironically, best documented in the case of Zubaydat, a poor village in the Jordan valley, where two foreign agencies most anxious to avoid such eventualities had introduced drip immigration in order to increase village productivity and to demonstrate the value of modern intermediate technology methods.
One unforeseen result was the expectation on the part of the recipient villagers that foreign funds would continue to provide capital, repair costs, and so on.
Individual villagers remained unwilling or unable to co-operate to raise necessary communal funds between them, for example to repair a broken pump.
The case of Zubaydat revealed other problems which had until then received scant attention.
Although the villagers of Zubaydat significantly increased their productivity through the introduction of drip irrigation, they quickly found that their real problem lay with marketing.
Their difficulties stemmed from three sources.
Israel, in order to guarantee the occupied territories as a captive market for its own agricultural production, had started in 1984 to apply strict limits to Palestinian produce.
It made the marketing of Palestinian goods inside Israel subject to a licence that in practice was only given for produce, like olives, which was not produced by Jews in commercial quantities.
It would not allow Palestinian goods to be exported westwards to compete against its own produce in the European market.
Palestinians therefore had to compete with subsidized Israeli produce in the home market while being denied access to the Israeli one.
Through the open bridge policy Israel had skilfully encouraged the export of Palestinian agricultural produce to the Arab world.
This too, had major problems.
Apart from the paperwork and delays incurred on both sides of the bridge, exporters found themselves exposed to political pressures and a declining market, as Jordan developed its own agricultural potential on the east side of the Jordan valley.
However, it was increasingly recognized that the most significant obstacle to development lay within Palestinian society itself.
Most Jordan valley farmers are sharecroppers, normally giving 50 per cent of their produce to their landlord.
In most cases the landlord is also the commission agent who purchases produce wholesale and either auctions  it in the local market or arranges for it to be boxed and exported to Amman, an operation which requires friendly relations with the authorities in Amman.
Since the landlords/commission agents are also the main dealers in seed, fertilizers and equipment, it is virtually impossible for individual farmers to resist them.
Two landlords/ commission agents control virtually the whole produce of the Jordan valley.
While a farmer might sell a 14 kg box of tomatoes for two shekels, the same tomatoes would retail in Jerusalem at two shekels per kg, indicating a fourteen-fold profit for middleman and retailer.
It was not surprising that a growing number of small farmers in the West Bank viewed the commission agents not only as too closely connected with Amman politically, but also as parasites upon their labour.
As a result, a number of Palestinian intellectuals and development workers began arguing that liberation from Israel was only part of a broader process and indeed unless that broader process, which implied radical economic change, took place no liberation from Israel was likely.
Similar questions were being asked in the social sphere, notably with regard to health and to the role of women in society.
Those who examined the health conditions of the occupied territories quickly discovered a conflict between the claims by Israel of a steady improvement in health services and the reality.
For example, it was claimed that the military government had reduced the infant mortality rate to between 24 and 30 per thousand in the West Bank and 30 per thousand in Gaza, comparing very favourably with the rate, 22 per thousand, for Palestinians in Israel.
Such claims were contradicted by research which indicated that the true level might be about 70 per thousand.
Significantly, it was found that overall the infant mortality rate was slipping behind those of Jordan and Syria as well as Israel.
Furthermore it was discovered not only that the ratio of physician to population was substantially worse than for Israel or Jordan but that owing to insufficient funding and planning, 280 doctors were actually unemployed in the territories and another 120 were employed on low salaries under a local professional union's absorption programme.
At the same time physicians in government clinics in Gaza examined an impossibly large number of patients — on average 100 patients per day, while in UNRWA clinics a doctor would examine between 70 and 120 patients daily.
The provision of hospital beds was in decline, having been 2.2 per thousand in 1974 it had fallen to 1.6 per thousand by 1985, due to both hospital cuts and to natural increase.
Malnutrition and parasite infestation were high, reflecting the generally low health status of the population.
For example, in a rural locality close to Jerusalem, 34  per cent of children under three showed signs of malnutrition.
There was little surprising in such findings.
Governmental expenditure on health services in the occupied territories amounted to US$30 per person compared with US$350 per person inside the State of Israel.
Furthermore, while 70 per cent of the population lived in rural (village or refugee camp) localities, almost all health facilities were located in towns.
Less than one-third of inhabited localities had basic mother and child health facilities, a fundamental health requirement.
Only a fraction of the population could afford the cost of the government health insurance scheme which replaced the low cost health service previously available.
There existed severe imbalances in terms of expenditure which favoured hospitals over primary health care centres, towns over rural locations, the more affluent central area over the far south and far north of the West Bank, and between the rich and poor, male and female.
Research showed that both infant mortality rates and malnutrition tended to be higher among girls than boys, a fact which could not conceivably be ascribed to the occupation but reflected traditional attitudes that damaged the health of the community.
To a growing number of health professionals it was self-evident that Israel's priority was the application of a system which ensured dependence and control rather than the good health of the community.
Consequently, when a handful of practitioners came together in 1979, it did so with a single guiding principle: ‘the real measure of development is the ability of a people to build its own comprehensive and complimentary and independent infrastructure that is capable of dealing with its own problems, needs and aspirations.’
Many health professionals were strongly attracted to the idea because it put them in touch with the community in a quite different way from their private clinics or hospital services.
Some health professionals even argued that they learnt more from the process than did the ‘recipient’ villagers.
Consequently, the movement rapidly grew, forming the Union of Palestinian Medical Relief Committees (UPMRC) in 1982.
By 1988 the Union had over 700 health professionals giving their free time voluntarily, providing services to 50,000 patients, and reaching over one-quarter of the populated localities of the territories.
It did not intend, it said, to replace any existing service but to complement them by providing services where there were none.
But it operated in an entirely different way from the older service already operating.
The Union's guiding principle was the need for the local community itself to take charge of the process whereby health priorities were set and met.
Previous experience, following WHO health manuals, had  failed because insufficient attention was paid to the political, clan, class and gender divisions within communities.
The Union made its assistance conditional on each community creating its own managerial committee.
It also insisted that each committee must recruit candidates to be trained by the Union to act as local health workers.
In this way the Union successfully mobilized the population to take control in a way it had never done before, and to identify and overcome both health and social problems which had not previously been tackled.
Obvious as such an approach may seem, it was a concept with revolutionary implications.
The dynamic effect of the Union's work mobilized the communities directly affected, while many more communities heard about it and wished to participate.
If the Union had made a significant contribution to solving health problems, it had also unquestionably played a more significant role in awakening community action.
In the women's movement, too, a significant revolution took place over the same decade.
Four networks, reflecting the ideologies of the four major Palestinian parties, Fatah, the DFLP, PFLP and the Communist Party, established committees all over the occupied territories to advance women's affairs, run kindergartens and literacy classes, assist with income-generating projects, and provide legal advice and support in such matters as employment.
These activities were not new.
They had been provided for many years by the YWCA, and other urban based and normally middle class-run charitable societies dispensing relief and assistance.
Part of the impetus had been the growing frustration felt by women in the voluntary work committees that they and the issues which concerned them tended to be elbowed aside by men.
It also resulted from the sense of injustice, that women fared even worse than men in employment and domestic life.
Such women decided they could only begin to tackle their problems through their own women's networks.
The revolutionary aspect of the new women's committees, as with the new medical work, was the transmission of power to the lowest community level by a network of committees in a large number of localities.
The difficulty the women's committees discovered, however, was that social programmes with no nationalist content failed to attract women, while nationalist programmes quickly triggered wasteful competitive conflicts between the four committee networks for ‘control’ of a locality.
This competition was exacerbated by the factionalism of the PLO during the years 1983–6.
Following the formal reconciliation of PLO factions in April 1987, progress was made to achieve better harmony and co-ordination between these groups, and to find a happier  balance between the twin goals of national and social justice, a process which fortuitously prepared the committees for the challenge posed by the Uprising.
The initiators of these popular committees were well aware of the way in which Israel had lopped off the leadership of previous political, labour and social movements.
Consequently, part of their strategy was to diffuse the leadership of the movement as widely as possible.
Each committee was aware of the dangers of individual or mass arrest, and contingency plans were made for the automatic replacement of committee members should they be arrested.
It was an almost perfect system, for it implied that if Israel wished to dismantle the women's committees it would have to imprison the entire membership.
In agriculture, the popular movement began to respond to the kind of difficulties that farmers like those in Zubaydat had encountered.
Agriculture, despite its declining base, was still the primary element in the West Bank's economy.
An agricultural relief committee was established in 1983 by a handful of young agricultural engineers, some of whom had already been working with ‘the voluntary work committees’, a network of skilled and unskilled workers which had been operating since the mid-1970s.
As in the case of popular health work, these professionals were struck by the absence of applied research and extension services, particularly for poor farmers who stood in greatest need of such assistance.
Apart from the continued seizure of cultivable land by the authorities, the main problems faced by farmers were the severe limitations on water use, unfavourable marketing conditions, production quotas, restrictions on the planting of fruit trees, and poor access to credit facilities.
Behind these problems lay not only the difficulties inherent in the occupation, but also the socio-economic realities of Palestinian society.
Of these the overwhelming one was the fact that the peasant farmer suffered most from the effects of the occupation, while the large landowners seemed, comparatively at any rate, to benefit from the system of occupation.
It was felt that they enjoyed the support of both Israel and Jordan, neither of which welcomed a growth in the economic power of an increasingly politicized peasantry.
By 1986 over sixty agricultural professionals and 400 farmers were active members of the Palestinian Agricultural Relief Committees (PARCs), seeking strategies for overcoming such problems through research and education, pest control campaigns, the supply of competitively priced vegetable and olive tree seedlings, and most important of all, research into the characteristics of marketing.
In the longer term the Palestinian Agricultural Relief Committees  tried to help individual farmers to eke out an adequate living, encourage the organization of small farmers at the village level, and foster the growth of a farming structure better able to stand up to the rigours of occupation than the present one in which middlemen and large landowners dominated agriculture.
Central to Agricultural Relief, as with the other elements of the popular movement, remained the belief that the community had to set the agenda of priorities and participate in seeking solutions.
Self-reliance was also promoted in other economic spheres, albeit modestly.
Until Palestinians learnt to rely upon themselves and their own productivity, implying a withdrawal of both custom and labour from the Israeli sector, there could be no hope of liberation.
This, at any rate, was the ideology.
In its purest form, the doctrine advocated a return to subsistence economy but on a less individualistic and more communal basis.
Voluntary Work Committees worked hard to encourage iqtisad bayti , or household production, a concept pioneered by Agricultural Relief with activities such as chicken farming, market gardening and food processing.
During 1987 a women's household production network (in fact inspired and organized by a foreign worker) also began to produce pickled vegetables for retail in grocery stores in the West Bank, to displace Israeli produce.
By the time of the Uprising such ventures had not gone beyond examples of what theoretically could be done.
Among some development workers this utopian view of development caused unease.
The reason for this unease lay in the doubtful practicability of total self-sufficiency.
The trend of things had been for agricultural land to go out of production because it was easier to earn a living working in Israel.
This was not a new development resulting from the occupation.
Rather, if one considered the nineteen years of Jordanian rule to be an interruption in the physical integrity of Palestine, it could be argued that ever since the beginning of the century an increasing proportion of the agricultural labour force of the Palestinian uplands provided seasonal labour on the coastal plain for Jewish, Arab and other industrial and agricultural enterprises.
Nevertheless, the ideal was there, and its symbolism and potential were important.
Uprising: the power of the people
The popular movement did not produce the Uprising, but its proven modus operandi was found to be essential to its success.
By the end of 1987 not only had large numbers of people participated in community  activities but many others were aware of the model.
Furthermore, through the trade unions and the women's committees, the major political organizations were well aware of the potential political importance of the popular movement.
Thus, while the health, agricultural and voluntary work committees remained social rather than political in their programmes, they blazed a trail that others widened into a national highway.
As a result, almost as soon as Israel tried to suppress the Uprising with curfews, blockades and violent policing, the community organized itself along the lines the popular movement had already prescribed.
In virtually every locality in the occupied territories, popular neighbourhood committees established themselves, assuming responsibility for public hygiene, health, education (after schools were closed), maintaining a watch on the streets for the approach of Israeli troops or settlers, organizing household production, distributing agricultural produce to the needy and reclaiming land.
The spontaneity and autonomy of these committees within ‘the national consensus’ were striking features.
The Unified Leadership (UNLU) claimed these ‘are more than temporary committees which will operate for a limited period of time.
They will represent a permanent structural change in the form of organisation of Palestinian society…
These structures are not explicitly political.
They function as democratic structures of local organisation.’
The rise of the committees implied disengagement from Israel.
UNLU repeatedly stressed the need for police and tax officials to resign, for people to refuse tax demands, to boycott Israeli goods, to avoid labouring in Israel and to be as self-reliant and self-sufficient as possible.
When Israel proclaimed the committees illegal, accusing them of receiving ‘PLO money’, UNLU answered:
The reality is that the popular committees are not being funded by anyone…rather they are responding to the lack of funding of the community services [i.e. by the authorities]by trying to organise their own.
The conditions which have initiated and sustained the Uprising have been characterised not by subversive money but by a lack of money…
The real irony is that if Israel continues to systematically close all community service institutions, while the government sector has all but collapsed, then the people will be left with no option but to organise things for themselves…in the end only the popular committees will be left.
It was easy to assume, in the euphoria of this new found self-reliance which Israel found so difficult to break, that the occupied territories were on the road to political freedom.
The achievements of the first nine months of the Uprising were impressive.
The most obvious of these had been to bring the fate of the occupied territories onto centre stage internationally, persuading George Schultz to renew his peace mediation efforts.
It had also wrought a fundamental shift in power between the PLO and the Arab world, and within the Palestinian community between the PLO and the people of the territories.
Although it had been obscured by the emphasis put on the military and diplomatic struggles within the Arab world and in the international arena ever since 1967, the centrality of the people under occupation in the national struggle could no longer be disregarded.
A critical relationship had already developed between the PLO and the Palestinians of the territories.
The latter, whilst loyal to the PLO leadership, were among its sharpest critics.
At the time of the 18th PNC in April 1987, when the different PLO factions were reconciled, the Jerusalem al Fajr English Weekly commented on the lack of effective leadership:
we will not be satisfied by the PLO leaders simply kissing and making up.
A lot of hard work needs to be done.
To begin with, the Palestinian leadership must conduct an honest and tough critique of the events of the past, of our position at present, and where we want to go from here.
There was also unease at the PLO's propensity to act against local opinion, witnessed in its treatment of the home-grown NGC in the late 1970s, its abuse of Joint Committee funds for politically corrupt purposes, and in Arafat's flirtation with Husayn in the mid-1980s.
It was feared that Arafat was so desperate to achieve diplomatic action in the early months of the Uprising that he might betray its purpose by a renewal of the PLO Jordanian alliance.
Ever since 1983 the general mood in the territories had been consistently against Jordanian representation of the Palestinians, even as part of a joint team.
Most people in the territories feared the PLO was in danger of rushing into some unsatisfactory settlement rather than holding out for the right conditions.
Warning of the growing impatience of the shabab , the youth, one journalist wrote ‘if they [the shabab ]see that the PLO's political initiatives are producing no results, they will force the PLO into  a more radical posture or else they will go looking for a more radical leadership within the PLO.’
After the Uprising, UNLU was not afraid to criticize the PLO openly.
When Husayn ceded sovereignty over the West Bank in July 1988, UNLU publicly warned the leadership ‘the PLO outside the occupied territories should not ‘fill the gap’ left by Jordan by duplicating its work, which was based on the principle of patronage through corruption.
The challenge is to find ways to support the existing popular structures so that they can better continue their struggle.’
UNLU would not have given such a warning had it not feared how the PLO outside might behave.
When Arafat met with King Husayn and President Mubarak in Aqaba in October 1988 amid reports of negotiations on a Palestinian Jordanian confederation, UNLU was quick to condemn the idea and express its own concern: ‘when the Palestine National Movement is increasingly united around clear, unambiguous political proposals, rumors of confederation negotiations are worrying and confusing.’
It was also feared that the PLO would instruct ‘acceptable Palestinians’ to meet George Schultz.
For this reason UNLU cautioned it to boycott Schultz, through the strikes and demonstrations it was able to organize during his visit to Israel, 3–5 June.
This, too, indicated how UNLU now led, and the PLO followed.
Some felt it was the way things should always have been.
It was inevitable that the shift of leadership from the PLO outside to UNLU should give rise to thoughts of a split in Palestinian ranks, between the ‘inside’ and ‘outside’.
UNLU communiqués, however, were emphatic not only in their recognition of the PLO, but also that the PLO represented all Palestinian people, both outside and inside Palestine.
Despite the setbacks before the Uprising there had been growing recognition of PLO leadership in the territories.
In 1986, for example, a poll suggested that 95 per cent of the population recognized the PLO as their sole legitimate representative, a 9 per cent increase in support since 1982.
Nevertheless, differences did exist between the outside and inside view.
In 1986 one poll suggested that one-quarter of the population found the PLO leadership too accommodationist.
There was considerable ambivalence, too, about a final two state solution implicit in the Arafat-Husayn initiative and the 1983 Fez plan.
The dream of a democratic secular state in all Palestine, viewed as an unrealistic non-starter by virtually all the international community and probably by most of the PLO leadership, enjoyed growing support according to opinion  polls, 58 per cent in 1983, rising to 77.9 per cent in 1986.
Even as an interim objective, the idea of a West Bank and Gaza state apparently enjoyed the support of only 50.1 per cent of respondents, while 43.6 per cent preferred to continue the struggle for all Palestine.
Although such polls should be treated with caution, it is not surprising in view of such opinions that the vast majority of the occupied territories population, 80.6 per cent, also rejected Resolution 242.
It was difficult to be sure where this left the objectives of the Uprising.
Repeated UNLU communiqués called for recognition of the PLO, the refugees' right of return, and the right to self-determination and the establishment of a Palestinian state.
They stressed UNLU's moderate demands, calling for a two state solution, mutual recognition, direct Israeli-PLO negotiations, concluding ‘the Palestinians are calling for no more than peace with a reasonable measure of justice.’
Such calls were similar to the known PLO position.
However, there clearly were differences between the PLO leadership and UNLU but more, perhaps, of tone than of political content.
The PLO leadership seemed readier to compromise and accommodate Israel, Jordan, the United States and the Arab League than were the people under occupation.
By contrast opinion in the occupied territories concerning these other players was hardening rather than softening.
There were now clearer limitations to what the PLO could do without provoking open protest from its constituents in the occupied territories.
The implication for Israel and the international community was that it might have been easier to transact a deal with the PLO before the Uprising than after it.
People in the popular movement had a different kind of disquiet with the leadership of the PLO.
It is important to frame this disquiet in the correct context.
There was no question of the popular movement, even the most radical in it, actually rejecting the PLO's political and institutional leadership.
The anxiety was more one of style, about its bureaucracy, its lack of enthusiasm for social and economic change and its susceptibility to venality and materialism (most clearly expressed in its use of Joint Fund money).
Among many activists there was a feeling that the PLO leadership had become the property of the Palestinian middle classes in the diaspora and that many of the leadership led relatively luxurious lives, insulated from the realities of nation building as these were experienced under occupation.
The tension persists in a number of spheres.
Where the popular committees are devoted to encouraging the development of self-reliance and local power through co-operative activity in different fields, it is  feared that Fatah, the dominant component of the PLO, has little vision of social and economic change.
On the contrary, many in the popular movement believe that Fatah has more interest, as one activist put it, in hospitals than in mobile health clinics, in bureaucracy than in local control, and in co-operation with the economic and political notables than with grass-roots movements.
Suspicion of outside money, even from the PLO, remained deep.
Some leading exponents of the popular movement believed that if large quantities of money were sent to support the Uprising they would, instead, destroy it by creating political jealousies and deflecting the Uprising from the central theme of self-reliance.
Some, particularly within the popular movement, feared a sudden political settlement in which the PLO leadership might be installed as the government of Palestine.
Some preferred to suffer occupation for longer, than to achieve freedom before local institutions were robust enough to ensure that they were not swept aside by a newly installed government of ‘outsiders’.
They feared that the community-based social and political work directed towards a more democratic and egalitarian society than currently existed would be undone by an influx of ‘bourgeois’ values and money.
in view of the prominent part taken by the women's movement and of the general position of women in society, it was not surprising that women felt particularly strongly on such issues.
Many Palestinians also feared that the PLO leadership would not welcome the kind of lively debate and democracy which the popular movement had fostered, but would wish to be authoritarian in its government.
This fear was well expressed by one long-serving member of the popular movement, ‘the PLO will be keen to control.
Insiders will be crushed by the PLO military, there is bound to be conflict between insiders and outsiders.
The PLO failed as a leadership, not as an idea.
Unfortunately the PLO remains obsessed with its own survival problems.’
But it is important to bear in mind that such misgivings are made privately.
There is no question of the popular movement rejecting the PLO.
On the contrary, its support is total.
It merely wants the PLO to learn, as the members of the popular movement themselves have learnt, that the strength of the national movement lies in the philosophy which has taken root so strongly in the territories over the 1977–87 decade.