

A VERY TORY COUP: THE OUSTING OF MRS THATCHER
By R. K. Alderman and Neil Carter
THURSDAY 22 November 1990 was one of the most momentous days in modern British politics.
When Mrs Thatcher announced her resignation it was as though an immovable institution had been overthrown.
She was the longest-serving Prime Minister of the century with an unprecedented three successive election victories to her credit and a parliamentary majority of almost one hundred.
Her departure, when it came, was spectacularly abrupt.
A mere two days before she had been deliberating with other world leaders at the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
A week earlier, Michael Heseltine, whose challenge in the leadership election contest brought about her fall, had still been adamant in public that he would not stand against her.
Indeed, at the end of October it had seemed unlikely that there would be any contest at all, even with a ‘stalking horse’ candidate as had occurred in 1989.
Mrs Thatcher's dramatic and unexpected exit was even more remarkable because it was the first instance since Neville Chamberlain's resignation in 1940 of a Prime Minister in good health and eager to continue being forced out of office other than after electoral defeat.
It is the purpose of this article to offer a preliminary analysis of the events which led to Mrs Thatcher's decision to resign.
Mrs Thatcher's unwilling departure was the result of a combination of factors.
In the longer term, the unpopularity of certain policies and of her personal leadership style had made her increasingly vulnerable to electoral defeat and, as a consequence, to criticism from within her own party.
This discontent, which had been instrumental in provoking the challenge to her leadership by Sir Anthony Meyer in 1989, continued to plague the Prime Minister through the first half of 1990 and flared up again in the weeks prior to the leadership contest.
There were also more immediate factors that were specific to the 1990 contest.
A concatenation of events particularly damaging Mrs Thatcher was subsequently compounded by errors of tactics and organisation by those running her campaign.
A vital part was also played by the existence and nature of the Conservative Party's election procedures.
Mrs Thatcher was not technically brought down by the formal election processes.
But, as was  suggested might be the case in an earlier article, the procedures played an essential part in producing the circumstances which ultimately rendered her vulnerable to the more informal pressures on her to resign.
The Background
Although Mrs Thatcher had emerged the comfortable victor after the ‘stalking horse’ leadership challenge by Sir Anthony Meyer in 1989, speculation about her future persisted.
At the Cabinet level there were embarrassing signs of the Prime Minister being less than fully in control of events.
A major reshuffle in July 1989 had produced a Cabinet which, it was loudly proclaimed, would lead the party into the next general election.
But the resignations of Norman Fowler in December 1989 and Peter Walker in March 1990 (albeit for family reasons) coming so soon after the major re-adjustments necessitated by Nigel Lawson's departure in October, both unsettled the Cabinet and had a demoralising effect on backbenchers.
There were also increasingly visible divisions within the parliamentary party itself.
The government's proposals for legislation on immigration from Hong Kong, for instance, provoked widespread backbench opposition.
But the main cause of dissent was the Community Charge, or poll tax.
The principles underlying the poll tax had long been criticised by some sections of the party.
Now many more MPs expressed alarm about the actual impact of the tax on their constituents and, consequently, on their chances of re-election as they discovered to their dismay that most households would be paying far more in poll tax that they had under the old rating system.
The new, uniform business rate generated similar outrage: nowhere was the anger better illustrated than in Bath, a city epitomising Thatcherite entrepreneurial success, where there was a shopkeepers' strike in protest at the damage it was wreaking on their livelihoods.
Government unpopularity resulting from the state of the economy in general and high interest and mortgage rates in particular had provided Labour with an opinion poll lead of about 10% for some months.
But by March the announcement of poll tax levels had helped to convert this lead into a massive 20% plus in most opinion polls.
Moreover, some 70% of the public disapproved of the tax, with 50% considering it the decisive issue in determining the way they would vote.
This discontent produced a Labour victory in the Mid-Staffordshire by-election on 22 March, the 21.4% swing to Labour representing the party's best by-election result in half a century.
Not surprisingly, there was enormous backbench pressure on the leadership either to amend the poll tax or to cushion its impact.
Mrs Thatcher was, of course, strongly identified with the tax and her personal popularity plummeted as a consequence.
By April Gallup found only 24% of voters satisfied with her performance, making her  the least popular Prime Minister since opinion polling had begun.
For many Conservative MPs the message seemed all too clear: Mrs Thatcher was now an electoral liability and had to be replaced before the next election.
The whispering on the backbenches began again.
Throughout March and April the newspapers carried a plethora of stories suggesting either that there would be a further challenge to Mrs Thatcher when the next leadership election fell due in November, or that there would be strong pressure on her to announce her retirement before then.
Polls suggested that up to one in four Conservative MPs wanted her to go before the next general election: growing numbers of backbenchers were prepared openly to declare that the time had come for her to call it a day.
The unrest was taken sufficiently seriously to prompt vigorous attempts by senior members of the government to dampen this constant speculation about the leadership: for example, Sir Geoffrey Howe, among others, publicly denied that there had been any Cabinet-level discussion about the Prime Minister standing down.
Even Mrs Thatcher felt obliged to dismiss talk of plots against her as ‘bunkum and balderdash’ and to reaffirm her commitment to lead the party into the next election.
Such demands failed, however, to quell the discontent, which increasingly focused on Michael Heseltine as the only serious alternative to Mrs Thatcher, a view supported by polls that showed him to be the voters' overwhelming choice to replace her.
Heseltine had resigned from the Cabinet in January 1986 over the Westland affair and had, since then, assiduously cultivated the party in the constituencies.
Though he never disguised his leadership ambitions, he continued to deny that it was his intention to challenge the Prime Minister.
Heseltine faced the tactical dilemma that were he to campaign openly and be seen to be instrumental in splitting the party and bringing down the Prime Minister, he would be criticised as divisive and disloyal.
The antipathy towards him was so widespread on the right wing of the party that Norman Tebbit announced that he would himself be a leadership contender if Mrs Thatcher were to resign.
Ironically, this intervention was felt to be unhelpful to the Prime Minister because it seemed to lend legitimacy to the possibility of a contest in the autumn.
The local council elections in May appeared to be a watershed in the party's and, therefore Mrs Thatcher's fortunes.
Speculation about the leadership had persisted in the run up to the elections — in which most commentators expected the Conservatives to perform disastrously.
In the event the party's net loss of around 200 seats was, or was successfully presented as being, better than expected.
Kenneth Baker, the Party Chairman, made particular political capital out of Conservative gains in the ‘flagship’ Thatcherite London boroughs of Wandsworth and Westminster where exceptionally low poll tax levels had been set.
This ‘success’ prompted a further onslaught by senior ministers against what Baker described as the ‘hysterical gossiping’among MPs about the leadership.
Although Heseltine published his own plans to amend the poll tax, he felt obliged, in the same week, to issue yet another declaration of loyalty to the Prime Minister, thus apparently ruling himself out of a leadership contest in 1990.
Suddenly Mrs Thatcher's authority in the party had strengthened and, by the end of May, all serious talk of resignation and leadership challenges had subsided.
The Prime Minister's position continued to improve throughout the summer.
Labour's opinion poll lead slipped into single figures as the worst effects of the poll tax wore off.
Within the Conservative Party the Gulf crisis lent weight to the argument that a leadership challenge would be inappropriate.
The surprise announcement of British entry into the Exchange Rate Mechanism appeared to have solved, at least in the short term, the long-standing divisions in the party and government over the correct approach to Europe — divisions that had contributed to Lawson's resignation a year earlier.
Indeed, ERM entry was accompanied by confident predictions that the economy would benefit from an eight to nine months honeymoon period that would see key indicators — notably inflation and interest rates — improving in time for a general election some time in 1991.
In early October, as Mrs Thatcher — flanked by her Cabinet — received a nine-minute standing ovation at the close of a successful party conference, few expected any challenge to her in the leadership election which had to be held within 28 days of the start of the new parliamentary session, due to open on 7 November.
A challenge, if it were to occur, would require a major issue and a trigger.
Neither of these, as yet, existed.
The Challenge
The resignation of Sir Geoffrey Howe, the Deputy Prime Minister and last remaining member of Mrs Thatcher's original 1979 Cabinet, on 1 November provided both the issue and the trigger.
Howe resigned in protest at his ‘growing difference’ with the Prime Minister over ‘the increasingly important issue of Britain's role in Europe’.
His decision was prompted by Mrs Thatcher's vehemently expressed opposition to proposals for monetary union at a recent European Community summit in Rome and a strident populist performance in Parliament in which she displayed considerable hostility to the idea of European integration.
Howe's departure reawakened deep divisions within the Conservative Party on the issue of Europe.
Indeed, the implication of his resignation letter was that for five years there had been conflict at the very heart of the government that had precipitated the earlier resignations of Heseltine, Lawson and, in July 1990, Nicholas Ridley, the Trade and industry Secretary (the last after he had expressed intemperate views about Britain's European partners that many observers believed the Prime Minister herself shared).
The resignation also inevitably reopened the vexed question of Mrs Thatcher's leadership style: she was accused variously of being domineering, abrasive, unwilling to listen to other opinions and out of touch with grassroot opinion on the backbenches, the party and the country.
It came against the background of Conservative popularity again declining in opinion polls and the party reeling from a shattering by-election defeat at Eastbourne — formerly one of its safest seats.
The issue of a leadership challenge made an immediate return to the top of the political agenda: the discontent in the parliamentary party that had been barely suppressed since the spring resurfaced with a vengeance.
The Confederation of British Industry, at its annual conference, added to the furore by calling on the government to be more positive towards European Monetary Union.
Heseltine came under mounting pressure to stand in the forthcoming leadership election.
Nevertheless, at least in public, he reiterated his previous position that there were no foreseeable circumstances in which he would challenge Mrs Thatcher.
Aware that he might have only one chance, and uncertain whether his support was sufficiently strong to withstand accusations of breaking his word and of disloyalty, he kept his options open by writing a public letter to his constituency party association (a traditional device for signalling dissent) in which he was highly critical of Mrs Thatcher's leadership style and her stance on Europe.
Since he continued at the same time to deny any intention to stand, the letter seemed designed to test the ground while adding to the ferment in the parliamentary party — especially among those MPs sitting in vulnerable, marginal seats.
Heseltine's opponents also employed a mixture of tactics in a campaign to defend the Prime Minister.
A succession of senior ministers played down speculation about the leadership by denying the existence of divisions in the Cabinet over Europe and calling on MPs not to divide the party with talk of a leadership contest.
There were other more personal attacks on Heseltine, questioning his political judgement and his loyalty to the party.
But the main line of attack was that Heseltine should ‘either put up or shut up’— with the apparent intention of forcing him either to keep silent or to declare himself before he was ready.
Representatives of Conservative Central Office helped Heseltine's local constituency association to draft a public reply to his open letter declaring its support for the leadership.
Further, the Prime Minister brought forward the deadline for nominations to the leadership contest to 15 November in order to force the hand of any challenger and to reduce the time available to mount an effective campaign.
In a public display of Cabinet loyalty, Douglas Hurd, Foreign Secretary, and John Major, Chancellor of the Exchequer, signed Mrs Thatcher's nomination papers and the Prime Minister again made clear that she would be prepared to fight through three ballots if necessary.
As the closing date for nominations approached, a remarkable hothouse atmosphere prevailed at Westminster, fuelled by the intense media scrutiny and the active canvassing now being carried out by both sides.
With further government setbacks in by-elections in Bradford and Bootle on 8 November, there was a strong feeling that Heseltine's reputation would be irreparably damaged if he did not stand: it was now or never.
Canvassing on his behalf appears to have indicated, however, that many MPs would remain loyal to the Prime Minister in a first ballot, switching only in a second when, of course, there might be additional candidates.
Heseltine aides feared most what, in the event, actually happened: that he would play the stalking horse role — forcing the resignation of Mrs Thatcher but ultimately losing to a third candidate.
Heseltine had not publicly declared whether he intended to enter the leadership contest when, on 13 November, Howe made his eagerly-awaited resignation speech in the House of Commons.
It was the most dramatic and outspoken resignation speech in living memory.
Howe's attack was two-pronged: he ridiculed official denials that a policy split existed in the Cabinet over Europe and he made trenchant (and remarkably personal) criticisms of Mrs Thatcher's style of leadership.
At the end of a powerful performance, made more remarkable by its unexpected ferocity, he concluded by urging Conservative MPs to consider whether they could continue to support Mrs Thatcher's leadership.
The effect was devastating, seriously weakening Mrs Thatcher's hold on the premiership and making a leadership contest virtually inevitable.
Peter Jenkins, a seasoned political observer, writing in The Independent on 14 November, captured the mood among Conservatives with the comment that the speech polarised the forces for and against Mrs Thatcher to the extent that a contest was now the only way of resolving the divisions.
Howe's speech effectively marked the end of the phoney war and the start of the public campaign for votes.
This was implicitly acknowledged that same evening by Mrs Thatcher's appointment of George Younger to run her election campaign.
When Heseltine launched his campaign on the following day he made a shrewd tactical switch.
Europe had been the policy issue which had precipitated his challenge and he reiterated his differences with Mrs Thatcher over Europe.
But he made an astute appeal to the self-interest of Conservative MPs concerned about government unpopularity by making his prime focus the poll tax.
He cited recent by-election setbacks and pointed to numerous opinion polls indicating that the party's prospects of winning an election would be better under his leadership.
Crucially, he promised to undertake an immediate and fundamental review of the tax.
The Prime Minister's supporters were immediately thrown onto the defensive since most Conservative MPs  saw the tax as the single biggest obstacle to a Conservative victory at the next election.
A subsequent admission by Kenneth Clarke, Secretary of State for Education, that it was a major problem forced an unscheduled Cabinet discussion in order to establish an agreed government position on the issue.
The success of Heseltine's switch of focus was illustrated by a succession of opinion polls in the days leading up to the leadership ballot, all indicating that there would be a huge swing to the Conservative Party were he to become leader.
Some polls put the Conservatives under his leadership 10% ahead of Labour.
The campaign tactics of the two contestants differed markedly.
Mrs Thatcher rejected a personal campaign, preferring to emphasise her stature by carrying out her normal official duties which included a visit to Ulster and attendance at the Security and Cooperation summit in Paris (where she was when the result of the first ballot was announced).
She eschewed all requests to be interviewed about the contest on radio or television, opting instead for a few newspaper interviews with sympathetic journalists.
Heseltine, by contrast, seized every opportunity to be interviewed, as well as campaigning actively at Westminster.
The campaign became increasingly bitter and rancorous as it progressed.
Even before Heseltine announced he was standing there were a number of press smears about some of his closest aides, the worst example being a report in The Sun on 13 November headlined ‘The Adulterer, The Bungler and The Joker’, which Mrs Thatcher was forced publicly to disavow.
There were attacks on Heseltine's temperament and suitability for office, instancing the occasion on which he had waved the mace in the House of Commons and also the manner of his resignation from the Cabinet over the Westland affair.
There were last minute threats by ardent Thatcherite MPs, notably Teresa Gorman, that they would consider resigning the party whip were he to win.
There were suspicions about the role that Conservative Central Office played in orchestrating some of these manoeuvres.
Such suspicions were certainly not entirely stilled when, at an early stage, Baker told staff that while they should not disparage the premier's opponents, Central Office was, nonetheless, the office of the leader and therefore must not create the impression of neutrality.
In the event, it was the Prime Minister who made the most personal attacks on her challenger in a series of last minute newspaper interviews.
She made a direct assault on his leadership credentials by accusing him of planning to introduce Labour Party policies and implying that he was motivated primarily by personal ambition.
She also delivered her own populist riposte, opening up the possibility of a referendum on the issue of the introduction of a single European currency.
Most commentators, however, judged these attacks to have rebounded to her disadvantage.
Heseltine brushed aside attacks on his  ‘socialist’ policies by pointing out that this had not prevented the Prime Minister from including him in her Cabinet.
The evident surprise displayed by some Cabinet ministers about her reference to a referendum lent further weight to his criticisms of her style of leadership and unwillingness to consult Cabinet colleagues.
His supporters were also quick to remind others of her opposition to the principle of referenda in 1975, circulating copies of speeches she had made at that time.
On the eve of the ballot both camps expressed confidence about the outcome: Mrs Thatcher's team anticipated gaining sufficient votes to win outright: Heseltine's followers asserted that he had enough support to force a second ballot.
More objective observers regarded the contest as too close to call.
A major obstacle to accurate prediction was the preference of many MPs for keeping their own counsel.
It was clear that the responses they had given to the respective campaign teams were not necessarily accurate.
There had been some notable public defections from the Thatcher camp by some of her erstwhile ardent supporters — including Edwina Currie and Emma Nicholson — but many MPs clearly feared possible retribution from their constituency parties, most of which were strongly supportive of Mrs Thatcher.
(The election rules required soundings to be taken among constituency associations and reported to the 1922 Committee.
These revealed approximately 70% support for Mrs Thatcher.
There was also a majority of 2:1 in her favour among Conservative peers.
Only the Conservative MEPs supported Heseltine.)
Over the final weekend suspected waverers came under pressure from their associations with the possibility of the deselection of a number of declared Heseltine supporters being raised.
Mrs Thatcher expressed confidence that she would win and declared again, as she had at the outset, that even if she did not win outright she would continue to a second ballot no matter how narrow the margin of her majority over Heseltine.
Significantly, however, in view of what was subsequently to happen, during the week leading up to the ballot there were growing reservations among her supporters, including ministers, about such a course of action.
Although they continued throughout to support Mrs Thatcher, a number were known privately to have expressed the belief that a failure to secure outright victory on the first ballot might irretrievably damage her authority and force her to stand down.
There were reports that senior ministers were insisting that if she failed to secure outright victory, she should consult them before deciding to carry on.
The public knowledge that such discussion was taking place was damaging enough for Mrs Thatcher; it was accentuated by signs that there was an active campaign to line up alternative candidates to stand against Heseltine in the second ballot.
At first, Douglas Hurd's name had been the one most frequently mentioned, but by the weekend John Major's was also being raised.
Such was the speculation that Hurd and Major — Thatcher's two nominators for the contest — were obliged to issue a joint statement insisting that they would not stand against Mrs Thatcher in a second ballot, but this all too clearly left open the possibility that they would stand if she were out of the contest.
Heseltine's aides were able to exploit this by urging all opponents of Mrs Thatcher to vote for him in order to bring their own preferred candidate into a second ballot.
The Denouement
The result of the first ballot was announced at 6.30 pm on Tuesday 20 November.
The figures — 204 (55%) for Mrs Thatcher, 152 (41%)for Heseltine and 16 (4%) spoiled papers, thus leaving Mrs Thatcher four votes short of outright victory — devastated her supporters and threw the party into a frenzy of speculation about her future.
Besides being bad for Mrs Thatcher personally, it appeared to be almost the worst possible result for the party as a whole since it made inevitable a further week of damaging internecine strife.
Within minutes of the result being known, Mrs Thatcher (still in Paris) had announced her intention to stand in the second ballot and Hurd, with her in Paris, had declared that she continued to have his full support.
Less than forty hectic hours later, Mrs Thatcher, who had once proudly proclaimed herself a ‘lady not for turning’, had made the most dramatic U-turn of her whole political career.
There were bitter recriminations within the party about who was to blame for her decision to resign.
Some ascribed it to a plot by ‘the men in grey suits’(a catch-phrase often used to describe a fairly ill-defined set of senior party officials, government business managers and elder statesmen).
In fact, it appears to have been due less to a plot than to a calculation that she could not win in a second ballot.
The announcement on the morning of 22 November of Mrs Thatcher's decision to resign came as a dramatic surprise to the public because, up to that point, all the outward signs had been that she intended to stick to her initial resolve to contest the second ballot.
She returned to London on the 21st, cutting short her stay in Paris.
It was announced that Hurd and Major would again be nominating and seconding her candidature.
A new campaign team headed by John Wakeham, the Secretary of State for Energy and a close political associate, was appointed to replace what had generally been regarded as the ineffective one used in the first ballot.
Finally, later in the day, on her way to the House of Commons, and after she was known to have met a group of senior party figures, she vigorously reiterated her determination to fight on.
Much, however, already had and was to happen behind the scenes.
On the evening of 20 November the Prime Minister's swift decision to fight on plunged the Conservatives into almost total disarray.
This was  exploited by the Labour Party which, anticipating such a situation, had tabled a motion of no confidence in the government.
This was, it seems, partly with the rather Machiavellian intention of forcing Conservative MPs to unite behind a Prime Minister whose continuance in office was considered best to serve Labour's prospects of victory at the next election.
Ardent supporters and a number of ministers applauded her resolve, stressing the narrowness of the margin by which she had failed to achieve an outright win (blaming the complicated election rules for the stalemate), and expressed full confidence in victory in the second ballot.
There were reports that some ministers, less optimistic in the face of evidence that a number of her supporters were already defecting to Heseltine, were seeking to stabilise the situation by holding out the prospect that Mrs Thatcher might retire voluntarily in the spring, making an orderly succession possible then.
But there were many, including senior ministers, who were highly critical of her decision to continue and believed that despite it she could and should be persuaded to stand down.
There was considerable alarm that, in a characteristic move to pre-empt pressure on her to stand down, she had plunged the party into further bitter feuding before the full implications of the result could be digested.
Despite explanations that the various options had been carefully considered in advance in anticipation of a disappointing ballot result, her action was seen as yet further evidence of the style of government which had helped precipitate the leadership crisis.
Several Cabinet ministers were reported to be outraged that she had failed to consult them, depriving them of the opportunity to try to persuade her to step down in favour of a more plausible ‘unity’, or ‘stop Heseltine’, candidate from within the Cabinet.
A major problem for those wishing to persuade Mrs Thatcher to change her mind was the time constraint imposed by the leadership election rules.
Nominations for the second ballot — the only opportunity for new candidates to enter the contest — were due by midday on 22 November.
There were hurried consultations among Conservative MPs on the evening of the ballot announcement.
Sir Cranley Onslow, chairman of the 1922 Committee, announced that the Executive would be meeting to make arrangements for the second ballot amid conjecture that it, too, would discuss Mrs Thatcher's position.
Even Thatcherite loyalists were reported to be discussing the possibility of persuading her to stand down in favour of Major.
Among the many meetings that took place that night, one of the most significant seems to have taken place at the house of a Foreign Office Minister, Tristan Garel-Jones.
It was attended by a number of Cabinet ministers — Chris Patten, Norman Lamont, William Waldegrave, Malcolm Rifkind, Tony Newton — and other ministers — including Richard Ryder, John Patten and Alan Clark (a particularly vehement Thatcher loyalist)— a group drawn, significantly, from both the wet and dry wings of the party.
This group concluded that Mrs Thatcher's continued participation in the contest could only prove disastrous for the party: she might either scrape a narrow victory and limp on, having lost the confidence of the party, or lose and allow Heseltine to become Prime Minister.
Neither outcome being desirable, they communicated to the Chief Whip, Tim Renton, their belief that Mrs Thatcher should be dissuaded from standing in the second ballot.
On the following morning a number of soundings were taken.
Cabinet ministers, who had been asked to canvass opinion amongst their junior ministers, were contacted by the Leader of the House, John McGregor.
The Chief Whip canvassed backbench MPs and there was a meeting of the Executive of the 1922 Committee.
Renton also discussed the situation with Lord Whitelaw, the deputy leader of the party, who was one of its most widely respected elder statesmen and a person renowned for the loyalty he had shown to Mrs Thatcher.
Then, at lunchtime, Mrs Thatcher met a group of the so-called men in grey suits.
Those present included Whitelaw, Onslow, Baker, Renton, McGregor and Wakeham.
The purpose of this meeting was to seek information about the state of opinion in the party and advice as to the viability of Mrs Thatcher's staying in the leadership contest.
Precise details of the evidence presented at that meeting have not yet been revealed but it is clear that it proved inconclusive.
She was told that there was slippage of some support among backbenchers; that the 1922 Executive was divided, with some preferring a wider choice in the second round; and that there was some disquiet in the Cabinet.
But strong support for her persisted in the party outside Parliament.
There was no guarantee of victory in the second ballot, but she could still win.
No one suggested that there was an alternative candidate who had a better chance of defeating Heseltine.
It was with her confidence bolstered by the outcome of this meeting that Mrs Thatcher left for the Commons to make her statement on the Paris summit meeting.
On her way, she stopped in Downing Street to declare forcefully ‘I fight on, I fight to win.’
Wakeham had made it clear when he took over from Younger as her team manager that the campaign must be conducted more vigorously, with Cabinet ministers taking a much more active part in it.
In view of the evident divisions within the Cabinet, he advised her to speak to ministers individually that afternoon to ensure she had their full support.
There are conflicting accounts of what actually transpired during these interviews.
Certainly, initial reports that a small number threatened to resign in the event of Mrs Thatcher continuing have been denied by those involved.
Nor is it clear how many ministers urged her to fight on — though at least two did.
It is, however, beyond doubt that the overwhelming majority of Cabinet ministers interviewed declared unequivocally that they believed that she could not win.
Some  expressed the fear that she would be humiliated if she carried on, or that even if she won she would be leading a demoralised party.
Some urged her to step down to allow another Cabinet minister to enter the second ballot against Heseltine.
As the news that such advice was being offered leaked out, some backbenchers and non-Cabinet ministers urged her to reject it.
A deputation from the right-wing 92 Group visited her that evening, as did three ministerial members of the No Turning Back Group.
Tebbit also advised her to carry on.
However, after Wakeham reported that support among backbenchers had collapsed during the day, perhaps by half, it was clear to those around Mrs Thatcher that, although she said she would sleep on it, she was virtually certain to resign.
Mrs Thatcher finally announced her decision to resign at a Cabinet meeting summoned at the unusually early hour of 9 am the next day, declaring that she had concluded that the unity of the party and the prospects of victory in a general election would be better served if she stood down to enable Cabinet colleagues to enter the ballot for the leadership.
The way was thus cleared for the names of Hurd and her eventual successor, Major, to be entered for the second ballot against Heseltine.
Conclusions
It was, said Mrs Thatcher, when she informed Cabinet colleagues of her decision to stand down, a ‘funny old world’ in which a Prime Minister with her record of electoral success should find it necessary to resign.
There was, indeed, a good deal that was ‘funny’.
Mrs Thatcher's style of government was a major factor in bringing about her fall; but why now when it had been a matter of controversy throughout her premiership?
Howe's resignation played a vital part; but she had survived that of the Chancellor, Lawson, a year before.
Mrs Thatcher might now be widely regarded as an electoral liability; but she had bounced back before from low opinion poll ratings and by-election reverses to win huge general election victories.
The Times hypothesised in the course of the election campaign that it was leaders who lost elections, not challengers who won them.
The circumstances which led to the inconclusive ballot result lend some credence to this.
Considerable credit must, however, also be given to the shrewdness of Heseltine's tactics.
There seems little doubt that a number of deficiencies and miscalculations, both strategic and tactical, on Mrs Thatcher's side contributed to her defeat.
Some of these were directly attributable to her personally, others to her campaign team.
The decision to foreshorten the leadership election timetable proved to be a serious error.
It allowed too little time for the furore provoked by Howe's resignation to die down.
It also meant that Mrs Thatcher was going to be away in Paris at  the summit meeting in the crucial final days before the first ballot.
The decision appears to have been prompted in part by an assumption that it would either discredit Heseltine by forcing him to back off from a challenge (which was thought most likely) or, if he did stand, give him insufficient time to mount an effective campaign.
Both assumptions proved mistaken.
Heseltine's campaign team, having been canvassing backbenchers for several weeks, had already developed a considerable momentum.
It was ready to move into top gear at very short notice.
Heseltine was able to announce that he already had assurances of support from a hundred MPs when he formally declared his intention to contest the leadership.
Towards the end of the campaign, Mrs Thatcher's actions in attacking Heseltine personally and especially her allegation that he would introduce Labour policies gave an unfortunate impression of panic — reminiscent of ‘Wobbly Thursday’ during the 1987 general election campaign.
So, too, did opening up the possibility of a referendum on the issue of a single European currency which, as has been seen, also laid her open to criticism on other grounds.
She was also mistaken in declaring her intention to fight on immediately the result of the first ballot was known.
As the incumbent leader, Mrs Thatcher possessed the advantage of having the support of the party machine.
Being able to rely upon the full support of all the ministers — especially Cabinet ministers — was obviously a further strength not available to Heseltine.
Indeed, in the early stages of the contest much was made of the lightweight nature of the public support Heseltine received (it was not until the run up to the second ballot, when Mrs Thatcher was out of the race, that he received public support from Lawson and Howe).
Mrs Thatcher exploited the change in the leadership election rules (instituted after Meyer's challenge) requiring the names of those MPs nominating candidates to be made public by having Hurd and Major sign her nomination.
By contrast, despite earlier speculation that it would be supported by ex-Cabinet ministers, Heseltine's nomination was ultimately signed only by a former junior minister and a backbencher who had never held ministerial office.
These advantages for Mrs Thatcher were, however, to a considerable extent counterbalanced by the composition of and the tactics adopted by her campaign team.
Portrayed on its appointment even by a relatively objective observer as lacking in heavyweights and by a more critical backbencher as  yesterday's men and the C team, the team disappointed many.
It was regarded as too narrowly based upon Mrs Thatcher's wing of the party and insufficiently representative of, or capable of appealing to, the various other strands of opinion.
Younger MPs commented adversely on the absence of anyone from the 1983 or 1987 intakes.
The team manager, who had run the campaign against  Meyer in 1989, appears to have been initially reluctant to take on the task.
Another respected ex-Cabinet minister, Fowler, was reported to have declined a request to join.
There seems little doubt that the team suffered badly by being deprived of the services of Ian Gow, a widely-respected, close associate of the Prime Minister who had played a major part in her 1989 campaign and whose murder by the IRA in July had led to the Eastbourne by-election.
Some of its members were actually away from Westminster at crucial stages in the campaign.
The team clearly adopted a far too low key approach, with insufficient trawling for support among backbenchers which was reported to have offended a number who felt that their support was being taken for granted.
It was a matter of considerable comment that only after the setback of the first ballot did Mrs Thatcher herself take the step of meeting backbenchers in the Commons tea room.
It was also only at this stage that she appointed a more balanced team headed by Wakeham.
Overall, Mrs Thatcher's team gave the impression of being overconfident and inadequately informed.
Heseltine's team, by contrast, was highly skilful, visibly enthusiastic, extremely active and very well informed as to backbenchers' voting intentions.
It took full advantage of its opponents' weaknesses.
Its activities enabled the Heseltine campaign to seize the initiative and sustain a momentum which kept its opponents mostly on the defensive.
That the leadership was conducted by secret ballot was also important in counteracting the advantage to the Prime Minister of having the party machine on her side.
There were suggestions that Conservative Central Office endeavoured to persuade the officers of local associations to support Mrs Thatcher.
Constituency party activists were certainly mostly pro-Thatcher, but it is clear that many MPs used the secrecy of the ballot to oppose her.
The media played an important part in the leadership election campaign.
This is not to suggest (as some have) that the attempt to oust Mrs Thatcher was initiated by the media.
But it certainly received massive media coverage.
Heseltine's campaign team courted the media more assiduously and performed more effectively in that arena than Mrs Thatcher's.
It also capitalised on the plethora of newspaper opinion polls adversely comparing Mrs Thatcher's potential to lead the party to electoral victory with Heseltine's.
Not least, they used them to demonstrate his credibility as an alternative Prime Minister.
Of course, even if consideration is restricted to essentially short-term factors, Mrs Thatcher's poor performance in the ballot cannot be attributed solely to the strategy and tactics of the respective campaigns.
That Howe's resignation should have occurred so opportunely for Heseltine — on the very eve of the one time of year that the party rules permit a leadership challenge — was extremely important.
So, too, was the presence of a serious challenger rather than another stalking horse.
Nevertheless, Meyer's stalking-horse challenge in 1989 may well have been a necessary prerequisite for the substantive challenge in 1990 because it broke the psychological barrier against mounting a challenge when the party was in office.
An essential precondition for the events of November 1990 was the government's longer-term unpopularity as demonstrated by the opinion polls and by-election results.
While it was not the sole cause of this, the poll tax was  undoubtably the most important single factor.
But there was no prospect of removing it as long as Mrs Thatcher remained leader.
She had come to be seen as an electoral liability.
Her very longevity in office now appeared as a handicap to a party which needed to look forward to the 1990s not back to the battles of the 1980s.
She seemed to be out of touch.
Considerations of this sort clearly  weighted heavily with Conservative MPs when voting in the leadership ballot.
But Mrs Thatcher was not actually removed by that election — though, as we have shown, its inconclusive result laid the ground for what followed.
Nor was she forced out by the men in grey suits — though intrigue played a major role.
The Cabinet was the crucial body.
Mrs Thatcher finally decided to go when her Cabinet colleagues told her that she could not win through.
A desire to put a speedy end to the strife that had riven the party and restore unity was a prime factor in their minds.
But it was not the only one.
Another factor played a vital part in the arguments they advanced: the need to entrench the achievements of the Thatcher government.
For this it was necessary for the premiership to pass not to Heseltine but to a leading member of the Cabinet.
This, in our judgment, was the cardinal motivation behind Mrs Thatcher's eventual decision to yield to the pressure for her resignation.
CITIZENSHIP: A REMARKABLE CASE OF SUDDEN INTEREST
By Derek Heater
IN December 1834 Sir Robert Peel was in his constituency of Tamworth in preparation for a general election.
In some haste he drafted a brief manifesto to show how the Conservative Party was adapting itself to the post-Reform Act political scene.
He had also been born in Tamworth; and so it was natural that, in February 1988 to mark the bicentenary of this famous Conservative Prime Minister and Home Secretary, the current Home Secretary should visit that Staffordshire town.
It was a splendid opportunity for Douglas Hurd to recall those long-lost Victorian values which the Thatcherite brand of Conservatives so ardently wished to revive.
‘We have to find’, he declared, ‘as the Victorians found, techniques and instruments which reach the parts of our society which will always be beyond the scope of statutory schemes.
I believe that the inspiring and the enlisting of the active citizen in all walks of life is the key.’
The wags dubbed it the second Tamworth Manifesto.
The Home Office, which claimed, somewhat doubtfully, paternity of the term ‘active citizen’, appeared to have hit upon an ideologically useful concept for the Conservative Party.
The words ‘citizen’ and ‘citizenship’, usually accompanied by its virtual Siamese-twin adjective ‘active’, echoed through the party conference in 1988.
They were constantly issuing from the lips of ministers.
Their collective utterances may help us to understand the meaning they wished to attach to this favoured term.
Mr Hurd seemed particularly fond of the idea.
Thus in April 1988 he wrote in the New Statesman , ‘Underpinning our social policy are those traditions — the diffusion of power, civil obligation, and voluntary service — which are central to Conservative philosophy…
The diffusion of power…the key to active and responsible citizenship.’
Then, in September 1989, in The Independent , he gave it a different slant: ‘The idea of Active Citizenship,’ he wrote, ‘is a necessary complement to that of the enterprise culture.
Public service may once have been the duty of an elite, but today it is the responsibility of all who have time or money to spare.
Modern capitalism has democratised the ownership of property, and we are now witnessing the democratisation of responsible citizenship.’
Both the Prime Minister and the Home Office minister, John Patten, tried their hands at epigrammatic contributions to the message being broadcast.
‘When you have finished as a taxpayer,’ Mrs Thatcher asserted, ‘You have not finished as a citizen.’
Mr Patten turned lexicographer in an article in the Guardian to define the concept in the following way: ‘The active citizen is someone making more than a solely economic contribution to his or her community; nothing more or less.
By reviewing the statements like these it is possible to construct some kind of picture of what the Conservative Party has understood active citizenship to mean.
First of all, despite Patten's disclaimer in his Guardian article, the Conservatives seemed to be demanding a monopoly over the idea on the grounds of its consonance with traditional Conservative doctrine.
In a negative sense, they argued that active citizenship was a healthy return to old values which had been submerged by passive reliance on the ‘nanny state’.
Party commentators tended to contrast the morally debilitating, Labour-encouraged harping on rights in the evil 1960s with the beneficent emphasis on obligations which the Thatcherite vision entailed.
In a positive sense active citizenship has been said to involve voluntary work, local initiative and payment of one's civic dues in service, not just cash.
Hurd provided a Heineken view of voluntary work, designed to reach the parts of our society which will always be beyond state provision.
The active citizen is the person who seeks out opportunities to succour the needy, protect the environment, administer schools and defend, through neighbourhood watch schemes, the local community against the depredations of the burgeoning criminal class.
Much of this citizenly activity will take place at the local level.
This is both convenient and desirable; it is part of the process of the whittling down of state power and interference, a cardinal item on the Thatcherite agenda.
Finally, neither individual nor corporate bodies must be allowed to think that they can salve their civic consciences by generous donations to worthy causes.
Purchase of such indulgences cannot guarantee citizenly salvation.
Addressing a Lions Club conference in 1990, John Patten declared that ‘Active citizenship has already fired the imagination of many people…
(But charitable) support is not just a matter of writing cheques; there is also a great potential to give in kind.
‘Active Businesses’ are becoming increasingly aware that their responsibilities extend beyond their immediate workforce to the community.’
Perhaps the concept has come to be more closely associated with the Conservatives than the other major parties.
If so, then the reasons for this are probably related to the fact that they have been the party of government and their ideas are consequently more newsworthy; that  they have displayed greater skill and exerted greater effort in publicising their views; and that the other parties delayed the formulation of their interpretations of the concept.
But if the Conservative Party thought that it was cornering the market in citizenship, they were to be quickly disillusioned.
When the new SLD was born, its leader, Paddy Ashdown, was quick to grab at the notion.
In June 1988 he declared, ‘I believe that our party should now consider development of a new, enhanced concept of the citizen in the modern state.
Indeed, I wonder whether this could be the very centrepiece of our new way of thinking.’
The leader was perhaps doing no more than drawing on the enthusiasm detectable in each of the two components of the party for the idea of citizenship.
Thus we find that Richard Holme, a former President of the Liberal Party, wrote about the topic in The People's Kingdom , published in 1987.
‘The firm place on which each individual should stand in society is the rock of citizenship, an idea…strangely neglected in British life.’
A few months later, in January 1988, David Marquand wrote in a newspaper article that ‘An active state needs active citizens, willing to accept their share of the obligations its activities imply…
But Britain's political culture of rulers and ruled, insiders and outsiders, monarch and subjects has no place for active citizens or civic morality.’
Professor Marquand, it should be noted, was a founder of the SDP.
When we look at what the centre of the political spectrum (if we may so classify Liberals, SDP and Liberal Democrats) mean by citizenship and its implications, we discover different emphases in its constituent parts from the Conservative formula.
Where Conservatives seek to enhance a sense of and opportunities for the discharge of civic obligations, the SLD has stressed empowerment, to use the jargon word, as I suppose we must.
Both parties recognise failings: the Conservatives believe we are short on the honouring of obligations; the Liberal Democrats, on the enjoyment of rights.
Thus, whereas the Conservatives have tended to equate active citizenship with a sort of Samuel Smiles social self-help, SLD supporters have expressed themselves in terms of self-government.
For example, in his elegant and profound book,The Unprincipled Society , Marquand wrote that ‘a flourishing community will be a mosaic of smaller collectivities,…where the skills of self-government may be learned and practised.’
And at the macro level they see the burgeoning of a true British citizenship as being dependent on constitutional reform.
This must necessarily include the replacement of the constraining and obsolete crown-subject relationship, which prevails in British law, by a modern state-citizenship relationship, the enactment of a bill of rights and the reform of the electoral system by means of proportional representation.
The Labour Party has displayed less enthusiasm for citizenship than the other two major parties.
One has the impression that the politicians have half-heartedly picked it up so as not to be left behind in the citizenship fashion-parade, or maybe because they have been prodded into rendering some kind of lip-service by their convinced academics.
David Blunkett MP showed himself most committed on the issue, protesting at the sheer chutzpah of the Tories in purloining for themselves a concept of essentially socialist origin.
The Deputy Leader, Roy Hattersley, joined the fray in The Sunday Correspondent .
Referring to ‘active citizenship’ as defined by Douglas Hurd, he wrote: ‘As a platitude it has much to commend it.
To become an acceptable philosophic theory it has to be extended in one of two different directions.
It can be perverted — as Mrs Thatcher will seek to pervert it — into an alternative to public spending.
Or it can be extended into the simple truth that we can only fulfil our obligations to our neighbours when society takes collective decisions about individual rights and individual responsibilities.
That is a basic principle of democratic socialism.’
Two of the Labour Party's professorate homed in on two facets of the concept which seemed particularly appropriate for their party.
Bernard Crick, in double harness with David Blunkett, pleaded for ‘far more spontaneous sociability and helpfulness to neighbours and strangers — fraternity.’
However, when Raymond Plant of Southampton University wrote a Fabian Tract on the subject, he chose to emphasise not the third element in the French Revolutionary triad but rather the third element in T.H. Marshall's triad of civil, political and social citizenship.
Plant entitled his pamphlet Citizenship, Rights and Socialism .
It was published in October 1988 as an attempt to influence the Labour Party's programme of modernisation.
He offers ‘democratic citizenship’ as ‘a key idea.
.. that can provide a unifying framework within which policy can be elaborated and a link to Labour's historical principles be maintained.’
The cover-design is presumably intended to encapsulate the Labour Party's interpretation of citizenship.
It depicts seven roses tied with a ribbon labelled ‘Citizenship’.
Each bloom represents one essential feature: the economy, economic equality, consumerism, democracy, people at work, the environment and Britain in the world.
The core of Plant's argument is a careful statement of the case for social citizenship and the reasons for preferring it to the philosophy of the New Right.
He accepts the need for Labour to embrace the advantages of individualism and market forces.
However, he insists on the pressing need for government to improve social welfare provision.
The reason for considering such a policy to be absolutely crucial derives from the recent decline in social citizenship on both sides of the state-individual reciprocal relationship.
As the New Right has denounced and undermined a communitarian form of society, so ‘The numbers of people for whom such communitarian visions are good and mean something at the level of their everyday experiences are declining, attenuating their moral force.’
The thrust of the pamphlet is the urgent requirement for both state and citizenry to rebuild a healthy sense of social citizenship.
But did the concept of citizenship really strike to the very vitals of Britain's political parties?
In April 1990 the Guardian carried a leader in which it described the ideal citizen as conjured up by Mr Hurd as ‘active but elusive’: ‘Apart from a minor sighting in a speech by John MacGregor, the Active Citizen has vanished from public debate as if he had never been.’
True, as we have already seen, John Patten tried to resuscitate the idea a couple of weeks later in his Lions address.
There were no evident sympathetic echoes.
The Liberal Democrats, in apparent decline, were in the meantime searching for a more catchy slogan.
Even Professor Plant, author of the most thoughtful party political analysis of the concept, concluded an article entitled ‘Labour's sights on rights’ in The Times in June 1990 with a whimper rather than a bang of citizenship.
Almost as a pleading afterthought he wrote, ‘Along with all this must go an emphasis on citizenship.
The transformation of subjects into citizens cannot be secured by Acts of Parliament alone.’
True, the political parties were not the only forums in which the idea of citizenship was being debated from the mid-1980s.
Academics have been writing books and articles; Charter 88 has been campaigning for constitutional reform; citizenship is to be incorporated in the National Curriculum in the schools; and a commission under the august patronage of the Speaker of the House of Commons published a report entitled Encouraging Citizenship in October 1990.
Even so, if the enthusiasts for the citizenship ideal sought comfort from this proliferation of interest against the background of a decline in party commitment, they might have been chastened by one reaction to the report of the Speaker's Commission.
A commentator in the Financial Times delivered himself of the following judgment: ‘Tripe is tripe: if it is not then what we have here is codswallop, tommyrot, drivel.
So much for a tradition whose origins may be traced back to early classical times!
For citizenship is scarcely a new-fangled concept.
As a status it is already evident in the Greek polis as that form of polity emerged from the mists of the Homeric age.
It existed in Rome even before the end of the monarchy.
Why then this sudden burst of interest in Britain at the end of the second millennium AD?
We may perhaps discern four separate factors.
One is an academic interest.
The second is concern for the social condition of the country.
The third is the belief in the need for constitutional reform.
The fourth is the issue of political education in schools.
Let us examine each of these in turn.
Interest in the matter of citizenship quickened in American universities before there was any evidence of much work this side of the Atlantic.
There seem to have been two main spurs to this research and writing: fascination about the intellectual origins of American republicanism and worry about the civic health of the nation especially after the trauma of the Vietnam war.
In the first category we may mention Kettner's The Development of American Citizenship 1608–1870 (1978) and more particularly Pocock's influential The Machiavellian Moment (1975).
In the second, Pranger's The Eclipse of Citizenship (1968) and Walzer's impressive Obligations: Essays on Disobedience, War and Citizenship (1970) come to mind.
The influence of these publications in Britain is evident in the writings of, for example, Michael Ignatieff and some articles in the New Statesman (and Society ).
The focus of this work, as also of Adrian Oldfield's forthcoming Citizenship and Community , is an interest in the lessons which may be derived for modern society from the Classical-Renaissance-Enlightenment emphasis on civic virtue.
Side-by-side with the political philosophers was the work of the sociologists, represented in Britain most eminently by Ralf Dahrendorf.
This intellectual activity was partly no doubt prompted by the blatant individualism of the New Right.
Much of the thought and investigation centred on a revival of interest in T.H. Marshall's classic exposition of the evolution of citizenship in Britain,Class, Citizenship and Social Development (1950), and especially his notion of social citizenship.
More technical were the studies of the relationship between citizenship and capitalism, which particularly bothered scholars with a knowledge of Marxist analysis.
This work was conveniently summarised by the Australian sociologist Bryan Turner in his Citizenship and Capitalism (1986).
In some measure the effusion of academic material was coloured by ideological commitments.
Debate tended to polarise — New Right and old Left.
In both the United States and Britain those of a conservative turn of mind regretted the 1960s’ emphasis on rights, especially welfare rights and, as they saw it, the decline of the concomitant sense of obligation to state and society.
In the USA Lawrence Mead wrote an influential book entitled Beyond Entitlement: The Obligations of Citizenship (1986).
The downgrading of welfare provision by the Thatcherite and Reaganite administrations in turn led to a reiteration by the Left of Marshall's notion of social citizenship.
Some observers went further and criticised him for seemingly assuming that progress from civil  through political to social rights has been a painless historical process.
Not so, it was suggested.
Rather, the extraction of rights has been a constant struggle and remains a constant struggle — witness the undermining of social rights both in theory and practice.
The New Right attack on social entitlements derived as much from harsh socio-economic facts as from ideologically grounded beliefs about human nature.
This brings us to the second stimulus to the citizenship idea.
The costs of social welfare have been rising.
Hospitals now need expensive body-scanners; schools need expensive computers.
An ageing population is both less productive and a more costly burden on the health services.
High unemployment rates bear heavily on benefit payments.
These technical and demographic facts of life were as significant in shaping Conservative social thought in the 1980s as the scorn expressed in the rhetoric about social security parasites and swindlers.
Given these problems, there are three possible ways of coping.
Continued welfare-state provision by increased reallocation of funds.
Secondly, run-down of social provision justified by the argument that the less well provided must ‘pull themselves up by their own bootstraps’.
Or, thirdly, arrangements whereby the needy are increasingly looked after by voluntary and charitable activities.
By the mid-1980s the Thatcher government was coming under increasingly embarrassing criticism that it had opted for the second style of social policy.
Rocketing unemployment figures following the recession of 1980–81; mounting crime rate; lengthening hospital queues; crumbling school fabric and obsolescent textbooks brewed a noxious mixture of political complaint.
If these social problems had not been so evidently worrying, it is highly unlikely that the active citizen would ever have been heard about.
Labour reacted by attacking the government for these conditions; stung by accusations of heartlessness, the Conservatives tried to mobilise the active citizen for the amelioration of the problems.
Government ministers presented the argument along the following lines.
We acknowledge that the country has a number of social problems.
You must not expect the state alone to cope with them.
Indeed, the problems have in part arisen because of that unrealistic expectation.
A caring and just society must depend on public and private provision — and, in the words of John Patten, ‘a third force’, namely the active citizen.
The contribution of this third force should be in both cash and service.
The wealthy citizen, enjoying the added riches derived from reduced income tax rates, will take a civic pride in playing the benefactor for worthy causes.
Thus the hospitals, schools and universities should learn how to help these conscientious citizens to provide financial assistance rather than expect the Treasury to be constantly replenishing their begging-bowls.
Many problems have a clear local manifestation; local initiative and self-help must consequently provide the most apt solutions.
Inner-city degradation requires the responsible confidence of local business to plan and invest in schemes of regeneration.
Hooliganism, vandalism and more serious crimes against the person and property must be tackled by neighbourhood watch schemes.
Indeed, the alternative adjective which came to adhere to ‘citizen’ was ‘caring’.
‘Active’ had too much of the overtones of the busybody; perhaps, as we shall see later and to change the metaphor, it had even more objectionable side-effects.
The Conservatives saw the body of citizenry as a kind of secular Salvation Army marching to the tune ‘Tamworth Manifesto’, arr.
Hurd.
In contrast, liberals of various party allegiances viewed the same body rather as a Pioneer Corps to shore up and renovate Britain's derelict constitutional edifice.
It was, as they saw it, Mrs Thatcher's abuse of the loosely defined conventions that made such politically conscious people demand constitutional reform, one cardinal feature of which should be a properly articulated status of citizenship.
They banded themselves into an organisation which they called Charter 88.
And so we come to our third reason for the propagation of citizenship as an ideal.
Politicians who objected to Mrs Thatcher and her radical conviction politics suffered the anguish of apparently unresolvable frustration.
Although she was supported by little more than a third of the electorate (or 40% or so of those voting), there seemed no prospect of ousting her from office.
She operated an ‘elective dictatorship’, a phrase coined, ironically, by Lord Hailsham about the Labour government under Wilson.
The SDP, devised as a tool ‘to break the mould’ of British party politics, itself broke in the clumsy hands of Dr Owen.
Yet Labour in the 1980s was still insufficiently united and popular to reverse the massive Conservative majority in terms of parliamentary seats.
If the traditional system was not properly democratically responsive, it must be changed.
Charter 88 demanded a written constitution ‘anchored in the idea of universal citizenship’.
A clear, legally defined status of citizenship, it was argued, could help in a number of ways to restore Britain's status as a democratic polity.
In the first place, the retention of the archaic concept of the sovereignty of the Crown-in-Parliament has precluded the development of a fully-fledged citizenship based on the democratic concept of the sovereignty of the people.
If we are technically subjects of the Queen, how can we be free and equal citizens?
If the will of Parliament is sovereign and not the will of the people, how can we be true politically participative citizens?
Still less can we be true citizens if that parliamentary will is in practice the will of a Prime Minister presiding over a cowed Cabinet and protected by an impregnable parliamentary majority.
The logic of this argument is that our constitutional theory and machinery must be reformed.
Moreover, the civil and political status and rights of the citizen, central to such a reform, must be enshrined in a bill of rights.
Again, the would-be reformers' interpretation of the 1980s led them to this conclusion.
A number of events seemed to highlight the crying need for British equivalents of the American First Amendment protecting the freedom of speech and the press and of the various Freedom of Information Acts which operate in so many democratic states.
If effective civil and political citizenship were to be enjoyed in Britain, then the citizen must be emancipated from the obsessive secrecy of government and the extraordinarily clumsy device of having to appeal for the protection of his or her rights to the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg.
When a government uses repressive secrecy laws more to protect itself from criticism than to protect the nation from foreign danger, then political citizenship is abridged.
When recourse to an international court is necessary because the national courts are incapable of righting an injustice, then civil citizenship is abridged.
Moreover, although these issues were thrown into sharp relief during the Thatcher administrations, Labour governments had been hardly more liberal.
Could one really put one's hand on one's heart and swear that the Ponting case would not have happened if Harold Wilson had been Prime Minister?
The fault, dear reader, is not in our leaders, but in our system, that we are underlings.
The fourth cause of the interest in citizenship may be traced to the nervousness in some Conservative quarters about political education and the complementary belief that the schools were failing to produce ‘good citizens’.
The terminology and practice of citizenship education were encouraged by the Board and Ministry of Education from c.1880 to c.1950.
Sometimes during this period alternative labels could be found, such as‘Civics’ or ‘Education for Democracy’.
There followed a bridging period when, especially for examination purposes, some English pupils were taught ‘British Constitution’.
Then, in the 1960s, the bull of controversy was grasped firmly by the horns as the term ‘Political Education’ came into fashion.
The change might well have been partly due to the intense interest in American research at the time into the political socialisation of children.
For example, Fred Greenstein's Children and Politics was published in 1965.
Much of the political education of the 1970s in all likelihood differed very little from the best practices of the 1930s.
Nevertheless, advocacy of focusing on issues rather than institutions became more insistent with the development of the Politics Association and its offspring the Political Education Project under the direction of Bernard Crick.
In the early 1970s this kind of teaching enjoyed some  clear official blessing, especially during Shirley Williams' tenure at the Department of Education and Science.
In the 1980s, however, the teaching of controversial political issues was provoking considerable nervous hostility on the right of the political spectrum.
Fear of teacher bias and classroom indoctrination, a perennial concern, was magnified by the development of Peace Studies.
Politicians and academics blazed with their furious objections.
Dr (now Sir) Rhodes Boyson, then a junior Education minister, declared in 1982, ‘I am suspicious of all forms of political education….
Politics, like sex education, is something that should be left to the family.’
Professor Roger Scruton made himself the spearhead of the academic attack, especially in his Peace Studies: A Critical Survey (with Baroness Cox, 1984), and Education and Indoctrination (with Angela Ellis-Jones and Dennis O'Keefe, 1985).
As a result of these worries, there was incorporated into the 1986 Education Act a specific prohibition against promoting ‘partisan political views in the teaching of any subject in the school.’
(Clause 44).
Consequently, by 1987 Alex Porter of the University of London Institute of Education could write that ‘Political education is now, more than ever, a ‘low status, high risk’ area of the curriculum.’
Yet within two years of the publication of this gloomy statement the educational powers that be were asserting the need to incorporate into the new National Curriculum educational preparation for citizenship.
At the time of writing the National Curriculum Council is due to publish its guidance document on Citizenship as a Cross-Curricular Theme.
The old term had been revived.
In the words of Stephanie Marshall of the University of York, citizenship had become ‘Political Education's longed for ‘place in the sun’.
What had happened?
There have been two related developments.
One is a shift by the government from an emphasis on the adult active citizen to the young novice citizen.
The other is an attempt to trump ‘bad’, non-conformist political education with ‘good’, stabilising citizenship education.
Apart from John Patten's Lions speech, by 1990 the citizenship baton appears to have been passed from the Home Office to the D.E.S.
When a large conference was organised for the Speaker's Commission on Citizenship in Northampton in February 1990 the Secretary of State for Education, John MacGregor was one of the principal speakers.
He asserted that the home and the school share responsibility for ‘equipping…the citizens of tomorrow’.
He identified ‘three fundamental aspects of citizenship’ which should be the responsibility of the school to cover: ‘…the individual's rights and responsibilities within a democratic society…the organisations and structures of society, including the rules and laws within which it functions…(and) the role of the individual…'
Four months later Alan Howarth, Parliamentary Under-Secretary at the  D.E.S., addressed the twenty-first anniversary celebrations of the Politics Association at the House of Commons.
He emphasised that the home and voluntary groups have crucial functions to perform in preparing young people for citizenship, as well as the schools.
He concluded by commending the work of the Association in ‘this very important field’, namely ‘all aspects of politics and citizenship’.
It should also be noticed that the Shadow Secretary of State for Education shared the platform with Mr MacGregor at Northampton and associated himself with most of his remarks.
Mr Straw stated quite unambiguously that ‘I hold the view that citizenship should be taught in every school, to every child, in a systematic way.’
The role of the schools could, indeed, hardly be denied.
If the behaviour patterns of the good citizen as delineated by Home Office ministers were both so lacking and so necessary to cultivate as they suggested, the schools' function in laying the essential foundations was transparently obvious.
Once central government becomes involved in prescribing school curricula, it cannot omit some form of education in public affairs: at any rate, it would be difficult to find a state where there is such a deliberate omission.
A weighty body of objective opinion — of HMI, teachers, academics and local authorities — had built up during the 1970s to support the common-sense view that a pupil leaving school aged sixteen at the youngest should be prepared for the responsibilities and opportunities associated with the age of majority which he or she would attain no more than two years later.
There is a similar emphasis to be found on the educational preparation for citizenship in the report of the Speaker's Commission.
This explains that ‘Our recommendations begin with matters such as how people may in the future learn more effectively what being a citizen actually means….
We recommend that citizenship should…be a part of the education of every pupil from the early years through to further and higher education….’
Furthermore, the Commission sent recommendations to the National Curriculum Council on the matter.
Now, if political education had been transported by means of the vehicle of citizenship from the position of ‘low status, high risk’ to ‘a place in the sun’, had it also been transformed on the way?
Suspicions have sometimes been voiced that, whenever government has supported civic education, the reason has been that learning of this kind has been interpreted as supportive of a respectful attitude.
The purpose of this school work has been viewed as an inculcation of such citizenly virtues as national loyalty, ready willingness to honour one's duties and deference to the Establishment.
The function of the citizen is to conform, not question.
Thus, when the Board of Education issues its official Suggestions for Teachers handbook in 1910 it transmitted a clear  message: ‘…the high function of the teacher is to prepare the child for the life of the good citizen, to create and foster the aptitude for work and for the intelligent use of leisure, and to develop those features of character which are most readily influenced by school life, such as loyalty to comrades, loyalty to institutions, unselfishness and an orderly and disciplined habit of mind.’
Two generations later one educationist, Geoff Whitty, questioned the value of the political education movement precisely because of the official support it had received.
(This was in 1979, before the attacks of the likes of Rhodes Boyson and Scruton.)
In one article Whitty declared that, ‘There is…a fair amount of prima facie evidence that the success of the political education movement in mobilising support from politicians is associated with their belief that it could assist in preserving the status quo and in bolstering respect for it.’
It was a point of view shared by several other educationists and political scientists.
But if these commentators believed that schools were failing to hone their pupils' political critical faculties to a sufficient sharpness, by the 1980s, as we have seen, right-wing commentators were expressing the contrary view.
By introducing controversial issues in the school, like Northern Ireland, race relations, aid to underdeveloped countries and nuclear weapons, schools were engaging in a politicisation of the curriculum which verged on, often slipped over into, quite unacceptable indoctrination.
This kind of teaching, it was argued, implicitly if not explicitly, was unacceptable because it would lead to an undermining of loyalty to the nation and government in minds too tender truly to comprehend the import of what was happening to them.
Is citizenship education, in contrast to political education, therefore ‘safe’?
Is it being introduced into the schools because of this characteristic?
We may test this suspicion by reference to various statements concerning the perceived nature of the new Citizenship Education (though unfortunately because of frequent postponements of its publication date, the National Curriculum Council guidance document on Citizenship as a cross-curricular theme is not available at the time of writing).
Let us take as reasonably authoritative pronouncements the address by MacGregor and Howell to which we have already referred and the recommendations of the Speaker's Commission to the National Curriculum Council.
They all refer to obvious approaches to citizenship education to which everyone can subscribe: topics like institutional knowledge and practical voluntary activity.
However, the question for our purpose here is whether they embrace matters which have provoked objections in the past.
It could well be argued, for example, that one of the qualities of a citizen in a democratic society is an interest in and an ability to understand various aspects of controversial issues.
We find little overt  reference to this facet of citizenship.
Howell's address comes nearest to such an acknowledgment.
He spoke about ‘making confident, independent, well-informed judgements and decisions…including those needed in ‘international life’.
He referred also to his belief that ‘Citizenship is…about the sense of nationhood.’
Do such declarations mean that the young citizen should be involved in discussing Britain's defence budget and strategic posture?
Do they mean discussing immigration and race relations laws and their implementation?
If young people are encouraged to adopt critical attitudes of mind about topics like these, will the spectre of Clause 44 of the 1986 Act again rear its head?
It is too early to answer this question with any certainty.
What does, however, seem likely is that the great marketing operation for citizenship education, like that of citizenship before it, has involved the promotion of a product which its advertisers do not fully comprehend.
The Speaker's Commission report opens with a section entitled ‘The Difficulty of Defining Citizenship’.
It notes disagreements and differences among both political philosophers and teachers.
The truth is that it is an exceedingly complex concept; and nothing but confusion can arise from attempts to reduce it to curt labels and pat slogans.
And yet politicians are dependent, especially in this age of the ‘sound bite’, on precisely these simplicities.
What is more, politicians must cut their fashionable ideas to fit into the jigsaw of their party doctrines.
We have already seen that this is what happened to ‘citizenship’ in 1988: each of the major parties emphasised those features of the concept which, from their own ideological standpoint, they considered most important.
This confusion was even worse confounded in the schools.
When Professor Fogelman undertook a survey of school work for the Speaker's Commission, he collected a most eclectic list of topics which teachers proffered as contributing to work in this field.
One may take leave to wonder whether, if Aristotle had pondered even more deeply on the nature of citizenship, he would have agreed with these schools and added; health and safety; eating for health; smoking; sexual relationships and decision making; or body abuse.
Politicians rushed in where philosophers have feared to tread.
Teachers, with a professional nose for the job had been handling a range of social issues, especially under the general heading of PSE (Personal and Social Education).
If something had to be labelled with this vogue word ‘citizenship’, they no doubt felt that the more they included in their responses, the better they would be thought to be discharging the task of citizenship education.
But it was the politicians who should have completed their homework more thoroughly.
Life, civic life included, is not as simple as the purveying of fashionable ideas suggests.
Perhaps, then ‘active citizenship’ is more precisely comprehensible than ‘citizenship’tout court?
Not really.
This, too, contains a host of problems.
It is either tautologous, positively dangerous, unoriginal or highly ambiguous.
If we accept, with Aristotle, that a citizen by true definition is someone who involves himself or herself in public or community affairs, then that person is ‘active’.
An individual who is passive, utterly apathetic and withdrawn from community life is no true citizen.
That person may hold ‘citizenship’ as a legal, national status, but does not display citizenship as a quality.
Perhaps, however, the term ‘active’ should be read to mean something more?
Perhaps it means that low-key, sporadic participation, which is the norm for most displays of citizenship, is not enough?
Is the requirement a mass mobilisation of the whole population to some form of community or public activity?
This would certainly justify the emphasis of the added adjective.
But it would be highly destabilising for any modern state.
The third possibility is that the adjective is a deliberate invitation for the population to divide themselves into ‘active’ and ‘passive’citizens.
One can easily imagine such a polity.
It would have an elite of politically conscious and publicly conscientious active citizens and a majority of couldn't-care-less passive citizens.
Maybe we have that already?
If so, why try to highlight the condition and pretend it is something new?
Surely, there can be no intention of institutionalising a classification?
After all, the term ‘active citizens’ was invented by the Abbé Sieyes in the early stages of the French Revolution.
They were the citoyens who paid at least the equivalent of three days' work in direct tax.
Should one consequently resist too vigorously the wicked thought that active citizenship in modern Britain will be a status conferred on those who actually pay their poll tax?
Fourthly, there is the matter of ambiguity.
Dr Colin Wringe of the University of Keele has analysed the ambiguities in the active citizenship concept.
He questions whether the word ‘active’ should be understood as an antonym of ‘reflective’or ‘critical’.
Clearly, an unreflective or uncritical citizenry would be highly undesirable as well as, strictly speaking, a contradiction in terms.
On the other hand, Wringe's suspicions gain some credence in the light of the well-publicised hostility of the Thatcherite Right to ‘the chattering classes’.
Wringe continues by suggesting that pronouncements on active citizenship indicate that its central themes are respect for democratic values, the law and one's obligations.
Each of these is susceptible of alternative interpretations.
One may suspect, from the very nature of Conservative political philosophy, that an elitist, Schumpeterian style is what the recent advocates of active citizenship have in mind.
The activities in which citizens are to be engaged are to be far removed from any levers of real political power.
However (and this is particularly pertinent in the educational context), if citizens are to learn respect for  democracy, they must understand its nature.
This involves appreciating that a more politically participative interpretation is equally valid, even more so.
It follows that ‘To teach the value of living in a democracy is therefore, by implication, to raise the issue of whether the society in which we actually live is democratic or not.’
Not, in all probability, quite the meaning of active citizenship Mrs Thatcher and her ministers have intended.
Dr Wringe also questions the Conservative sense of respect for the law as being a responsible acceptance of the legal code, its interpretation and its enforcement.
In the first place, it is important to distinguish between the rule of law in its political and its criminal senses.
Democrats have always been concerned about the abuse of power, not petty larceny.
Indeed, the struggle for a more just society has historically entailed constant protest and demonstration to change oppressive laws.
He describes as ‘ominous’ any ‘suggestion that, out of‘respect’for the law we should refrain from any forthright criticism either of particular laws, or of the institutions of law enforcement or the governmental process by which the laws are made.’
Good citizens should view laws, law-making and law-enforcement not with ‘awe and reverence, but sober scepticism’.
By such an attitude the citizen may responsibly sustain the tradition of advancement towards a more just and democratic society.
But is that what Mrs Thatcher and her ministers have intended?
On the matter of emphasising obligations rather than rights, Wringe argues that in the liberal tradition the citizen's most important obligation is in fact the defence of rights.
Failure of this citizenly vigilance can all too easily lead to an erosion of our entitlements.
Moreover, defence of rights may indeed require activity in the form of very vigorous protest.
Again, one may doubt whether this interpretation would be very palatable in Conservative circles.
Wringe further argues that the picture of the active citizen heavily engaged in voluntary service is something of a contradiction.
It involves a depoliticisation of the citizen, who by definition should in truth be acknowledged to be a political being.
Echoing the French general, we might declaim, ‘It's magnificent, but it's not citizenship.’
Wringe concludes by stating that ‘A more damning criticism is that, whether through expediency, inadvertence or just plain lack of sufficient thought, both the concept in itself and its key proposals obscure dilemmas and ambiguities well known to political and educational philosophy.’
Is there any way out of this semantic maze?
Various clarifications of a bifurcatory nature have been canvassed.
In the first place, one may recognise that the English language is not helpful.
In contrast, the French, for example, have two words for citizenship: ‘citoyenté ’ and ‘civisme ’, the former describing the status, the latter, attitude and  behaviour.
Others have distinguished the classical emphasis on duty and virtue from the liberal emphasis on rights and freedoms (e.g. Oldfield cited above).
Still others (e.g. Almond and Verba's Civic Culture ) have differentiated between ‘citizen’ and ‘subject’frames of mind.
These distinctions are helpful.
But they do not take us sufficiently deeply into the complexity of the concept.
The present writer has attempted an analysis into five interconnecting elements (Citizenship: The Civic Ideal in World History, Politics and Education ).
It is suggested that citizenship is a relationship between an individual and a polity.
The citizen must therefore identify with his state.
This identity is partly a legal status, partly a feeling.
The status of citizenship endows the individual (as T.H. Marshall has shown) with three sets of rights or entitlements — civil, political and social.
However, the citizen-state relationship is reciprocal.
These rights are therefore matched by obligations or duties.
Finally, the citizen must, if true to his quality, be possessed of some civic virtue.
Linked with identity, this expresses itself as loyalty; linked with obligations and duties, it is a sense of responsibility.
A condition of citizenship, it is contended, cannot truly obtain unless all five elements exist and are in balance.
Identity, civil, political and social rights and duties, and civic virtue are not elements to be selected on a pick-and-mix basis for the convenience or advantage of a political party.
Unless that basic truth is grasped, there will continue to be confusion in both media discussion of the issue and in schools.
With regard to the schools, there is a danger in the decision to make citizenship a cross-curricular theme.
By recognising that a number of subjects have a valid and useful contribution to make, some elements may be given less weighty consideration than others and the interrelationships may become lost.
Unless there is a truly successful arrangement for the coordination of this teaching in schools, the current confusion will persist into the next generation.
Such a circumstance would be most regrettable — and not only because it is one of the functions of education to dispel confusion.
There is another reason.
Coincidentally with the struggles to define, encourage and teach citizenship at the national level, attempts are being made in both official and academic forums to clarify and define a European citizenship in a Community sense.
This already exists in embryo: for instance, there is a European passport and a European flag.
This is not the place to discuss this question.
What is important to notice here is that continuing uncertainty about the meaning of national citizenship is both inconvenient and dangerous in the light of European Community developments.
It will be difficult enough comfortably to relate national and Community citizenships.
Features that are intrinsically valuable in our national citizenship could be undermined if we are so uncertain about what they are in any case.
Orwell warned in 1946 that the English language ‘becomes ugly and inaccurate because our thoughts are foolish, but the slovenliness of our language makes it easier for us to have foolish thoughts.’
Citizenship is too important a concept to be corrupted by slipshod thinking.
ACTIVE CITIZENSHIP IN THE 1990s
By Dawn Oliver
Citizenship has increasingly attracted the attention of politicians, public figures, political scientists and academic lawyers in the last decade or so.
This may be seen from the range of those who went to press on the subject in 1989 and 1990.
Douglas Hurd, then Home Secretary, and a number of other Conservative ministers began to extol the virtues of ‘active citizenship’ as a way of overcoming the lack of a sense of responsibility to the community, lawlessness and overdependence on the state.
Paddy Ashdown advocated a’ Citizens' Britain’of free, participating, secure individuals in place of what he saw as a ‘Citadel Britain’of oppressed, stressed people and a closed political system.
In April 1990 the Prince of Wales launched his ‘Volunteers’ scheme, under which young people would have opportunities to contribute to the public welfare and learn the value of participation and the feeling of belonging to the community through voluntary work.
The Speaker's Commission on Citizenship put in a plea for the encouragement of citizenship through education in schools, through training of public servants to understand the duties of the state to its citizens, and through voluntary service to the community (the Commission was associated with the Prince's Trust launch of the ‘Volunteers’ scheme).
Citizenship is to become a cross-curricular subject in the national curriculum.
The wide appeal of the concept derives in part from the fact that it is non-partisan, not associated with any particular political doctrine.
The political parties each have a different vision of precisely what citizenship involves but they are all broadly agreed that it is a good thing and agree in general terms at least on its basic ingredients.
Although, as we shall see, citizenship has much to do with the individual rights of citizens, the concept lacks the implication of liberal individualism often associated with ‘human rights’ and found objectionable by many on the political left.
Although it is often taken to imply that the citizen is entitled to ‘social rights’, it does not immediately conjure up a picture of socialist collectivism which would alienate those on the right.
It does imply a responsibility to the community and appeals therefore to thinkers on the right of the political spectrum concerned about ‘active   citizenship’ and personal responsibility, as well as to those on the centre and the left who see benefits in community solidarity.
Yet it is far from clear exactly what citizenship involves, either legally or from a political or social point of view.
The Legal Content of Citizenship
Legally, citizenship has very little meaning in the United Kingdom.
The term is used to distinguish citizens from ‘aliens’ who suffer certain disabilities such as having no right to remain in the country, being liable to be deported in certain circumstances, often not being entitled to vote (though Commonwealth citizens and citizens of the Republic of Ireland resident in this country do have the vote) or to receive state benefits.
This is a rather negative approach, since it tells us nothing about any positive rights that citizens may have.
That is not to say that British citizens in the legal sense have no rights, only that they are not part of the express legal concept of citizenship.
The best place to look for the substantive law relating to citizenship is not under ‘citizenship’ in law books.
The clearest general account of the legal rights or ‘entitlements’ of citizenship is still to be found in T. H. Marshall's Citizenship and Social Class , published in 1950.
Although the concept of citizenship as a political and social status and practice has changed since then, and although the legal content has also undergone change, Marshall's analysis remains seminal.
Marshall traced the development of a legal status of citizenship in the United Kingdom through a number of historical stages.
First, the winning of civil rights during and after the eighteenth century: in a number of important cases the courts developed the doctrine that the individual was free to do anything which was not made unlawful by a specific law; and the corollary of this approach was that the state could not interfere with the civil and political liberties of its citizens (in those days ‘subjects’) unless the government could persuade Parliament to pass legislation authorising the interference.
It followed that citizens enjoyed freedom of speech, association, conscience, movement and so on, freedoms which protect both the citizen's autonomy in his private life and his right to participate in political activity.
Political citizenship rights, notably the right to vote and to stand for election, were won in the nineteenth century and the early twentieth as the Representation of the People Acts extended the franchise by stages until universal adult suffrage had been achieved.
And finally, social citizenship rights, on a range from ‘the right to a modicum of economic wealth and security’ to ‘the right to share to the full in the social heritage and to live the life of a civilized being according to the standards prevailing in society’were won in the twentieth century, especially in the post-war period when the welfare state was extended so that all were guaranteed education, health care and a ‘safety net’of financial provision through what was then ‘national assistance’.
Many of the legal ‘rights’ or ‘incidents’of what political scientists or philosophers might refer to as citizenship are enjoyed regardless of whether the individual in question is a British citizen.
It has been said that ‘…during the last forty years the United Kingdom has moved away from the nationality citizenship model’.
Freedom of speech or association, the right to sue in the courts of the United Kingdom and to rely on its laws apply broadly to all who are present in the realm; certain of the social services — school education, health care — are available to citizens of the European Community countries and to certain other non-British citizens.
As indicated above, the right to vote is not limited to British citizens.
So in practice legal citizenship rights are not generally ‘nationality based’ in the UK.
In the post-war period and until the 1970s the content of Marshall's citizenship — which has been called a ‘citizenship of entitlement’— expanded in various ways: the political element in the form of the right to vote and stand for election grew to include participation in the political process through a proliferation of pressure groups; the civil element was enhanced through anti-discrimination legislation, and the UK's signature of the European Convention on Human Rights.
The granting of an individual right of petition to the European Commission and Court of Human Rights permitted individuals complaining of breach of the protection of civil rights in the Convention to go to these institutions if they failed to obtain redress through the UK courts.
The availability of legal aid to those unable to afford to pursue their legal rights in the courts made a practical reality of the access to justice to many who could not have afforded to do so.
And provision by the welfare state expanded until the 1970s with benefits increasing in real value, access to higher education and health care expanding, and rights to housing for the homeless being guaranteed by law for priority groups.
However, since the mid-1970s for a variety of reasons the content of this ‘citizenship of entitlement’ has been reduced.
The operation of the electoral system has changed as a result of alterations in the level and distribution of support for the political parties, so that the value of a vote is far less for the supporters of some parties than others and in some constituencies than in others.
This is particularly true of the value of votes for the smaller parties of the centre — the Liberal Party, the SDP and now the Liberal Democrats; and of the value of votes for Labour in the South and for the Conservatives in the North and in Scotland.
The influence of pressure groups in the political process has waned in the last decade, largely because the Conservative Party, and indeed many electors, took against the relationship between the  Labour government and the trade unions in the 1970s in which the unions had seemed to exercise excessive influence over the government.
Civil liberties have also been eroded in the last decade or more by government efforts to suppress media comment, criticism and reporting in cases such as the Spycatcher, Ponting and Tisdall affairs.
There has been increased regulation of peaceful demonstrations since the Public Order Act 1986 and judicial decisions in cases involving picketing during the miners' strike of 1984–5, and increased police powers of detention without charge since the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984.
There is also talk of ending the ‘right to silence’.
And more people are now ineligible for legal aid than was the case a decade ago.
At the same time, however, civil rights of an economic kind have been expanded through legislation such as the right to buy council housing and to purchase shares in privatised industries.
This has been a major platform of government economic policy.
But it would be stretching the meaning of citizenship to regard these rights — however desirable they may be from other points of view — as forming part of an enlarged ‘citizenship’.
They are essentially directed to promoting the individual persona and private autonomy of the individual rather than citizenship in the sense of the relationship between the individual and the state or the community.
As far as the social element of citizenship is concerned, cuts in public expenditure have meant underfunding of education and public housing and complaints about the standard and availability of many public services, including public transport and the health service.
The point must be made here that not all reductions in civil, political and social rights are necessarily unjustified.
It is clear that there have to be some restrictions on the exercise by citizens of freedom of speech, the right to demonstrate, the application of pressure on governments through industrial action or other means.
The level of provision of the social element of citizenship has to depend upon the prosperity of the country and its priorities as determined by the government in allocating resources between investment, private consumption and social services.
But there is a widespread, though of course not universal, feeling that some of the restrictions on civil and political rights have been largely due to government's desire to avoid criticism and political embarrassment and to suppress dissent.
As far as the social element is concerned, a government should recognise the need to promote social cohesion by securing that all citizens have a standard of living that enables them to participate in the life of the community; governments must take care that reductions in the social element of citizenship which they may regard as necessary in the area of economic policy do not result in sections of the population being excluded from citizenship and membership of the national  community.
Should substantial sections of the population feel excluded, then there are dangers of alienation, lawlessness and damaging social divisions.
There is a widely felt fear that cuts to the social element of citizenship have damaged social cohesion and that this damage outweighs any advantages that the policy may have in the economic sphere.
Citizenship and the Community
This brings us to the relationship between citizenship and community.
This is an important aspect of citizenship and one which is recognised by those advocating ‘active citizenship’ in various forms.
Citizenship is essentially a relationship between the individual and the community.
In the post-war period when Marshall was writing, the senses both of national and local community were strong.
This was in large part a result of the war effort which had stimulated a sense of national pride in ‘Britishness’ and had produced cooperation within communities, locally, in towns, in neighbourhoods and at work.
But in the 1990s many citizens, particularly among the English (who tend to be less conscious of their ‘Englishness’ than the Scots and Welsh are of their national identities), do not even feel British: it has been commented that the British lost their sense of identity along with their empire and have not yet found another identity.
The establishing of national assemblies in Scotland and Wales and of regional assemblies in England could serve to stimulate a feeling of national identity at these levels, but this would still leave something of a lacuna at the United Kingdom level.
The principal weakness in the sense of community when Marshall gave his lectures was the class system, and his emphasis on the social element of citizenship was directed largely at counteracting divisions in the community that would otherwise be caused by class inequalities.
In the 1990s class divisions are in many respects less consciously felt than they were in the post-war era, but there are other divisions which pose a threat to the sense of community, national identity and social cohesion.
The sense of Britishness has been supplanted or supplemented by Scottish and Welsh nationalism; the sense of identity with the nations of the United Kingdom is not felt so strongly by minorities in the population — Moslems from Pakistan and India, Afro-Caribbeans, Indians, Bangladeshis and others who experience discrimination in the British community while also experiencing a sense of belonging to their own religious and ethnic communities.
This problem of the sense of identity at national government (i.e. United Kingdom) level is one which will be felt more acutely in many countries in what promises to be a period of mass migration.
This is a process about which we have only recently become aware.
The Gulf  crisis brought to public attention the very large numbers of non-nationals working in the Middle East states, but there are also large non-national populations in the member states of the European Community and there is likely to be a large movement of people out of the USSR and the Eastern European countries into Western Europe now that the borders are relatively open.
These movements can cause real problems from the point of view of the sense of national identity and citizenship of the migrants and for their relationships with the indigenous populations.
These are problems which it is a major responsibility of government to face up to and adopt sensitive policies to foster social cohesion without denying people the right to their own culture and way of life.
The sense of belonging to more than one community is an example of what Heater has called ‘multiple citizenship’.
While in most respects this diversity enriches community life in the United Kingdom, the good relations between the different groups are precious while they last, very fragile and can cause enormous problems should they break down — as in Northern Ireland.
If for example the relations between Moslem populations in the United Kingdom, or between those populations and the non-Moslem community, were to break down as a result of the crisis in the Gulf, the implications for social cohesion public order and the peaceful coexistence of communities would be grave.
The sense of national community is indeed crucial to citizenship.
Some politicians have been extraordinarily insensitive to the complexities of the issues involved in fostering a sense of national community.
This sense is often identified with nationalism and patriotism which can be dangerously close to racism, chauvinism and xenophobia.
There is evidence particularly on the political right of a view that ‘multiple citizenship’ is somehow inconsistent with British citizenship, whereas what is needed is a way of combining a sense of belonging to the British, English, Welsh, Scottish or (more problematic still) the Northern Ireland community at the same time as feeling a sense of community with other groups.
The sense of national community is not helped by exhortations to cheer for England in Test Matches and the implication that those who do not are in some sense not good British citizens, and yet this sort of crude and simplistic interpretation of the obligations of citizenship was heard from some politicians in 1990.
Other factors have contributed to the weakening of community spirit.
Increased mobility has reduced the feeling of attachment to neighbourhoods; the redevelopment of old housing estates in the 1950s and on into the 1970s broke up established communities.
As more women go to work and as marriage break down increases the networks of local cooperation and support weaken.
Some take the view  that Conservative policies that promote competitiveness rather than cooperation, materialism and self-support rather than altruism, have also undermined the sense of community.
Others ascribe the weakening of community consciousness to the failures of the churches to inculcate a sense of moral responsibility into the population, to the fashion for ‘permissiveness’ in education in the 1960s and 1970s which undermined respect for authority, and to the failures of parents to control their children.
Consciousness of the weakening of the sense of community, especially at local level, started to reawaken in the 1970s.
At that period policies of housing redevelopment began to be replaced by rehabilitation, in recognition of the fact that redevelopment often destroyed thriving communities and the people decanted into new housing estates commonly felt isolated and unable to develop a sense of community in their new neighbourhoods.
The Liberal Party developed its own brand of ‘community politics’ which brought it dividends in electoral terms in local government.
More recently, a number of voluntary initiatives have sought to foster a sense of belonging to the community on the part of young people.
Notable among these are the Prince of Wales' ‘Volunteers’ scheme, launched in conjunction with the Speaker's Commission on Citizenship in April 1990; and the Citizenship Foundation, launched in September 1989 with the objective of promoting ‘effective citizenship’through projects in schools.
Education for Citizenship
The political parties have also turned their attentions to citizenship and the community.
The Conservative enthusiasm for active citizenship has already been mentioned.
Their approach is to encourage a sense of citizenship in various ways.
Of these, education is particularly important: the national curriculum is to include citizenship as a cross-curricular subject and the National Curriculum Council is working on how this can be taught.
Bodies such as the Citizenship Foundation are preparing materials.
There is broad cross-party support in principle for the teaching of citizenship in schools, although there need to be safeguards against using this part of the curriculum to promote a partisan, party political ideology or concept of citizenship.
The Speaker's Commission on Citizenship, in its report Encouraging Citizenship , placed great emphasis on the teaching of citizenship and expressed concern that this should be done effectively.
‘Citizenship as a study area is particularly vulnerable either to being presented as theory without practice, as in civic courses, or to being offered solely as an experience, as practice without theory.'
The Commission felt that both elements were necessary if a balanced and effective course in citizenship were to be provided.
The objective of the Commission was that ‘young people should leave a school with some confidence in their  ability to participate in their society, to resolve conflict and, if they oppose a course of action, to express that opposition fairly, effectively and peacefully’.
They also felt that experience within the community was important for the individual, as an encouragement to make a voluntary contribution in later life, since this would ultimately promote social cohesion.
We can see here that citizenship goes far beyond learning about Marshall's ‘citizenship of entitlement’ and extends into cultivating the practice of citizenship, the promotion of a sense of community, social cohesion, and ‘civic virtue.
’ Active Citizenship’
‘Active citizenship’, according to the Conservative view, should include taking responsibility in the community through activities such as serving as a school governor or a magistrate, running Neighbourhood Watch schemes, and doing voluntary work of various sorts.
It also includes accepting responsibility for one's own family, and it is here that the burden of active citizenship is liable to fall disproportionately on women.
There is still a strong view prevailing in the Conservative Party that ‘a woman's place is in the home’.
In practice, many family members look to the female members to take on the lion's share of responsibility for children, elderly relatives, the sick and the disabled, as well as domestic work, sometimes in addition to taking employment outside the home.
The stress this imposes on carers can be damaging to their mental and physical health and deprive them even of a fulfilling private life.
It can also in effect make it impossible for them to participate in the community and thus deprives them of an important aspect of citizenship.
It also exonerates the community from taking on some of these tasks — caring for the elderly, the chronically sick and the disabled, and it is this aspects of the emphasis on family responsibility that produces scepticism about the motivation of exponents of active citizenship: it is seen as a substitute for the state's responsibility for the social element of the citizenship of entitlement.
A number of points needs to be made about the Conservative concept of active citizenship.
There is much to be said in this writer's view for the encouragement of service to the community in these and many other ways, and for the encouragement of individual responsibility and parental control of their children: but the Conservative vision is essentially one-dimensional.
Citizenship is a burden, a set of obligations which a citizen owes to the community.
But these aspects of citizenship should form part of a wider concept which embraces also the citizenship of entitlement, participation in the wider national and political community and readiness on the part of the state to engage in debate and discussion with the citizenry, what Fishman has called ‘due political process’.
What seem to be missing from Conservative ‘active citizenship’ are these other dimensions.
Citizenship should, it is suggested, be regarded not only as a burden, or even as a set of rights or entitlements, but also as an opportunity for self-fulfilment and a reciprocal relationship between citizens and the state.
As we have seen, the civil and political elements of citizenship have been eroded in recent years.
The Conservative's active citizen is essentially apolitical, doing service to the community in non-political ways, and the Conservatives sometimes give the impression that they are anxious to eliminate political activity from many aspects of community life.
This explains Conservative dislike of the churches' drawing attention to the question of the duties of government to the citizenry — it was not regarded as proper for the churches to take an interest in political matters of this kind.
Another example which serves to illustrate this view of citizenship as apolitical is the decision taken by a Conservative-controlled local authority, Barnet, in 1987 to refuse to allow political groups such as CND or Amnesty International to take part in a community festival (the Court of Appeal found that this decision was unlawful and struck it down, too late to save the festival).
So far in this discussion the emphasis has been on the voluntary nature of the ‘obligations’ of the active citizen, which is to be encouraged through the educational system and in other ways about which, it must be said, there is fairly broad agreement across the political spectrum.
But there is, of course, scope for increasing the legal obligations of the citizenry.
The traditional and generally uncontroversial legal obligations of the citizen are to obey the law, to pay taxes, to serve on juries and to do military service.
But there is talk of citizenship involving a ‘duty to work’ in the United States, which could find itself transplanted to this country — indeed it already exists in some of the social security regulations — or a legal duty to control children, which is what is implied by an idea under consideration by the government to make parents responsible for fines imposed on their children.
There are other ways besides exhortation in which citizens can be placed under pressure to perform what a government sees as the obligations of citizenship, short of coercive legal enforcement.
If, for example, eligibility for a grant for education, or for council housing, or for employment in the public service, or for a place for a child at a school of first choice, were to be assessed by reference to the citizenship record of the applicant, then this would put considerable pressure on many people to perform these ‘voluntary obligations’.
There are a range of other citizenship ‘obligations’ that could find a place in a government's policy.
For example, a duty to have children, or to limit the number of children one has, a duty not to send children to a private school, or to do so, a duty not to use private health services, or to do so.
These examples are given in order to illustrate one of the dangers of the current preoccupation with the duties of citizenship, and that is the scope for it to encroach on the privacy and autonomy of the  individual.
‘A society which inflates citizenship so that it expands to occupy the total area of an individual's life is indeed in danger of becoming totalitarian’.
Since citizenship has become a fashionable and acceptable word, it is easy to slip into the habit of using it in preference to ‘individual rights’ or ‘human rights’, but it is important to bear in mind the desirability of keeping the private sphere of the life of the individual separate from his role as citizen, an essentially political role and status.
In this respect Marshall, too, was confusing since he made no explicit distinction between those civil rights which are to do with citizenship — freedom of expression and association for example— and those which are to do with protecting the citizen from the state or the community — the freedom to marry and found a family, a right to privacy for instance .
Citizenship and the Labour Party
Of the other political parties, Labour is not very explicitly committed to citizenship.
As far as the citizenship of entitlement as formulated by Marshall is concerned, Labour is opposed to the introduction of a Bill of Rights, for example, which would be one way of restoring the civil and political rights which have been eroded in recent years.
Its reason for this is largely to do with its distrust of the judges who, it feels, would use their power to strike down government action or legislation as being contrary to a Bill of Rights, as the American courts can do, to promote their own conservative values.
Labour's preference seems to be to rely on the political process to protect the rights of the citizen.
One problem here is that it is cold comfort to an individual citizen that he can use the political process to air his grievances, for example by writing to his MP or councillor or to the press or voting for another party next time round.
None of these uses of the political process will secure that the grievance is properly considered and a remedy given where appropriate.
The other problem is that Labour is not interested either in reforming the political process very radically to make it more effective in protecting citizens.
Although the party is committed to freedom of information and devolution, it is not interested in proportional representation which would revitalise the political system.
Although there is much to be said for freedom of information, it is not clear that it would greatly help individual aggrieved citizens.
And devolution might be less effective than it should be if, as could well be the case in Scotland for example, the support for one particular party was such that there was very little likelihood of a change of control at elections.
This would greatly undermine the political accountability of such assemblies.
Labour's prime interest as far as the citizenship of entitlement is concerned is with the social element, and the party is also committed, within the resources available, to improving this.
The party is concerned to ‘empower’ the individual, and interestingly the party's policy  review,Meet the Challenge.
Make the Change , devotes considerable attention to the citizen as consumer and the need to enhance the quality of both public and private services for consumers of them.
This use of language marks a significant shift in emphasis from the post-war years when those in receipt of public services were regarded more as applicants and claimants than as consumers (the same shift can be seen in London Regional Transport's irritating habit of addressing its passengers as customers — despite the fact that we have no real choice and the quality of service has not altered in line with the changed mode of address).
On active citizenship Labour has had little to say, although Labour spokespersons haves given support to the general idea of civic responsibility and the encouragement of a sense of community, which can be traced back to the nineteenth century traditions of civic virtue and community solidarity which are strong in the Labour party.
The Liberal Democrats and Citizenship
Of the three main parties, the Liberal Democrats have the widest concept of citizenship and the most radical commitment to it.
They propose the legal reinforcement of the three elements of the citizenship of entitlement.
The civil rights of the citizen would be secured by a Bill of Rights based on the European Convention on Human Rights.
Such a measure would also protect the position of the private individual, since the Convention gives rights to privacy, to marry and found a family, to practice religion.
The political element would be secured through the adoption of proportional representation.
And the social element, if Paddy Ashdown's proposals were adopted, would be protected through the legal definition of entitlements to health, education, housing and welfare.
As far as ‘active citizenship’ is concerned, the Liberal Democrats, like the Liberals before them, have a strong commitment to community politics and the encouragement of community action.
They would devolve power to national assemblies in Scotland and Wales and to regional assemblies in England, and their hope is that this would promote a sense of national and regional identity while preserving the United Kingdom and a sense of belonging to a British community.
It is significant that the Liberal Democrats, unlike Labour, see a central role for the law and the courts in promoting citizenship: they would seek to clarify the obligations of the state and the rights of the citizen in law.
In these respects they differ markedly from the other two parties and have a much stronger and more developed concept of citizenship.
Whether it is an appropriate concept and whether it would work is, of course, a matter for debate.
Citizenship in the 1990s
Let us conclude by considering the ingredients of citizenship and the possible role of the law in giving effect to a modern concept of it.
It is  suggested that the civil, political and social elements of Marshall's version of the citizenship of entitlement are essential but not sufficient for a modern concept.
It is essential that these rights be such as to allow citizens some autonomy in their private lives as non-citizens, but also that they should enable citizens to have an effective input into the national political system and into their local communities.
This means, among other things, that the electoral system should be one that does not effectively disenfranchise large sections of the citizenry, while at the same time it must produce a government that will be both effective and accountable.
The need for a modern concept of citizenship is not the only need of the political system — others include accountability of the state and effectiveness in government and a balance has to be found between these three desiderata.
So any electoral system should promote all three, and in this writer's view the present system does not do so.
The legal system should also provide adequate protection for the exercise of citizenship rights, and here there are questions as to whether the present system under which civil liberties are residual rather than rights is adequate.
Most other Western countries provide constitutional protections for the civil and political rights of their citizens.
So the question whether a Bill of Rights should be adopted in the United Kingdom is relevant to the issue of citizenship.
Social rights are particularly problematic when the issue of their legal protection arises.
As indicated earlier, Paddy Ashdown has advocated the legal definition of these.
While this would be possible, it would be hard to protect such rights in any great detail through, for example, some form of constitutional entrenchment since the standard of these rights depends very much on the state of the economy and on demographic factors such as the numbers of elderly in the population (currently increasing greatly) and the number of children and the size of the working population.
Another approach to protecting the social element is to secure that there is an open and healthy political system through which citizens can act as watchdogs over their own social rights — this again highlights the importance of the political element of citizenship.
As Desmond King has argued, ultimately ideological and institutional support are the best protectors of social citizenship rights.
One external institutional support that is likely to prove increasingly influential is the European Community, which is seeking to promote a ‘social charter’ covering rights to proper conditions of work and to health care, social security, training.
Other institutional supports for citizenship could include a more responsive system of local government, and national and regional assemblies if these were to be set up.
Important though Marshall's citizenship of entitlement is, it is not the whole picture.
It was limited in various ways, particularly since it was conceived as a status, a collection of legal rights against the state, rather than as a practice.
This aspect has a bearing on two further components, social cohesion, which has to do with the sense of community and national identity, and what Heater has called civic virtue.
This is one respect in which active citizenship is important because involvement in the community by voluntary work and political activity serves to foster a sense in the participating citizen of belonging to the community and of national identity, while at the same time contributing to the common welfare.
The problem here is how can social cohesion and civic virtue be promoted?
As we have seen, education is one way, but other possibilities exist also.
The Speaker's Commission advocates opportunities to participate in schemes such as that run by the Prince of Wales Trust, openness in government, which allows citizens to make a contribution to the political process through lobbying, campaigning and so on.
They also express the hope that the citizenship record of school pupils could be given more weight by universities and other institutions of higher education when admitting students, and this could be facilitated by the inclusion in UCCA and PCAS forms of a standard section in which a reference to community involvement could be included.
And for so long as the honours system continues in operation, there ought to be recognition of citizenship as a criterion.
Indeed the Commission recommended that a new part of the honours system should be developed to give a distinctive, but equal weight to citizenship and voluntary achievements.
Finally, they suggest the establishment of a Standing Royal Commission on Citizenship, or a chartered institution or charitable trust that would have specific responsibility for research into citizenship and to stimulate public discussion of it.
The Commission also considered the obligations of the state to the citizen, a subject which as we have seen advocates of active citizenship have tended to neglect.
They felt that it was important that public officers concerned with citizens — judges, the police, the armed services, even teachers, doctors land nurses — should receive training on the obligations of the state and on the rights of citizens.
In these fields both citizens and the officers concerned experience the same difficulty, the inaccessibility of information about what citizenship involves.
The Commission suggests that one way of solving this problem, which is sees as being fundamental, would be the codification of the law relating to citizenship, including the obligations of the state.
The implication is some form of written constitution, which would be a major step for the system, though one which has growing support in the form of Charter 88 for example.
The Speaker's Commission gave weight to the need to have ‘an agreed framework of rules governing the relationships of individuals to the state and to one another.'
This, however, is a highly problematic area.
There is less consensus in practice than the Commission  admitted.
When it comes down to specifics, there is not even any real consensus between the political parties about the state's duty to secure the civil, political and social elements of citizenship identified by Marshall.
Nor is a duty to promote a sense of national identity and social cohesion universally acknowledged.
The Speaker's Commission stressed that the ‘entitlements’ of citizenship should be protected: ‘The Commission considers that it is the duty of government to enable people to have an equal opportunity to participate in citizenship.
The duty includes the provision of a floor of social entitlements.’
These should protect citizens from the homelessness, poverty, bad housing, unemployment, religious racial and sexual discrimination, physical and mental disability and ill health and the need to care for dependent members of the family which prevent citizens from participating in society.
It does not follow that it is the duty of government to provide these services — the duty could be discharged by securing that they are available from other sources: this is what is implied by the distinction between the providing and enabling state.
However, this point should not be taken to imply that the burden can be effectively discharged by the voluntary sector, even though it may be able to make a useful contribution to meeting these needs.
The Commission rightly made the point that ‘there is a concern that voluntary effort is being used to compensate for deficiencies in the public services.’
It felt that this was wrong and there was a danger in an over-reliance on voluntary effort.
And ‘in no sense should voluntary bodies partly or wholly relying on fundraising and volunteer help take over elements of the core work of the public services.’
In other words, active citizenship should be regarded as a supplement to, not as a substitute for, the citizenship of entitlement.
What should be the relationship between these various ingredients of citizenship, and in particular between civil, political and social rights, the duties, legal and moral, of citizens and the duties of the state?
There would be dangers in making the enjoyment of the entitlements of citizenship conditional on the performance of the legal or moral duties of citizenship, especially the ‘voluntary obligations’ of service to the community, since these entitlements are, it is suggested, too important to be ‘bought’by community service and forfeit for lack of the required track record of active citizenship; also, it would be unduly intrusive to place these burdens on citizens who should be entitled to a private life, and many of whom — women with young children or dependent relatives to care for, for example— do not have the time or resources to do service to the wider community.
The most problematic aspects of a modern concept of citizenship is the need to promote the sense of national identity or in some way to secure that citizens experience a sense of belonging to the state and the state belonging to them.
Without this, there are real dangers of  alienation, social division and disorder.
The inevitable increase in migration into and within the European Community will exacerbate these problems, and it is essential that public policy be directed at promoting good relations between all groups in the community and a sense of social cohesion.
Conclusion
The development of citizenship in the 1990s will no doubt continue to occupy the attention of politicians, and increasingly it will come to be debated by citizens, particularly as it enters the national curriculum.
If it is to become an accepted institution in the United Kingdom, then it must become a much clearer and more developed concept.
We need to reach a consensus on the legal rights and duties of citizens, and on the legal obligations of the state to its citizens.
But the non-legal aspect of citizenship is also vital, and appropriate institutional and procedural arrangements need to be developed that will promote the practice of citizenship and harness senses of national community, social cohesion and ‘civic virtue’ to the benefit of both the state and the community of citizens.
THE IMPACT OF THE COMMUNITY CHARGE ON ELECTORAL BEHAVIOUR: THE 1990 LOCAL ELECTIONS IN ENGLAND AND WALES
By Colin Rallings and Michael Thrasher
ONE of the avowed goals of the introduction of the community charge to replace the system of domestic rates was to improve the accountability of local government.
Mrs Thatcher was concerned not simply that fewer than half the electorate bothered to participate in the choosing of their local council, but that many eligible electors were not themselves local taxpayers.
She believed that ‘representation without taxation’ led to councils gaining support more for what they could promise as spenders rather than save as prudent housekeepers.
By introducing a per capita tax, it was the government's aim to draw every adult's attention to exactly how much their local services were costing and to encourage them to assess whether they were receiving value for money.
This is not the place to rehearse old ground about the politics of the poll tax, but it is important to note that, as implemented, the tax straightaway compromised some of its initial stated objectives.
The wide entitlement to reliefs and rebates, which the government insisted were more generous than under the rates; the existence of safety nets to redistribute income between certain authorities; and the immediate introduction of capping all fudged the relationship between councils and voters.
Local authorities continued to be threatened with central government imposed limitations on their ability to raise revenue locally, and the personal consequences for individual community charge payers voting for either increases or decreases in expenditure would vary considerably.
When one further considers that all electors in Scotland and in non-metropolitan England and Wales have services provided by two different types of council, then the image of a clear and direct line of accountability between elector and local authority begins to evaporate.
Nevertheless, the issue of the poll tax was very clearly the context within which the 1990 local elections were fought.
The new tax was the source of considerable public indignation, with marches, rallies and petitions the order of the day throughout the country.
Moreover, it had   become clear from the opinion polls that the unpopularity of the new tax was being laid at the door of the government which had introduced it, rather than the local authorities who were responsible for levying and collecting it.
The 1990 local elections were thus treated by both politicians and commentators as providing not simply a test of the impact of the poll tax, but also a crucial verdict on Mrs Thatcher and her government.
The political temperature throughout the spring was very high, and Labour's lead in the polls was consistently over 20% in the month following their dramatic gain in the Mid-Staffordshire parliamentary by-election in late March.
Swings of up to 30% to Labour in the year since the county council contests were recorded in several local government by-elections, with the party registering a number of victories in the hitherto barren ground of rural South and East.
Projections from the polls suggested that Labour might make over 500 net gains on May 3rd, and the prospect of such a result led to speculation about the removal of Mrs Thatcher from office.
More than anything, though, the May 1990 elections provided voters with an opportunity to make their views known in the relative calm of the ballot box, and it was an opportunity they took in unprecedented numbers.
A Summary of the Results
LONDON
The quadrennial elections in London were, by some degree, afforded the most political and media attention.
In the event this was justified, because the results in London did differ markedly from those in the rest of the country.
The London Boroughs had last been contested in 1986 when Labour won exactly half of all the seats and a small plurality in votes cast — see Table 1.
Opinion polls conducted in the capital during the 1990 campaign suggested that Labour might receive as much as 50% of the vote overall, with surveys in individual boroughs presaging Labour gains in such key areas as Barnet, Wandsworth and Westminster.
In the event, however, Labour actually suffered a swing against it compared with 1986, lost a net total of 20 seats and, in some boroughs, even performed less well than at the 1987 general election.
The Conservative vote increased by something over 2%, whereas Labour's  share, despite an almost ten point decline by the Democrats, rose by just 1.3%.
In eleven boroughs there was a swing to the Conservatives, with movements of over 7% being recorded in Brent, Wandsworth and Westminster.
The emphasis given to London by the media allowed the Conservatives to camouflage their very much poorer performance everywhere else.
Indeed, if the results in London had been repeated throughout the country, Labour would not have done well enough to gain an overall majority in a putative general election.
As The Economist put it: ‘Mrs Thatcher has much to thank the capital for’.
One characteristic which London did share with the rest of the country was an increase in turnout: 48.2% of registered electors voted, compared with 45.4% in 1986.
METROPOLITAN BOROUGHS
Turnout in the metropolitan boroughs in 1990 was, at 46.3%, higher even than that in the two pre-general election contests in 1983 and 1987.
Turnouts of over 50% in individual wards were almost commonplace, and in only one ward throughout the metropolitan areas (Elswick, Newcastle upon Tyne) did fewer than one in three of the electorate go to the polls.
There was a healthy rise in participation in almost every borough, with habitual poor performers like Sandwell and Sunderland increasing their average turnout by almost 10%.
Bury and Stockport once more topped the list, with third place going to Bradford, an authority where the national attention paid to the city's politics, and the polarising of political opinion on the ground, can only have increased electoral interest.
Metropolitan Borough Elections (% vote)
Competition between the parties was, however, somewhat less than in previous years.
Councillors were elected unopposed in 53 wards, more than 6% of the total, and there was a contest between the three major political groups in only 6 in every 10 wards.
Labour was, as usual, almost universally present, but the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats fielded 48 and 76 fewer candidates respectively than in 1988.
Both parties seemed to feel little obligation to fly the flag in their most barren areas, with the Democrats in particular gaining some reward from the careful husbandry of their more slender resources.
Indeed, the ability of the Liberal Democrats yet again to confound the pundits and the polls was a striking feature of these elections.
Their  vote was scarcely changed from two years previously, and they easily overcame their tormentors from the 1989 European Assembly elections, the Greens.
They came first in 66 wards and emerged as the only national political party other than Labour and the Conservatives with any metropolitan councillors.
This relative success should not, however, overshadow Labour's undoubted triumph.
With the party buoyant in the opinion polls, and taking full benefit from government discomfiture over the poll tax, Labour increased its share of the vote to almost 55%.
At this level of support the electoral system begins to work very handsomely in a party's favour, and Labour came first in over three-quarters of the wards.
Despite this, only Bradford was actually gained by the party, and many Labour votes were in a sense wasted by piling up even higher in areas where the party were already dominant.
The Conservatives suffered a considerable loss of seats, but their share of the vote was static compared with 1986 thanks to the declining support of the former Alliance parties.
However, they did 5% less well than in 1988, and their attempts to castigate high spending Labour metropolitan authorities seemed to backfire.
There was little sign of any success for the campaign that Mrs Thatcher announced on the steps of 10 Downing Street in 1987 to ‘win back the cities’ for the party.
The so-called Tory flagship council among the metropolitan boroughs, Bradford, was comfortably won by Labour with an above average swing of 7.4% since 1988.
These general trends once again disguise some interesting regional and local variations in results.
Labour made least advance in the West Midlands, with its share of the vote in Sandwell, Walsall and Wolverhampton actually decreasing compared with 1988.
However, in 1988 those three boroughs were each among the top five increases in Labour share of the vote.
It seems likely that the party had done so well then that there was little room for further advance, rather than that its performance in 1990 was especially poor.
At the other end of the scale, Labour did impressively well in some boroughs.
Its share in Liverpool rose by more than 14% compared with 1986, but hardly changed if comparison is made with 1988.
On the other hand, the party made substantial headway on both 1986 and 1988 in a large number of boroughs.
In Stockport Labour jumped from third to first place in terms of votes cast, and in Leeds it added almost 10% to take its share to over 55%.
The considerable increases in the Labour vote in Knowsley and Tameside do, however, have to be seen alongside a lower level of party competition.
Although the Conservative vote overall remained roughly at its 1986 level, their comparative share actually fell in 22 of the 36 boroughs.
Some of the wilder fluctuations can be explained by changing patterns of party contestation.
The Conservatives only contested three seats in  Barnsley in 1986, so their borough-wide share was certain to increase after fielding ten candidates last May.
Conversely, in South Tyneside, they had candidates in 13 wards in 1986 but only in nine this time.
The performance of the Liberal Democrats was similarly affected, although their average share of the vote in seats contested held up very well.
The benefits of targeting were seen, for example, in St Helens where the party gained four seats compared with 1986 and managed to keep its share at the level experienced in the days of the Alliance.
Finally, we should note the healthy expansion in the number of women candidates — exceeding 25% for the first time in the metropolitan authorities.
Although women were proportionately less successful than men in being elected (24% of them came first as against 35% of men), 1990 resumed the upward trend in female participation in local elections which had been so strangely set back in 1988.
ENGLISH AND WELSH DISTRICTS
The results of the district council elections in 1990 were quite exceptional.
Although media attention remained fixed on events in London, they surely provided Mrs Thatcher's government with its biggest shock.
Labour topped the poll and won more than half the wards in the tier of local government usually assumed to be a Conservative stronghold.
Unlike in London and the metropolitan areas, the Tory vote actually fell compared with 1986, and Labour's share rose by more than 10%.
The Liberal Democrats did much less well than had the Alliance in 1986 in terms of votes, but they had more success in targeting and retaining council seats.
Turnout was 7% higher than in 1988, and was in fact the highest for this set of authorities since local government reorganisation in 1973.
District Council Elections (% Vote)
Against this background the Conservatives fell back almost everywhere, only obtaining greater than 50% of the vote in the Chancellor of the Exchequer's home district, Huntingdonshire.
They found themselves squeezed by either Labour or the Democrats depending on local patterns of party competition, and they lost control of a wide range of  district councils.
In Hampshire alone Gosport, Havant and Portsmouth all slipped from their grasp.
There was a small regional dimension to these results, with the swing to Labour varying from 3.2% in the Northern standard region, where only 4 districts held elections, to 8.8% in both the East Midlands and the North West.
The Conservatives did not do as badly in the South East as elsewhere (average swing to Labour, 4.7%), whereas Labour performed much better in another traditional area of weakness, the South West, with the Conservative vote dropping substantially in Bristol (-6.7%), Exeter (-8.8%), Penwith (-11.6%), and Torbay (-17.4%).
Labour's performance, particularly in parts of the South of England, was extraordinary.
It polled comfortably more than 50% in a number of areas where it will be looking for parliamentary gains at the next general election.
Included in this list are Great Yarmouth, Hyndburn, Slough, Harlow, Ipswich and Thamesdown (Swindon), where the local authority and constituency boundaries are exactly or very nearly contiguous.
The Liberal Democrats had the highest share of the vote in several authorities where they have proven local government strength.
The question remains, however, one of translating local performance into national success.
In areas such as Cheltenham, Hereford and Eastbourne there is little to suggest that anything new has happened to enable them to translate this into general election support.
Nevertheless, as the outcome if the Eastbourne parliamentary by-election demonstrated, a strong local electoral base developed over a number of years can provide the Liberal Democrats with the opportunity for a sensational, if perhaps transient, victory.
Such local support cannot, however, be taken for granted.
In Southend, for example, their vote fell quite sharply compared with 1988 and they lost six seats, although in neighbouring Rochford their share increased by 8%.
In the districts fewer councillors were returned unopposed than in 1988, and there was a sizeable increase in the total number of candidates.
The Greens were present in over 500 wards, compared with 206 wards in 1988, and the Liberal Democrats were able to field almost as many candidates as they had done previously.
This contrasts with the picture in the metropolitan authorities where they had 15% fewer candidates.
On average each vacancy was fought by more than 3 contenders.
The proportion of women candidates was at 29.4% the highest we have yet discovered for any tier of local or central government.
More women were elected in 1990 than in 1988, but still a lower proportion of female candidates than male were successful.
However, with more than 25% of all district councillors returned in 1990 being women, we may just be seeing evidence of a ‘bottom up’ trend in female participation in electoral politics in Britain.
Determining the impact of the Poll Tax
The swing to Labour, the increase in turnout and the sharp variations in results between authorities are all relevant when it comes to examining what effect the poll tax had on voting patterns.
We will again look at each set of local councils in turn and attempt to gauge the role of differences in poll tax levels in determining the electoral outcome.
LONDON
In London, the combination of exceptionally low community charge levels and big swings to the Conservatives in Wandsworth and Westminster and, conversely, an almost equally poor Labour performance in charge-capped Brent and Hammersmith and Fulham, seemed to provide prima facie evidence that the poll tax had had a significant impact on behaviour.
Individual authorities apart, however, the pattern across London was much less clear cut.
Analysis of the effect of poll tax levels in all boroughs indicates a tendency for a swing away from the incumbent party.
In the 15 boroughs effectively under Labour control at the time of the elections, there was a 1.1% swing to the Conservatives since 1986.
It appeared to make no difference whether the borough had been charge-capped.
In the 13 Tory-controlled authorities, the average swing was 0.5% to Labour.
There is only one significant change to this pattern when the actual levels of community charge are taken into account.
In the two Labour authorities, Barking and Haringey, where a community charge at or below the government's estimated figure was levied, there was a swing to the incumbents.
Similarly, there was an average swing to the Tories in those boroughs where poll tax demands were below government estimates or where household bills were likely to be less than under the rates.
Conservative/Labour swing (to/from Cons.) and Poll Tax Levels in London 1986–1990 
The biggest swings to Labour in Conservative run authorities were in Kensington and Chelsea (3.6%) and Merton (3.2%).
Whilst the poll tax in Kensington was set some 48% above government estimates, Institute of Public Finance figures suggest that average household bills  would be a quarter lower than under the rates.
In Merton, a poll tax below the government estimate and a modest 5% increase in average household bills did not protect the council from an adverse swing.
Local issues, including the election of three independent candidates who campaigned against a new road, played a part in the Tories' loss of Merton, and similar borough-specific factors seemed to be at work in those Labour authorities where the party fared particularly badly.
In poll-capped Brent, where the levy and average bills only increased by 4%, the swing against Labour was 7.3%.
In Ealing, where bills increased by 30% but which was not capped, the swing to the Conservatives was 6.0%.
In Hammersmith and Fulham, where the pre-capping levy and the average bill were up by 23%, there was a 5.2% movement in favour of the Conservatives.
Conversely, in Haringey, despite being capped and having the highest poll tax in the country, there was a 1.4% swing to Labour.
In Lewisham, with the council imposing a poll tax some 20% above government estimates, albeit at only £297, Labour posted its best result in all London with a swing of 5.2% compared with its already good performance in 1986.
These results suggest that, although very high or very low poll tax demands could affect the performance of either party, levels of community charge were not themselves the prime determinant of electoral behaviour.
Rather, it seems voters were strongly influenced by their perception of the competence of their own local authority.
METROPOLITAN BOROUGHS
A similarly complex picture emerges from the results in the metropolitan authorities.
In the three authorities which were controlled by the Conservatives before the 1990 elections, there was an average swing to Labour of just 1%.
However, this disguises variations between Bradford, where the swing to Labour was 2.5%, and Trafford, where there was a marginal movement to the Conservatives.
In those four boroughs where no one party had overall control there was a much more pronounced rise in Labour support, with the party's share of the vote in Wirral increasing by over 8% despite an individual poll tax figure below government estimates and average household bills less than the previous year's rates.
The remaining 29 boroughs were under Labour control before the elections.
In 19 cases rises in household bills of more than 30% were suggested by IPF figures, and here the swing to Labour was 3.1% compared to 3.7% in authorities where the average increases were less.
Somewhat more of a variation occurs if we examine the eight capped metropolitan boroughs.
In these cases Labour support was 5.5% higher than it had been in 1986, compared with 6.9% higher in the 21 non-capped authorities.
These was no difference in the degree to which turnout rose between the two sets of authority.
However, it should be pointed out that contests between Labour and the Conservatives took place in only 91 out of 165 wards in the capped authorities in both 1986 and 1990.
Any change data are thus inevitably incomplete and do not make allowance for potential voting patterns in the many very safe Labour wards where councillors were returned unopposed.
We also examined the performance of the parties in wards with differing social and economic characteristics.
Of particular interest are the findings for Bradford, Sandwell and Walsall.
In Bradford the Conservative vote in 13 wards was more than 10% above what would be predicted from the character of those wards, despite the positive swing to Labour noted earlier.
In other words, one legacy of the regime of Councillor Pickles and his colleagues has been a city where the Conservatives have managed to stem the tide to Labour over the past decade.
In the two West Midlands boroughs there was a clear tendency for the Conservatives to do better and Labour worse than a similar examination of a wide range of ward social characteristics would lead one to expect.
It may well be that in some metropolitan areas Labour is suffering the kind of adverse voter reaction noted in the London boroughs, but the issue of the poll tax appears itself to have had very little substantive impact on the differences in electoral behaviour between authorities.
ENGLISH AND WELSH DISTRICTS
Analysis of the impact of the community charge in the English and Welsh districts is complicated by a number of factors.
First, only about one-third of authorities hold annual elections and each year some councils change their electoral systems.
Second, even where there are annual elections, the actual wards in which ordinary vacancies occur often differ from year to year.
We can thus only strictly compare the district elections of 1990 with those at the same point of the cycle tour years ago in the 114 local authorities where no material change to either boundaries or the electoral system has taken place.
These councils can in no way be seen as a representative sample of all 333 districts.
In addition, alone of the authorities considered in this article, district councils are on the second rung of a two-tier structure of local  government.
The bulk of the money raised and spent in non-metropolitan England and Wales is at the county level.
Many counties had drawn on their reserves to keep rate increases down in their own election year of 1989.
In 1990 they took the opportunity to rebuild them as well as allocating extra money to services such as education in the wake of legislative changes.
When determining their poll tax levies, districts were thus faced with already agreed demands from the counties, and their own precepts actually made up only a small proportion of the total amount community charge payers were required to pay.
It could therefore be argued that as the districts were neither fully responsible nor fully accountable for the level of poll tax paid by their residents, electors would find it hard to make a judgement on the performance of their own authority based solely on that criterion.
What is immediately apparent is that the political control of the district authority made very little difference to the Conservative/Labour swing in 1990.
The Labour vote itself rose by an average of between 8.3% in hung authorities to 9.7% in the handful of Democrat-controlled districts.
Conservative/Labour swing (to/from Cons.) and Poll Tax Levels in District Councils 1986–1990 
Aggregate data do not, of course, allow us to draw any inferences about the behaviour of individual authorities which give rise to these findings, particularly where so few cases are often involved.
There was, for example, a 6.2% swing to the Conservatives in Labour controlled councils with less than a 10% increase in household bills, but in fact just one council, Harlow in Essex, falls into that category.
Only four councils in the entire sample showed a swing to the Conservatives.
In each of these cases there was a slight drop in the Labour vote, with the Conservatives benefiting from the declining performance of the Democrats.
Only two shire districts, Basildon and Bristol, had their poll tax levies capped by the government, and thus a comparison with all other authorities is not very productive.
In general, Labour seemed relatively to suffer from high poll tax levels even where it was not in control of the council.
It is not as if the blame was being placed on Labour counties, for in only one case where a Conservative or hung district had a poll tax of over £400 (Derby) did Labour control the county.
The Conservatives' worst performances, in contrast, came where they had a majority on the council and there had been a large increase in bills.
The 15.3% swing against them in Torbay is indicative both of this and of a more generalised dissatisfaction with  the policies of the council.
Once again we are led to the provisional conclusion that the poll tax was only one variable determining party support in individual district authorities, not least because of the problems voters had in deciding where responsibility lay.
One important political ingredient giving shape to the results in the districts was the failure of the Democrats to contest more than two-thirds of the vacancies, compared with the Alliance's presence in over 85% of wards in 1986.
The decision by the party to target carefully chosen areas of strength allowed them to gain a share of the vote far in excess of their opinion poll rating.
On the other hand, their absence from many of the wards they had fought in 1986 in places such as Cherwell, Portsmouth, Stevenage and Waveney directly contributed to Labour's success.
The impact of such variations in party competition should never be overlooked when analysing the outcome of local elections.
Discussion
The data we have examined suggest that the poll tax was not itself the prime cause of the variation in results either between types of local authority or individual councils.
Labour's inability to make progress in London as a whole compared with 1986 disguised sharp differences between the boroughs.
However, apart from the exceptional cases of Wandsworth and Westminster, there is no prima facie evidence that borough determined reactions to the poll tax can explain the performance of the parties.
Outside London there was a strong swing to Labour regardless of either political control or the level of the community charge.
Having said that, there were local influences at work which had a bearing on the result in particular boroughs and districts.
We have been able to examine these largely through inference alone, but our information does seem to support Curtice and Steed's view of the ‘denationalisation of British politics’.
Variations across London often reflected the differential performance of the parties there at the last general election, and may well portend trends for the next.
Similarly, the West Midlands, except Coventry, still seems to be an area where Labour is doing less well than it should all other things being equal.
In the shire districts, the spectacular advances which enabled Labour to claim more than 50% of the vote in many authorities lend a further twist to the puzzle of why the party has not been able to match consistently good local results in these areas with comparable general election support.
Such findings should perhaps not come as too great a surprise.
It is increasingly apparent that the context of an election is important in shaping its result.
As we have noted, surveys on the poll tax conducted in the first half of 1990 mapped not only the considerable public  hostility to the tax, but also the fact that the blame for it was firmly laid at the government's door.
Only the dwindling band of loyal Conservative voters was likely to believe that the increase in charges compared with the rates was the responsibility of profligate local authorities.
These elections were presented almost as a referendum on the performance of the government, and in such an atmosphere most councils must have felt confident that, for this year at least, they would avoid any adverse local electoral reaction to their fiscal policies.
The non-metropolitan districts had the additional advantage of being able to portray themselves as the victims of county councils spending heavily in one of their own non-election years.
It is, of course, conceivable that the community charge will have a bigger direct effect on local elections in future years.
Once people have been able to make a direct year-on-year comparison of local taxation demands, rather than be confused by a change of system, then councils may well be judged on their own individual performance.
At the very least, the law of anticipated reactions is likely to come into play.
However, it should not be forgotten that local authorities are also responsible for providing services, and there is evidence to suggest that voters recognise that such services have to be paid for.
Low local taxes are not always a recipe for electoral success.
It is possible to argue either that the community charge has failed its first test as a device to improve the accountability of local government or that it has not really been tested at all.
Our data clearly demonstrate that the election results in individual local authorities in 1990 were at most only marginally affected by absolute or relative poll tax levels.
It may well be that a fairer test must await an examination of the poll tax over an entire electoral cycle.
Or, perhaps, it can never really be tested at all.
The determination of the government to oversee the levels of local expenditure, and its use of reliefs as an instrument of national policy, immediately blurs the relationship between the council and the community charge-payer.
The current structure of local government, with its varying patterns of single-tier and two-tier authorities and annual and quadrennial elections, serves only to confuse the issue.
Moreover, the government must recognise the need to balance its long-term interest in improving local political accountability with its short-term concern over the most appropriate timing of the next general election.
More than most the government will want the 1991 district council elections to be an almost nationwide referendum on its record in office.
It can ill-afford to have electors responding solely to one ‘local’ issue and ignoring the wider political climate as they make their party choice.
TELEVISING THE HOUSE OF COMMONS
By Michael Ryle
FOR many years the House of Commons regarded itself as a closed society whose proceedings were private except to the extent that the House itself decided to report them.
As late as 1845 the House excluded strangers from all parts of the House.
On 19 July 1990 the House resolved to accept the televising of its proceedings as a permanent feature.
We have come a long way.
The slow progress towards acceptance of television by the Commons has been examined by Dr Bob Franklin in previous articles in this journal.
On 9 February 1988 the House resolved by 318 votes to 263 to approve in principle ‘the holding of an experiment in the public broadcasting of its proceedings by television…’; a select committee, chaired by the Leader of the House, was appointed to consider the implementation of the experiment; and on 12 June 1989 the House endorsed, by a majority of 293 to 69, the report of the Committee.
This article describes the experiment and considers what might be learned from it and how the televising of the House is now proceeding.
I have drawn heavily on that Committee's reports and evidence and on three independent studies relating to the experiment.
I have also reached conclusions as a result of my own extensive viewing of parliamentary, news and current affairs programmes on both BBC and ITV (I have not watched Sky TV) and from interviews I had with twelve selected MPs.
The Experiment
The experiment began with the State Opening of Parliament on 21 November 1989, and continued right up till the House's decision to approve permanent televising in July 1990.
With a few exceptions, the ways the House has been covered by the cameras — and equally the ways the broadcasters have used television coverage of the House in the programmes — have changed little since the experiment began.
The administrative arrangements and rules adopted for the experiment have been endorsed by the House for the permanent coverage, and so, for the time being, the House is televised and reported on television today in much the same way as during the experiment.
When considering television of the Commons, two distinctions should be emphasised.
First, the camera coverage of the House and of its committees is provided in quite different ways.
Proceedings in the Chamber are fully recorded so that everything that is said or done is  available for the broadcasters to use in their programmes.
For committees (except those on private or hybrid bills), their public proceedings are covered only when one or other of the broadcasters, independent producers or other organisations wishes to film some part of a committee's work for use in a programme.
Committee coverage is demand-led.
The second distinction is fundamental.
That which is filmed is not the same as that which is broadcast.
The ‘clean feed’ from the House, and the material filmed in committees, are all available for the broadcasters to use as they think fit.
This may be in live coverage, for news programmes, for special programmes reporting the proceedings of Parliament or for other documentary, current affairs or educational programmes.
But most of the signal never reaches the viewer's screens.
Furthermore, whereas the House controls the ways it and committees are televised, it can exercise no editorial control over the ways the broadcasters use this material in their programmes, provided they comply with four specific guidelines.
These are:(i) no television picture may be used in any light entertainment programmes or programmes designed as political satire;(ii) extracts from televised proceedings may be used in broadcast ‘magazine’ programmes which also contain music or humorous features, provided that the different types of item are kept separate;(iii) televised proceedings may not be used in party political broadcasts; and (iv) no extracts of televised proceedings may be used in any form of advertising or publicity, other than in the form of programme trailers.
The Committee has nevertheless expressed its own views on programme policy and decisions, as, of course, have individual Members.
For example the 1989 Report expressed the hope that there would be regional as well as national programming, that committees would be covered, and that there would be a significant amount of live broadcasting.
And the Committee has kept a close watch on the uses made by the broadcasters of parliamentary material in their programmes.
Although the broadcasters (subject to the existing obligation to ensure political balance in their programmes as a whole) are not under any parliamentary or governmental control in such matters, there is an unwritten understanding that their coverage of the proceedings of the House must have some regard to the wishes of the House and its Members.
Administration and Finance
The Committee recommended that, pending further review, the somewhat complicated administrative and financial arrangements which were endorsed by the House and used during the experiment should continue until 31 July 1991.
They are summarised here.
For the House itself, the signal is produced by an independent Operator, Broadcast Communications plc, under contract to a company, House of Commons Broadcasting Unit Ltd.
(HOCBUL), formed for the purposes of the experiment by the BBC and independent television.
The board of the Company consists of twelve directors, with three appointed by the BBC, three by independent television and six by the Speaker on behalf of the House.
The Committee has been given powers to give directions and to perform other duties in relation to the televising of the House.
A Supervisor of Broadcasting (Mr John Grist, who has long experience at senior level in broadcasting and television) has been appointed to work directly on behalf of the Committee and to give directions on its behalf when urgent action is required.
He is charged with ensuring that the Operator providing the signal complies with the rules of coverage, with coordinating committee coverage, and with generally liaising between HOCBUL, the Operator, the broadcasters, the Committee itself and Members and Officers of the House.
Copyright in relation to both the sound and television signal is vested in the Speaker on behalf of the House, but HOCBUL are licensed to provide the signal to the BBC, ITN, other independent television contractors and other organisations approved by the Committee.
HOCBUL charge for providing access to the signal to other bodies and their costs are shared with such additional users.
This has worked without dispute.
A ‘users group’ meets about once a month to consider any problems over access to the signal and has proved a useful forum for discussion of wider and longer-term issues.
The costs of the television experiment were shared between the broadcasters, the Parliamentary Works Office and the House itself.
The broadcasters' costs up to the end of July 1990 were estimated as £595,000, equivalent to approximately £20,000 per week.
In addition the broadcasters envisaged spending some £250,000 on coverage of committees.
These costs are partly offset by revenues from the sale of the signal to other users, which were estimated to be £235,000 during the experiment.
The estimated costs which will be borne by the Parliamentary Works Office (a government agency) for changes in accommodation, lighting, wiring, the creation of a television archive, and for additional staff total £594,000.
The House itself bore the costs of the Committee — £203,000 (excluding printing and shorthand writing).
Thus the total identifiable cost of the experiment was about £1,642,000, shared almost equally between the broadcasters and public funds.
It may be thought that this was a remarkably small price to pay for the opening up of our democratic processes to the public.
There are separate administrative arrangements for committees.
The broadcasters, as the main customers for the signals, established a pooling arrangement under which a single contractor, Commons Committee Television (CCTV), coordinates and produces committee coverage for the broadcasters.
They have, on occasions, covered four  committees simultaneously.
This requires careful planning, especially in the allocation of committee rooms for use by committees which are to be broadcast, but, in practice, there appears to have been little difficulty.
Looking at the administrative and financial arrangements more generally, the diminution of political concern is remarkable.
The 1988–89 Committee spent a long time agonising over the problem of how to keep the broadcasters at arms length, so that their editors would not be able to provide the signal in ways that might be journalistically attractive but would be repugnant to Members.
The issue of ‘who should get the contract’ was also prominent in all the discussion preceding the experiment.
The ultimate ingenious compromise has, however, been widely accepted almost without comment.
The only difficulties reported by the Committee related to the charging arrangements for coverage of committees.
The cost of coverage of a typical meeting was £1,412, and that is what a single customer would have to pay, but when many channels have been interested, the price has fallen as low as £36.
The cost for a single user of a committee feed is a real deterrent, particularly for individual ITV regional companies, and the Committee was anxious to avoid anything that might inhibit regional coverage.
CCTV have recognised that the present arrangements for sharing costs between customers are ‘less than ideal’ and are looking to improve them.
Technical and Practical Issues
Before televising began, many Members were anxious about a number of technical issues, especially the level of lighting.
There was also concern about where to find accommodation for the control room and other working space, and fears that television staff would increase the demand for catering and other services.
The 1989 Report shows that the Committee considered these matters at length, and, because of this foresight, most of the technical problems seem to have been overcome without too much trouble, and complaints have been minimal, The equipment in the Chamber of the House is remarkably compact.
Eight small, remotely-controlled electronic cameras are fitted under the galleries, covering the House from both sides and permitting a variety of shots.
They do not obscure the view of the Members sitting on the back-benches.
The main disadvantage of this arrangement is that the cameras are looking down on those speaking from the front-benches, and, unless they take care to keep their heads up, the tops of their heads rather than their faces are exposed on the screen.
The camera operators in the Commons have a serious problem.
In most other parliaments, members have allotted places and, as soon as a member is called, as the author has seen in some of the Canadian legislatures, computerized selection of the name focuses the camera automatically on him or her, and also adds relevant information  (name, party, constituency, etc.) as a screen caption.
Unfortunately this cannot be done in the UK House of Commons, and the cameraman has to identify the Member who has been called, often in the midst of a throng of Members competing for the Speaker's eye, and then to add the computerized caption.
Inevitably, this sometimes takes a little time, but the camera crews are becoming remarkably skilled at finding the Members and delay is now minimised.
The Committee found the picture quality generally satisfactory; happily this was also the judgement of the broadcasters who use them in their programmes.
Lighting has also proved less of a problem than anticipated.
For the experiment, eight temporary space lights were installed in the Chamber and the strip lights under the galleries and above the Speaker's Chair were upgraded.
The lighting is considerably brighter than before but even so, the Committee reported, is at the margins of acceptability for the production of pictures of broadcastable quality.
In the early days a few Members complained about the new lighting, but some adjustments were made and the Committee reported no further objections on these grounds (although a survey of MPs attitudes following the introduction of television, which was conducted by the IBA, showed that 59% of the respondents found the lighting in the Chamber too bright, compared with 31% before the experiment began).
For the future Committee envisage the installation of ‘electrically powered chandeliers of an architecturally and aesthetically acceptable type’.
Members themselves will participate in the final selection.
Heat from stronger lighting could be a problem, but it seems that so far the normal air conditioning has been able to cope and no abnormal discomfort has been experienced.
The Committee made no reference to complaints from Members, although the IBA survey showed that the percentage of MPs who found the Chamber too hot rose from 9 before the experiment to 36 after it had run for four months.
The sound system in the Chamber has proved less acceptable.
The IBA survey showed that many Members expressed dissatisfaction with the acoustics.
As the Committee emphasised, however, the acoustic problems are of long standing and cannot be attributed to television.
Further attempts are to be made to improve the sound system, but perhaps Members will discover that if they want to hear better, and if they want listeners to radio and viewer of TV to be able to hear properly, they will have to stop shouting so much.
Finally, none of the accommodation problems proved too serious during the experimental period.
The control room, although just workable, is very cramped (especially as it has had to take on committee work).
For permanent television, the Committee concluded, a larger control area will have to be provided.
In general, the technical and practical problems of televising the Chamber itself have not been nearly as great as was feared.
Since the experiment, few Members have complained on this score, and none of those I interviewed.
The Committee itself concluded ‘that the overall technical standard of the operation has been high, both in the sense that the signal itself has been generated with great skill and proficiency and that the practical and logistical problems associated with presence of televising personnel and equipment have been kept to a minimum’.
The original arrangements for televised coverage of committees were more makeshift than those for the Chamber.
Although the Committee hoped that the broadcasters would cover committee work, there was no expectation that this would be at all extensive, and therefore minimum effort and expense appeared reasonable; in particular, the Committee did not recommend the installation of remote-controlled cameras.
Two or three cameras, mounted on tripods, could be placed in three select committee rooms and in two used by standing committees, and some upgrading of the lights was required in those rooms when the cameras were in use, but the aim was to make as few changes as possible during the experimental period.
In the event, as shown below, the coverage of committees, especially select committees, has been much greater than anticipated.
This has highlighted a number of shortcomings in the technical arrangements.
Cameras mounted on tripods proved intrusive and cumbersome; some chairmen and others have complained about the strong lighting, although most Members seem to have found the level tolerable; discomfort has been experienced as a result of additional heat and difficulties with ventilation (always a problem in summer, as those who have worked in the committee rooms or attended meetings there will confirm); and the sound system has not worked well.
Other problems were encountered, including background noise, the positioning of the shorthand writer, overcrowding in many rooms when a politically interesting meeting was being filmed, and the arrangements for covering committee meetings away from Westminster.
Many of these problems are transitional.
This was a genuine experiment and lessons were — and still are — being learned.
The broadcasters were happy with the quality of the pictures (though not with the sound) and with the service they had received from CCTV, and the Committee was happy that the coverage of committees had been carried out both efficiently and resourcefully, and — for the most part— with sensitivity to the needs of committees.
No doubt substantial changes will have to be made for permanent coverage.
These will hopefully include the installation of remote-controlled cameras, for which the chairman of both standing and select committees have pressed, although this will be expensive — the total cost of equipping  one remote control unit from scratch with four cameras (now considered desirable for best committee coverage) could be £300,000, to which must be added £10,000 per room for wiring and fitting brackets for the cameras.
It will almost certainly be necessary for more committee rooms to be equipped for televising, as the Committee accepted.
Looking further ahead, I would strongly endorse the request made by the chairman of the Liaison Committee for inclusion in the proposed new parliamentary buildings of at least one large committee room specially designed for televising committee meetings that attract large numbers of press reporters and the public.
Rules of Coverage
Sound recording of debates in the House leaves very little room for editorial choice (as opposed to selection of what is broadcast).
It is totally different for visual recording, where a selection has to be made from a great range of possible pictures.
As soon as thought began to be given to the televising of the House, one of the most troublesome issues was the extent to which editorial discretion should be permitted in camera coverage.
At one extreme, the editors could be given total licence to film anything they liked and to show the House in their own way (as when covering a football match, or as in some American state legislatures where camera and microphone men are even allowed to wander around on the floor of the House).
At the other end of the scale, rules would define precisely the shots that may be made for specified circumstances, confining all shots to the head and shoulders of the Member who has the floor, for example(this solution has been adopted by the Canadian House of Commons).
Although the House of Lords has allowed the BBC and ITN broadcasters a fairly free hand when filming their House, the 1988–89 Committee was much more cautious and imposed rules almost as restrictive as those in Canada (despite, one might think, its own visit there).
These restrictions were contrary to the wishes of the broadcasters, who feared that they would lead to monotonous and unimaginative presentation, and were condemned by most commentators, including many MPs.
There was some opposition in the Committee but it was not pressed to division, and it seems that the restrictions were reluctantly accepted as part of a package deal to get agreement on the report as a whole.
The Committee proposed a broad statement of objectives with which the Operator would be required to abide: ‘The director should seek, in close collaboration with the Supervisor of Broadcasting, to give a full, balanced, fair and accurate account of proceedings, with the aim of informing viewers about the work of the House’.
The precise restrictions the Committee recommended, and which were imposed at the beginning of the experiment, may be summarised as follows:
(a)
the galleries, the officials box and those standing behind the Speaker's Chair should not be shown except unavoidably as part of wide-angle shots;
(b)
shots which show the Speaker receiving advice from a Clerk at the Table should not be used and Officers and staff should not normally be shown, except when taking an active part in the proceedings;
(c)
wide-angle shots may be shown during divisions and the various processes of a division may be recorded, but without close-ups of Members;
(d)
in no circumstances should close-up shots of Member's or Officers papers be taken;
(e)
the standard format for depicting the Member who has the floor should be a head and shoulder shot,not a close-up;(d wide-angle shots of the Chamber may be used from time to time;
(g)
generally the director should switch to a picture of the occupant of the Chair whenever he or she rises, especially when dealing with disorder;
(h)
otherwise, the camera should normally remain on the Member speaking until that Member has finished; during Questions the director should show only the Member asking a Question and the Minister replying; cut-away shots to show reactions would not normally be allowed, except shots of a member referred to by the Member speaking, and medium-angle shots are permitted to show both the Member who has the floor and another Member seeking to intervene;
(i)
in no circumstances are split-screen shots to be used; and
(j)
panning shots along the benches are not to be used.
No wonder, it may be thought, that the broadcasters were unanimous to finding these restrictions too severe; some argued that the Commons itself, by these restrictions, was giving a false and misleading impression to the audience, especially because of the absence of reaction shots; Anne Lapping, the editor of A Week In Politics , said ‘the more freedom you let the cameras have, the more good it does to the Mother of Parliaments’.
Channel 4 took to their tents and sulked and even declined to accept live coverage while these rules remained in force.
Many Members also continued to think that the rules were too restrictive — about half of those questioned in an IBA survey gave this reaction.
Some of the Members I interviewed would like wider shots and more panning and reaction shots.
In practice, however, the rules do not seem to have proved as restrictive as many had feared, especially after some relaxations were permitted in January 1990, in response to submissions by the broadcasters, allowing group shots (midway between head and shoulder and wide-angle) and more individual reaction shots (although these relaxations do not apply during Question Time or ministerial statements).
The broadcasters have now said that, subject to some minor changes, they are reasonably content that the rules of coverage allow them to give an accurate representation of the House's proceedings, and the Committee recommended that no further modifications be made to the rules at this stage.
The 1988–89 Committee was particularly concerned — as, indeed, were the Speaker and many Members — about the possibility that demonstrations from the public gallery or grave disorder on the floor of the House might be shown on television; it emphasised that ‘deliberate misconduct designed to secure televised publicity ought not to achieve its aim’.
Demonstrations in the galleries were not ‘proceedings’ of the House and should in no circumstances be televised.
The Committee even considered the possibility that the occupant of the Chair be given a cut-off button or that other devices be employed to override demonstrations or disturbance in the galleries or on the floor of the House, but it rejected such innovations.
It did not want any kind of disorder to be filmed, including unparliamentary behaviour by Members (or even Members trying to attract attention by wearing fancy dress or clothes bearing slogans), and it therefore recommended that in all cases of disruption or disorder the director should cut to wide-angle shots, which would not show the offending incident, or to the occupant of the Chair.
In practice, the rules regarding the treatment of incidents of serious disorder remain largely untested, as there were few such occasions during the experiment.
The Committee was satisfied that minor incidents of misconduct or defiance of the Chair had been well handled by the directors within the rules.
Disorder in the Chamber or the galleries — or even the blazoning of slogans — has not so far created the problems that some had feared.
The Blumler report lists a few breaches of the rules of coverage during the experiment, but, proportionately, very few indeed, and Members seem to be broadly happy that the cameras have respected the rules.
In general, it seems that the enforcement of the rules of coverage is no longer a significant issues among MPs.
My own impression is that the editors have, over the past year, become a little more flexible in their interpretation of the rules.
They use slightly wide shots; they make much more use of the medium-range shots showing the Members (or the absence of Members) around the person speaking; there are more individual reaction shots; and they vary the camera angles in ways that minimise the monotony that results from keeping the camera on one member for an extended period.
The head of Broadcast Communications, who supply the clean feed, has confirmed that ‘there was a little bit of liberal interpretation of the rules on my part’.
As a result, although the coverage is not as lively or interesting as it would probably be if the editors had more freedom, it is not nearly as stilted as many people feared; it is certainly much better  than the terribly restricted and monotonous presentation of the Canadian House of Commons.
Viewers in this country do get a fair picture of the debates and other proceedings in our House.
The rules for the cameras in committees are essentially the same as in the House, except that it is recognised that it is not possible to exclude shots showing the public, especially those sitting behind the witnesses in a select committee.
In practice, there have been no problems.
CCTV made no criticism of the ways the rules have affected their editorial discretion; indeed, they have interpreted them pretty freely, and have recently even used close-ups of the Chairmen, Members and witnesses.
And the Committee was satisfied both with the way the guidelines had been observed and with the resulting coverage.
How the House has been Broadcast
How the House is televised is important; far more important is how the House is broadcast — the use the broadcasters make of the clean feed they are given.
The broadcast coverage during the experiment up till 18 March 1990 was extensively examined in the Blumler report, which analysed 2,442 items of broadcast parliamentary material.
Using a different sampling method, the Hetherington study aimed to analyse over 20% of television broadcasts relating to the Commons up till the end of March.
Both studies covered regional programmes as well as national, Blumler more extensively than Hetherington.
The Cumberbatch evaluation also dealt with coverage.
Here are the salient features of their findings.
Televising the House has led to a dramatic increase in the portrayal of MPs at work in the House.
For example, analysis by Cumberbatch shows that of 2,315 television appearances by MPs in news and current affairs programmes, some 15% emanated from the House itself (sound over still pictures) before televising and 37% after the experiment began.
Political news direct from the Commons rose from 13% of items before the experiment to 21% after.
The Hetherington study shows the increase in the amount of parliamentary news carried on three of the main news programmes,Channel Four News , BBC1's Nine O'Clock News , and ITN's News at Ten :
Blumler shows that, since televising, the main news programmes have included an average of about 2.6 parliamentary stories a day, and that on half of these days one of these has been the lead story.
A week-by-week analysis showed no reduction in the amount of parliamentary coverage on news programmes, other than a slight fall-off after the opening week.
The broadcasters were able to enliven their reports by incorporating actuality clips from the Chamber in about one-third of their parliamentary news stories, and these clips averaged between 25 and 77 seconds in duration, depending on the programme, which usually comprised about a quarter of the story (exceptionally, BBC2's Newsnight had longer stories, averaging eight minutes, and its average actuality length of 49.5 seconds comprised only 10% of these items).
News from Parliament in these programmes goes out to huge audiences; some 11 to 15 million people watch the main national news.
Turning to the parliamentary review programmes, new programmes that started when televising began were the daily round-up programmes on the business of the previous day, BBC2's Westminster and ITN's Westminster Programme ; there were also two weekly programmes on Sundays, BBC2's Westminster Week and Channel 4's A Week in Politics .
Their policies and treatment differ.
Westminster goes out every Tuesday to Friday at 8.15am for 45 minutes, and on Mondays for 15 minutes.
It offers extensive coverage of the previous sitting-day's events in the Commons, both in the Chamber and in committees; it also reports the debates in the Lords.
During the experimental period, it consisted of a straight-forward selection of uninterrupted extracts — often one or two minutes in length — from speeches by both front and back-benchers, linked by a commentator, but with little political assessment.
Interviews and studio discussions were not used.
Treatment of individual items of business was quite extended, averaging about 5.5 minutes in length, with some items taking up to half an hour; actuality comprised, on average, about 4.7 minutes of each item.
In an attempt to show the House at work, many types of business have been covered, not just the big occasions when the House is full.
There has been extensive coverage of select committees (especially in the Thursday programme as many committees meet on Wednesdays) and some coverage of standing committees (perhaps not surprisingly, the committee on the Broadcasting Bill seems to have had particular appeal for the broadcasters and 16 of its sittings were televised).
There have even been short extracts from late-night adjournment debates.
The viewing figures are estimated to have been between 100,000 and 150,000.
This relatively low figure no doubt results from the programme being broadcast at a time that is inconvenient to many viewers.
The Committee was disappointed that there was not an evening round-up of each day's business; it found the morning programme a less than adequate substitute.
Westminster is a factual and somewhat pedestrian programme and, in the past, it tried not to offer political judgements.
In my view, however, therein lies its strength; it is a programme that can be relied on to give an unvarnished account of the proceedings of the House and its committees; it has been called a mini-Hansard.
It therefore seems to me unfortunate that, since the beginning of the 1990–91 session, the BBC has changed the format to include interviews with MPs and even studio discussions on some occasions.
Perhaps it is seeking to increase the audience, or perhaps it was lead astray for a while by the fact that, during the Conservative leadership contest, the exciting politics at Westminster were not in the Chamber.
Whatever the reason, such additional matters are fully covered on other programmes and attention to them, or even comment on what has happened in the House, distracts from, and reduces time for, the proper reporting of Parliament.
I hope the policy will be reconsidered.
The Parliament Programme , produced by ITN, reports the previous day's proceedings on Channel 4 each day at 12 noon, for 30 minutes.
It has included more discussion and comment than Westminster did in 1989–90, with only 65% of its items using televised actuality and the average duration of each piece of actuality being only three minutes (69% of each item).
It usually includes three items from the Commons and one from the Lords, with at least one interview or discussion.
Occasionally it has gone outside Westminster.
On Fridays it includes a humorous review of the week by an invited MP.
This programme has given more coverage to committees than any other programme, with 25% of its attention being given to select committees and 6% to standing committees (compared with 9% and 3% respectively, in Parliament ).
The average audience has been between 200,000 and 250,000.
A Week in Politics has been put out by Channel 4 for a number of years, but it was adapted to be the channel's weekly round-up programme on Parliament; it is broadcast for one hour on Sundays at 10 am.
About half of the programme is devoted to Commons business.
75% of its parliamentary stores use actuality.
The average length of each item is over 5 minutes, half of which is actuality.
In the period surveyed, it gave 15% of its attention to committees.
The programme has attracted good audiences, estimated at between 300,000 and 350,000 people.
Slightly late in the day (it started at the end of January 1990), the BBC put on its own Sunday programme.
During the experiment, BBC2 ran Westminster Week from 12 noon for just short of an hour.
The first half of the programme concentrated on the main parliamentary news of the week, with an above average emphasis on interviews with front-benchers.
A special feature of this part of the programme was that it regularly included a section with about six brief items, averaging 20–30 seconds in duration, including sound bites of 10–20 seconds.
As a result 80% of its stories incorporated actuality, but the average length of these  items was only three minutes, two-thirds of which was actuality.
Westminster Week gave 18% of its attention to committees.
The second half of the programme was devoted to parliamentary news in the various regions, with interviews with local MPs and other politicians.
Because this programme tried to do so much in limited time, it seemed to some observers to be somewhat thin or superficial.
Since the beginning of the 1990–91 session,Westminster Week has been replaced by two programmes; the first,Out of Westminster , sets parliamentary issues in a regional context and involves local MPs from each region, and the second, called Scrutiny , deals with the work of parliamentary committees.
The decision of the BBC to change the format, in effect dropping the first half of the old programme, is not surprising.
For many viewers, the most important parliamentary programmes are those that give live coverage to the debates in the Chamber or to committee hearings.
There has been regular live coverage of the House on Westminster Live from 3.05 pm till about 3.50 pm on Tuesdays and Thursdays (including Prime Minister's Questions) and occasional other live coverage of both the Chamber and select committees.
SkyNews also broadcasts a live parliamentary report and covers the House in its nightly news bulletins.
Westminster Live focuses on Prime Minister's Questions.
After an introduction by the presenter, who usually speculates on the issues likely to be raised with the Prime Minister that day (a tiresome waste of time, especially as he is frequently wrong), the programme goes live, with only minimum commentary, till about 3.48 pm when the presenter returns to summarize the exchanges (another waste of time).
Significantly, this has meant that every Tuesday and Thursday some business after Questions has had live coverage, outside editorial control or selection; the effect of this on the work of the House is discussed below.
Westminster Live has also covered special occasions.
It broadcast the opening speeches on each day of the debate on the Queen's Speech in 1989 (when televising started); it has stayed on after 3.50 pm on some Tuesdays or Thursdays to cover important ministerial statements; and it has had special editions to cover the Budget and other major debates.
Against all expectations, the BBC has also given live coverage to a number of select committee hearings, typically when they were dealing with issues currently in the news, such as the Chancellor of the Exchequer giving evidence to the Treasury and Civil Service Committee on the Autumn Statement.
All these live programmes have attracted large audiences, with 800,000 to 1,200,000 viewers on a typical day, and more on big occasions (1.7 million for the statement on 1 February 1990 on the Colin Wallace affair, for example).
The 1988–89 Committee was particularly anxious that as much coverage as possible should be given to Parliament on regional news and current affairs programmes, so as to improve the prospects of Members being seen at work by their constituents.
It was assured by the broadcasters that the full range of local interest and opinions represented in the House would be reflected in regional programming.
The Committee has not been disappointed.
In the regions, and in Scotland and Wales, there are nightly regional news bulletins and a number of parliamentary or political programmes; further extensions are currently being planned.
Both Blumler, examining coverage by 31 BBC and ITV regional stations, and Hetherington bring out the extensive nature of these programmes, although performance has varied considerably between the regions, with stations in Scotland, Wales and the North appearing to pay more attention to Parliament than stations in the South or the Midlands.
There has been a substantial increase in coverage of the Chamber and of committees in regional broadcasting; some regions, BBC and ITV, have generated good week-end reviews which give more time to back-bench MPs.
And Blumler found that ‘Parliamentary television in the regions has not been a mere mirror or pale shadow of national television.
Regional broadcasters presented events in Parliament to their viewers through a range of creative and innovative programmes that were distinctive in a number of ways’.
Considerable use has been made of actuality, especially in BBC regional weekly, review programmes, and there has been a reasonable amount of committee coverage.
The Committee concluded that the broadcasters could legitimately claim to have made a praiseworthy attempt to deliver the sort of programmes they had promised.
No individual Members had submitted evidence questioning the ways in which the work of the House and its regional interests had been portrayed in their own locality (one Member, Mr James Kilfedder, complained in a Commons debate (19 July 1990) of the failure of both BBC and Ulster TV to provide proper coverage of the speeches of Members of all parties from Northern Ireland).
In general, regional reporting of Parliament appears to have been highly successful.
Questions of Balance
Much of the anxiety among Members, particularly the opponents of televising, arose from fears that the broadcasters would not preserve a proper balance in their selection of matter to be covered and that they would, in their desire to present newsworthy stories, distort the public presentation of the House.
The 1988–89 Committee attached the greatest importance to coverage which would give an ‘unvarnished account’ of the proceedings of the House.
It is important to look at  the balance that has been struck and at how much varnish — subjective commentary, for instance— has been applied.
Looking at political balance (perhaps the most sensitive matter), the Conservatives were given, on all programmes, more actuality coverage than Labour and other parties combined (1,788 actuality excerpts of Conservative MPs on 971 occasions, as opposed to 1,241 excerpts on 851 occasions for MPs of all other parties, in the period analysed by Blumler), but this is not surprising as the Conservatives are the majority in the House.
Furthermore, the procedure for Questions, with ministers answering Questions from the two sides of the House alternately, means that, on average, the Government side (backbenchers and ministers combined) will take three-quarters of the time.
However, the Conservatives also predominated in both national news bulletins and in parliamentary review programmes, particularly the latter.
Overall, the Conservative Party received more than half the broadcasting time on 56% of the occasions when Members appeared in an item, as opposed to 35% for Labour and 12.6% for the Liberal Democrats.
Finally, the gap between coverage of the Conservative and Labour Parties widens as the ladder of parliamentary status is ascended, being quite marked at the Prime Minister/Leader of the Opposition level; Blumler found this a cause for some concern.
Blumler also suggested that parliamentary television was markedly bipartisan, paying relatively little attention to the Liberal Democrats and Members of other smaller parties, but analysis of the actuality contributions of various participants shows that they received more than their proportionate strength in the House; Liberal Democrats were given 4.3% of total actuality contributions and took part on 7.8% of contribution occasions.
Bearing in mind the numerical dominance of the Conservative Party, and the fact that ministers, and especially the Prime Minister, make the news and announce policy, I myself do not find the statistical advantage shown for that side of the House either surprising or disturbing.
When watching parliamentary television, I have not often felt that there was an unfair political balance and none of the Members I interviewed raised this matter, except that one Liberal Democrat believed that the smaller parties were squeezed out of live coverage on Tuesdays and Thursdays.
It is noteworthy that the Committee received only one complaint about political balance, and that referred to a single item in one news programme.
The balance between front and back-benchers is almost as sensitive.
Back-benchers have featured quite prominently, contrary to some earlier fears.
They made up between 24% and 36% of appearances by politicians on national news programmes, 46% of appearances on regional news, between 42% and 49% of appearances on  national parliamentary review programmes, and up to 60% of appearances on regional review programmes.
47% of actuality contributions on all programmes were made by ministers and Opposition front-bench spokespersons and 53% came from the back-benches.
Professor Blumler emphasised that although Cabinet and Shadow Cabinet Members figured prominently in much of the television coverage, with the Prime Minister and Leader of the Opposition naturally to the fore (they received 28% of the coverage on ITN's News at Ten , but less on the review programmes and still less in regional coverage), ‘Parliamentary television was nowhere merely a Neil and Maggie Show’.
Eight of the twelve Members I interviewed made no complaint of bias towards the front-benches (or vice-versa!), or felt that the balance had been well struck, but four expressed reservations.
One Conservative Member complained that ministers tended to dominate on regional programmes, while local Members were squeezed out.
This received some support from the statistics, as far as Conservatives are concerned; the total number of ministerial appearances on regional news and weekly programmes in the period analysed by Blumler was 124, while Conservative back-benchers appeared 104 times.
In general, balance between front and back-benches will always be contentious — each element wants to have a larger role — but by and large the broadcasters seem to have struck it reasonably well.
The Committee makes no reference to widespread complaint.
As far as balance between national and regional reporting is concerned, there appears to be little cause for complaint.
Coverage in both dimensions has been good.
The House and the Committee have always been anxious to see a proper balance in the coverage of the various aspects of the House's work.
As Blumler shows, Prime Minister's Questions got the largest single proportion of coverage in nearly all news programmes (rather surprisingly other Questions (35%) outscored the Prime Minister's (23%) on the BBC 9 O'Clock News), but reports of debates also featured highly in the news (15% to 29%).
Coverage of select committees ranged between 8% and 12% on the main news programmes, with much the same degree of attention to legislation.
The distribution of attention in the parliamentary review programmes was substantially different.
Here, other Questions beat those to the Prime Minister on each programme; coverage of other debates fell to between 4% and 11%; attention to legislation rose to between 12% and 18%; coverage of select committees roughly doubled, reaching 25% in The Parliament Programme ; between 3% and 6% of coverage was given to standing committees.
In the regions much more emphasis was given to MPs contributions to debates, averaging about a third of the total coverage.
Coverage of committees has certainly not been neglected.
Not only has significant use been made of committee matter in broadcast programmes, but this has spanned a wide range of committee activity.
Every one of the departmentally-related committees has been covered, with the number of televised occasions, up till the Whitsun recess, 1990, ranging from two (Education, Science and Arts) to nine (Environment) with an average of 6.2 televised meetings.
The Public Accounts Committee was also televised seven times in that period and the European Legislation Committee, the Procedure Committee and the Televising of Proceedings Committee itself were also covered.
A total of 93 select committee meetings were televised.
On three occasions, committees were filmed when meeting away from Westminster.
On six occasions committees were covered live for at least part of their hearings, usually when taking evidence from ministers.
Nine standing or Grand Committees were also televised during this period, with the cameras being used at 36 sittings.
Some chairmen of select committees were critical of some aspects of their coverage, mainly because they would like to be covered even more, but most chairmen expressed their satisfaction with the way in which the work of select committees had been portrayed on television during the experiment.
The impression left with the chairman of the Liaison Committee was that the use made by the broadcasters of televised proceedings had been ‘balanced and interesting’.
Finally, there is the question of whether the broadcasters have provided the ‘unvarnished account’ demanded by the Committee.
Blumler's long and detailed analysis of the extent of commentary added by the broadcasters to the straight record of proceedings, shows the purpose and nature of commentary and even its style (whether it was sacerdotal, topical, didactic, conflict, entertainment, or minimalist).
He concluded that commentary has conformed very closely to the Committee's preference for a style that is appropriate and complementary to Commons proceedings.
Professor Hetherington was more concise.
Asking whether the broadcasters had provided an ‘unvarnished account’, his answer was ‘Yes, they have’— and he gave his reasons.
My own interviews suggested that Members feel that, looking at parliamentary business as a whole, a correct balance has generally been achieved.
Specific criticisms included the view that coverage of Business Questions (coming immediately after the Prime Minister on Thursdays) was excessive; that there was too much coverage of points of order; that too much attention was paid to the confrontation between the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition; that not enough attention was paid to legislation; and that more should be shown of the nuts and bolts of the House's work.
Eight out of twelve Members, however, welcomed the extensive coverage being given to select committees, and some would like even more.
In general, this indicates a desire by Members to show more of how the House works, with less attention to issues of wider public or political interest.
This will always be a conflict.
However it is resolved, not everyone will be satisfied, but my guess is that the viewers prefer the politics.
Public Reactions
All the indications are that the public likes the House being televised.
A survey carried out by the BBC indicates that before television broadcasting began, 69% of respondents thought televising the House of Commons ‘a good idea’; only 14% though it ‘a bad idea’.
The figures were much the same after the experiment had been running for three months, but 83% thought the experiment should continue.
On the other hand, the Cumberbatch survey showed that while 24% of over 1,000 respondents thought televising a bad idea in early November 1989, those thinking this had fallen to 15% by March 1990, and a rising number of people agreed that it was a good idea because ‘the public have a right to know what goes on’— 87% in the first survey and 95% in the later one.
The Cumberbatch survey produced some other interesting findings, some apparently at odds with the conclusions above.
The public's political knowledge appears to have increased; the number of respondents who were able to name their own MP correctly rose from 34% in the first survey to 43% in the last.
But there were also negative changes.
68% of respondents in the first survey thought televising would ‘make MPs improve their behaviour’, but this declined to 48% after three months of the experiment.
The view that ‘because of televising MPs will be more accountable to their voters’ was widely held, but by a declining proportion — 76% before the experiment and 59% after three months.
And interest in watching Commons TV declined over time; the numbers who said they would be or were ‘very interested’ in watching dropped from 24% before televising started to 10% after three months, with a corresponding rise in those who said they were ‘not at all interested’from 18% to 30%.
The BBC survey contains a large number of ‘before and after’ reactions by the public.
It is difficult to summarise them, but, broadly, both they and the Cumberbatch survey confirm the public support for televising, suggest that interest waned slightly as novelty wore off, indicate that on some matters there is growing understanding of Parliament, but make plain that many people still have a lot to learn about MPs and their work and roles.
Increasing interest in Parliament was also indicated by a growth in the numbers of letters received by the Speaker, which generally showed ‘enthusiastic public response to the experiment’.
His correspondence concerning rowdiness (a matter on which many people have written, especially since sound broadcasting of Parliament started) had decreased, perhaps because the public were better able to appreciate the context in which noise arose.
Viewers did not seem to be repelled by the complexities of procedures — in fact many were intrigued — but there had been reaction to the sight of empty benches.
A considerable growth of public interest was also revealed by a 25% increase in the number of enquiries received by the House of Commons Public Information Office, including letters from all over the world, since the start of televising.
The head of the Office believed that the experiment had ‘greatly increased public perception of the House’.
Increased interest among television audiences was also confirmed by broadcasters and political journalists who were interviewed by Professor Hetherington.
Perhaps television will eventually lead to better public comprehension of that much misunderstood institution of Parliament.
We will only know the answer to this and many other questions when televising has continued for a much longer time.
The main measure of public interest must be the extent to which people watch Parliament on the box.
Viewing figures are so far quite encouraging for those who favour televising; it will be of great interest to see whether, in the long run, they rise or fall.
Initial public reactions during the televising experiment had, however, a significant affect on MPs.
Those I interviewed said that nearly all the public comment they had heard had been favourable to the televising of the House.
Poor attendance in the Chamber had been criticised, but the televised coverage of select committees had been welcomed.
Members were pleased when constituents said that they had seen them on the box, and only one Member had received complaints that he had not been seen.
The impact of public reactions was clearly shown by one Conservative back-bencher.
‘I am in favour of televising because it is going down well with my constituents…the world is paying attention’, said Mr David Nicholson, MP for Taunton.
As one of his constituents, I can confirm this view.
Effect on the House and its Members
The awareness of being watched by such a powerful eye as television affects the behaviour of those being watched.
Indeed one of the main arguments against the televising of Parliament was that it would damage the way the House works, although some thought it would change for the better.
A full appraisal of the televising of the House would therefore require detailed examination of the nature and extent of changes in the practices and proceedings of the House, and in the conduct of its Members, since televising began.
It is, however, rather premature to attempt such an appraisal at this stage as the initial reactions of Members to this new factor in their lives may not be  typical.
The longer-term affect of television on the House must await further research.
Here it will suffice to indicate some provisional impressions.
Taking first the behaviour of individual Members, it seems that initially they were very conscious of the cameras when speaking and prepared their speeches accordingly, but the effect wore off, particularly when the House was not being covered live.
Several Members told me that most still speak in much the same way as they did before the cameras were introduced, and that is certainly my own impression when I watch them on television.
Awareness of the camera has, however, led many Members to plan more carefully their behaviour in the Chamber, including taking care to sit next to Members who are likely to be called (although organised ‘dough-nutting’ has largely been dropped) or choosing the right people to sit next to them.
A more continuing change has been the wearing of smarter suits by most males and of brighter colours by many ladies.
In general, nearly all the Members I interviewed felt that their own lives and life style (leaving aside their use of procedures) had not changed greatly since the coming of television.
Turning to collective behaviour, opinion of those interviewed was divided on the effect of television on attendance in the Chamber.
My own impression is that initially there was a significant increase, but that attendance has now returned to much the same levels as before the cameras came in.
Much anxiety was expressed before the experiment lest televising would encourage showing off, bad behaviour or rowdiness.
It is difficult to be precise about the outcome, but again the general impression seems to be that there has been no significant and continuing deterioration, and some well-placed observers thought that behaviour had, on the whole, improved.
The Committee drew attention to the fact that during the experiment fewer Members had been formally penalised for bad behaviour than in several recent sessions, and reported that neither the Speaker nor the Community had any evidence that rowdiness had significantly increased; on the possible long-term effect, early evidence was ‘mildly encouraging’.
The formal procedures of the House have not, so far, had to be changed following the introduction of television, and the Procedure Committee has taken the view that, unless a powerful case can be made to the contrary, it is not for the House to adapt to televising.
Television has, nevertheless, had a noticeable impact on the ways many Members use the procedures of the House.
The most obvious change appears to be an even greater enthusiasm to be called at Question time; one Member told me that he, like others was tabling a lot more Questions for oral answer to try to secure a television slot, and the Speaker confirmed that television had made Members generally anxious to be called, both for Questions and in debates at prime time.
Statistical  comparisons with previous periods indicate that he has extended the time for supplementary questioning on ministerial statements and on Private Notice Questions and this has enabled more Members to be called.
The most important changes, however, have resulted from the live coverage of proceedings from about 3.10 till 4.50 pm every Tuesday and Thursday and longer on some occasions.
The pressure on the Speaker is then at its greatest.
Prime Minister's Question time, is, as one senior Member put it, ‘heavily orchestrated’.
There also appears to be much competition to secure the floor in those crucial minutes after Prime Minister's Questions while business is still going out live.
Ministers may try to make a statement (they secure this every Thursday with the weekly business statement); the Opposition may seek to have a Private Notice Question; the Government prefer to have a debate on a Government motion or bill; the Opposition would like to have an Opposition Day when it opens the debate; and backbenchers seek to get in with points of order and applications for emergency debates.
The Members of the smaller parties complain that they are squeezed out by the front-benches whatever happens.
The extent to which these tactics are successful — and indeed the extent to which they are tried (early evidence from January and February 1990 indicated a decrease in the numbers of statements, Private Notice Questions, applications for emergency debates and points of order compared with previous sessions — is a matter of some speculation.
Further research is needed.
In practice the tactical  manoeuvring may become less relevant if Westminster Live continues its recent practice of leaving the Chamber after the Prime Minister has finished and switching to studio interviews.
On the other hand, the effect of live broadcasting will be increased now that it is being done on Wednesdays as well.
Televising might have made a big impact on proceedings in one other area.
Select committees have had substantial coverage, but all the evidence suggests — and this is my own impression, having served or attended many committees over the years and now seeing them on television — that, with a few minor modifications, the ways these committees work is little changed.
Some Members have claimed that the coverage the committees have received has enhanced their standing and authority.
I believe this is true, and that it is a major gain from the televising of Parliament.
The Future
The House has now decided that televising of its proceedings should be made permanent.
The 1990 Report discusses a number of consequential matters that are yet to be decided, including assistance for the deaf; the preservation of, access to, and use of the television archives; and the provision of a television feed to Members' rooms.
There are two major issues, however, on which decisions must be taken.
The first, and urgent, question relates to the administrative and financial arrangements that should replace the present system under which four separate bodies produce the clean feed from the two Houses of Parliament (HOCBUL and the Operator for the Commons Chamber, CCTV for Commons Committees and the BBC and ITN jointly for the Lord).
The Committee set out the principal options, and the preferences of the broadcasters.
It concluded that there were two serious options:(a) a broadcasting unit established as a department of the House which would be responsible for the whole operation involved in producing the signal from the Chamber and committees, and possibly the Lords (this is the solution adopted in several legislatures in Canada); and (b) an independent unit answerable to a select committee and contracted to the House to produce the signals on the same integrated basis as in option (a).
In either case the cost of producing the signal could be met from public funds or recovered, in whole or in part, from the users.
The Committee will consider the matter further.
It has a lot to decide.
The second issue dominated the debate on 19 July 1990 on the Committee's report.
For some time nearly all Members (except those totally opposed to televising the House) have wished to see the creation of a dedicated television channel, providing complete and continuous coverage of all proceedings on the floor of the House.
The 1988–89 Committee described this as a ‘highly desirable objective in the public interest’.
The 1989–90 Committee recommended that this should be provided at the earliest opportunity, as an adjunct to the permanent televising of the House.
In the debate, the Leader of the House (Sir Geoffrey Howe) said ‘We all want a dedicated channel’.
And 69 Members (including the tellers) voted for an amendment that would have made permanent television conditional on the provision of such a channel.
Members would like the people they represent to be able to watch as much as they wish of their MPs at work, and whenever they wish, without being dependent on the editorial and journalistic selections of the broadcasters.
It is their democratic right and modern technology makes it possible.
Such a dedicated channel would also be my preference, though no doubt selection would have to continue for committee coverage, and selected extracts would still be used on news and review programmes.
The obstacles to a dedicated channel are partly technical and partly financial.
The Committee held out little prospect of an early solution but, at the time of writing, was receiving further evidence on this question.
Early impressions suggest that there could be keen competition to provide such a service — if the money can be found!
Conclusions
The experiment in the televising of the House of Commons was a success.
Expert observers thought it so.
Members who had been earlier supporters of television were confirmed in their views; those who had been uncertain found themselves in favour; several original opponents became supporters.
The Speaker judged it a success, and said that the worst fears voiced before the experiment about the impact of televising on the House had not been borne out.
The Committee concurred.
The House agreed with the Committee's report, with only one Member, Mr David Amess, expressing total opposition to permanent televising and only 34 Members (including tellers) voting against the motion (contrast the division in 1988 when 266 Members voted against the holding of an experiment).
Most important, the public clearly like what they see.
There are two reasons for televising Parliament.
The first is so that the people can see their elected representatives and can get a better understanding of the institution.
I am sure that this is being achieved.
Every Member I interviewed believed that television had increased public interest in Parliament and most thought it had improved public understanding of how the Commons works, It is even more important, however, that the House should be televised so that the public can follow the actual matters being debated in Parliament.
As Mr Tony Banks MP has said, ‘Television should broaden peoples knowledge about parliamentary affairs and the performance of the Government and Opposition, and give them a better base on which to make judgements at the time of the election’.
Parliamentary television is here to stay.
It is a notable advance and a victory for democracy.
As another Member, Mr Jeremy Hanley, has said, ‘I believe that this House belongs to the people of the UK and not to its Members…
I only wish we could show them more of it’.