

PHOTOGRAPHY February 1992 £1.95 AN ARGUS SPECIALIST PUBLICATION CHARLES WALKER STALKING PARADISE GUIDO ALBERTO ROSSI AERIAL IMAGES DOCUMENTARY TONY O'BRIEN, KEITH CARDWELL, JOHN EVANS
contents
NEWS
JOHN THOMSON
British documentary photography has an extremely long and impressive pedigree.
From the beginning, photographers have recorded every facet of our own society, and many also made superb visual documents of foreign races and cultures, none more than John Thomson
KEITH CARDWELL
Over the last few years, Keith Cardwell has become a big name in ‘documentary photography’, he explains just how and why
BOOK REVIEWS
TONY O'BRIEN
Documentary photographer Tony O'Brien has produced a number of long-term projects on drugs and prostitution
FLIGHTS OF FANCY
Dave Reeder tracked down aerial photographer Guido Alberto Rossi shooting in Australia for his next book
RODINAL 100 YEARS ON
It might seem odd during a period of so much innovation and advancement in photographic technology that a film developer formulated in 1891 should still be so popular today, over 100 years on
REV LA DIFFERENCE!
Eschewing both rutted ‘autoroute’ and Paris-Dakar’engineering, ten couples somehow cajoled their 2CVs across the Sahara and eight survived to turn a brain-storm into an annual rally.
John Evans travelled with them to provide the evidence
STALKING PARADISE
Charles Walker is preparing photographs for a series of travel books.
In this article, he gives some  advice on photography in a Tahitian paradise.
TIM CLAYTON
Sports Photographer Tim Clayton has reached new heights since living in Australia.
David Rowley spoke with Clayton about his route to the top
SEE HERE
Photography's comprehensive guide of what to see at your local gallery
GIVE-AWAY FROM POLAROID
Polaroid's fourth free guide to instant imaging, ‘Darkroom Techniques’, is now available.
Darkroom Techniques explains how to apply Polaroid techniques to conventional materials, such as making instant prints from slides, and also how to produce conventional prints and slides from Polaroid materials.
The guide offers advice on producing  visualise and proofs from 35mm  transparencies , duping slides, selecting the correct instant film to suit your requirements, a problem solving  page and much more.
For your free copy of the ‘Polaroid Guide to Instant Imaging: Darkroom Techniques’ write to:
Please note, the guide is only available while stocks last.
NEW DIGITAL CAMERA DOWNLOADS TO PC
A new digital camera, which allows images to be captured then downloaded into a PC has been unveiled by Logitech, a market leader in computer input devices.
Known as FotoMan, the technology is expected to have a similar impact on desktop publishing as the Polaroid camera had on photography when it was first launched.
While the camera is computer dedicated, it is just like a conventional camera in every other aspect — the only real difference being that there is no film involved.
Up to 32 digitised photographs being stored in the camera at any one time.
The end results from a photo session, are transferred directly into a computer by plugging a cable attachment into the serial port of any desktop, laptop or notebook PC.
Once in the computer, grey scale images can be easily and professionally integrated into documents with Foto Touch, Logitech's new Windows-based image editing software which comes with FotoMan.
Using a NiCad 24-hour rechargeable battery, the camera can be used both indoors and outdoors without the need for cables, film, development or additional memory storage.
The user simply lines up the image in the viewfinder of the fixed focus lens and presses the button.
A threaded filter adapter ring ensures that the camera can make use of standard 37mm camcorder accessories such as wide angle telephoto and macro lenses and filters.
The final price for FotoMan is expected to retail at less than £600 exclusive of VAT and should be available during the spring of 1992.
For further details contact:
FREE LEICA LENS
If you're thinking of purchasing a top-of-the-line, multi mode Leica R5, now is the time to do it.
For a limited period only, Leica Camera is giving away a free 28–70mm VARIO-ELMAR-R zoom lens, worth £577.
For more information check out your local Leica dealer, or contact Leica direct at 
TIME MANAGEMENT FOR PHOTOGRAPHERS
Professional photographer Darron Hartas of York has devised a time management diary system exclusively for use by photographers.
His system, called ‘Action Booklets’ is part of the ‘Business Builder’promotion series introduced last year by his firm Hartas & Hartas.
The pack contains twelve action booklets, one for each month, together with a time management pamphlet explaining how to make better use of your time and how to utilise the monthly work books.
Darron, trained as a photojournalist, has experimented over the last four years with commercially available time management systems before devising his own to suit the needs of the professional photographer.
The pocket sized booklets include sections for monthly, yearly and five yearly goals, daily schedule with equal space for morning, afternoon and evening appointments, daily expenses, to-do lists and short cut coding for speedy appointment entries.
For more information, and a free booklet called ‘Look Before You Leap’, an introduction to time management for the professional photographer, write to 
ELECTRONIC IMAGING AT NESCOT
Many photographers are currently becoming increasingly worried about the impact of electronics on the industry.
Small computers are now routinely used to perform the tasks for which photographers are employed, whilst the advent of still video is making increasing inroads into the working lives of photojournalists.
A series of one day lectures in electronic imaging are planned by North East Surrey College of Technology (NESCOT), Epsom, Surrey, aimed at photographers who wish to become involved with/know more about this fascinating area.
The courses planned are:
An Introduction to Electronic Photography, 25 February, 5 May
An Introduction to Computer Manipulation of Images — 3 March, 12 May
Courses in more advanced aspects of electronic imaging are to be organised later in the year.
Further details are available from Linda Thompson on 081 394 3179 .
NEW SHAPE FOR FUJI
Recently introduced into the Fuji range of compact cameras is the FZ–3000 Zoom.
Incorporated into the camera is a built in 38–115mm power zoom lens, made possible by adopting ‘binocular’ styling which makes it easy to hold but still allows easy access to the various functions.
With its three times zoom range the FZ–3000 covers the vast majority of everyday shooting conditions.
A 3-step ‘Quick Zoom’ feature instantly sets the lens to 38, 70 or 115mm.
The FZ–3000, together with a hand strap, carrying case, lithium battery and flash unit, is available now and retails for around £220.
KODAK SUPPORT FOR OLYMPICS
Kodak Limited has responded to the appeal from the British Olympic Association with a donation of £10,000 to help support the British Teams at the Winter and Summer Olympics in 1992.
Though Eastman Kodak, the parent company, is a major sponsor of the Olympics, Dennis Wilcox, Manager, Corporate Public Relations said ‘here in the UK, we also wanted to give direct support to the British Teams and the best way to do that was by a donation.
We now wish them every success at Albertville and Barcelona.’
SURVEY RECOMMENDS BAN ON SNAPPING ROYALS ON HOLIDAY
85% of the respondents to a recent survey, commissioned by Canon Cameras, stated that the press should be banned from taking photographs of the Royal Family when they are on their private holiday.
Moreover, 87% think that the Royals should be protected from photographers when not on official duty.
Only 12% think that they are public property and therefore the press should be able to take photographs of them at any time.
The survey of over 1,000 adults aged 15+, conducted by NOP at the end of November 1991, researched the public's attitudes to photographs of the Royal family in the press.
Other key findings from the survey include:
47% admitted to enjoying looking at photographs of the Royal Family in newspapers and magazines, 50% claimed that they did not.
Of these, women and older people were more likely to enjoy looking at photographs of the Royal family.
The Princess of Wales was most frequently mentioned as the Royal that respondents enjoy looking at photographs of, being mentioned in 69% of cases.
She is followed by The Queen (22%) and The Queen Mother (23%).
Half of the respondents would take a camera to an event where the Royal Family was present.
When asked for comment on the quantity of photographs of the Royal Family in the press there was no clear opinion.
46% think there are too many while 45% think that there are the right number.
Almost a third (29%) of people who said they enjoyed looking at photographs of the Royal Family said that there were too many pictures of the Royal Family in the press.
Commenting upon the results of the survey, Richard Young, well known for his images of the  Royals , commented: ‘As long as the Royal subject is in full public view and the photographer is not doing anything he shouldn't, like trespassing, there is no reason at all why the press should be banned from taking their photograph.
However, I do believe that intensely private moments should not be captured on film, but this is left very much up to the integrity of the individual photographer.’
Richard continued, ‘I personally think that there is a lot of hypocrisy surrounding this subject.
I maintain that the general public loves to look at, and discuss, photos of the Royal Family.
The Royal Family are, after all, public property, and many of them love to have their picture taken.’
DUTCH PHOTOGRAPHER WINS PRO PRIZE
The Kodak Pro Prize for advertising photography has been won by the young Dutch photographer, Rineke Dijkstra, working for agency DAV studio.
The photography was part of a direct mail campaign, featuring work of 10 Dutch photographers, promoting Dr Adams Shoes.
This leading award for photography is part of the EPICA Awards — the top creative awards for Europe.
A total of 416 companies entered from 21 countries with the UK taking 17 of the 50 winners.
JOHN THOMSON
British documentary photography has an extremely long and impressive pedigree.
From the beginning, photographers have recorded every facet of our own society, and many also made superb visual documents of foreign races and cultures, none more than John Thomson
Many early photographic images can be interpreted as ‘documentary’ in some sense.
These pictorial records have had a variety of purposes.
Some were  brought back from new and exotic lands simply as sources of amusement or sensation.
Sometimes they were illustrations for serious study or important social statements.
Almost any photograph can reveal something about its own time if read properly — even the boring cartes-de-visite portraits produced in their millions all over the world, offer evidence of contemporary fashions and attitudes.
Irrespective of their original function, these historical documents now provide us with many fascinating insights into the way we were.
Some early documentary photographers however, made serious attempts to provide an informed comment on some important aspect of society, which would also form a lasting account of the period.
Some of these documents remain not only as important records of passed time but as superb images in their own right.
For example, take Frank Meadow Sutcliffe's pictures of Whitby, its community and its industry; a marvellously revealing historical document with an impressive pictorial content too.
The same can be said of PH Emerson's work on local communities of the Norfolk Broads.
Emerson idealised the fishermen and reed cutters of the Broads as symbols of rural simplicity and the ‘natural’ life.
His ‘tasteful’ vision of life on the fens and broads, romanticises what was frequently a very hard and frugal existence.
But underneath the veil of whimsy, we are still left with some valuable evidence of the life and traditions of those people in that place at that time.
John Thomson was one of a small number of photographers, who seems to have been motivated by a genuine desire to ‘document’.
His work also had a strong visual appeal, but he managed to prevent aesthetics from getting in the way of his real intentions.
Thomson was born in Edinburgh in 1837, the son of a wealthy tradesman.
He received an excellent education in Edinburgh and, probably learned the craft of photography from one of the many practitioners who operated there.
For a young, intelligent and well off man of 25, the mid 19C offered excellent opportunities for excitement, discovery, and perhaps even a modest profit.
Thomson, eager to experience as many of these opportunities as possible, set off for Penang in 1862.
There he set up a small photographic portrait business, and made some early forays into recording ethnic ‘types’ and customs.
In 1863 he moved to Singapore and  set up another, much larger studio.
He provided portraits for the various colonial communities and dignitaries, and made pictorial ‘views’ and ethnic studies.
However, portraiture and similar commercial assignments soon began to bore him.
Thomson found that photography was an agreeable way of making a living, but he knew that he, and the camera, were capable of greater things.
His imagination and curiosity fired by reading many accounts of expeditions and discoveries in Asia, he travelled to India in 1864.
After his experiences photographing there, he found it very difficult to continue the rather dull life of a colonial portraitist, and soon set off again for the strange and exotic land of Siam.
In those days, simply being British seems to have been a passport to the higher circles of whatever country the traveller set foot in.
Thomson soon found himself hob-nobbing with Mongkut, the King of Siam, who he met through the royal children's governess, Anna Leonowens.
Her memoirs formed the inspiration for the film ‘The King and I’, although Thomson's portraits of the King show that he looked nothing at all like Yul  Brynner .
Thomson's entree to the court of Siam enabled him to make an important record of ceremonials there.
He also made some excellent pictures of the floating city of Bangkok and its inhabitants, which had never been seen in the west.
At this time he began to combine his visual records with considerable written comment and analysis of his experiences.
His journal of the time notes that he found the King's many wives very charming to look at.
However, his Victorian sensibilities were disgusted by their habit of chain smoking cigarettes — a little slip into hypocrisy here by Thomson, who was the son of a wealthy Edinburgh tobacconist.
In Siam, Thomson teamed up with a journalist called Kennedy, and ,together with a large entourage, they set  off on a perilous journey to Cambodia.
Despite contracting malaria and experiencing many difficulties, they finally found the object of their expedition hidden deep in the tropical jungle; the mysterious Angkor Wat, the ruined temples of an ancient civilisation.
He returned to Edinburgh in 1866, and tried, unsuccessfully, to present a paper on his Cambodian experiences to the Royal Geographical Society.
He did manage to read a paper to the British Society at a conference on Geography and Ethnology however, and the pictures he used to illustrate the item were very well received.
The British Journal of Photography were lavish in their praise for the quality of his work, which had been undertaken in difficult circumstances.
Thus encouraged, he published a small portfolio of his Cambodian pictures, and planned further photographic expeditions.
In 1867 he set off again, this time for Vietnam, and from there to Hong Kong.
Throughout his travels he had met and been impressed by fellow globetrotters from China, and had slowly formulated a plan to create a thorough visual documentation of Chinese civilisation.
During the next four years he travelled extensively in China, recording every facet of life at all levels of society, from paupers to princes.
The work, comprising 218 images and entitled ‘Illustrations of China and its People’, was finally published in four volumes between 1874 and 77.
It is a veritable encyclopaedia of Chinese landscape, architecture and culture.
The technically brilliant pictures reveal a wealth of detail and information on everyday life in China, providing interest for scholars and a sensation hungry general public.
The book was certainly the most thorough document of a country made up to that point in time, and received accolades from all quarters.
As well as being technically superb, the pictures reveal that Thomson certainly had a gift for composition and a feeling for light and atmosphere.
However, Thomson was certainly not obsessed with aesthetics.
‘My share in the composition is very small indeed.’
He remarked, ‘I have only permitted nature to do what she is always willing to do, if photographers do not stand in her way.’
Thomson is very modest about his artistic achievements — he was never interested in exhibiting — however, he thoroughly enjoyed the technical side of photography.
He wrote highly  thought of articles on technique for the British Journal of Photography, and eventually became official photographic instructor to his beloved Royal Geographical Society.
This is a role which provided him with a great deal of satisfaction.
In his later years he recalled with pride the opportunity it gave him to lecture such eminent men as Sir Henry Stanley on the correct procedure for expedition photography.
The Thomson family settled in London, where he made a bare living from his books, talks and articles.
During this time he was inspired by a book called London Labour and London Poor by Henry Mayhew.
The illustrations were engravings based on original daguerreotypes, the text a Reformist's account of lower working class life.
The book had worthy intentions, and the text made some good points, but the illustrations were weak and said nothing about the real conditions of the poor.
Thomson, and a reformist journalist called Adolphe Smith, set out to produce a similar but better document on urban poverty, this time using photography for more accurate illustrations.
Liberalism and reform was gaining strength at that time, as manifested in the socially aware novels of Dickens and the activities of Dr Barnardo and his homes for waifs.
Thomson's experiences abroad, where he had been confronted with every type of poverty and degradation, had nurtured his already strong humanitarian streak.
Through his travels he had also developed excellent social skills.
If you can talk your way out of trouble in a Chinese opium den, the back streets of London hold no fear for you.
Candid photography was possible but difficult at this time, so all the shots had to be  set up .
Due to his technical expertise, he was able to work extremely quickly and unobtrusively, and he also had a knack for directing people so that the end result looked very natural.
Some of the images hover on the verge of being idealised ‘genre’ pictures.
However, in a society that in general believed the fate of the poor to be a direct result of their own shortcomings, the work showed creditable compassion and worthy intentions.
‘Street Life in London’ began publication in 1877.
It appeared in 12 monthly parts.
 Each issue related the experiences of three separate people, illustrated by Thomson's photographs which were reproduced by the Woodburytype method.
This body of work represents an important stage in the development of documentary photography, and it is certainly the achievement that Thomson is most remembered for.
This was one of the first serious attempts to record the real lives of ordinary working people.
Granted some of the images are a little sanitised, but the good intentions can be clearly read through the window dressing.
There is no doubt that the document provided ammunition for reforms.
It has even been suggested by some historians, that the series gave impetus to the building of the Thames Embankment, which prevented the regular disastrous flooding of the homes of poor people.
Thomson's restless nature drove him abroad once more after publication of Street Life, to Cyprus.
However, although he made some valuable and technically superb images there, he became disillusioned by travel, and came home to London for good.
To support his ever growing family, he opened a studio in Buckingham Palace Rd.
This proved to be a handy location, when he became ‘By Appointment’ to HRH.
He became a member of the Royal Photographic Society and for his works for the Royal Geographical Society was made a life member in 1917.
Thomson died in 1921 aged 84.
His real interest had always been in the scientific aspects of his work.
Although now remembered solely for his pictures, he would probably have preferred to be recognised as a man of science, and the man who taught Sir Henry Stanley the rudiments of expedition photography.
Visual documents such as Thomson's are an exciting link with our own history, and that of the developing world.
The photographic pioneers who travelled our own rural lanes, and cobbled back alleys have left us a visual legacy that portrays the changing face of our society.
This legacy has been added to down the years, and continues to develop.
It's an interesting thought that the images of every day life that we all make today, will sooner or later become a part of this heritage.
What will future generations make of those dog eared colour prints of great aunt Tracy with a safety pin through her nose, skateboarding, tower blocks, hippies, cooling towers.
Will it all seem as quaint to them as the age of steam and the stovepipe hat now seems to us?
THE SHOE BLACK BY JOHN THOMSON
YUENFU  MONASTERY BY JOHN THOMSON
THE GOVERNMENT OF CHINA.
SHEN-KWE-FEN, TUN-SEAN, MAOU-CHING-WE — CHINESE  MINISTERS OF STATE
THE CHIMNEY SWEEP BY JOHN THOMSON
THE ABBOT AND MONKS OF KUSHAN MONASTERY
COVENT GARDEN LABOURERS BY JOHN THOMSON
KEITH CARDWELL
Over the last few years, Keith Cardwell has become a big name in ‘documentary photography’, he explains just how and why
At the age of 44, Keith Cardwell is now in his thirteenth year of being a professional photographer.
He came to photography via a Fine Arts degree, a teaching qualification and a career which combined teaching, private painting projects and social work.
Since becoming a professional photographer, he has undertaken a wide range of assignments but, from the beginning of 1986, began restricting the commercial work he was offered in order to produce less technically-orientated, more creative images.
Whilst initially not as financially rewarding, the change in direction has brought him increasing recognition.
His work has been the subject of seven one-man exhibitions, has been featured as a lead article in the British Journal of Photography, included in many other shows and has received a number of prizes (including the South Bank Festival Photography Competition 1990 Portfolio).
Keith Cardwell's decision to move from the world of commercial photography into the more demanding, and typically less lucrative, area of documentary photography can be almost directly attributed to a TV series, a BBC 1 documentary called The Family .
It was a ‘fly-on-the-wall’ programme covering the fortunes and misfortunes of a London family, over a period of time — warts and all.
‘The idea first came to me when I was at college and Paul Watson, a BBC producer, came to do a series of lectures.
He showed a selection of film clips and I was really impressed.
The scenario was that there was this normal, everyday family being filmed in their home at their most private moments and, in one scene, where a young boy is being pressurised into getting married, they all leave the room and he turns to the camera and says something like ‘I've got to be careful here.
They're gonna catch me’ and he was just talking to the film crew and not the camera and was not conscious of the fact there was probably 14 million people watching it.
I just felt like I would have given my right arm to be there with a camera — and that stayed in my mind for a long time.’
Part of Keith's interest in the documentary style of photography he excels in was, perhaps, further fuelled by the amount of time he has, over the years, spent in part-time social work which has given him access to various kinds of care units.
‘When I was still involved in commercial work, I also used to foster kids’, he says, ‘and, consequently, got to know a lot about the care system.
I got involved with agencies who specialise in placing children who were difficult to place, be it handicapped, black or of the wrong age, and that led to my doing a lot of work taking photographs for a magazine published by the British Agencies for Adoption and Fostering and various publicity and public relations work for the Catholic Children's Society .
During his work with children in care, he met Toni, an 18-year-old black transvestite prostitute who, along with others, are in social care.
This led to a series of startling photographs of these people ‘on the streets’.
‘Those were all done on one roll of film’ he explained, ‘Because they had to be instantaneous and I knew if I went back again, it would not be the same.
For most of the black and white pictures, I used a Leica M6 and shot it with a similar approach to The Family.
It looks like 16mm film because it's Kodak Gold and that's because I wanted it to look like good-quality home snaps as opposed to a kind of beautiful, arty shot.
Another of Keith Cardwell's main interests is China.
In 1988, he was awarded an honorary masters degree at Guangsi Province University and has lectured on European art to post-graduate students there.
He was also made an honorary villager of Guilin, one of the main centres for child artists and his status in China means that he can now travel freely and have access to areas of Chinese life which are not generally open to foreign visitors.
Again, the roots of this passion grew in Leeds.
He joined the Chinese Society at the University having been ‘knocked out’ by seeing Antonioni's cult film ‘Shanghai’.
This interest led to a plethora of documentary work in China and Keith is planning another visit as soon as he finishes his latest project which he began last February.
He is working on a documentary on the East End, particularly the Bangla Desh community.
Eamonn Percival
Keith Cardwell can be contacted on 071–639 1296.
NIGHT OUT, TRAFALGAR SQUARE BY KEITH CARDWELL
BOOK REVIEWS
LEICA REFLEX PHOTOGRAPHY
By Brian Bower
This is one book that no Leica owner should be without.
Packed with useful information and ideas.
Brian Bower, a Leica enthusiast for over twenty years, introduces you to the world of Leica cameras, briefly outlining their history.
The author then moves on to describes the wide range of lenses and equipment giving his own evaluations gained from years of practical use.
He then deals with the craft itself, offering valuable advice on film types and exposure.
The subjects covered are numerous.
Among these are landscapes, nature, including close-ups, and photographing people, to mention but a few.
All these are described in a clear and succinct manner.
There is even a chapter on buying second hand — which has to be a boon for other Leica devotees.
The text is accompanied by an abundance of superb photographs, colour as well as monochrome.
The vivid images featured in these are a feast to the eye, which make this a beautiful book as well as a valuable source of reference.
Tony Agius & Manny Cefai
LOW LIGHT AND NIGHT PHOTOGRAPHY
By Roger Hicks
If you have struggled to obtain more atmospheric pictures using low lighting conditions, then this book will prove to be a valuable addition to your reference collection.
Now published as a more affordable paperback, the book guides you through the process of taking photographs under most lighting situations and achieving the desired results.
The author deals with various subjects, such as concerts, parties, landscapes etc., including their inherent conditions.
Advice is given on the types of film and equipment to tackle them with.
He does this with the aid of a collection of 160 photographs which graphically show the results that may be obtained.
Mr Hicks delivers the text in a straightforward, no nonsense style, retaining a relaxed discourse with the reader.
This makes the book an easy introduction to what might otherwise to a frustrating branch of photography.
THE FREELANCE PHOTOGRAPHER'S MARKET HANDBOOK
And so, a new year and a new Freelance Photographer's Market Handbook.
If you've never come across the publication before, it is an essential purchase for any would-be freelance photographer and the well established alike.
If you take photographs as a hobby, you are likely to have produced at least one quality snap in your time and it might just be that a magazine would find it useful.
But there are so many magazines out there, which one do you approach?
Who do you approach and how do you approach them?
These and many similar and related questions have been asked by freelance photographers before and will be continued to be answered in The Freelance Photographer's Market Handbook.
The handbook lists over 950 publications currently available in the UK today.
Categories include aviation, cycling, food and drink, photography and sport, animals, business and transport.
If you've got a portfolio, then the agency listings give you ahead start in knowing where to send it and how much commission you are likely to earn if your work is accepted.
National and major regional newspapers too are listed including the name of the Picture Editor and the telephone number of the Picture Desk.
A listing of major factual book publishers may also be of help.
And if you are stuck for supplies or a place to work then a listing of major suppliers, studios and darkrooms will accommodate you.
For little more than the price of two rolls of 35mm this source of invaluable information really is worth having.
Andrew Banner
THE PHOTOGRAPHER'S STUDIO MANUAL
If you have ever considered setting up a photographic studio then you will know that there is an awful lot to think about.
The design of a layout is vitally important, but the equipment you use also plays a major role.
Organising yourself for such a task is no easy thing.
you might think you have it all planned but have you ever set up a studio before.
The chances are that you haven't and that's where The Photographer's Studio Manual comes in.
Written by the well known Michael Freeman, the book details the setting up of a studio from its very conception to kitting it out with the latest gear.
But, not everyone has thousands of pounds to spend on a studio set up and Freeman has addressed this point and also detailed the necessary design and items for the temporary home studio and has also included sections on portable studios.
Through its 260 pages, the manual offers text on technique, lighting, special effects, composition, portraits and much more.
In fact, the book transforms into photographic ideas as you progress through it.
The text is interesting and informative without being too technical.
There are many illustrations throughout which offer a visual display of the technique or design which the text is referring to.
The quality of the photographic images is very good and offers step by step examples of ideas.
This hard backed book is an invaluable source for the amateur photographer who wants to make the break into studio work.
It's also ideally suited to photographers' assistants who want to progress.
I'm sure that there's a wealth of information for studio photographers as well.
However, I doubt that the book will be of any use to the professional.
TONY O'BRIEN
Documentary photographer Tony O'Brien has produced a number of long-term projects on drugs and prostitution.
He has worked in Afghanistan, where he was captured, and more recently in the Gulf.
Two of his photographs were chosen by Life for their pictures of the year
Tony O'Brien first got into photography because he didn't know what he wanted to do.
‘I left the States and was travelling in Italy when I met a photographer.
I had always been sort of fascinated with pictures: I was more of a visual person than a word person.’
Hanging around with the photographer sparked Tony's interest in the medium, ‘It was a combination of things; one was the bull, the adventure, the romance, and I really found that I liked it a lot.
So, I thought I was going to be a freelancer — what a fool.
I went back to the States and was going to cut my swathe in society in Washington.
I lasted about six months there, then I went back to New Mexico.’
An opening on a local newspaper was Tony's real entry into professional photography, ‘It was like — whoops, now you've got to do it.
I knew nothing about the profession when I started, absolutely nothing.
The first day at the newspaper they sent me into the darkroom with a roll of film and I think I was in the closet for about five hours before I could figure out how to put it on the reel.’
Did he tell anyone that he didn't know what to do?
‘Of course I know how.
A print?
Sure.’
‘Go down to the mayor's office and use a flash.’
‘A what?’
After working on a couple of local papers for a number of years, Tony and a number of colleagues launched a weekly newspaper, following this was a spell at the Santa Fe daily.
Then some work for the Albuquerque paper, the State's largest paper.
‘While all this was going on I began work on Corrections and Police , two magazines founded by the Ford Foundation.
‘Through this kind of work you see the underside of society.
After Corrections I joined Picture Group in 1981 and for some reason I ended up doing a lot of work for them in the ghettos, guns, drugs and things like that; it became my forte and I came to feel at ease in this kind of environment.
I knew the risk was there but it didn't become a major concern.
you're always concerned, don't get me wrong, but you just put it to the back of your mind.
‘Recently I decided I wanted to do something on prostitution.
Everybody has an idea of prostitution and I don't think a lot of people know what it's all about.
I'd always wondered what drove them, what were they about.
I realised that many did drugs, so I spent a lot of time in the drug community before hand, so that once I hooked up with the women I could move back and forth.
I knew that if I was with prostitutes it would be very difficult for me to get into the drug community and be accepted.’
Because the two subjects were approached separately what was going to be one piece became almost like two stories.
‘I did an area in Washington, as far as drugs, called the Graveyard and then for the prostitution I did New York and Washington DC.’
So how did Tony manage to gain the confidence of the dealers, ‘It took at least two or three weeks before I took my camera out and that was probably one of the hardest things I did.
You see all these things go by; it's like having no hands or feet, you just can't do anything.
So, I got to the point where I was at ease in that community or as at ease as you can be, then spent another three weeks there.
Then I started getting involved with the women and that took another three or four weeks because that was a different world with another set of rules.
‘Another thing which caused me to spend a long time on the story was that prostitution is a black and whit story, but the business side of photography usually wants colour.
I didn't want to use print film; I just don't think it's as good as a slide film where you can get the saturation.
Luckily I had a friend who had run the photo lab at Time magazine who was working with me on the technical side and we came up with this idea of trying to use Fujichrome 1600.
I didn't want to use flash; I think you lose a lot with flash.
That was one of the things with black and white, the shadows, the dimension that you can get.
We took Fujichrome, shot it at 5000 ASA and developed it at about 6400 ASA, we just pushed the shit out of it and we had no idea of what would happen.’
As the images show, their idea was successful.
‘Gradually I got to know what would work, it caught the mood, the shadows held up and the grain was soft, it was like a pastel painting.
I lost a lot of pictures, but it opened up the night-time for me and I felt that the mood came out.
So I ended up doing a piece on a night out on the streets and tying in this woman Misty and her child.
The commission for the piece came from Life magazine, but due to a change in publishers the images never ran, ‘I've tried to sell it overseas and in Europe and had very good success with it.
The Correspondent used it, it sold in Italy, Germany and Spain.
But when editors have seen it in the States they've been very impressed but find it difficult to use.
That's the problem in the States; we're glitter.’
A deal of Tony's documentary work seems to involve some form of danger, ‘I went to Asia twice; in 1986 and when the Soviets began their pullout and stayed for a year and a half in Peshawar, Pakistan.
I was doing the Mujahadeen side for Life and one day I thought it would be a great story to be in Kabul when it fell, to see it from the Mujahadeen side.
Everybody wanted that, but I had some contacts, I knew I could get in there.
Initially I wanted to be in Kabul should there be an offensive, then reality began setting in and I could see that they weren't going to take a village, let alone a capital.’
The ideas for the story changed and Tony went in with a Mujahadeen espionage unit, though he uses the term lightly.
‘It was in Kabul that I got caught in a safe house,’ another term he'll always think of differently, ‘by the secret police and I was put in prison.
But I was very lucky, I was only there for six weeks; I was very, very lucky.
I thought the best-case scenario would be a year, and that was kind of depressing.’
Tony returned home to New Mexico in September 1989.
‘I think it all caught up with me: Corrections, Police — and you build up these defences within yourself and you have to pull away because you know: Wait a minute man, it's not hitting me the way it used to, I'm not jumping into it.
I'm not taking the pictures for the reason I first picked up a camera.
It made me think a lot about photography while I was in prison; it was like why are you doing this?’
In February '91 Tony started an essay on Arafat, ‘I hooked up with him on two different occasions, over the course of a couple months, trying to do a photo-essay on him; which was probably the most ridiculous thing to do the first time out of the box for a while — talk about a third-rate Keystone kops movie, with me as the star!’
Tony left the Picture Group and joined Jocelyne Benzakin's agency because he wanted to continue to work on projects and was impressed with what she does and her perceptions of photography.
A recent visit to the Festival of Photoreportage was the first time that Tony had met other members of the group, ‘Some of them I didn't know and for me that was the wondrous part of being at Perpignan.’
After Perpignan Tony went to the Gulf war.
While waiting around for five months he had been planning to do a story on a particular platoon of sixteen guys, which was very promising at first and the men enthusiastic and helpful.
Unfortunately it was blocked by an unpleasant senior officer.
Tony decided not to stay within the pool system but to work independently.
This turned out to have been a wise decision.
The pool system was not just to protect journalists and share the work out fairly, but also to control and censor the media.
‘I and a few others got into Kuwait in the morning and we were finishing our day's work at about 5pm.
Then, as the light was going, a convoy rolled in with the pool — just too late for them to get any pictures.’
The army undertook to transport film and copy but it was often delayed or lost.
In fact, says Tony ‘The military openly gloats over the way they kept the media under control and in relative ignorance, and the public is behind them.’
One of the problems being in the Gulf was keeping in touch with the reality of the situation and the actual dangers.
Thus, when a number of media people went to Basra, Tony and a few others headed for Nasariyah.
Their vehicle came under fire but was not hit.
One of the group took it lightly and suggested going by a slightly different route.
‘I screamed: ‘This is real; it's not a game!’
Chris Morris told me that the other group had got caught in Basra because they had lost touch with reality briefly and got careless.’
The full reality of the war came home to Tony when a soldier beckoned him over to a lorry and opened the back doors.
‘It was piled four deep with bodies, as was the other lorry beside it.
I decided at that moment that I'd had enough.’
The grim reality of the war was reinforced when Gad Gross, who had been part of the JB group, was killed by Iraqi soldiers on 29th March.
He was only 27, amusing, very intelligent and talented and will be deeply missed by those who knew him.
And for the future, a trip to Everest with a group dedicated to breaking records who will attempt a difficult route.
A quiet life isn't Tony's style.
Ted Welch
PROSTITUTES BEING BUSTED BY POLICE BY TONY O'BRIEN, JB PICTURES
HEROIN ADDICTS IN GRAVEYARD AREA BY TONY O'BRIEN, JB PICTURES
FLIGHTS OF FANCY
Most aerial photographers are pilots who taught themselves photography.
That may be why photographer turned pilot, Guido Rossi stands apart from the crowd.
Dave Reeder tracked him down, shooting in Australia for his next book
Guido Alberto Rossi was born in Milan in 1949 ,photographing widely in the Middle East and Indochina until 1973 .
He then specialised in sports photography ,becoming a director of The Image Bank ,Italy ,in 1978 .
Since the mid-1980s he has produced some thirteen books of aerial photography ,consolidating his position as the world's leading exponent of such work .
With another seven such projects under way ,he provides The Image Bank with a wide variety of stock shots from his travels ,shooting people (conventionally) and landscapes (from the air) worldwide .
‘I was in Florida, looking for better ideas of shooting landscape and took a short plane ride.
Halfway through, the pilot turns to me and says ‘Do you want to handle the controls?’
So I figure, why not?
It goes okay and then he asks ‘Do you want to land?’
Ha, he's crazy but I do it.
It was a little bumpy!’
As a major career move, that sounds a little irresponsible.
But Guido Alberto Rossi had already had three very successful but very different photographic careers: documentary work in the Gulf and with US forces in Vietnam, sports photography and general travel work, mainly for magazines.
In 1984 he had nothing left to prove — he was successful, shooting stock shots for The Image Bank , which he'd been a director of for six years.
‘I was shooting a lot of travel features at the time and had done a few aerials just to try something new.
After that flight, I went back to Italy and started to pick up flying lessons whenever I could, became a pilot and then, about four years ago, bought my own plane.’
It's not always been easy.
He's had his share of bad experiences in the air but ‘it's a kind of drug’ and like any drug, it's expensive to do with any regularity.
‘I'm a photographer, not a billionaire, so I needed to get a good idea going to pay for it all.
And then I had it — specialising in aerial photography.
Once I found the first publisher, it just snowballed.’
That's one way of describing his one man assault on the bookshops: more than a dozen volumes of aerial travel photography to date with at least seven more being worked on now, plus a wide selection of Italian magazine work in Genie Viaggi, Il Piacore, Expression and Autocapital.
Sadly, little of this work had appeared in the UK.
To date, we've seen Rome from the Air ,Venice from the Air ,Florence from the Air , with Thames & Hudson releasing Egypt from the Air and Tuscany from the Air .
Available in Italy are Malaysia, Umbria, Martinique, Guadeloupe , Mauritius, Singapore, Kenya, Europe and (soon) Australia.
‘They're quite easy to do.
I do very little research apart from general reading and looking at guides — to be frank, there's not enough money involved to pay for extensive on the ground or air research.
So, I just go up and shoot.’
but it can't ever be that easy, can it?
‘Well, sure, we may have to go back to some places, if the light is wrong or something.
Like here in the north of Australia, I've been waiting for two days for the light I need for a shot of some valleys.
But I'll get it in the end.’
What are the problems shooting from the air?
‘Not so much problems as surprises and difficulties.
In Tuscany, for example, we were shooting all these amazing villages from the air.
I had with me a good friend who knows the region well — he lives there — and he was following our route on a map.
Suddenly, we've lost our place.
We know the villages exist but, later on the ground, we just couldn't find them!
Other difficulties occur with regulations — places you can't fly without permission.
In Egypt that took five weeks to get; all for five days shooting.’
A more general problem is the need for a close understanding with the pilot — although he can fly, Rossi relies on a pilot to control the plane whilst he takes the shots.
‘Like any hobby or job, it's vital that we speak the same language, understand the same flying terms.
We just use whatever plane we can for as long as it takes: Singapore in eight hours of helicopter flight, Egypt in 50.
But Tuscany, Tuscany was a nightmare!
There was so much bad weather!’
He has a few suggestions for those tempted to try aerial photography.
‘In a city, always use a helicopter — you can get in close, go slowly, move more easily.
But for a big landscape, a plane is a major advantage because you can cover much greater distances.
The biggest technical problems are haze/pollution and vibration.
They're both technical problems with obvious technical solutions — clearly you can use most sorts of lens from the air, except very long telephotos.
They're beaten by the vibration.’
But the secret he's learnt through long experience is the nature of light — from the air it's very different.
‘Haze is easy to tackle, the light demands great care.’
A longterm Leica man, he uses the F4 most of the time —‘Mainly for its very fast motordrive.
If I'm shooting for stock, I can get lots of shots of a rapidly changing situation.
For instance, in Kenya we came at a herd of elephants fast and low — bang!
I had a roll of good frames.’
He's still looking for ways to improve, too.
‘I would love to shoot from a blimp — a lovely, solid platform that would let you get long exposures at night.
I've used a balloon in Africa but you tend to go where it wants!
I'll do it, but at present I'm very busy finishing off Australia, working on China, the Vatican, Portugal and the  Balearics .’
With such a punishing schedule, isn't he in danger of becoming typecast?
‘I'm not crazy about the idea, but I guess it's better to be remembered for something!
Yet I keep changing, keep searching for the next challenge.
Remember that I used to be very well known for sports shots.
I could have kept on and on, but I just got tired of the crowds, the people getting in the way all the time.
From the air I don't have that problem but, curiously, when I've been shooting on the ground in China I've relished the people everywhere.
Maybe I just need to have a change.’
What might that be?
‘Perhaps when I get tired of flying, I'll look underwater!’
Which presents enthusiasts of Rossi's work with a dreadful dilemma: we want to see more and more of his photographs that set the standard for aerial work, equally we're convinced that his sub-aqua images would be equally ravishing.
Spoilt for choice, or what?
Tuscany From The Air and Egypt From The Air are published in the UK by Thames and Hudson Ltd .
CAIRO, THE CITADEL BY GUIDO ALBERTO ROSSI
ALEXANDRIA, EGYPT — GENERICAL CITY BY GUIDO ALBERTO ROSSI
RODINAL 100 YEARS ON
It may seem odd that during a period of so much innovation and advancement in photographic technology that a film developer formulated in 1891 should still be so popular today over 100 years on.
But the world famous RODINAL is just that
Formulated in Germany by Dr. Momme Andresen, and introduced commercially in 1891, the Para-Amidophenol Hydrochloride developer was first used in highly concentrated form for rapid development of plate films.
It was only when Leicas started to gain popularity in the 1930s that the developer was also found to be very suitable for giving high actuance and sharpness at much higher  dilutions with the new miniature films.
Thus a legend was born.
Whereas many modern formulations claim to do one special thing or another, i.e. obtain finer grain or higher speed or better sharpness, Agfa's Rodinal simply develops films better than most others.
Most importantly it will give brilliant negatives to work from with as much gradation of tone as can be reproduced on modern printing papers.
Rodinal is very easy to use, being a ‘one-shot’ developer, and has an advantage over some ‘special’brews in that it can be used with all slow, medium and high speed films and in any format from 3 5mm and 120 rolls to 5″×4″ and larger sizes.
Because the recommended  dilutions for Rodinal are between 1:25 and 1:75 the developer is very economical to use.
It also has an extremely long shelf-life and loses none of its potency even when turning from its original pale  straw colour to the colour of strong tea after a year or more.
One story claims that a bottle of Rodinal, found in the ruins of a building in Germany after the World War II blitz, was usable after 30 years!
At the high  dilutions of 1:25, 1:50 and 1:75 Rodinal acts as a ‘compensating’ developer.
This means that whilst the developer produces full shadow details to work from in the negative, the highlight areas do not become too dense so blocking-up any highlight details.
A typical subject requiring compensating development is a high contrast ‘against the light’ landscape shot.
An average exposure and development would give a high contrast negative which would need manipulation at the printing stage to show shadow and highlight detail in the finished print.
Rodinal's characteristics have to be seen and experienced to be believed.
It is not the finest-grain developer around but it does, at these high  dilutions , produce extremely sharp grain and negative images with a real ‘bite’ to work from.
Because modern emulsions are much finer grained than those produced 100 years ago, Rodinal now gives discerning photographers, both amateur and professional, printed results that were not possible when the developer was invented.
Whilst Rodinal may not be looked upon as a standard developer by the photographic industry in the same way that Ilford's ID-II and Kodak's D-76 are regarded, it is interesting to note for instance that Ilford list, among other developers, Rodinal at a 1:25 dilution, complete with recommended developing times, for its new Delta-400 high-speed emulsion at normal, pull 1-stop and push 1-stop exposure indices.
Flattery indeed.
Other manufacturers should follow suit!
One of Agfa's own outstanding black and white emulsions is APX 100 PROFESSIONAL.
One of the recently introduced APX range,(the others being APE 25 and APE 400), APK 100 is an extremely fine-grained medium-speed film.
Processed carefully in Rodinal it gives as fine a grain as is likely to be required from, for example, 35mm enlarged to a 20″×16″ exhibition size print.
A big advantage of using a medium-speed film such as APE 100 is that it is fast enough for hand-held camera use but not so fast that on bright days creativity is limited by the necessary use of a small apertures or high shutter speed.
Undoubtedly diluted Rodinal and APX 100 is one of the best developer and film combinations available today and one which should satisfy nearly all photographic subjects and situations.
So it should rank as a ‘standard’ brew.
Ideally all negatives should make good prints on a ‘normal’ grade 2 paper.
With different rolls being exposed to several subjects of different contrasts this is still possible with APE 100 and Rodinal if the developer is used at different  dilutions .
By following the ‘golden rule’ of black and white photography — to expose for the shadows and develop for the highlights — negative contrast can be lowered or raised according to the subject's original tonal contrast.
Because over development, or an increase in developer dilution or strength, cannot appreciably raise the density of the exposed shadow areas,(in the region of lightly exposed silver halides there is almost nothing to actually overdevelop), the developer strength or developing time can be varied to lower or increase the highlight areas.
If the subject contrast is very flat the dilution of Rodinal can be lowered to  1:25 or even less so that the increased developer activity boosts the exposed high-tone areas and produces a negative with an expanded tonal range.
On the other hand if the subject's contrast is very high the dilution of Rodinal can be increased to 1:75 or more to fully develop the negative without over-developing the highlight areas.
Both these developing manipulations should produce corresponding negatives with tonal ranges which have a ratio of 1:7.
Negatives within this contrast ratio will produce good prints without manipulations and show a black, white and a recognisable grey scale in between.
Although much of today's photographic technology has a lot of latitude, built into its products and processes, optimum quality is best obtained with care and attention paid to each stage of the photographic process.
It can then be repeated again and again with guaranteed results every time.
Agfa's Rodinal falls into this category, although at 100 years old it is positively ancient and not modern, but it nevertheless has many qualities that other modern developers have only just caught up with.
Rodinal is undoubtedly a ‘classic’ in every sense of the word and the many photographers who continue to use it, or indeed who have recently discovered it, never look back; their results speak for themselves.
The following is a list of Rodinal developing times as recommended by the three major film manufacturers for some of their own films.
They should only be used as a starting point for normal contrast subjects.
note that any of the inherent variables that a camera and meter may have can make noticeable differences to the figures in this table .
REV LA DIFFERENCE!
Eschewing both rutted ‘autoroute’ and ‘Paris-Dakar’engineering, ten couples somehow cajoled their 2CVs across the Sahara and eight survived to turn a brain-storm into an annual rally.
John Evans travelled with them to provide the evidence
It takes the French to tackle one of the planet's least hospitable regions in one of man's most loveable motors.
But thanks to drivers as indomitable as their machines, Timbuctu could become the Le Mans of the desert.
With as many flats as a Parisian tower block and the ‘pits’ affording no more than a shove out of the sand, it was 16 days before the old fort hove into view 338Km after Algiers had disappeared from the rear-view mirror.
No Moslem could have greeted the sight of its medieval columns with more glee than the clapped-out crews of the TransaDeuche for, even though the place is a little less remote these days, it was still a pretty formidable achievement getting to it in a vehicle not really designed to leave the Left Bank.
Timbuctu may have lost some of its mystique but still attracts more legionnaires than lager-louts and was always going to appeal to the adventure-seekers who answered the call of the organising triumvirate of Jerome Viellard, Oliver du Plessis and Ann-Pascale Suppot-Reveilhac.
Swallowing their dismay that the idea was, amazingly, not entirely original — an intrepid bunch had actually driven Citroens across the Sahara in 1922 — they nevertheless required little persuasion to spend Christmas and New Year far removed from Santa as could be imagined.
Assembling in front of the Eiffel Tower, the teams drove through France and sailed the Med safely enough before rumbling south from Algiers with back-up that did not include much besides a wing and a prayer.
Looking equipped for a spot of gentle camping in the Dordogne but definitely not for dicing with dunes and wadis of the harsh landscape that lay ahead, they scorched on regardless, not for once wishing they had the half-track trucks or ‘autochenilles that carried their predecessors.
Supported by four Landrovers and equipped with a few flimsy spares, they sported jeans and shorts rather than jodhpurs, tee-shirts instead of ties and jackets, while on their heads they wore cheches — and definitely not pith-helmets. but if the style was different, the spirit was certainly reminiscent of those pioneer days.
Although points were accrued only from staged ‘specials’— and not from the mind and backside-numbing slogs in between— neither mode was immune from punctures, broken suspension arms or getting lost while the conditions took their toll on the spirit and sprocket alike, tempers fraying as frequently as fan-belts.
Early problems included interminable delays for petrol and a 20km detour around shifting sands but the boring flat stretch between Algiers and Reggane caused more mental than mechanical anguish.
Camping in tents and cooped up in those magnificent mobile ovens, the crews were understandably as short on fuse as they were long on indestructibility and tantrums were as common as stones through the windscreen, the motley band continued their unsung way across the tropic of Cancer while those celebrated and sponsored Paris-Dakar counterparts roared along to the west.
No pair coped better with the 38 degree heat or searing, unyielding surface than Jean de Saget and Cecile Pastre in their 2CV christened James Bond who established an early hold on the race they were not to relinquish.
But for once it was the taking part that counted most and when you've slept in the ruins of a fifties French post office, seen the New Year in with champers in the middle of a sand dune, coped with Idi Amin look-alike policemen and paid backstreet prices to backstreet petrol dealers, you're going to have memories to last as long as the event.
Two crews that would have been especially grateful for this kind of compensation were Dennis Arlett and Patricial Lagesse whose accumulated woes would not let them pass Gao while, even more heart-rending was the final submission of the chassis previously held together by Jean-Christophe Savzey and Claire de Valbray — an agonizing 50km from the finish.
Left at the side of the rutted washboard that has claimed so many victims, it was a poignant reminder that the desert takes a dim view of those who treat it with such disdain.
But those eight survivors saw it differently — and lived to show that it can be conquered — with the right blend of indestructibility between man and machine.
John Evans can be contacted on 071–386 8527 .
DEUCHE 5 (BATMAN) FINALLY COMES TO REST AT GAO.
DEUCHE 3.
OLIVER DU PLESSIS AND CHYSLAIRE ARE ESCORTED INTO TOMBOUCTOU BY THE TOUAREG
DEUCHE 7 (JAMES BOND) CECILE AND JEAN STUCK ON DUNE NEAR ANEFIS ON 31/12/89
STALKING PARADISE
Charles Walker is preparing photographs for a travel book on ‘Para-dise’.
In this article, he gives some advice on photography in a Tahitian paradise
The first journey to Tahiti, which must be mingled in every traveller's mind with images of Gauguin's  paradisaical view of natural beauty, will start usually with a sense of disappointment.
The island of Tahiti has been spoiled by over-development, and the sands are volcanic black.
Those in search of the classical paradise of golden beaches and tranquillity must treat Tahiti merely as a landing stage, and move on to better things, to nearby coral islands, lagoons and atolls, all of which abound in this part of the Pacific.
About 20 minutes flight from Papeete (the capital of Tahiti) is the famous ‘private atoll of Marlon Brando’ Tetiaroa, perhaps the most photogenic of the populated islands.
Nearer to Papeete, and within a five minute flight, is the more varied island of Moorea, the sister island of Tahiti, which offers enormous visual variety for photographers intent on building up a library of ‘tropical island’ shots.
While working on a book of tropical island pictures, earlier this year, I visited Tahiti three times and had an opportunity to vary the outward journey.
The first time, I went by boat, the second time by plane and finally by helicopter — to the nearby island of Moorea, where I spent several days in search of the perfect image.
What does a photographer look for when commissioned to shoot pristine paradise?
This is perhaps the most difficult question one can answer.
Shots of unadulterated paradise — images of soft sand, azure skies and palm-fringed beaches can, when they are well done, bring in a great deal of money, yet, all too often, there is something empty about such shots.
Perhaps it is this very ‘emptiness’ which appeals to many clients, for they can strip their advertisements over the aquamarine seas, or over the azure of skies, so that our subliminal minds will equate the goods they offer with the freshness of unspoiled paradise.
Wile I happily photograph the classical palm fringed beaches of this kind, my feeling is that the good tropical island photography requires that one chooses a scene of paradise which records the fact of perfect beauty, yet, at the same time, evokes the presence of humans.
My argument is that a place may be a paradise only if humans can live there — the picture must sell not merely paradise, but the idea of the ‘enjoyment’ of paradise.
This is why I chose to shoot a picture of a beach in Moorea with traces of the ‘ethnic’ thatched houses beneath the palms, for these evoke the human world without allowing the paradise to be disturbed  by humans.
The subject is essentially twofold — beach and palm trees, so thought must be given to each.
The beach has to be relatively clear of large objects (it is quite extraordinary how so many tropical islands are being ruined by outlandish modern buildings, hideous modern boat-shacks and quick-food restaurants).
The pattern of palm-trees must be interesting in itself.
Great care must be taken to ensure that the line of palms do not look like some modern Forestry Commission plantation.
Trees evenly spaced, at regulation height, and all plumb vertical, must be avoided like the plague.
The ideal is to find a spot where at least one palm tree leans over the beach at a steep angle (more about this in a later article).
This leaning tree should be combined with a general silhouette of trees which is disturbed by at least one palm that  outstrips the others to enhance the pattern of the whole.
Having chosen the tree pattern and the beach, one must then be careful to ensure that the sky is not cloud-filled.
The armchair traveller for whom you are shooting these pictures does not want to visualize paradise under cloud.
In fact, in common with many Pacific islands, Moorea is quite cloudy.
The mountainous half of the island is almost perpetually under a thick cloud.
I had to wait for a considerable time for the expanse of blue sky above my chosen scene (figure XX) to be substantial enough for photography.
At the same time, while ensuring the blue of sky in front of the camera, I had to wait for the sun to fall on the scene from behind me, otherwise the sparkle of beach and palms would have been lost.
Something of the casual innocence of the picture may be lost when I tell you that I had to hunt this particular combination of light for two days before obtaining the shot I wanted!
Another standard (yet always refreshing) approach to paradise shots is to introduce the human element by way of a foreground boat.
Here many problems arise, for so many ethnic boats are now ruined by heavy outboard motors which weight the air with the smell of diesel fumes, and dispel any feeling of paradise.
Undoubtedly, there must be outboard-motor-free boats on Moorea, but I could not find any which were nicely placed against an unspoiled backdrop of palms, beach and sky.
Eventually, I chose to shoot the boat in my picture (figure XX) because the outboard was painted white, and was not too obtrusive.
Additionally, I stalked the craft carefully, so that I could shoot a position which left the outboard almost hidden behind the boat.
The practical problems which the photographer faces with such a shot are numerous.
First of all, one has to wade up to one's chest carrying camera and tripod.
This is a hazardous undertaking in tropical seas because of the sharp coral, which almost comes alive in its search for human feet.
I once lost a whole Bronica set in the Maldives while in only two feet of sea — but that is another story.
On some islands, there is a lethargic variety of sea-snake which lies on the sand in the shallow, and which can give a nasty poisonous bite when stood on.
Such natural impediments aside the real problem is that however still one tries to remain, one's own body sets up waves which destroy the reflections which are such an intrinsic part of the sought after image.
The photographer destroys the photograph, so to speak, and the philosophical implications of this are enormous.
Another problem is that, in the bright Polynesian sun, the boat is almost blinding white.
If one photographed the boat with the sun behind one, as regulation photography requires, the film would record a white haze of boat, and contrast into darkness the less intensely lighted surrounds.
I got round this potential danger of tonal contrasts by ensuring that I was near enough to the boat to see it mainly in its own shadows (figure XX), thus reducing the glare of white, and thereby allowing a less contrasting tonal interplay between boat and background.
Even with this stratagem the blue of sky and the green of palm trees is darkened considerably.
At the time, I felt it was no bad thing, for it helped intensify that curious brooding quality which is such an important element in so many tropical landscapes, and especially those of Polynesia.
After the hassle of dealing with the subtle sunlight of evening, it was a sheer relief to set up tripod at the Moorea Village Hotel, and shoot a few of the guests relaxing at sunset beneath the convenient palm-tree across the still waters of the swimming pool (figure XX).
This image is almost entirely man-made, save perhaps for the palm-tree, yet it still evokes a sense of paradise.
Who says the camera never lies?
This shot brings to mind one very important aspect of tropical island work.
One is always tempted to save money by photographing locals, or the various attractive men and women one meets on holiday.
From a point of view of commercial work, however, this is bad practice, and false economy.
It is always advisable to shoot with experienced models.
Unfortunately, experienced models are hard to come by on most of the Polynesian islands, though it is possible to find a few in Papeete.
It is certainly worth the extra expense of paying their fees and hotel costs.
In terms of hard currency, I will give you an example of what I mean.
While shooting in the beautiful Maldives last  year, it cost me about £200 for a model, plus the various costs of transport and hotel.
however, the shots I took have already made over £5,000, and look good to make more in the future.
No ‘amateur’ models could have  been so photogenic as to command such a price.
The interesting thing about this story is that the model was used almost as an incidental — she was portrayed in the distance, as the aesthetic human element on an otherwise deserted beach.
A serious photographer cannot afford to work in any tropical paradise without shooting from the air.
Atolls, coral reefs and palm fringed beaches have a beauty of their own when seen from the unaccustomed vantage point offered by flight (figure XX).
The surge of breakers, the translucency of the coral led green, and the reflected blue of perfect skies, give some of the finest opportunities for semi-abstract photography.
In Tahiti it is possible to hire (at Papeete airport) a three-blade helicopter for a photographic trip.
I mention that this mechanical bird has three blades because we have here something of great importance for a photographer — the three blades are designed to give a far smoother ride than the two-bladed machine, and because of this it is possible to shoot at a speed as low as 125th of a second.
Normally, aerial photography requires a speed of at least 250th of a second to avoid shake, and some specialists, working from faster planes, insist on 500th!
Of course, helicopters can hover, while, so far as I can see, light planes can rarely drop to less than 90 miles per hour, so when there is a choice, it is best to shoot from helicopters.
Aerial photography requires good expanses of clear skies to be successful, and if you hire a helicopter in advance, you must make the booing subject to weather conditions — flights are far too expensive to hang around (quite literally) waiting for clouds to pass in order to take pictures.
When working from a helicopter or plane, one is very much in the world of instant photography, and you must prepare for this.
Plan every move carefully, for the twenty minutes of half an hour available to you will flash by, and seem like seconds.
Load your camera before you start, and have spare films (removed from their containers) within easy reach.
If you work with a medium format camera, such as the ETRS Bronica which I use, then load as many spare film-holders as you carry with you.
The law requires you to wear a harness, so learn what movements are possible within this encumbrance.
Practise taking shots before you leave the ground, ensuring that all your equipment is within easy reach.
Learn to operate the door (sometimes a complicated affair in a helicopter) so that you can do this quickly and safely when actually flying.
Plan everything to give time-saving efficiency, for you will need it — time is literally money in these circumstances.
Do not let the pressure of time overcome you: try to remain calm, and attempt to compose your images.
Rapid shooting may give many frames, but quantity will never make up for quality.
It is better to come away with half a dozen good shots which may be sold to clients, than to finish up with six hundred unsaleable frames which will have no further practical use.
Charles Walker Photographic ,
VIEW ALONG THE SOUTH-WESTERN BEACHES OF MOOREA
MOOREA VILLAGE HOTEL CHARLES WALKER PHOTOGRAPHIC
CORAL REEF BETWEEN MOOREA AND TAHITI
MOORED BOAT ON MOOREA
TIM CLAYTON
The last in a distinguished line of top class British sports photographers, Tim Clayton has reached new heights since living in Australia, gaining international recognition by winning the portfolio section of the International Olympic Committee's Best of Sport Photographic Contest, open to professional sports photographers world-wide.
David Rowley spoke with Clayton about his route to the top
From the suburbs of industrial northern England to the bright skyline of Sydney, Australia, Tim Clayton has striven to perfect his art as a photo journalist.
The holder of an impressive string of awards, he has now achieved world-wide recognition by winning the portfolio section of the International Olympic committee's Best of Sport Photographic contest, with eight pictures judged the world's finest.
The award caps an amazing 10 year streak of success for Clayton, aged 31.
He was 1990 Ilford Press Photographer of the Year in Britain — the first regionally-based photographer to win the prestigious title.
Clayton, now lives in Australia, having emigrated in August, 1990, with his family, when he began work on the Sydney Morning Herald.
The achievement is all the more remarkable considering Clayton's modest start.
Born in Leeds, England, in 1960, tragedy soon struck the family when his father, a sports journalist, died of a heart attack when Clayton was six.
his mother died of cancer two years later.
Clayton was adopted by his aunt and uncle and brought up in the working class brewery town of Tadcaster, North Yorkshire.
A school leaver in 1976, he had never owned a camera or taken a picture.
With average school qualifications, he planned on becoming an apprentice joiner, but saw a vacancy advertised for a trainee photographic technician at Yorkshire Post Newspapers (YPN) in Leeds.
His application was successful.
He describes the job as ‘being in the dark room, mixing chemicals and coffee, though not together.’
His adoptive father lent him his old Kershaw 450 bellows camera and six weeks into the job Clayton admits he fluked his first page one picture.
‘1976 was a heat wave in England and we had a basset hound called Hector with big ears and a droopy face.
I took a picture of the dog as it looked up while lying next to my sister Jayne, who was sunbathing in the garden.
When I saw the negative it looked as though she had a  dog's head on her shoulders.
‘The Yorkshire Evening Post (YEP) used it on the front page with a by-line.
That was it.
I knew what I wanted to do from then.’
Clayton continued working in the darkroom while pursuing his goal of becoming a photographer.
He worked evenings and on days off, covering local soccer and accompanying other YPN photographers to gain experience.
However, qualifications remained a major obstacle.
His boss insisted he had to pass his English ‘O’ level if he was to become a photographer.
Aged 21, his ambitions were looking gloomy, having failed the ‘O’ level five times, together with his City and Guilds course in photography.
‘I guess I was never cut out for exam situations.
I couldn't spell and about the only time in your life you're not allowed to use a dictionary is in an English ‘O’ level exam.’
However, while still working in the darkroom, he gained second spot in the 1979 Northern Sports Photographer of the Year competition.
His luck continued as he was offered a trainee photographer job on the YEP when a senior photographer left to join a British national newspaper.
Editor Malcolm Barker agreed to overlook the qualification requirement and offered Clayton the job.
He was, in his own words, ‘like a greyhound out of the traps’ and quickly established himself, with the result of further awards.
He was inspired by British photographers Eamonn McCabe and Chris Smith during his early career.
They were at the forefront of sports photographers excelling at their work.
McCabe was then on The Observer and Smith on The Sunday Times.
Clayton used to rush out and buy both papers each Sunday to judge who had the best picture.
‘McCabe was probably my favourite at the time because he was so intense for three or four years.
But I admire Smith's ability to keep on turning out good pictures.’
Clayton himself was content to learn the profession through a series of standard local newspaper pictures, with the added impetus of covering his favourite impetus of covering his favourite sporting teams, Leeds United Football Club and Leeds Rugby League, at the weekend.
A significant bearing on his career came in January 1988, with a trip to  Uganda, when the YEP and Leeds City Council launched a famine appeal for the Save the Children Fund.
Despite the enormity of the tragedy it was tremendous professional experience in a completely different environment — a country recovering from war.
He gained third place in the 1988 Ilford Photographic Awards Features category for one of those pictures, but jokes that on his arrival in Africa ‘I kept looking for a cheque presentation because that's all I was trained to do.’
The Uganda experience, together with later coverage of the Lockerbie air disaster in Scotland and the crash of a Boeing 737 at Kegworth, changed Clayton's thinking.
He admits he lost his naiveté and began to think more deeply about his own work and photojournalism generally.
Such considerations prompted a move to the YEP's sister paper, the morning Yorkshire Post (YP), to further his development.
The YP had not previously been considered a pictorial newspaper, usually resorting to small two column width photographs.
But with a new editor, Tony Watson, keen to use pictures to advantage and a solid team of experienced photographers, it pursued a new direction.
‘We really did wonders in the context of a regional paper,’ Clayton said.
In retrospect he says the YP learned to compete with the new generation of respected photographic newspapers such as The Independent.
‘That paper had a big effect.
It used pictures well, with great reproduction and everybody started to take notice.
It gave photographers a lot to aim for!’
Clayton's development as a photographer had accelerated at a rapid pace and within 12 months he won 12 awards, including:
runner-up in the 1989 Ilford Photographic Awards Press Folio
British Press Photographer Awards Sports Photograph of the Year
Nikon Regional Press Photographer of the Year
UK.
Press Gazette Regional Sports Photographer of the Year
British Press Awards Sports Photograph of the Year
Third place in the World Press Photo Sports Picture of the Year
However, Clayton still felt he had more to offer.
‘I'd put in as much as I could and got out as much as possible at YPN.
It really was time to move on.’
London seemed to be the obvious next step, but Clayton had other ideas.
‘London is a nice place to visit, but being from the North of England we weren't exactly overflowing with money.
It would have meant living in a shoe box in Clapham Junction or something similar.
Besides, the trend on the national newspapers was away from staff photographers and to contract work and I really didn't see the point in moving my family to London without any job security.’
Clayton had visited Australia in 1988 and had been given a firm job offer by the Sydney Morning Herald.
‘I thought there were a lot of good things happening on the Herald.
They were using pictures well and I felt as if I could contribute.’
He is still extremely grateful to the SMH, though his results on behalf of the paper since have gone a long way to repaying any debt of gratitude.
Teething problems of a new job and country aside, he was instantly able to appreciate the technical merit of photography in the pure light of Australia.
He joked: ‘In England, if you were sent to a rugby league match at Batley on a night you had to park your car on the touch line and leave the headlights on and hope the players would run into the beam of light so you could get a  picture.
You were pushing film to the limits, working at 3200 asa.
All of a sudden you're in Sydney, where you're using FP4 film at 1000th at F5.6.
Having trained in grim British winters, it was instantly so much easier.’
He finds Australian photographic subjects a lot more amenable too.
While Britain probably has the best and the worst press in the world, the latter had convinced many that ‘you're going to stitch them up.
They're very wary.’
By comparison, due to relatively few papers in major Australian cities, there is more time on assignments for less photographers.
People are not as afraid, rather more helpful and understanding.
Combined with his British experience, it has made the job more comfortable.
While there was still the quota of run-of-the-mill assignments on the SMH, he quickly established himself and was offered the better jobs.
Clayton's ‘natural’ approach to photography proved a great asset in his continued success.
The SMH had made the set-up picture a fine art.
Photographers were tending to adopt that method on every job, even if there was the opportunity for a natural approach.
He volunteered for sport assignments to escape the constraint of set-up pictures.
‘I feel so at ease covering sport.
It's such a natural thing to cover.
You're simply using your eye and camera to capture a moment.
You're not taking someone's preconceived ideas to an assignment.
I'm not battling with my own ideals when covering sport.’
The age factor also helped.
On the YP he had been virtually the youngest photographer.
On the SMH he is almost the oldest, at 31.
That has further stirred his competitive edge.
‘It's tremendous to work with such a talented team of photographers on the SMH.
I honestly believe there can't be a paper in the world with so much strength in depth photographically.
We have the potential to do great things.’
Clayton attributes a lot of his success to sport itself.
‘I was never any good at  sport at school although I loved to take part.
I only have two sport medals.
One was for being a substitute in a local soccer cup final.
I was sent on with a minute to go and never touched the ball.
The other medal was for coming second in a canoe race.
And only two people took part.
‘After I got married, my wife Teresa, who used to swim competitively, taught me to swim properly.
We got caught up in the keep-fit bandwagon in the mid 80s and got ourselves into shape.
I'm sure a healthy body leads to a healthy mind and that helped me cope with the daily pressures of newspaper life.’
American Football was another major inspiration.
‘It hit Britain in a big way in the mid 80s and I became engrossed in the game.
I really admired the professional attitude of the sport.
Each play is important and a one yard gain can sometimes be just as important in the context of a team effort.
‘I think I somehow adopted some of the American football philosophy.
My work became more consistent, I started to give each assignment as much effort as possible and to evaluate my performance, to see mistakes and room for improvement.’
He believes the psychology generated in many newspapers is lacking, where the job is treated as a production line with photographers feeling they are on a treadmill.
‘I think being a press photographer is not a lot different from being a team sports person.
We all need motivating and encouraging and we need to make people feel good about their efforts and achievements.
It's vital to keep momentum and motivation going.
We're not just playing a weekend game, but working five or six days a week, so there are bound to be problems of mental fatigue and photographers become stale and burned out.
We really do need a whole new approach to the job.’
As for the future, Clayton hopes to produce a book of selected work and is trying to convince his superiors to let him cover sport full time for the SMH, though he keeps an open mind.
‘In a way it would be interesting to work in a country where you couldn't speak the language so you could communicate with your eye and your camera, not your tongue.
Travel is such an education.’
Whatever the outcome, he insists his family has to come first.
‘We're just thankful we've had the opportunity to do what we've done.
You're only here once so you've got to try and make the most of it and enjoy life to the full.’
Tim Clayton can be contacted on Australia (043) 433979 .
SEE HERE
Photography's comprehensive guide of what to see at your local gallery
We tend to regard the Middle East as a ‘trouble spot’ and our understanding of the region and its culture is limited by the stereotyped images we receive through the media.
Over the last three years photographer Ann Jousiffe has worked in North Africa and the Middle East and with her exhibition at Cafe Casbar, Earlham Street, London from 4 to 29 February, she hopes to present a more realistic view of the area.
She says: ‘People have a very cliched view of the middle East, but my impression, having been to three or four Arab countries, is that it is grossly misrepresented in the western press.
When you are there the impression is one of a very warm and very vivid culture; there is a lot more humour.
There is a very young population in most Arab countries.
 It's a much more exciting and lively place and more relaxed than you could ever possible imagine if you read certain tabloid newspapers.’
Going to Libya in 1988, Jousiffe — her name is English, possibly of French origin and not Middle Eastern in spite of its sound — found that she suffered from the negative influence she had absorbed and thought: ‘I won't enjoy this.
As a woman, I was expecting to have difficulties.
I couldn't have been more wrong; people are very respectful there.
I had a lot less hassle walking around Tripoli, than I would have walking around Athens, for example.
You need to know how to behave; not to dress outrageously or act provocatively.
I have never felt in any way uncomfortable.’
Jousiffe's work has been published in British magazines, which include Geographical ,Renaissance ,Traveller and South , as well as a number of Arabic publications.
She has built a reputation for herself as a specialist in the area and is not involved as photographic director for Al-Wasat , a magazine based in London, which is launched this month for distribution throughout the Arab world.
Proceeds from the exhibition will be donated to Medical Aid for Palestinians, a medical charity working in the Middle East.
ABERYSTWYTH
Arts Centre
The Royal Photographic Society Exhibition , the pictures chosen for the 135th Annual International Open Exhibition (until 23 Feb).
Ray Moore: 1920–1987: The Last Ten Years , a leading independent photographer, Moore took as his main theme landscape and the mystery of the commonplace 
BATH
F. Stop Photography Gallery
Kalachakra , Dorian Shaw visited Tibet early last year to record life and ceremonies in that country 40 years after its invasion by China (until 22 Feb).
Tansy Spinks & Susan Taylor,in a joint exhibition, Spinks shows work inspired by a visit to Prague, while Taylor has an installation created to mark women's fortnight (29 Feb–28 Mar).
Royal Photographic Society
David Hockney — New Electronic Snaps, the artist uses still video cameras and colour copiers to make high tech ‘snaps’— mainly portraits of family and friends — in his Los Angeles studio (until 1 March).
Phase II , a collection of 50 large scale photographs by John Davies, which focus on the construction of the Phase II office building on the Broadgate development in the City of London (until 15 Mar).
Photobooth Collages , since 1985, Liz Rideal has been using prints from high street photobooths to create large composite pictures.
In this exhibition she explores the relationships between music and the visual arts by translating four moments representing the four seasons from the score of Purcell's The Fairy Queen in her distinctive use of line and colour (until 15 March).
Fish Tank Sonata , in a journey with a fish tank and a collection of kitsch objects, Arthur Tress creates an allegory on humanity's need for ecological understanding (7 Mar–4 May).
Panoramic Views , from the camera of Michael Westmorland (21 Mar–17 May).
The Ninth Awards Exhibition , the Association of Photographers annual awards (25 Mar–10 May).
Daily 09.30–17.30, adults £2.50, concessions £1.25, family £5, yearly pass £10, concessions £5, free to members, disabled and under-7s.
BIRMINGHAM
Ikon Gallery
Site Work: Architecture in Photography since early Modernism , this Photographers' Gallery touring exhibition explores the interaction between photography and architecture and includes images by Paul Strand, Walker Evans, Lazlo Moholy-Nagy, Bill Brandt and Diane Arbus alongside work which embodies a more contemporary response to architecture (until 15 Feb).
Sight Lines is a response by contemporary artists to buildings and includes Alison Marchant's photomontage installations and the photographs of Johnnie Gathercole with text by his sister Maggie (until 15 Feb).
BRADFORD
National Museum of Photography, Film and Television
Stone Walls, Grey Skies , by the distinguished American architectural photographer, George Tice, who came to Britain last year as Fellow in Photography at the NMPFT and Bradford and Ilkley Community College.
The exhibition is a result of his Fellowship work (until mid-Mar).
Printing Pictures , examines the craft of printing and processes developed in the quest for the perfect print (until mid-Mar).
BRISTOL
Watershed Media Centre
New Contemporary Show ‘92 , six newcomers exhibit for the first time (until 23 Feb).
Daily 12.00–20.00, free.
CAMBRIDGE
Cambridge Darkroom
A Mass of Figures , Jim Harold examines the quality of space of an abandoned hospital in a photographic and sculptural installation (until 1 Mar).
How Do Women Walk , by Elspeth Owen is exhibited jointly with:
Observances, Absent & Present , by Kirsten Lavers and Kevin Weaver.
Both exhibitions result from the 1990/91 bursary awards and involve a combination of performance and photography (7 Mar–12 Apr).
CARDIFF
Ffotogallery
Suspended States , installations and projected images by Susan Trangmar (until 19 Feb).
Sabastio Salgado , includes some of his most important work from the 70s to the present day (28 Feb–4 Apr).
ORIEL
Inscape Wales 3, includes work by  photographer Helen Sear (29 Feb–28 Mar).
CHELTENHAM
Art Gallery & Museums
The Pursuit of Perfection , the National Portrait Gallery's major retrospective of society photographer Dorothy Wilding, who was the most successful and fashionable woman portraitist in the London of the 1920s and 1930s (22 Feb–4 Apr).
DERBY
City of Derby Museum and Art Gallery
The A 38 , David Buss has spent the last 20 years working at different places along the road that join Nottingham and Cornwall.
He has produced 41 portraits of people who live, work or journey on the road (14 Mar–26 Apr).
Metro Cinema
Trespassing Greg Lucas has firm ideas about his right to pursue his interest in rock climbing wheresoever he pleases.
The exhibition records his climbs of outcrops on private land — hence the title (4 Feb–1 Mar).
DUNDEE
Barrack Street Museum
After The Wildwood , colour photographs by Aberystwyth-based Jeremy Moore explore our relationship with trees and woodland and indicate changes which have taken place over time, by referring to contemporary evidence (until 15 Feb).
McManus Galleries
Raymond Moore & Mary Cooper , Moore concerned himself with the landscape and the mystery of the commonplace.
His work is exhibited alongside that of his wife, Mary Cooper, who also uses landscape to seek out the quiet voices of the intimate and the familiar (until 20 Feb).
EDINBURGH
Portfolio Gallery
Between Ourselves , the respected photographic artist Mari Mahr, looks back on her Hungarian upbringing and the cultural identities that have shaped her knowledge of her three subjects: her grandmother, mother and daughter (until 8 Feb).
Inscape , celebrates 20 years of work by the influential British photographer, John Blakemore.
Primarily known as a landscape photographer, Blakemore's latest work centres on still-life studies of found objects and material from his garden (21 Feb–28 Mar).
GLASGOW
Street Land
Elevations , a response to dance by Glasgow-based Richard Learoyd, the result of a Scottish Arts Council commission in 1990 (until 16 Feb).
KENDAL
The Brewers Gallery
Inside Out , hailed as the First Biennial Of Contemporary Northern Photography, the exhibition has work by Neville Blaszk, Simon Dent, Mike Golding, Lynne Otter, Kate Tregaskis and Geoff Weston, all of whom live and work in the Northern Arts region (until 22 Feb).
LONDON
Association Gallery
Contemporary Women Photographers , an opportunity to see the work of professional women photographers.
The exhibition includes both commissioned work by women at differing stages of their careers (until 8 Feb).
The Alternatives, consists of images which did not secure a place in the Ninth Awards Book and Exhibition.
The images on show reflect the initial choice of photographers themselves, rather that of the awards judges at the final stages (11–21 Feb).
The Ninth Awards Exhibition , around 300 of the country's leading professional photographers submitted over 2200 images for the prestigious Association of Photographers annual book and awards (25 Feb–19 Mar).
Barbican Centre
Barbican Art Gallery
Colour Photography Ancient and Modern , the first exhibition spanning the career of William Eggleston, American pioneer of colour photography, from his early black-and-white work to his most recent project, English Rose (27 Feb–4 May).
Cafe Casbar
Cities & Deserts: Travels in Oman, Jordan & Libya , portraits and landscapes by Ann Jousiffe which reflect the cultural diversity of the Arab world, including rarely seen images of Libya (4–29 Feb).
Camden Arts Centre
Outer Space , is concerned with recent developments in photo-based installations and presents a range of cultural, historical, political and technological ‘spaces’ in an attempt to look beyond established attitudes to photography (19 Mar–26 April).
Camera Club
People in Parliament , an exhibition of work by club president Roland Boyes MP (during Feb).
Camerawork
Turning the Map: Images from the Americas part one , Christopher Columbus reached America 500 years ago and amid the  celebrations of his achievement this two-part exhibition by photographers from all over that continent reminds us that America is not just one country and Columbus' arrival was not so much a discovery, but more the beginning of colonisation by Europeans (until 21 Feb).
Turning the Map: Images from the Americas part two (27 Feb–30 Mar 
Goethe-Institut
Gerhard Richter , to complement the Tate Gallery's retrospective on the artist, the Institut will show a selection of work which includes watercolours, photographs and some early ‘photo paintings’(until 8 Feb).
Hamiltons Gallery
Bob Carlos Clarke , recent portrait and still life work (until 1 Feb).
Linhof Gallery
The Boys'-Own Images , platinotype images by Paul Caffell, William Ingram and Eddie Ephraums (until early Feb).
National Portrait Gallery
Eve Arnold: In Britain , the exhibition is mounted with the assistance of publishers Sinclair Stevenson to coincide with publication of a book by the same title.
The Magnum photographer has lived and worked almost continuously in Britain since 1961 and the exhibition is selected from work of that period (until 23 Feb).
Photographers' Gallery
New German Photography , six bodies of work by recipients of the prestigious Krupp fellowships awarded over the pasts two years (Bill Brandt Room until 14 Mar).
Lost Charms , Graham Budgett's literal images of bracelet charms represent human characteristics that have been lost (Tom Hopkinson Room until 7 Mar)
Martin Cullen , the former amateur boxing champion explores emotions of anger, aggression and claustrophobia with tiny photo sculptures in small boxes (Portfolio Room until 7 Mar).
Portfolio Gallery
Rebecca Hossack Gallery at St James's
The Tooth Fairy and Other Stories , by John Miles shows him to be a photographer with an eye for the bizarre (until 21 Feb)
Smiths Gallery 3
Fields of Vision — Dreams of View , Robin Dawson creates collages and montages combining black-and-white, hand colouring.
Cibachromes and solarization (17–22 Feb)
Zelda Cheatle Gallery
George Platt Lynes , a rare collection of vintage portraits form the 1930s to the 1950s (until 13 March).
Neil Libbert , an exhibition of portraits by one of Britain's best editorial photographers (until 13 March).
MANCHESTER
Cornerhouse
Adrian Piper: First major retrospective in Europe , through her performance, installation and video work Piper explores questions of sexual, racial and ethnic identity.
The exhibition is organised in collaboration with Ikon Gallery, Birmingham (until 23 Feb).
NORWICH
Arts Centre
Cadbury Hill Fort , Bristol-based Bob Pullen's 20 black-and-white images capture the strange qualities of the fort, charting a journey into and around the site (until 1 Feb).
3605/1732 , Photographs by Tim Edgar look closely at the area of Bristol defined by the Ordnance survey reference of the title (until 1 Feb).
Mon-Sat 10.00–17.00, 10.00–23.00 on performance nights, free.
PONTEFRACT
Pontefract Museum 
Locals , portraits of local people in their home and work environments by Kevin Reynolds (22 Feb–22 Mar).
SALFORD
Viewpoint Photography Gallery 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Beats the Chinese Heart , a Viewpoint touring exhibition by Simon Buckley shows the mix of traditional and modern lifestyles in Hong Kong and looks at the how the Chinese community has attempted to recreate the atmosphere of Hong Kong in Manchester (until 2 Mar).
SHEFFIELD
Untitled Gallery
Order & Chaos: Views of Gala , Stills Gallery touring show by Patricia Macdonald (until 8 Feb).
Edge of Invention: Steel, Image + Industry , 1992 is the 250th anniversary of Benjamin Huntsman's invention of the Crucible steel production process.
The exhibition gives a contemporary overview of the historic link between Sheffield and steel (15 Feb–7 Mar).
Oleg Timchenko, constructs a photographic installation as part of a collaboration with the Mappin Art Gallery exhibition Heat + Conduct featuring nine artists from  Tbilisi (9–21 Mar).
Heat and Conduct , Miro Svolik's dream-like sequences (21 Mar–9 May).
SOLIHULL
Central Library
15th Open Exhibition of British Photography , organised by the Solihull Photographic Society, the exhibition annually attracts over 2000 entries from amateur and professional photographers (until 22 Feb).
Mon–Wed 9.30–17.30, Thurs–Fri 9.30–18.45, Sat 9.30–17.00, free.
Evening slide programme Mon–Fri 19.45, Sat 19.00, admission Mon £2.50, Tue–Sat £2.
SOUTHEND-ON-SEA
Focal Point Photographic Gallery
Olivia Parker: Still Lifes , taken from The Photographers' Gallery Weighing the Planets series (until 113 Mar)
Miro Svolik: An Exhibition of Photographs , some of the images result from the Czech photographer's work at Project UK ‘91 (until 13 Mar).
Jed Hoyland: Mnemosyne ,piscatorial still life images (until 13 Mar).
The Art That Threatened Art — Art Photography from 1840s–1880s ,(21 Mar–25 Apr).
A Leap in the Light — Art Photography from 1880s—1960s ,(21 Mar–25 Apr).
Joseph Koudelka & Ron McCormick: Two Views of Southend (1970s),(21 Mar–25 Apr).
YORK
Impressions Gallery
Photovideo: An Exploration , 12 photographers and video makers from Britain and abroad investigate new electronic technology and ask if this is the end of photography as we know it, or merely the next chapter?(until 29 Feb).
See Here is compiled by Ian Buchanan.
If you would like your exhibition to be included, send full details to him c/o .
Information should arrive three months prior to the desired month of publication.