

PART THREE
Irina's hand was trembling.
She thrust the key against the door several times, missing the lock.
At last she got it in and turned it and pushed the door.
It moved a little, then stopped.
Ludens helped her push and they squeezed through.
A pile of letters was lying on the floor.
Ludens kicked them aside and held the door open for Marcus.
Marcus marched in.
‘Marched’ was indeed the word.
He came in with a long stride, with head erect, and calm authoritative eyes.
He looked around, then made his way to the lavatory.
Ludens closed the front door, then looked for Irina.
She had disappeared into one of the bedrooms and was dragging clothes out of the drawers of a chest.
Time had slipped, the flat was in the past, not a particular human past, but some old ownerless past like that of a hitherto undiscovered cavern whose silence resisted the puny human sounds of the intruders.
The sound of clothes tumbling onto the floor was a startling phenomenon, difficult to interpret.
The rooms, painted green, were dark and damp and smelled of alien growths.
Ludens tiptoed into the kitchen and was amazed to see two mugs on the table with remnants of tea in them.
He then looked about, expecting to see a cage with a dead bird, the body of a starved cat in a basket.
He pulled back a curtain revealing a brick wall close outside the window.
Standing still he was aware of a, near or far, faint humming which he decided must be the sound of traffic in Victoria Street.
The flat, deep in the inwardness of a huge mansion block, was on the sixth floor.
The departure from Red Cottage had been effected with dream-like ease.
Ludens received one shock as he was returning to the cottage.
He was startled to see a column of smoke rising from among the trees.
He ran.
The source of the smoke turned out to be a huge cast-iron incinerator behind the house which had been crammed full of papers and what seemed to be old clothes.
The incinerator was tall, like an ornate pillar, with a crenellated top, and between its bars the smouldering contents spurted out at intervals in flames.
Gazing at the random and momentary flares Ludens felt himself in the presence of some awful rite.
What was it that had been condemned to this total destruction?
He felt an urge to reach out and rescue some of the sheets of paper on which he imagined he could see writing, but the heat was extreme.
Stretching out an incautious hand he burnt a finger on one of the bars.
Then suddenly Irina appeared carrying a bucket.
She did not see him at once, as he stood back from the coiling smoke.
Ludens thought, she can't put it out now!
But then, as she hurled the contents of the bucket at the huge pyre, he smelt paraffin and leapt away.
The incinerator became a roaring pillar of flame, its iron bars instantly glowing red hot.
Ludens shouted at her, afraid that the cottage would catch fire.
They ran back together to the front.
As he reached the front door he saw a strange sight.
The door was open and just inside Marcus was sitting on a chair, wrapped in what appeared to be a cloak or ulster, wearing a tweed hat and holding a stick in his hand.
He sat quite still, looking like a rather odd god in a shrine or a waxwork in a box.
Ludens looked upon him with relief.
Clearly Marcus had not changed his mind.
After that things moved fast.
Ludens informed Irina that a car was waiting in the drive.
He did not tell her how he had performed this miracle, nor did she ask.
She began hauling suitcases out of the hall, onto the grass.
It appeared that she and Marcus had already had breakfast.
Ludens ran into the kitchen, finding the other half of last night's mangled loaf.
He quickly devoured a few fragments and stuffed into a bag a lot of miscellaneous food which Irina was evidently leaving behind.
(He thought: maybe in London I can really get something to eat.)
Irina had already set off carrying two suitcases.
Marcus rose and was following her more slowly.
Ludens picked up two more suitcases and hurried after them.
Jack's beautiful pale-brown Bentley was parked in the drive, at the end of the track, at the edge of the wood, with its nose pointing to the outside world, towards freedom.
When she saw the car Irina uttered an extraordinary sound, a long raucous rapturous cry.
Marcus said nothing, he just climbed into the back seat.
Irina climbed into the front passenger seat.
Ludens detached from the windscreen a note from Jack which read Bon voyage.
Take care of my lovely car .
Ludens made two journeys back to the house to bring remaining luggage, the suitcases which Irina had for so long kept packed, ready for the moment of escape.
These now filled the capacious boot of the car and much of the back seat.
Should he lock up the house?
Irina said not to bother.
All this time Ludens was in a frenzy of exaltation and terror.
One thing that frightened him was the thought that, for some reason or other, Busby might prevent them from leaving.
He must resent the impertinent intrusion of the big car.
He could have many reasons for being vindictive.
He must know .
Suppose they were to find the gates closed and padlocked?
Arriving back at the cottage for the last time Ludens paused to look and listen.
He went round the back of the house and inspected the incinerator, now full of partly glowing but mainly black ashes.
He ran back and into the house, first to his own room, and then into the other half of the cottage, feeling a strange compulsion to find something, as if there were some crucial thing, upon which everything else depended, which was still hidden and must not be left behind.
He went into the downstairs room where he had seen Marcus through the window.
He picked up a piece of paper with some writing on it, could not decipher the writing, and dropped it.
In the kitchen he noticed the keys of the house lying conspicuously on the table.
Had Irina told Busby they were going?
At the last moment he saw an apple lying on the dresser and put it in his pocket.
Leaving was after all easy.
The beautiful pale-brown Bentley bumped with slow calm dignity down the drive.
The gates were wide open.
Only as the car approached them did Ludens think he glimpsed a figure standing in the shade under a tree.
Once on the motorway Ludens was able to calm his mind by, what could not be ignored, the pleasure of driving the magnificent car.
Instinctively anxious for its welfare (he had not needed Jack's admonition) he drove it carefully at a modest pace, resisting the temptation to press hard upon the accelerator.
Nor was he unaware of the rays of force emanating from the presence behind his back of the fateful being now committed to his charge.
No one spoke during the journey, which was marked by two events, one of them baleful.
The first event was introduced by a loud and persistent hooting just behind them.
Then a blue Rover drew out and flashed past them at speed, two people waving.
Jack and Alison.
Ludens, proceeding sedately, worked out what must have happened.
Jack, used (unlike Ludens) to getting his way, had hired the Rover somehow in Edmarsh, and had (Ludens had no doubt) commissioned someone to rescue the Volkswagen and drive it to London.
Jack could, in the briefest time, bring about such things, impossible to others.
The second event was the sudden brutal crashing of something large and heavy, coming from above, upon the windscreen.
The car swerved.
The projectile vanished in a wild cloud of feathers.
A pheasant, caught in a stream of air, had dashed itself to death.
Its blood, streaming upon the glass, was slowly set aside by the windscreen wipers.
Nothing was said.
But Ludens became aware that Irina was now quietly crying, quietly and continuously her tears streamed down, not like a waterfall, but like the gentle slide of water over smooth stone.
Ludens, aware but gazing ahead, felt a deep weary compassionate feeling of tenderness and pity which soothed and pacified the anguish of his exaltation and his fear.
Ludens had brought up two suitcases in the lift.
The rest were locked up in the car which was illegally parked below.
He had at first intended to drive straight to Jack's house in Chelsea.
But he decided he must at least stop somewhere to telephone a warning of their arrival and to find out if Pat was still alive.
It seemed sensible to go to the flat and telephone from there.
Only now his charges seemed to be settling themselves into occupation, having forgotten the urgent purpose of their return to London.
Marcus was still in the lavatory.
Ludens went to look at Irina who was on her knees rummaging in a pile of clothes which now covered the floor of the bedroom.
The garments exuded a damp musty smell, some were stiff, some visibly mildewed, some stuck together and had to be torn apart.
‘Oh shit , I can't find anything to wear!’
‘Is your father all right?’
‘Yes, he sits there for hours, he thinks.’
‘I think we should go at once and see Patrick.’
‘Who's Patrick?’
‘My friend who's ill.’
‘Oh yes.
I could go out and buy some.’
‘What?’
‘Clothes.’
‘All right, but Marcus and I must go, I must telephone to say we're coming.’
‘What time is it?’
‘Just after twelve.’
This seemed incredible.
A day, days, must have passed since he stood beside the lake.
At that moment Marcus reappeared and said, ‘Alfred, would you mind —?’
Ludens followed him into one of the other rooms, a bedroom, green, where an iron bedstead was wrapped in stillness.
Marcus said in a low voice, ‘Would you mind shaving me?
I don't think I can do it myself.’
A few minutes later Marcus was sitting in the bathroom before a washbasin (the water was hot) with a towel over his chest and his face covered with shaving cream.
Marcus had of course left his razor behind, but the bathroom cupboard revealed a razor, virgin blades, and cream.
Ludens, who had never shaved anybody but himself before, soon discovered that shaving somebody else required a different technique.
It was in any case no easy task to remove the hard stubble which covered Marcus's face and neck, though it had been cut as short as possible by Irina's nail-scissors.
Ludens, steadying Marcus's head with one hand, his fingers plunged into the short hair, and slowly and firmly moving the very sharp instrument, felt like an acolyte performing a dangerous task, perhaps intended as a test.
Suppose his hand slipped, suppose he were to shed Marcus's blood?
At the very thought he felt a tendency to tremble.
A large mirror above the basin revealed to Ludens at intervals the progress of his toil.
He was aware of Marcus watching the work of transformation.
Avoiding Marcus's eye, Ludens saw his own face, his dark hair unkempt, his shirt awry, his lips patted in a grimace of nervous solicitude.
His initial anxiety about the technique had postponed his astonishment at being able suddenly to touch Marcus, to hold him, feeling the shape and warmth of his head with one hand, while with the razor he caressed the cheek and throat, allowing his fingers to feel the smoothed flesh.
Surely a barber didn't hold his client in this way, was he perhaps going too far ?
But he could not think of any other way to work safely.
The finger which he had burnt on the incinerator was in addition giving him trouble and would not tolerate pressure.
The basin was full of scraped debris which Ludens removed at intervals by running the water.
Meanwhile Marcus's face, emerging from beneath the soiled stubble, was looking remarkably clean and young.
When the task was almost over Marcus, who had been solemn, caught Ludens's eye in the mirror and smiled, and Ludens smiled too.
They said nothing.
When the task was finished and Marcus had mopped and dried his face and neck, they once again looked into the mirror, Marcus still sitting and Ludens standing as if at attention behind him.
For a moment Ludens put his hands on to Marcus's shoulders, holding him firmly, feeling the warm flesh through the shirt.
As his grasp closed he felt a shock.
‘I've been thinking about you.’
‘Oh?’ said Ludens, removing his hands abruptly.
How had he dared to put them there?
No wonder he got an electric jolt.
What was to follow?
‘I want to ask you something.’
‘Yes?’
‘Could you close the door?’
Ludens closed the door.
‘It's about Irina.’
‘Oh, yes?’
‘I want you to look after her.’
‘How do you mean?’ said Ludens, startled.
‘I may not be able to be with her.’
‘She's grown up, I'm sure she'll be very good at looking after herself.’
‘She is a child, she does not know the world.
She may be in danger.’
‘What sort of danger?’
Marcus hesitated, he actually blushed, the blood suddenly colouring the new clean skin of his face.
‘All sorts of danger.’
Ludens, alarmed, began, ‘Oh, I don't think —’
‘I ask you.
That is all.’
Irina, dressed in her petticoat, threw open the door of the bathroom.
Ludens said quickly, ‘Look, we must go now to Patrick at once.
All right?’
‘Yes, yes.
At once.’
Ludens was suddenly conscious of being hungry again.
This seemed to have become a permanent condition.
He could hardly now suggest lunch, nor could he, at this solemn moment, eat the apple which was in his jacket pocket.
The food he had brought from Red Cottage was still down in the car.
Could he ask Franca to make sandwiches for them?
God, was Patrick still alive?
He remembered that he had intended to telephone, but decided not to.
Irina had dashed into the bathroom and was washing her hair with shaving-cream.
At an earlier time, when the Bentley was still on the motorway, a conference was taking place in the upper rooms of Jack's house.
Franca, Moxie, Dr Hensman and Father O'Harte, who had been talking softly in the front room, had now returned to the back room where the curtains had been drawn against the sun.
Patrick lay on his side, one arm upon his breast, in the attitude of a relaxed sleeper.
His long gaunt bony head lay heavily upon the white lace-fringed pillow which Moxie had put in place, the flesh of his thin forearms, emerging from spotlessly clean pyjamas, was like wax.
The ordinary naturalness of the attitude filled Franca with a thoughtless tenderness which she felt to be entirely misplaced.
She also retained her tears.
She told herself sternly that the time had passed when sympathy, hope, tender care, even love could have anything to do with the figure on the bed.
Pat was breathing, the bedclothes rose and fell.
His eyes, very nearly closed, showed a faint grey gleam beneath the lashes.
But he was surrendered, they had surrendered him, into the power of death.
The bottles, pills, medicines, even the glass of water, the paraphernalia of tending and caring, had been taken away, Franca herself had taken it away.
The room was stripped and tidy.
Nothing was left in it except Patrick himself and he had nothing to do now but to depart.
The doctor, who had now been there for some time, and was looking at his watch, had been explaining.
If Patrick was sent back to the hospital he might be temporarily revived, but only briefly and perhaps in some damaged state.
There was no point in adding this useless torment.
He was sleepy now, he was resting.
Let him have his sleep out.
His body, untended, would slowly and painlessly and naturally bring about what was inevitable.
In a few days' time, perhaps sooner, he would die quietly of pneumonia, peacefully suffocating as the bloodstream slowed and the deprived lungs surrendered their function.
‘So there is nothing more to do?’ said Franca.
‘Nothing.’
‘It's no use trying to rouse him?’
‘No.
I don't think he will regain consciousness.
And anyway better not.’
Franca had in fact tried vainly to waken him that morning, stirring him a little and calling his name.
Now she did not even wish to try, for fear of rousing up something terrible.
It was better to let him rest.
She said, ‘I shall stay with him.’
The doctor bowed his head respectfully.
He was a stout man with a bald crown round which a ruff of brown hair grew thickly.
He was attentive but impersonal, and esteemed rather than loved.
Father O'Harte, easing his little white collar, for it was a hot day, sighed deeply.
He was perspiring and would have liked to take off his jacket.
He had done his part.
He had performed the last rites earlier, when Patrick was at least half aware, and perhaps even knew what was happening and assented to it.
God was merciful.
Father O'Harte had become very fond of Patrick.
Now his task was over.
He knew that Franca and the nurse regarded him with hostility.
He would not visit this house again.
Franca had once seen a film of a burial at sea, how the coffin slid with a curious slowness down toward the waves and entered them without a splash.
She felt now as if something were slipping away, leaving her mind not quiet and empty, but suddenly filled with the black debris of her own trouble.
It was as if , during the time when she had so strangely loved him, she had relied upon Patrick, hoped for him, dreamed of him, run to him as to his love for her: a love which had never existed and could now never exist.
He had been, even as hope faded, her occupation.
Now she would have to think , that was what was happening to her mind.
Looking at Pat quietly sleeping away his life, she was shocked, assailed, by a sense of solitude.
Patrick had been company, tending him had been a solace, hoping for him had been a hope.
Now she had to think how to survive, that was what it came to.
If only she had stopped Jack in his tracks, at least made scenes, made a fuss, however mildly accused him, on the occasion of the first girl!
What had her motives been for keeping quiet then, for not behaving as (perhaps) most women would have behaved?
She had not colluded, but might have seemed to.
Had she deceived him?
Her main motive had been simply her love for Jack, her desire to believe him, not to question him, not to cause him any pain, but to accept as fundamental that he must be happy.
Love had stopped her mouth.
But had love been right?
She had believed Jack at the start when he had told her that she was the pillar, the guardian, the deep essential truth of his life, the indestructible centre point.
She had believed him even now , even after what had happened and was happening, when he had said that his love for her remained as it had ever been, something eternal.
If she were to cease believing that…
Supposing it were simply words which now meant little, something vague perhaps.
Yet when she looked upon him she could not but believe that his sincere eyes could tell no lie.
So shall I live, supposing thou art true.
She reflected upon, perhaps only now fully remembered, her sense, in forgiving Jack, of in some way devaluing him, accepting him and loving him as something less than the perfect being she had married.
She had sided with his lower self.
Should she not have fought him, fighting on the side of the better Jack, the good Jack, against the false bad Jack?
She could not see him in any such clear moralistic light.
Why should he not look at other women, as other men did?
His nature was different from hers.
Was this not, as she felt it, a judgment upon him?
Would it have been better if, like other men, he had not told her?
She could not think that, and in a way the question was senseless.
She had pitied him; and that was part of the devaluing, the belittling.
But would she have endured a Jack on whom she had forced her will, who would sadly, perhaps resentfully, have given up what he desired in order to please his possessive wife?
So in that way, she thought, she had acted not just lovingly, but selfishly in choosing peace!
That was the first weakness, the first failure, which had led on, so inevitably , through the series of, not after all so many, girls who did not matter, to the girl who mattered; and to the point where Franca's complaisant kindness must come to an abrupt end.
Yet even here she had been so far weak, so far selfish, in concealing her violent and terrible feelings, her destructive misery, her rage.
She was confused, of course, by liking Alison, not hating her, even in a weird sense sympathising with her.
Alison wanted to talk, to negotiate, to exhibit her guilt feelings to Franca and receive some sort of absolution.
Perhaps Jack had even encouraged Alison to do that.
So, they discussed her, they must do.
But Franca while remaining seemingly so calm, friendly and kind, had refused to be led into any woman-to-woman conversation about ‘how things were’.
She was, in any case, not sure how they were, or how they were for her.
The situation was so dreadful, so nightmarish,their details did not matter, they just confronted her as an abomination which was capable of driving her mad.
Once she had, after she had listened with a gentle face to Jack's admission, his ultimatum, that Alison was different, Alison was ‘for keeps’, believed that nothing could be worse, that she had now experienced the worst.
It was not so.
She had been tortured by Alison's presence in the house, by the sound of Alison and Jack laughing downstairs.
Now she was further reduced, twisted to screaming point, by Jack's having gone away with Alison without telling her where he was going and when he would be back.
Jack had left her a shamefaced note with no explanation, a humble note.
So it had come to her on the previous day, and came again now, the whiff, or stroke, of solitude, as her final hope for Patrick's life was extinguished.
Great waves of pain assailed her heart and she gasped and put a hand to her breast.
‘Franca, dear, wouldn't you like to go and lie down,’ came Moxie's voice.
Dr Hensman was looking at her.
He said in a kindly voice, ‘I'll write you a prescription for sleeping pills, and a mild tranquilliser.’
Their solicitude made Franca feel that she was going to faint.
She said, ‘I'm all right.’
There was a sound from downstairs, a door banged, then voices, loud clear voices, were heard below, the voices of Jack and Alison.
Franca said, ‘I think I'll go and rest now.’
She made for the door, but decided instead to sit down on a chair.
She could hear Jack and Alison modifying the pitch of their voices as they came up the stairs.
The new arrivals burst in.
They could not help bursting in, and though they were aware of it, could not help seeming what they self-evidently were, healthy and happy.
They had composed their faces, but their eyes sparkled and their mouths yearned to smile.
The sight of Patrick, and of the little assembly, sobered them a little.
Jack said in a low voice, ‘How is he?’
The doctor said, ‘I'm afraid we cannot hope now.’
Alison said, ‘Oh —’ and turned to Franca and put her hand on her shoulder.
Franca at once stood up, displacing the sympathetic hand.
Jack said to Franca, ‘We've been having the most extraordinary time!
We went to that place, Fontellen, you know, where Marcus Vallar was, where Ludens went to find him.
We thought we'd go and help!
Well, Marcus said he'd come and see Pat, and Ludens is driving him down in the Bentley!
We'd have got here sooner only we stopped for a bite of something.
Ludens will bring Marcus here, he should show up any moment, I hope he hasn't messed up the car!’
‘It's too late,’ said Moxie, and said to Franca, ‘do go and rest, dear.
I'll stay with Patrick.
We needn't detain these gentlemen’
The priest and the doctor had listened with interest.
They had of course heard of the ‘Vallar plan’, and had joined in discussions of it at various stages.
They now looked animated and alert.
‘I think I'll stay,’ said the doctor.
‘Me too,’ said Father O'Harte.
In the sun-twilight of the room Franca, the doctor, the priest, and the nurse stood as sombre figures.
The doctor and the priest wore their customary dark suits, the doctor's smart, the priest's shabby.
Moxie (who never ‘dressed up’ as a nurse) and Franca were wearing dark sad dresses.
Franca, with her almost black hair and her almost black dress, felt occluded, invisible, as if she were wearing a shadoor.
A little touch of brightness in the room had been Patrick's red pyjamas, where had those pyjamas come from?
Franca wondered.
Probably Moxie brought them.
By contrast Jack and Alison were brilliant figures, taller than the others, and upright, whereas the other four crouched a little and bent their heads.
Alison was wearing her dress of feathery blue cotton, bound in at the waist, her red hair was tousled, her freckled face not darkened, illuminated rather, by the sun, her pale skin delicately, milkily, opaque and her unpainted lips the faintest purest pink.
Her forearms and much of her long legs were bare, visible, pale as her face.
Jack, burly, untidy beside her, even taller, was wearing white trousers, a little smudged, and an apple-green shirt carelessly undone.
He had rolled up his sleeves.
His large sunburnt face and prominent blue eyes expressed determination and excitement.
Franca, looking at him, felt the old familiar rush of feeling as if her body advanced and entered his body.
The next moment she was a shocked spectator, seeing them both as something in a theatre, perhaps ballet dancers pretending to be puppets.
She moved the chair and leaned on it with one hand.
Jack instinctively moved to the window and pulled apart the curtains.
Sunlight streamed in.
The bell rang down below.
Jack immediately dashed out of the door followed by Alison.
Franca moved her chair well back against the wall and sat on it again.
The doctor and the priest, stepping back on the other side of the room, murmured to each other.
Moxie said, ‘I don't approve of this nonsense,’ and walked out onto the landing.
Loud excited voices could be heard below, and ascending steps.
Jack and Alison came in followed by Marcus and Ludens.
Franca was immediately struck by Marcus's appearance.
She had never seen him with his hair cut short, and the absence of the red-blond locks made him for a moment unrecognisable.
His face looked odd, the upper part brown, the lower part white.
He was dressed in a crumpled brown suit with a brown shirt and tie.
He entered the room leaning forward, in a blundering awkward way.
Ludens, slightly behind him, trying to hold his arm, was gripping the tail of his jacket.
Ludens looked his craziest, his hair jagged, his dark eyes narrowed, the corners of his mouth raised in a ghastly contorted grin of fear.
As he came in he looked straight at Franca.
In that instant she realised the whole shocking weirdness of what was going on.
Something terrible, horrible was going to occur, a desecration.
As she felt a desire to scream there was a strange sound in the room.
The priest had uttered some incoherent exclamation.
Franca rose to her feet.
Someone was holding her arm and pressing it hard.
It was Moxie, who was leaning against the wall beside her, seemingly spreadeagled by some centrifugal force.
Unconsciously she kept squeezing Franca's arm.
Jack and Alison stood side by side against the door, which was closed.
Their arms and shoulders touching, they stood at attention, like brightly caparisoned guards.
There were now nine people inside the small room.
No, ten, for a girl was also present, standing just beyond Marcus, a gipsy-like girl with fuzzy dark hair, wearing a much creased coat and skirt of light-brown cotton and a flowery blouse.
She was holding up the collar of her blouse and gradually twisting it.
There was an embarrassing silence.
The embarrassment might have been felt as relief.
Franca, staring at Marcus, thought, he's like a scientist, no he's like an architect, if his suit were smarter he could be an art dealer, he's looking competent and ordinary — and yet he's still terrible, as he always was.
Marcus, still leaning forward and clutched from behind by Ludens, was fingering his tie.
No one looked at the sleeping figure in the bed.
Franca thought, Oh God, who's in charge, am I?
Ludens spoke first.
He said, releasing Marcus and addressing Franca, ‘This is Professor Vallar.’
Then he said to Marcus, ‘You remember Franca.
This is Dr Hensman, and Miss Moxon, and this —’ He could not recall the priest's name.
Moxie whispered to Franca, ‘Don't let him —’
Franca said to the doctor, ‘Dr Hensman, perhaps you could explain to Professor Vallar that there is nothing he can do.
We thank him very much for coming.’
Dr Hensman said to Marcus, ‘My patient is in a deep terminal coma.
It is impossible to communicate with him.
I am sorry.
We appreciate your desire to help.’
He bowed, and gestured toward the door.
‘Suppose we all go downstairs now?’ he said to Jack.
Jack did not reply.
His lips were parted, he seemed excited, agitated, almost frightened.
His bared chest was rising and falling.
Alison was whispering in his ear.
He continued to stare at Marcus.
Franca appealed to Ludens.
‘Alfred —’
Ludens, addressing the doctor, said, ‘Can't he have a try?’
The sentence sounded ludicrous, as if Marcus were some child who had to be humoured.
The doctor, who evidently, and not unreasonably, on the basis of conversations with Franca, thought he was dealing with a madman, said to Marcus, ‘I think we should all go now and have a nice conversation downstairs.
Nothing whatever can be done here.
Perhaps you could open the door, could you?’
He motioned to Jack, who moved slightly away from the door, drawing Alison with him.
The door was opened by the gipsy girl who with a decisive movement turned the handle and pulled it wide.
Franca, wondering who she was, had decided that she was some sort of secretary or servant of Marcus, like the conjuror's assistant.
Dr Hensman advanced toward the door.
The priest did not move.
Ludens, now speaking in an angry slightly hysterical voice, said, ‘No, no!
We won't go away.
Marcus has been kind enough to come here.
He believes he can help Patrick.
He can't do any harm.
He might do good —’
The doctor said to Ludens, ‘I am sorry, you are evidently unaware of the facts of the medical situation.
Perhaps you imagine that my poor patient can be wakened up and talked to.
He cannot, it is too late, he will be dead soon.
And even if he could be roused — which he cannot — no contact could be made.
Don't you understand?
The mind is gone.’
‘What illness is he suffering from?’ said Ludens, who had managed to take charge of himself.
‘Well, we don't know,’ said the doctor, ‘but —’
‘There you are!’
‘The facts are evident.
It is fatal.’
‘I don't believe in these ‘facts’.’
‘Really !’ said the doctor to Ludens.
‘What do you want?
To disturb and shake a peacefully dying man simply to oblige your friend here who thinks he is a healer?
Please be rational, please be considerate.
Don't you agree?’
He appealed here to Franca.
All this time Marcus was standing, now more upright, looking about him at the various speakers, with an interested air.
Ludens said, ‘Jack —’
Alison said, ‘The doctor's right, let him be.’
Ludens said again, ‘Jack —’
Jack said, ‘I think Marcus should decide.
If he believes it's worth trying, then I think he should try.’
Moxie said, in a piercing furious voice, ‘But this is superstition, gross superstition!
Just think !
You can't do anything to Pat, you can't help him or harm him.
Do you expect us to stand and watch this idiotic charade?
There are people here who love Pat and who will be deeply hurt and upset by this brutal interference.
The peace of the dying belongs to the living too.
What you suggest is monstrous.
Don't you agree, Father?’
There was a moment's silence.
Franca, stirred by Moxie's surprisingly vehement utterance, said, ‘I think I agree.
You might raise him up as a devil.’
When she realised what she had said she blushed.
Where had that extraordinary utterance come from?
Of course it had belonged among those unhappy mad thoughts which she had had in the last days.
Perhaps it did express something which she really deeply felt, the sort of fear which she felt.
She put her hand up to the mound of hair upon her neck and a hairpin fell just audibly to the floor.
Ludens said, ‘Oh,Franca !’
The gipsy girl with the fuzzy hair said, ‘Let's go downstairs, shall we?’
Ludens said, ‘Please keep quiet, Irina.’
Irina (Franca now guessed who she was) said, ‘Keep quiet yourself.’
The doctor said, ‘This is becoming ridiculous!’
And to Ludens, ‘Please take your friend away’
At that moment the priest, speaking for the first time, intervened.
He said, ‘Professor Vallar has not told us what he thinks.
Should he not be asked?’
Ludens turned to Marcus and put his hand gently against his arm.
‘Marcus, do you think, you might somehow, perhaps, be able to help Patrick, to cure him?’
Marcus said irritably, ‘Yes, yes, of course.’
Then he moved from the centre of the room towards Franca, who moved quickly aside, and sat down on the chair which she had vacated, and leaned his head back against the wall and closed his eyes.
‘Your friend needs medical attention!’ said the doctor.
‘He is collecting his powers,’ said Ludens.
‘Everyone here is mad,’ said Moxie, tears coming into her eyes.
Father O'Harte then moved forward into the space which Marcus had vacated.
He said, ‘I think that this thing should be attempted.
Nothing may happen.
If anything happens I do not think it will be bad.
At least let us try.
I personally would like the Professor to be asked to do what he can.’
It was at this moment, as Franca recalled it afterwards, that the balance suddenly tilted in the other direction, and what had seemed sensible and inevitable suddenly began to seem trivial and irrelevant, and what had seemed impossible became not only possible but essential.
Ludens cried ‘Yes, yes!’
Jack stepped forward and put his arm round Ludens, the doctor made a washing-his-hands-of-the-matter gesture, and Franca said, ‘Oh do what you like!’
Marcus, who had seemed an almost ridiculous outsider, was now the centre of the scene, endowed, by the mysterious waft of change, with an authority recognised by all.
He opened his eyes, got up and moved to the end of Patrick's bed.
The others, grouped around him, stood in silence looking down at the stricken man.
Patrick lay as before, on his side, his head deep in the pillow, one arm upon his breast, the other extended.
The flesh was thinly spread upon the elongated skull, the motionless hands were bony claws.
Yet the hand touching the breast now seemed like a communication, as of one who, coming to an appointed place, says humbly, here I am.
Marcus turned to Franca and said in his deep slow honey voice, with his slightly foreign accent, ‘Please could you move the bed away from the wall.
I'd like it here .’
Franca and Moxie hastened to move the bed toward the centre of the room.
While this was going on Marcus took off his jacket and his tie and handed them to Irina, who was now visibly playing the part of the magician's assistant.
He said to Franca, ‘Please remove the covering.’
Very gently the two women drew the light quilt away, sliding it from under the arm of the sleeper, drawing it down at both sides, peeling it off and over the end of the bed.
Moxie folded the quilt and put it in the corner where the bed had been.
Marcus, standing now at the foot of the bed, carefully rolled up his sleeves.
He stooped and took off his shoes and kicked them aside.
Irina picked them up.
He undid the top buttons of his shirt and pulled the shirt apart.
He put one hand over his mouth, then drew it slowly down over his throat onto his chest.
There was something strangely impressive about these rites.
Father O'Harte shuddered and crossed himself.
Marcus, putting his hands upon the board at the foot, moved the bed slightly on its casters, moving it gently to and fro with a movement as of one rocking a cradle.
He stopped this and stood looking down.
Patrick, now revealed, lay, his arms undisturbed as before, seeming now like something fallen or struck down.
One leg was bent, the other extended, his bare long-toed skeletal feet pallid and damp upon the white sheet.
He seemed like an ancient man.
A stench, which Franca now noticed for the first time, arose from the bed.
Marcus still stood looking down, almost as if he were now puzzled and did not know what to do next.
There was a tense silence in the room.
Franca, now gathered into Marcus's attempt, was saying in her mind, Oh let it be all right, let it be all right, not sure what she meant by this, whether that Marcus should revive Patrick, or whether simply that Marcus should ‘get away’ without some positive disgrace, some catastrophe or shameful happening.
She did not, now, want to see him dismissed, led away hanging his head.
She was concerned too for Ludens.
She glanced at him.
His face was composed, motionless with concentration, no longer smirking with terror, as he bent his will upon Marcus.
Beyond him she saw that Father O'Harte was kneeling, his lips moving.
Looking again at Marcus she was horrified to see that he had again put his hand to his throat and was trembling.
Was he going to faint?
Marcus then moved round and sat on the side of the bed near to Patrick's feet.
He reached out and touched the feet, holding each one for a moment in his hand.
The bed was wide, Patrick was lying with his back to Marcus.
With a sudden movement Marcus stretched himself out on the bed, also lying on his side, bringing his body into contact with Patrick's, pushing his knees into the crook of Patrick's knees, and his breast against his back.
For a moment Franca thought that something obscene and horrible was about to happen.
Then she felt horror and pity at seeing Marcus so confused and so evidently useless.
Then she thought perhaps Pat is dead now, perhaps he has died even now while we have been watching this dreadful absurdity.
She thought of looking at the doctor and indicating that he should interfere and stop it; but she did not.
Marcus sat up again, sitting back on the edge of the bed.
He seemed to be at a loss.
It seemed the end of the attempt.
Franca thought, it's over.
How much longer would the silence last, when would someone say, please, stop, for heaven's sake, give up, it can't be done?
The unspoken words trembled in the air.
Then Marcus stood up and began to unbutton his shirt further.
He pulled it off and threw it behind him, revealing himself naked to the waist.
He stood still for a moment breathing deeply.
Then with an energy which he had not yet displayed he took hold of Patrick.
Franca could feel the increase of tension in the room.
Gently, deftly, as if he now knew exactly what to do, Marcus turned Pat on to his back, pulling him slightly toward the centre of the bed and laying his arms out straight beside his body.
The limpness of the body as it was thus laid in place was pitiful.
It seemed a kind of sacrilege thus to arrange it and pull it about.
It looked so like a dead thing.
Like a dead cat, Franca strangely thought, stirred by some memory.
She wondered, is Patrick still breathing?
She could not see.
Marcus then undid Patrick's pyjama jacket and started to try to pull it off, then decided not to.
He undid the cord of the pyjama trousers.
Then he lay down again carefully, putting his hand and arm on the far side of the body and easing himself down so that he was partly lying on Patrick, his trunk upon his trunk, his legs upon his legs, and, as he supported himself on his arms, his face just above the skeleton face.
Franca thought, he'll lie on him and suffocate him.
The priest had risen to get a better view.
There was a strange irregular sighing sound in the room.
Franca realised that it was Marcus breathing, slowly, deeply, into Patrick's mouth.
She felt her own breathing slow down to accord with Marcus's respiration, and she could feel, perhaps even hear, the others also breathing in unison.
After a while, Marcus, as if impatient, or to see if he had had any effect, stopped the breathing exercise and, half sitting up, began to pull the limp body about, almost roughly, almost angrily, as if he would scarcely believe that he was not succeeding.
The watchers moved a little closer.
Was it all going to end like this?
Ought she to end it?
Franca could feel Moxie tap her arm, but she did not turn to her, nor did she look around her, fearing to meet some significant glance.
She concentrated her attention and her will upon what Marcus was doing.
He lifted Patrick's hands and arms and let them fall, he shook his shoulders and moved his head to and fro, then he began to stroke his face, carefully as if he were moulding it.
This movement, which went on for some time, gave Franca (and Ludens agreed with her later) the sense that Marcus was actually creating Patrick.
Then, breaking the long silence, Marcus said slowly in his deep resonant voice, ‘Patrick, Patrick, wake up, it is I, Marcus Vallar, Patrick, I command you, wake up.’
Then, as Franca, who was nearest, was the first to see, Patrick opened his eyes.
They opened for a moment, then closed, then opened again and gazed at Marcus's face.
At this Marcus, instead of continuing his manipulation and massage, became quite still.
He took hold of Pat's head in both hands and, lifting it a little and coming close to it, simply stared into Pat's open eyes.
How long this staring, during which there was complete silence in the room, lasted, Franca could not afterwards be sure.
Perhaps four or five minutes, though it certainly seemed more; Moxie guessed ten minutes, and Gildas later told her that Ludens told him fifteen minutes.
During the later part, or the very last part, of this period, Pat's body began to show tiny signs of animation.
Father O'Harte said he saw, quite early on, a foot move slightly.
Then the fingers of one hand moved, an arm moved, and the trunk seemed to shift very slightly.
The body began, very faintly, in all its parts and regions, to twitch , as if its muscles, its very bloodstream, wished to prove that they could maintain their living functions.
This scarcely perceptible but ubiquitous twitching, described by Ludens as like the slight tremulous movement of leaves on a tree or ripples on a pool, was one of the strangest, and in an odd way most convincing manifestations of the raising of Patrick.
And all this while Patrick simply lay there looking with his now wide open eyes into Marcus's eyes.
At last slowly, continuously, Marcus began to withdraw, laying Pat's head back on the pillow, removing his hands, and sitting in his former position on the side of the bed.
From here however he leaned forward and began to stroke and caress Patrick's body, drawing his hands over his face and neck and chest.
He did not attempt the removal of the pyjama jacket, but suddenly stood up and began to pull the red trousers down and get them off; and it seemed that Patrick, shifting very slightly, assisted the operation, his eyes now moving in awareness of what Marcus was doing.
Now standing, and more energetically, Marcus caressed and massaged the thin white body, drawing his hands rhythmically along the arms, down the legs, over the chest and stomach, over the genitals.
Franca became aware that tears were coursing down her face.
She could hear Moxie catching her breath.
She too was weeping.
Alison held a handkerchief to her mouth.
Franca glanced to where Irina was standing, near the priest, and was startled by her expression.
Irina was not crying, but her face was contorted in what seemed a paroxysm of extreme embarrassment, even of fear or revulsion.
As Franca watched her she moved her left hand, which had been clenched upon her breast, and opened her fingers, spreading them wide in a spiky gesture.
Marcus suddenly said, ‘Bring another pillow.’
Moxie darted out, causing Jack and Alison to move, and returned with the pillow.
Marcus pulled Pat up by the shoulders, pulling him up so that his head was higher, and Moxie thrust the pillow in behind him.
Then Marcus became more rough, almost violent, pulling at Pat's limbs, pushing his body about, shaking him, patting and slapping.
In the course of this treatment, during which Patrick's eyes followed Marcus's movements, Patrick's face assumed a more alert expression and at last his lips moved and he uttered a sound.
Ludens said afterwards that it was a sound of protest at this rough handling.
It may have been.
Moxie and Franca were both (in retrospect) shocked by the degree of force used.
Marcus became gentler, moved to sit nearer to Patrick, ceased his exertions and, after gazing at Pat for some time, began to caress one of his hands, turning it about in his own hands and pressing it.
This mode of touching, unlike the previous ones, had the unmistakable air of a personal communication.
Alison sobbed aloud, then stopped her mouth with her handkerchief.
The priest quietly resumed his kneeling posture.
Marcus, still holding Pat's hand, then spoke.
‘Patrick, it's Marcus.
Any ill thing I said to you I now take back, any harm I meant to you I hereby revoke.
I ask you to pardon me.
I command you to get well.’
Patrick uttered a low whimpering sound and then, quite audibly, ‘Marcus.’
He tried to lever himself up in the bed.
Marcus said, ‘Be quiet.
You will be all right now.
You will get better.’
He released Patrick's hand and stood up.
Patrick reached out after him.
Marcus said, ‘Don't worry, I will come back, I have to rest now.’
After that he turned away from the bed, picked up his jacket which Irina had dropped on the floor, began to put it on, then realising he had no shirt on, dropped the jacket, found the shirt and put that on.
Ludens hastened to pick up the jacket and helped Marcus into it.
Everyone hastened to stand aside as he made for the door.
As he neared it, he suddenly stopped, staggered and sat down abruptly on a chair, leaning forward and holding his head in his hands.
The rapt circle now broke up, several voices were heard, the doctor moved to inspect Patrick, Franca said to Ludens, ‘Would he like to lie down?
There's a bed next door.’
Irina said to Ludens, ‘For heaven's sake get him out of here!’
Moxie said to the doctor, ‘What has happened?
What will happen?’
The doctor replied, ‘Frankly, I don't know!’
He tapped his forehead.
Alison said to Jack, ‘Will Pat recover now?’
Jack said, ‘Yes.’
Irina said to the doctor, ‘Could I have a word?’
The doctor, who did not know who she was, said, ‘Later.’
Jack said to Franca, ‘Didn't I tell you so?’
Irina said to Alison, ‘Mrs Sheerwater, I'm sorry —’ Alison said, pointing to Franca, ‘That is Mrs Sheerwater.’
Irina said to Franca, ‘I'm sorry to bother you, but could you give me the name and address of that doctor?’
Franca said, ‘Yes, yes,’ and ran into the other room and started frantically looking for pen and paper.
When she emerged, Marcus, leaning upon Ludens's arm, was already walking slowly down the stairs.
Irina seized the slip of paper, said ‘Thanks’ and followed.
Moxie and the doctor were with Patrick.
The doctor said, ‘Please be quiet all of you.
Go away,’ and closed the door.
Jack and Alison were having a hasty conversation on the landing.
Alison said to Franca, ‘I'm going now, dear Franca.’
Receiving no reply she disappeared, waving vaguely.
The priest, silently bowing farewell, unnoticed, also took his departure.
He had many things to ponder in his heart.
Tears came again to Franca's eyes, strange tears, tears for everything, for herself as everything, tears out of the terrible cloud of hope and fear that hangs over all things.
Jack took hold of her arms but she stood there limply, staring at him with her wet eyes, opening her wet mouth.
Jack said, ‘Franca,be here ’
She said, ‘I am here.
Patrick may live, but he may die too.
He may lose his mind.’
‘I know.
But about you and me.
It will be all right because it's got to be all right, it's necessary — without it the world ends.’
‘So you think —’
‘No, it's what you think, you must think , now in this moment — of magic — that's not the right word — of spiritual power — it's like a lightning flash — we will be all right, we two, for ever— isn't it?
Say so,say so .’
‘Three — Alison also —’
‘Oh hell, yes, her too, but you are the centre, Franca, noble lady, queen, oh my love —’
‘Yes,’ said Franca, putting her hand up to her tears at last, ‘yes, it's a miracle — it will be all right.’
She repeated again, ‘It's a miracle.’
‘Henceforth I shall be his dog,’ said Patrick.
‘He may not like dogs,’ said Gildas.
‘He liked one dog,’ said Ludens, ‘it made him feel relaxed and tender.’
‘Did he tell you?’ said Gildas.
‘What kind of dog was it?’
‘No, Irina told me.
It was a labrador.
She was a child at the time.
It wasn't their dog, it belonged to a neighbour.’
‘Dogs are enlightened beings,’ said Gildas, ‘they're saved.
Perhaps a dog could save his master.
Remember Judas's dog sitting under his chair in The Last Supper by Rubens in Brera.’
‘What did Irina tell you?’ said Franca who had just entered.
‘Ludens said Marcus once felt fond of the dog next door,’ said Gildas.
‘There you are,’ said Patrick, who was sitting up in bed.
‘I was and have always been his dog.
When he is sad because the world rejects him I shall place my paw upon his knee, and he will be moved and heartened and his strength will be renewed.
Every great philosopher needs his poet.’
‘You mean like Heidegger and Hölderlin?’ said Gildas.
‘No, not like anything that has ever been in the world before.’
‘I thought you said —’
‘Never mind what I said, I don't say things the way you ordinary people do, Marcus and I understand each other, we are folk of the frontier.’
‘Would you like some more glucose?’ said Franca.
‘Yes please.
We shall travel the world together as poor beggarly men carrying our message to the planet, and everywhere we shall be spurned and everywhere we shall be glorified, and a light shall shine about him like to the light which shone upon the day when he raised me from the dead.
And I shall write my songs and carry them in a pack and I shall recite them to the people, and sing them too, and I shall tell stories, and the little children shall gather around me, the while himself is in the temple.’
‘Why in the temple,’ said Gildas, ‘are you in India?’
‘They are in ancient Greece,’ said Ludens.
‘We shall walk barefoot and dusty and alone and suffer many things, and within our sufferings we shall find the pearl of great price, the untarnished joy, the secret treasure, and we shall find it because he is a pure saint and the bravest man in the world and I am a simple singer robed in humility, one risen from the dead’
‘Oh do stop, Pat,’ said Gildas.
‘You are in danger of becoming a Resurrection Bore.’
‘Here's your glucose,’ said Franca returning.
‘Please don't excite him so.
Isn't it time you went?’
‘At least he maintains our myth about the mission,’ said Ludens to Gildas, ‘and he's bloody right about Marcus's courage.’
‘I don't see why you call that courage,’ said Gildas to Ludens, ‘and the myth is yours.’
‘Two angels have I,’ said Patrick, ‘the Franca angel and the Alison angel.
Where is the latter?’
‘Out shopping.’
‘And the noble warrior?’
(He meant Jack.)
‘In the studio.’
‘He shall paint the story of our wanderings and of our death.’
‘What do you mean, ‘death’?’ said Gildas.
‘That's new.
I thought you had jointly overcome death.’
‘We are preserved for a higher ending.
When Marcus dies there will be signs in the heavens.’
‘What about you?’
‘I shall die, as dogs die, in a ditch.’
‘In civilised countries,’ said Ludens, ‘dogs usually die in their baskets.’
‘I shall die in a ditch like a poor gipsy man.
Franca, when can I have a drink did the doctor say?’
‘Pat, dear, can't you just decide to give up drink, can't that be part of the new life you're always talking about?
You can do without drink, you certainly don't need it to loosen your tongue.’
‘Yes, I must talk,’ said Patrick, ‘pardon gentles all, I must while the light is with me, while I can see, Oh the things I can see —’
‘Such as horses winning races?’
‘Those are base matters, I cannot see base matters.
I shall write a long poem about what I saw shining from the other side.’
‘I gather Irina is out shopping with Alison,’ said Ludens to Franca.
‘Yes, buying clothes, she's clothes mad.
By the way, Alison said, about Heather Allenby —’
‘Franca,’ said Patrick, ‘come and sit beside me, hold my hand.’
Franca came and sat on the bed and took hold of Patrick's hand and they looked at each other.
Ludens thought, why can't I do that, why can't I just ask a woman to hold my hand, why can't I ask Franca to!
Patrick's recovery, soon to be the subject of an article in the Lancet , was now, as Ludens pointed out to Gildas, in danger of being taken for granted by them all.
Gildas had said that he felt too tired to be continually renewing his amazement, he had other troubles.
The recovery had been, though slow, from its inception, fairly steady.
Fears about mental damage were soon dispelled.
Patrick's weak body slowly resumed its normal functions and its strength.
He could even walk about the room, leaning on Franca's arm, and hoped to go, similarly supported, as far as the river when the weather improved.
He had also, as Gildas remarked, not lost his ability to talk.
The English climate, having given its clients a long series of warm sunny days, had decided that this must be paid for.
Rain fell, and the temperature went down to ten degrees Celsius.
The women wore warm skirts or trousers, the men put on jerseys.
The dank flat occupied by Marcus and Irina, which had no central heating, had become danker and greener, redeemed a little by a contingent of electric fires brought in by Ludens.
He, moving between this strange abode and Jack's house in Chelsea, felt as if , wanting to be needed by everyone, he were merely becoming some sort of semi-invisible messenger.
After all, he thought, this new scene was entirely, well in a sense, almost entirely, his creation.
His faith and determination had saved Patrick's life and brought Marcus and Irina to London.
He felt possessive, a bearer of authority and responsibility, as if these people were his children.
He wanted them to love him.
Yet already they were ungrateful recalcitrant children, escaping from him in all directions, capable of forming new friendships and attachments.
In fact not much of this had yet occurred, though Ludens's jealous mind presaged it.
Patrick had of course(yet why of course when he had so nearly died?) resumed his role as poet, jester, teaser, charmer, visited by his old pub companions, and doted upon by Alison and Franca.
He had also talked with Father O'Harte.
He had given up his lodgings, and all his possessions were in store at Jack's house.
It had been suggested (by Jack?) that he might move in with Ludens, an idea which (although he was genuinely fond of Pat) Ludens did not fancy.
On the other hand (as Ludens surmised) Jack was not in too much of a hurry to shift Patrick, as Pat was an occupation for Franca, and one which brought her and Alison together.
Meanwhile, both Franca and Alison had, after initial suspicion, adopted Irina, at least as far as amusing themselves by helping her to spend money on having her hair done and buying clothes.
They treated her, amiably, as a ‘little savage’ or a ‘wild girl’, whom they must attempt to civilise.
Ludens, at this time, thought of Marcus as his child.
He also thought of him as his father.
He felt that his relationship with Marcus was undergoing deep changes willed not by himself, but by him.
Ludens found himself watching Marcus, jealously, but with intense curiosity and interest and waiting as for some magisterial dispensation which would mysteriously order his own future, now so completely held in the balance.
His precious sabbatical term was being, so far as academic study was concerned, wasted.
But Ludens was not concerned now with writing his ‘next book’, or rushing off to Rome or Paris to read in libraries.
Everything, including his next book, his future work and thoughts, his future being, depended upon Marcus.
He had even allowed himself to be irritated by Patrick's impudent image of himself as Marcus's dog.
If Marcus had a dog, Ludens was that animal.
In fact, and at least at present, Ludens had little reason to complain since he remained, with Marcus, the closest person, not exactly the beloved disciple, but the most valuable agent.
Marcus in London remained secluded, his chief ‘manifestations’ being visits to Patrick during which it seemed (Ludens was sometimes present) little was said.
Patrick was, and Ludens was touched by this, for all his grand ‘impudent’ talk, visibly and humbly afraid of Marcus.
Marcus rather absently, as if all this belonged to the remote past, asked Pat how he was getting on, and Pat reported how much better he was feeling.
Ludens knew that Patrick longed to touch Marcus, to hold his hand, to stroke his sleeve, but dared not.
Ludens was himself in the same situation.
Marcus, with Pat, looked tired, resuming the look of weariness which he had worn after the ‘resurrection’.
Perhaps the room revived a taxing memory of what had happened.
But what had happened?
Ludens was right in a way to complain that they were now all taking it for granted.
Perhaps that was what one had to do with miracles?
The medical profession helped the calming process by ‘explaining it all away’ in various manners creditable to themselves.
Even Dr Hensman, who should have been the most astonished (and perhaps secretly was) joined in the game.
Of course, it was now agreed, no one had really felt sure that Patrick was terminally ill, such conditions have their unpredictable aspects, even sometimes of psychosomatic origin (though this side of the matter was touched on lightly).
Patrick, on the other hand, Ludens noticed, proceeded in the opposite direction, occasionally speaking as if he had been, when Marcus arrived, not just dying but actually dead.
When Ludens cautiously challenged this, Pat replied, ‘Well, I should know!’
Ludens meditated upon this too.
Marcus, thus present occasionally at Jack's house, where he evidently felt his visits to be a matter of duty, inevitably encountered the women, who treated him with suitable respect and awe, and Jack, who was nervously affable, and even on two occasions Gildas to whom he nodded politely.
(‘He doesn't remember me,’ Gildas said.)
There was a simple ordinariness about those brief appearances, during which Marcus enquired about Patrick's health; but how long could ordinariness continue and what would happen next?
Ludens's own relations with Marcus might have been called, from Ludens's point of view, promising, even satisfactory, were it not that they were also precarious.
He visited the horrible flat every day to see if he could be of use.
Marcus seemed to expect this, though usually he had little to say to Ludens.
Once or twice they walked together as far as the river.
When Ludens tried to ask him about his ‘thoughts’, he replied that he had ‘difficulties’ which they might discuss ‘later on’.
Ludens knew that Marcus had spent part of his childhood in London but could elicit no information about this interesting period, except that his parents had had a flat in Knightsbridge.
He showed no desire to rediscover the metropolis; and when not out visiting or walking did, as far as Ludens could see, nothing; nothing, that is, except, presumably, think.
He did not read.
This continued to amaze Ludens who could not imagine existence without reading.
He sat in his room and occasionally made notes on pieces of paper.
He was, Ludens felt,waiting ; and Ludens waited too.
Ludens had not forgotten what Marcus had said to him about Irina.
Nothing more had been said on that subject.
Ludens, in his present highly textured frame of mind, stowed away this significant memory as not at present relevant to his proceedings.
He did not want Irina to become a problem to him, now that he was becoming at least welcome, even necessary, to Marcus.
He enjoyed being expected and being useful, providing electric fires, finding plumbers, even tidying and washing things, Irina's efforts in these latter respects being minimal.
At times Ludens wondered whether this state of affairs might not go on for ever, whether he might not give up his job and become Marcus's — what?— friend, secretary, servant, dog.
Sometimes he ventured to think of his role as that of a sparring partner.
He believed, and Irina confirmed this, that Marcus had been, though initially hostile, glad to see him at Red Cottage because he was an acquaintance and someone to talk to.
‘He can't find new people at this stage,’ Irina said, ‘old ones will have to do.’
Ludens was not sure about Marcus's ability to find new people, but certainly did not mind benefiting from being an ‘old one’.
His strange quiet co-existence with Marcus was facilitated by his now surprisingly easy relations with Irina, they even teased each other.
She once said, ‘We're like two schoolboys!’
The odd simile suited her own peculiar mode of speech, so full of girls' boarding-school slang and the coarse expressions which troubled Ludens.
Where had she learnt them?
He had also come to respect Irina for her ability so rapidly to transform herself into a reasonably well-dressed, reasonably good-looking girl.
Her dark hair, cleverly cut and more frequently combed, was soft and glossy, sat tidily, was very faintly curling, flowing abundantly down to her shoulders.
She had acquired, with the ready assistance of Alison and Franca, some charming cotton dresses, and also, for the cooler weather, some rather smart dresses of light wool in mistily dark shades of blue and brown, together with a great many silk scarves from Liberty's.
It could now become evident that she had a good figure.
Ludens also noticed her small feet, clad in expensive discreetly elegant shoes.
Irina, in these days, was often out, shopping, or visiting Pat, or going to see Marcus's solicitor, a Mr Garent, or simply wandering about London being (to use her phrase) a ‘mystery woman’.
Ludens told her to go to the British Museum and the National Gallery, which she did, though declining his offer to ‘show her round’.
She also went at least once to see Dr Hensman.
She spoke at intervals about moving herself and Marcus out of the flat (which she agreed to be horrid) perhaps to another flat or to some vaguely envisaged country cottage.
There was certainly no question (Ludens was glad to hear) of moving back to Fontellen.
Nothing was done about this move however except that Ludens collected the names of a lot of house agents.
He arranged for Marcus to see a dentist, and took him there in a taxi.
So, in a curious lurid calm which could not last and yet, it seemed, could not end, the days went by.
‘How I wish I had been there!’ said Gildas, not for the first time.
‘It was absolutely astonishing,’ said Ludens, also not for the first time.
‘So you say, but you can't describe it.’
‘I have described it!
He breathed into Pat's mouth, then he looked into his eyes —’
‘Yes, yes, but what was it that did it?’
‘I don't know.
Perhaps he didn't know.
It's a fact.
Can't you just accept a fact?’
‘No, and neither can you.
You're entirely bemused.
You're under that man's spell.
You think he's something holy and mystical’
‘Possibly,’ said Ludens, ‘but I don't know what that means either.’
‘Father O'Harte said Marcus was fighting with a demon, soon he'll tell us he saw the demon.
Poor Pat already thinks he's been raised from the dead and is destined for some great thing, to help Marcus to save the world!’
‘Well, stranger things have happened.
World-changes do suddenly arise.
How old was Christ when he began his mission?’
‘So you do think he's something holy and mystical?’
‘Those are your words.
I don't know what I think.
Don't be so severe with me, Gildas, I'm under an awful strain, I think something terrible is going to be required of me.’
‘Now you sound like Christ.
I daresay he said that to his disciples, only that bit was censored.
I gather you were too busy to see Heather Allenby.’
‘Heather —?’
‘The girl Alison has lined up for you.
She asked you out to lunch to meet her.’
‘Oh yes — I told Alison I couldn't come, I had to be with Marcus.’
‘You know Alison's play about the ballet school has been accepted by the BBC?’
‘Oh really —’
‘You see you aren't interested.
You ought to be.
We need you.
Jack needs you.
Can't you imagine what strain he's under?’
‘If he wants to talk to Marcus again I'll arrange it.’
‘Boy, you exasperate me!
Jack isn't worried about Marcus — he's worried about the women!’
‘I can't think about that.’
‘You mean you won't.
Has Franca spoken to you?’
‘No.’
This conversation, occurring shortly after the conversation with Patrick recorded above, was taking place at Ludens's flat, where a scrappy supper had been laid out by Ludens after Gildas's telephone call.
It was true that Ludens, though regularly visiting Pat, had seen very little of Jack and had scarcely exchanged any words with Alison or Franca.
He felt guilty, then disturbed, by Gildas's words.
He also felt a sudden pang, thinking that perhaps Franca, wanting to confide in him and finding him unavailable, had turned to Gildas.
Gildas, smiling his crooked smile across the table and reading his friend's thoughts, said, ‘Don't worry, she said very little, virtually nothing, as soon as she started to speak she decided not to.
And one didn't need to be told that she's unhappy about Alison.’
‘Well, of course—’
‘Your best friends are in trouble and you say ‘of course’ and forget them instantly.’
‘What can be done?
You are the one who keeps saying better not meddle, meddling is simply self-indulgence and will to power!’
‘I know,’ said Gildas, ‘you are right to remind me of it.
One is never entirely without satisfaction when one's friends are in a mess, one looks at once to how one can enlarge oneself by interfering.’
‘I hope you'll do better when I'm in trouble.’
‘You are a special case.
Anyhow you claim to be in trouble already, but you don't talk to me, I have to ring up.
I don't like that.’
‘I'm sorry.
It's just that I have to look after both of them’
‘They can look after themselves.
You fail to realise that Irina is a woman of iron.’
‘She is not.
You think all women are either little fools or bullies.’
‘No.
Franca is neither.’
‘Irina has had a terrible life.’
‘So now she'll get her own back.’
‘She's an uneducated child, an innocent .’
‘You are the innocent.’
‘All right, she rushes round buying clothes and —’
‘Don't denigrate her now just to please me.’
‘Oh get out, go home!’
‘Don't raise your voice.
I know your nerves are on edge.
I'm sorry.’
‘I have to look after them, I tell you!
I have to find another flat, a quiet one, or else a country cottage where Marcus can be a hermit.
Irina can't arrange that, she can't arrange anything.
And I have to talk to Marcus every day.’
‘But you like it.’
‘Yes, but it's difficult, it's very tiring.
We don't really discuss anything.’
‘At least he can shave himself now I gather.’
‘Yes.
I'm sorry about that, I rather enjoyed it.’
‘You are shameless.’
‘You are!’
‘So he still thinks he has a mission.
Like you think you're John the Baptist because an angel pointed at you.’
‘How did you know?’
‘In fact he's just a defeatist, a victim of Jewish masochism.
You keep saying Marcus thinks — he doesn't think, he dreams.
He hasn't got a philosophical mind.
Metaphysics would have been one way out, but he can't take that, so the alternative is to be a persecuted prophet.
You've got to think about something, thinking is very hard, you can't just sit all day and do it, even religious solitaries read and say prayers, when the human mind goes beyond anything perceivable there's no proof any more.
I'm just not persuaded Marcus has it in him to be at that level of intensity’
‘You are trying to provoke me.
I don't understand Marcus, I don't presume to.’
‘How humble you are.
You love him.’
‘Yes.’
‘Well, let's leave it at that.
Now I really am going.’
On the following evening Franca, Alison and Irina were together in what Jack laughingly called the women's quarters, a room just beyond the kitchen which Franca had once designated as her sitting room or ‘boudoir’, but which, before Alison's arrival, she had not much frequented.
Of course Alison was not ‘living in’ the house, but was often there visiting Patrick (her help as a nurse was no longer required), joining Jack in his studio (where she talked with him about his work), or chatting with him and Franca in the drawing room or kitchen before departing with Jack to a restaurant and taking him on to her flat for the night.
Franca guessed that Alison's appearances were part of a plan of Jack's to make Franca used to ‘having her around’.
Sometimes Jack would bring Alison and leave her with Franca, or Alison would ‘drop in’ on Franca after seeing Pat.
Franca did not initiate any meetings.
On these occasions Alison gave Franca some embarrassed or ‘significant’ looks, but did not renew attempts to have a talk about the ‘situation’.
Franca led the conversation in a cheerful tone, Irina and Marcus and Patrick providing abundant subject-matter.
Pat's recovery, miraculously initiated, had not proceeded miraculously fast.
Doctor Hensman was still in charge, making solemn authoritative pronouncements and predictions, and behaving as if it were he who had cured the patient.
What did perhaps seem like a continuation of the miracle was the way in which Patrick had regained his healthy appearance and good looks.
He seemed in fact, as many of his visitors remarked, handsomer than ever, possibly as a result of the continued absence of alcohol from his life.
The long skeletal head and ghostly hands seemed now to belong to a bad dream.
His skin, which had looked so moist and fungoid, was now smooth and clear, his flesh firm.
His dark hair, trimmed by Moxie, was curly and glossy, his face with high cheek bones and small nose and small sensuous mouth and dark blue eyes, had resumed its glowing charm; and when his friends (Barry Titmus, for instance, Jerry Locke, Sidney Brett, and Ned Oliver who had recovered from his own ailments) came to see him, roars of laughter could be heard from above.
Moxie had early detected Ned smuggling in a bottle of whisky, and had delivered a chastening lecture.
It was even possible, Alison told Franca, who already knew, that Pat was actually in the process of deciding to give up drink!
He still spoke of how, when he was better, he would ‘go to Marcus’ or ‘follow Marcus’.
But Franca believed in none of these things.
Meanwhile, Marcus came less and less often, perhaps ‘frightened off’, as Alison put it, by Pat's noisy friends, or simply feeling that Pat no longer needed him.
Irina, on the other hand, seemed to get on well with Pat, going up to see him with Alison.
Franca observed sadly, but without surprise, that her strange feeling of love for Patrick had waned and finally abated as he continued steadily to come to life.
She had loved him, she thought now, because, just at that time, she had had to have something else, someone else, to love, a private place for wounded love to go to.
But that had been, as she had then suspected and now knew, a device, a dream.
Her relations with the real live Patrick were exactly as before.
Her presence embarrassed, even bored, him, and his nervous joking and teasing upset her.
Alison, Moxie, even Irina, were closer to him now than she was.
She thought, I am becoming a recluse.
Yes, that's it, that is the way.
She began then to feel an odd sympathy and affinity with Marcus, who entered the house so quietly (for now they left the door open for Pat's visitors) and stepped so noiselessly up the stairs.
Franca even wished that she could set up a relation of some kind with him.
He looked so tall and reliable and gentle and wise, and always greeted her in a kindly way with a little bow and a murmur.
Twice she asked him to stay for a cup of tea, but he refused.
Franca was busy.
She had, to begin with, colonised the boudoir, rearranging the furniture and bringing down pretty china from the spare bedroom, so as, she planned, to sit there often by herself .
Lately however Alison, and sometimes Irina, had decided to walk in and join her, no doubt, as Franca felt, to cheer up the ‘lonely old creature’; and, in the case of Alison, perhaps to set scenes for some ‘statement’ which she felt that Franca might wish to, or indeed ought to, make.
Meanwhile, with some help from Moxie,(the ‘daily’ who sometimes ‘helped out’was still afraid of infection) Franca continued to run the house, to shop, to clean, to organise, to feed a sick man, to feed her husband, and entertain, as necessary, Alison, Irina, Gildas, Ludens, the doctor, Jerry, Sidney, Barry, Ned, and one or two of Jack's painter friends who, now that Pat was recovering, had decided to come round for drinks.
She dressed soberly, changed her clothes less often, coiled her long dark hair into its usual long glossy package which lay so neatly upon her neck.
She walked to the shops and back, sometimes walked through the back streets, once almost as far as Marcus's flat (but did not dare to go near it), avoiding the noisy King's Road, and the embankment where Jack often walked with Alison, and as she knew, farther east where Ludens walked with Marcus.
The weather had recovered so far as to be rainless, breezy, faintly warm.
And all that time, Franca contained in her breast a storm of anguish and violence so terrible that she had at times, when she was alone and longing to ‘break down’, to clutch her breast with a fierce answering force to keep the black horror from spurting forth.
Her face was calm and benign, always in company, and usually alone too, for she was aware that to play such a part properly allowed of no rest periods, no weak moments of unmasking.
She must continue, in her deceit,whole , like the spy who, in order to go on, has to become what he seems .
She was, daily, amazed at herself, at her self-control; and at the terrible demons which fed upon her, and in doing so, she realised, fed her.
She had begun to need her rage and her hate, even of late her fierce cruel fantasies.
She could not, and did not try to, riddle out, rationally order, explain, least of all banish, these horrible consolations.
As it seemed, if she were not to die of her love she had to poison it; and even, over its death agonies, to exult.
As the days went by, Franca cherished and nourished and developed her suffering, unable to envisage any change or any plan — any machine into which so much relentless force might be fed.
Indeed she was afraid to plan or picture a different future of any kind.
So long as she stayed silent she had a secret weapon.
If she spoke, if once there were the least word, the least crack or fissure, upon which tears and screams could follow, she would have lost her one advantage, her source of ordinary viable life, and would be utterly undone and destroyed.
The vicious force which was now her essence and to which she gave the name of hatred (only this was too narrow and too petty a name to describe it) was directed upon Jack: Jack on whom daily, as he looked at her sometimes so anxiously, so humbly, she smiled the smile of reassurance and of calm.
Although she kept Alison so firmly, as in some austere yet not malevolent discipline, at a distance, she could not hate her, even felt a companionable pity observing the discomfort and guilt which proud Alison could not altogether dissemble.
At times — and Franca was aware of this as a dangerous weakness — she felt a slight momentary urge to ‘talk’ to Alison, to give that tiny fatal signal for which Alison was, sometimes so urgently, so breathlessly, waiting.
A more immediate peril was her frail stupid desire to ask some sort of help from either Gildas or Ludens.
She had, lately, almost come to this point with Gildas, but had checked herself in time.
She was less close to Gildas, whom she regarded with some slight awe, for she feared his irony and his sharp tongue, and would not have allowed him the slightest ‘liberty’ had he not cleverly, for he was very clever, ‘set up, a conversation which led her, through a series of exchanges, into the danger area.
Here he, ever so slightly, pressed her.
Fortunately she retired just in time; and saw his dark eyes, which had been so sympathetic, gleam for a second behind his little round glasses with amusement, with a kind of mockery, as she so promptly retreated.
She allowed herself a little to wish that she could sometimes, however indirectly, speak to, even just be with, Ludens; but he was now, as Gildas told her and as she could see, obsessed with Marcus.
As for Irina, Franca could not, and did not try to, make her out, but got on with her perfectly well.
And all the time the line of force which bound her to her husband stretched and vibrated so that her heart in secret haemorrhage, gushed blood.
Irina was sitting on the table.
She liked to do that.
She was sitting, that is, on the kitchen table, as the women were, at the moment, in the kitchen.
Franca, said to be a good cook, was not a good cook, just an ingenious cook.
She did not like cooking.
At the moment she was cutting up courgettes and dropping them into a saucepan containing peppers and onions and tomatoes.
She was uneasy because Irina was watching her, indeed staring at her.
Or perhaps it was just the usual look of her rather weird eyes.
Alison sitting in a low wickerwork chair with her long bare legs stretched out, was watching Irina.
Irina puzzled Alison.
Alison had asked Franca questions about Irina such as: Is she sincere?
Is she laughing at us?
Does she like us?
Does she love her father?
Franca could not answer these questions or interest herself in such formulations.
She replied that they could only get an ‘impression’ of the girl and there was no use looking farther.
Anyway Irina was just passing by, a fleeting acquaintance.
She seemed reasonably harmless and naive and willing to please.
The three women could at least‘play tennis’, to use a metaphor which Alison had applied to her relations with Irina.
Franca thought in terms of a musical trio.
They could all three play together.
The performance was banal, but there were no obvious discords.
The evening sun, shining at the moment through a side window, over which Franca had drawn a curtain, showed up, glowing like stained glass, a pattern of green and blue leaves and red grapes.
The light in the tidy pretty kitchen was subdued and pleasant.
It reminded Franca of some old happiness; and she thought I haven't been really happy since that very first day when he said there was someone else but I wasn't to worry.
Irina was wearing a blue-and-brown check low-waisted summer dress with pleats, which Alison had already declared to Franca to be ‘too smart, too old, and too expensive’.
She was wearing blue tights and sandals and had hitched her dress well up in order to swing her legs.
At the same time she kept tossing her head and patting her hair, exploring its new tidied sleekness.
Her dark eyes narrowed with the strange squint-eyed intensity which so fascinated Ludens and to which he had drawn Franca's attention.
She had not entirely lost the gipsy look of her earlier manifestations, but now, more ambitiously attired, appeared more like some sort of stage character, a dressed-up Bohemian, an artist's model, or an adventuress in disguise.
Conscious of being looked at she swung her legs and smiled faintly, twitching her shoulders and arching her neck.
‘So your play is going on the stage?’
Irina said to Alison.
‘No.
It is to be on television,’ said Alison in her careful precise voice.
Alison, always simply and elegantly dressed, was wearing a white pleated skirt and a light green blouse which set off her red hair, ‘cooled it’ as Jack said.
She looked healthy and strong, a fine animal, her skin glowing, her hair radiantly shining.
She and Jack now drove out to Chiswick where they played tennis in the afternoons.
Alison added, ‘They said they would take it, but it is not quite certain that it will be performed.’
‘Why is that?’ said Irina, smiling.
‘Well, those things are uncertain.’
‘Haven't you got a contract?’
‘Not yet.’
‘Of course it will be performed,’ said Franca, ‘and Alison is writing another play, aren't you, Alison?’
‘Another play about a ballet school?’
‘No,’ said Alison, ‘it is about life, about marriage, and —’
‘So that's autobiographical too?’
‘No, neither is autobiographical —’
‘Perhaps I'll write a play.
No I won't, I'll be a photographer and roam the world with my camera.’
‘How's your father?’ said Franca.
‘Oh much as usual.
He wants to move out into the country.’
‘I gather Alfred is looking for a cottage for him.’
‘Is he?
That's news to me.
Anyway we want to get out of that bloody awful flat.’
‘Is your father writing a book?’ said Alison.
‘No.
He's existing.
Some people live, like the rest of us, like the people in your plays.
He just exists.’
But the people in my plays don't exist,’ said Alison, ‘they are fictional characters.’
‘Is existing better than living?’ said Franca.
‘He thinks so.
He thinks he's more real.’
‘And is he?’ said Alison.
Irina seemed to be interested in the question and turned a serious face toward Alison.
‘I don't know.
Perhaps existing is the wrong word.
He's like a toad.
He's just there.’
‘He's a very remarkable man,’ said Alison.
‘He certainly did Patrick a good turn.’
On this subject Irina affected a little air of scepticism.
The other two had not ventured to probe her views on the subject of the miracle.
Franca said, ‘Pat says when he's well he'll come to your father and be his servant.’
‘Oh great!
We could do with a servant like that.
He's fantastically good-looking.
Don't you agree?’
‘He certainly is,’ said Alison.
‘He is now,’ said Franca, ‘but, well, as you know, he talks all the time.’
‘That's fine.
We never talk.’
‘You sit like a pair of toads,’ said Franca.
‘Exactly.’
The door opened and Ludens came in.
Alison stood up, Irina jumped off the table.
Franca said, ‘Hello, Alfred.’
Irina said, ‘Hello Alfred, hello Ludens, hello Alfred Ludens, Franca has just compared me with a toad.’
‘Surely not.
Toads are quiet and harmless and nice.’
‘You pig!
Isn't he a pig?’
‘He's not a pig, he's my friend,’ said Alison.
Franca looked upon Ludens with relief.
She was used to the ‘younger brother’ role imposed on him by Jack and Gildas.
He was gentle and easy to be with and she liked what Jack called the mad Jewish grin.
Only lately Ludens had been preoccupied, nervous, anxious, restless.
Now, as he looked round the kitchen, he suddenly frowned and winced, putting on, but only for a second, what Jack called his surly Eastern European sneer.
He was known to be ‘worried about Marcus’, but Franca had not asked him exactly what the worry was.
Alison smiled at him her sunny smile which removed from her face what Franca thought of as her ‘legal look’.
‘I thought you were trying to find a cottage for Marcus, but Irina says you're not.’
‘I'm trying to try,’ said Ludens gravely, ‘but my clients can't decide what they want.’
‘I'm to have Patrick as my servant,’ said Irina.
‘Isn't that super?
He can carry the gear when I roam the world with my camera.’
‘Oh, are you a photographer?’ said Franca.
‘I'm going to be.
What else can I become?’
‘I've just been hearing about Pat's epic poem about the ‘other side’,’ said Alison.
‘Has he actually started it?’
‘He was writing something when I came in, only he wouldn't show it to me.’
‘Can I give you a lift?’ said Alison to Ludens.
‘My car's outside.’
‘Thanks, but my car's outside too,’ said Ludens.
Alison said to Franca, putting on her humble ingratiating tone, ‘I'm — I'm going back to my flat now.’
‘You can give me a lift,’ said Irina, hopping off the table.
‘Cheerio, Franca.
Be nice to me.’
‘I am nice to you!’
‘Be nice to me always .’
Franca, smiling, waved assent.
She said to Alison, ‘Where's Jack?’
She knew that he was painting upstairs.
‘He's painting upstairs,’ said Alison.
‘He's — er — coming on later.’
She gave Franca the hang-dog look again.
As Alison disappeared with Irina, Ludens seated himself on the table.
‘Can I help?
Peel potatoes, clean carrots, slice onions?’
‘No, thanks, Jack's upstairs.’
‘You and Alison seem to have tamed Irina.’
‘Haven't you?’
‘No.
She's a mad erratic little thing.’
‘Are they going to live in the country?’
‘She speaks of it, I make suggestions, she ignores them.’
‘And he?’
‘He's going through some sort of crisis or — metamorphosis.
I can't explain.
I'm being led — on some dark way.’
‘Alfred, I'm worried about you.
I feel you're simply being led on a wrong way.
I think that man's insane, and cunning — and the mixture of insanity and cunning is what you mistake for some deep wisdom.
You remember you always thought he had some secret.’
‘I still do.’
‘I think he's ruining your life, he's taking you away from your work, from your thinking, toward something empty and false — he's certainly wasting your time, they both are, they're exploiting you.’
‘So you don't really like Irina?’
‘I don't know.
She seems to me terribly unhappy in a way which can make people desperate, spiteful, even wicked.’
‘She's certainly unhappy — she's an unhappy lonely child — she's not wicked.’
‘No, of course— of course not — What am I saying.
I'm wicked.’
Franca, who had been leaning against the big warm cast-iron stove with a spoon in her hand, threw down the spoon with a clang and marched through the door into her sitting room.
Ludens followed, closing the door behind him.
In the sitting room too the curtains had been drawn against the sun.
The room was a little dusky, it smelt of flowers which Franca had picked in the garden that morning.
Jack did not like flowers, or rather said he was ‘bothered’ by them, and they were banished from the upstairs rooms.
There were two plump ‘sewing chairs’ and an embroidered hassock and blue china dogs on the mantelpiece, small rugs, a desk below an oval mirror, refugees from other parts of the house.
The dogs and the rugs, and the water-colours upon the walls, one by Franca herself, were relics from the days before her marriage.
Franca sat down in one of the low plump chairs and began to cry.
Ludens pulled the other chair near to her.
Franca did not attempt to wipe away the tears, she let them roll down and drip onto the front of the apron which she was wearing over her brown dress.
She sat upright with her hands on her knees.
She was thinking, I am doing something terrible and stupid, I am destroying myself even more, I am weakening myself, I am breaking .
Only I must not .
She imagined that if she did not wipe her eyes, thrusting in a knuckle or a handkerchief, the tears would leave less trace.
She opened her eyes wide, permitting the tears, willing them to cease, breathing deeply.
Her bosom heaved, her wet mouth opened, her wide eyes stared.
After a moment or two Ludens reached out and detached one of her hands from her knee.
The hand resisted, then after a moment gave way.
Ludens held her moist hot hand between his thin dry cool hands, nursing it upon his knee as if it were a wounded bird.
He lifted it, as if he were about to kiss it, laid it for an instant against his cheek, then restored it, still captive, to his knee.
Franca withdrew her hand.
Her tears ceased abruptly.
She drew a handkerchief from the pocket of her apron and very lightly dabbed her eyes.
Then she got up and went to the mirror above the desk.
Her eyes were slightly red.
She opened the desk and took out a powder compact and lightly touched her reddened lids.
Ludens, who had risen, said, ‘I'm sorry.’
‘Well, it wasn't your fault,’ said Franca in a conversational tone.
‘Perhaps it was,’ said Ludens, ‘I wanted to come closer to you and you must have felt it.’
‘You wanted to comfort me.’
‘Yes.
But — I'd put it differently.’
‘You wanted me to stop embarrassing you by crying!’
‘Franca,don't .
I just wanted to come to you, to make a little space around you, I don't want to discuss anything, I don't want to do anything, I won't say anything, I just wanted to be there , I mean here .’
‘I understand you,’ said Franca, turning round to face him.
‘And now, Alfred dear, please go.’
‘You're not angry with me?’
‘Of course not.’
‘You know I'm very fond of you.’
‘Yes.’
‘You help me too.’
‘Goodbye.
Come again as usual.’
Alone, Franca washed her face in cold water in the kitchen, washing off the powder she had just put on.
Returning to the desk she made up her face, powdering carefully about her eyes.
She used little make-up, but the little was important.
The sun had gone and there was less light.
As she could hear Jack coming down the stairs she returned to the kitchen and picked up the metal spoon and plunged it into the saucepan which she had not yet put on to heat.
She stood there awkwardly, incapable of further theatre.
Jack came in quietly.
Franca turned, bracing herself against the old unthinking uninformed wave of pleasure which, urging her towards him, almost lifted her off her feet.
Jack, in summer plumage, glowed with colour.
He had put on weight, but he was taking exercise.
His face and neck were reddish brown, his hair was bleached by the sun, his strong arms and hands were brown, looked smooth and warm.
He had combed his hair and shaved.
He did not approach his wife, but stood looking at her.
Franca turned slightly away and began senselessly to mess the contents of the saucepan with the spoon.
‘What's that stuff?’
‘Tomatoes and things.
How did painting go?’
‘Bad.
I think I've come to the end of what I can do.’
‘You always say that but then you find a new way.’
‘I wish Marcus could do something for me .
Ludens was here talking to Pat.’
‘Yes, he dropped in.
Irina and Alison were here.
Quite a social scene.’
‘Ludens can talk to Pat.
I hear them chattering.
I can't any more.
Pat just bores me with his rantings.’
‘He can be serious.
Perhaps he's serious all the time.
One has to argue with him, like Gildas does.
I don't mind listening to him.
I'm glad he's alive.’
Jack sat down in the basket chair vacated by Alison, making it creak prodigiously, hauled himself up again, found a hard upright kitchen chair and sat on that.
‘Franca, don't drift away.’
‘Where do you imagine I'd drift to?
I live here.’
‘Yes, you live here, you do, you do.
I don't mean go away, I know you wouldn't do that.
But you might become too — sort of quiet.’
‘But I'm always quiet!’
‘Yes, yes, but I mean remote, passive, sort of dreamy, as if you didn't notice things.’
‘I assure you, I notice all sorts of things.’
‘Sorry, I'm being stupid, it's just as if you might be too kind, too — you know —’
‘I'll be as kind as I please,’ said Franca, smiling.
‘Isn't that what you want?
It comes naturally to me.’
‘Indeed, you have a wonderful nature.
Almost too wonderful — too unselfish — as if you were — what I meant by remote — sort of sleepy, untouched, abstracted, not really present.’
‘Not all there?’
‘Forgive me, I'm blundering.
You are as wonderful as I expected, and I worship you for it.
You do really like Alison?’
‘Yes, very much.’
‘She adores you.
But if you could only be, with her, a little more direct.
She feels you're so noble, and apart —’
‘I think I'm being direct.
I'm just being myself.’
‘You see — naturally she wants to talk to you a bit, to talk frankly about how things are, she wants to explain —’
‘Naturally,’ said Franca, turning towards him now, still holding the spoon, ‘but what is there to explain?
You have explained to me over and over how this thing can be possible.
Of course it's possible, we prove it every day.
You have quoted many cases, even famous ones.
Other people have managed it, why not us?’
‘Franca, do you mean it?’
‘Yes.’
‘I wish you'd say something like that to Alison.’
‘I think you've always wanted two permanent women.’
‘But I never imagined I'd meet anyone like Alison.’
‘You were waiting for the right person.’
‘Well — yes — someone who was really good , and whom you could accept.’
‘You've done very well.
There it is.
We are exceptional people.‘
‘You are exceptional, you are the sovereign, you are the miracle.
We shall live openly and speak truth to each other, and create happiness for each other .
We can do it.
Franca, darling, we must be happy, we must be.
You will make us happy, you will make us good.
We shall arrange things —’
‘Yes, I suppose we will have to arrange some things,’ said Franca. ‘like, I suppose you mean, the timetable, which nights you spend with Alison and so on?
But you know I shall agree perfectly with whatever you decide.’
Jack looked troubled, smoothing his lately shaven cheek.
‘I mean something deeper.
It must be a way of life.’
‘Ways of life imply times for breakfast.’
‘How practical women are, leading men back to simple realities.
Yes, the details.
But I mean, like the inner and the outer, we must find a rhythm —’
‘You mean we three must?’
‘Yes, a pattern, of course we may not find it at once—’
‘So we can experiment.’
‘Not exactly, it will have to be something coming naturally, something intuitive, gradually found out, resting upon our truthfulness and our faith in each other.
Sorry, that's not very clear, but you know what I mean.’
‘I'm not sure that I do.
Perhaps you can give some examples.’
‘No, I can't.
It's not like that.
I can't see it as clearly as that — and perhaps it's better not to see clearly —’
‘That is often true.’
‘I see, I feel, a direction, an orientation — Help me, Franca.’
‘You see strategy not tactics?’
‘No, that's too clear and simple.
We shall go on living, and changing, together, and this will mean, for all of us, more life, more being, a circle of love, a mystery, a stretching out to each other in the dark —’
‘Why in the dark?’
‘Because such relations are deep, and depend on faith and love.’
‘It sounds rather like the Holy Trinity.’
‘I thought that too.
With you as the Holy Spirit!
But seriously, well, all this is serious.
I've thought about it so much and I feel it must and can be something wonderful for all of us.
And it depends most of all on you, in a way you've led us —’
‘I can hardly claim to have done that.’
‘You are too modest.
Your generosity, your goodness, your pure love has enabled this possibility.
I believe in this happiness.’
‘Since we are being so metaphysical,’ said Franca thoughtfully, ‘I would rather say that the happiness is your happiness, the spirit is your spirit.
You are being too modest.
You are the enabler, the creative power, the prime mover, the faith is faith in you.
To will your happiness is our happiness.
And of course you are right that this must be about happiness.’
‘Don't let's argue like this,’ said Jack, ‘I'm glad you agree that — I'm glad you agree .
Franca, darling, let's be simple.’
‘And move quietly in the dark.’
‘Yes.
You know that I love you and am nothing without you.
So often, in all this, I have felt that I am nothing .
You give me life.’
‘I think you have many sources of life,’ said Franca, ‘but I am touched by your gratitude.’
‘Franca, it's not just gratitude —’
‘I know, I know, it's something more mysterious.
But about arrangements, the details, what you called the simple realities.
I think you have something definite to say — and I hope I have made it easier for you to say it.’
‘You have done exactly that.
You understand so well.
It's this — well — Franca, to be absolutely blunt —’
‘Yes?’
‘I want — and I must have — both my wonderful women together under one roof.’
Franca laid the spoon down carefully on the stove.
She replied at once.
‘Well, that makes sense.
Would Alison like it?’
‘Her only worry is that you might not.’
‘Then she has no worries.’
‘Oh, Franca — angel —’
‘Do you mean this roof or some other roof?’
‘Oh, this roof — as you said, you live here — I live here — I can't abandon my studio, it's perfect — here is the scene where we must make our relationship real.
If I keep vanishing and having another life elsewhere, that's inevitably secretive, divisive, insincere, somehow untrue.
It's unfair to you, and unfair to Alison.
I want you to know my other life, so that really it's not another life.
I want the world to know how things stand, and that we're being truthful and open and not ashamed or in any way put down.
I owe it to you.
I owe it to Alison, we owe it to each other, to live this openly and simply.
Here is our scene, our home, and you will help us, you will care for us, you will be the centre.
Franca, this isn't madness, is it?’
‘No, Jack.’
‘Thank God.
You know, it hasn't been easy since — since Alison.
Sometimes I imagine I'm crazy.
But then I think of you, and I feel sane again.
These things can be thought about, moral problems can be faced and solved, one just needs the will and the courage.
Franca, sweetheart, I bless you, I worship you, you have a great soul, I feel I could serve you as if you were God —’
‘Jack, don't worry —’
‘I love you —’
‘Yes, good, but hadn't you better go now?
Alison will be waiting for you, and you must be anxious to relieve her mind.’
‘Of course.
I see it's late, I'd forgotten the time.
I must go.
I — I won't say any more now, but you know —’
‘Yes?’
‘Oh, and — just one other thing.’
‘Yes?’
‘About the others.’
‘What others?
Are there others?’
‘I mean Gildas and Ludens.
I know they wish us well, and they're both wise and reasonable people, they're tactful — but naturally they're inquisitive, they want to know what's happening, and make judgments on it all —’
‘You mean they might disapprove?’
‘I think they might misunderstand.
I'd rather — well, I know how discreet and wise you are, I know you'd never say anything to them.
I don't imagine they'd actually ask questions.’
‘Of course not.’
‘I'm sure what I say is quite unnecessary — but they might, you know, sympathetic looks and so on— I'd like you to keep them at a distance.’
‘I do.’
‘You are so sensible.
Later on it will be easier.
I'm not going to lose my two best friends.
Later on they'll understand, they'll see it as we do.
Now — my darling — I must go.’
Jack had been sitting in the chair while Franca stood before him.
Now he rose and they faced each other across the table.
Jack's face, usually so bland and pleased, was, throughout its surface, very slightly dislocated, like a drawing on crumpled paper.
He looked himself, yet older, different, an elder brother, his father, or else this future self which he was in the process of becoming.
Anxiety, doubt, even fear were very lightly sketched in: an appeal for forgiveness and love.
Then, as Franca stared at him, he blushed, a darker redness for a moment suffusing his sun-tanned skin.
She could not remember having seen him blush before.
He was hesitating, at a loss.
To forestall his next movement (such as his taking her in his arms) Franca moved rapidly round the table, took a firm hold of his shoulder, and, as he instinctively lowered his head, kissed his hot blushing cheek.
Then she moved briskly away, opened the door, and returned to the stove and picked up the saucepan and the spoon.
She said in a gentle voice, ‘Go now, dear Jack, see you tomorrow.’
Jack made as if to speak, then making a helpless expressive gesture, a sort of obeisance, strode out of the door and closed it behind him.
After a moment or two, after she had heard the front door close, she put down the saucepan and the spoon.
She waited.
Then she pulled up to the table the kitchen chair upon which Jack had been sitting and sat down, placing her elbows on the table and her head in her hands.
She was, now, trembling and shuddering, her heart was beating violently, she could feel her scarlet blazing face.
Had she blushed earlier?
No.
He had blushed, not she.
She had been, throughout that amazing conversation, perfectly calm.
She had looked and sounded rational, kindly,motherly .
Had she been convincing?
Yes.
Had she overdone it?
No.
She had not said ‘We'll all be one happy family’.
Something quite extraordinary had happened, she had achieved something extraordinary.
She was amazed at herself, at the weird awful feeling of triumph which was consuming her body, licking up over her like a flame.
It was a kind of masterpiece, one of the cleverest, most complete, things she'd ever done.
It was a turn of the screw of which she could never have dreamt herself capable.
She sat for a while, becoming quieter, breathing deeply, ceasing to tremble.
Then she got up and went to the front door and, as she did every night, and had always done, since Jack never cared about such matters, locked and bolted it.
She was alone in the house.
She went back into the kitchen and (she recalled this later with surprise), laid a cloth upon the table, set out plates, knives, forks, a wineglass, bread, butter, cheese, apples.
She brought out a bottle of red wine from the cupboard.
She opened the wine and poured some into the glass.
She put the saucepan back on the stove.
Of course such a supper, minus the wine, she might have eaten on any of the evenings (and they now stretched back a long way) when she found herself alone.
But there was something of an occasion, even a ceremony, even a sacrament, in the way, on this evening, she set out the food and the vessels.
She sat down and sipped the wine and contemplated what she had done.
Chiefly she felt that, as in a sudden slip or subsidence, she had become a different person: a worse person, a desperate person, but powerful and free.
Or was she simply mad, suffering perhaps from some well-known form of psychosis?
Free ?
How could she think that when she had in fact entrammelled herself in terrible evil bonds, luxuriating even in her bondage?
She had been really free before.
But now had she not, just as she was telling herself that she commanded the game, in fact lost her freedom?
Of what value after all is a power which one could never use, or at any rate did not know how to use?
She was amazed at herself,scandalised , but at the same time could admire the absolutely impromptu fluency of her wicked vicious ill-intentioned lying to Jack.
It was true that as she entrapped him she was entrapping herself.
She would have to consider later how she would escape from that very complex cage.
Surely the very power which she now felt she possessed would enlighten her later about how it was to be exercised.
Yes, I am free, she said to herself, but it's not like ordinary freedom, it's being in hell, a brilliant lucid hell.
If I lose my concentration, if I lose my grip,my command , now, I shall fall into despair and humiliation and drivelling insanity.
That is what I am escaping from, that is the alternative.
I must think .
I've never been able to think so clearly in my life before.
I've never been able to think such extreme thoughts in my life before.
It's as if my mind has suddenly broken through into a new area, a space, a vast capacity which I never dreamt I had.
The pressure, the pressure , cannot crush me, it forces me to think.
I can now contemplate my experience, my discovery, of how total pure love can be, in all its atoms, converted into total pure hate.
I thought those dreadful fantasies I had of killing Jack were the extremity, the end.
But I see now that the end is something farther, higher, more utterly frightful.
Franca had indeed had those fantasies, and continued to have them, of how she would kill her husband, smashing his head with a hammer, plunging a carving knife into his side, drugging him with sleeping pills and suffocating him.
Or she might drown him in the bath or push him under a train.
The vivid proliferation of these fantasies had seemed to Franca to represent her final degradation, the end of her sanity, the cell in which her husband would ultimately immure her to whimper away what remained of her life.
Her murderous dreams had then seemed to her the hallucinations of a soul mad with grief.
Now, in the awful clear light which had broken upon her, they appeared as possibilities among others, and not necessarily the most interesting.
How easy it had been to mislead him, as he produced his apologetic arguments and justifications.
She could have gone on for hours.
She had seen his point of view and expressed it even better than he did.
She had made him stupid, and mocked him, and his old assumptions about her docility had blinded him.
She had inhibited her sympathy, one genuine sympathetic impulse would have ruined her.
For truth,all must be false.
The enormity of ‘one roof’ had taken her by surprise, and it was perhaps the way that had stiffened her which made her now feel so free, so beyond obligation.
There, suddenly, the light had shone.
It was as if Jack had driven her,herded her into this enlightenment, and a terrible pleasure had come to her aid.
Now she could, for a while, rest with her achievement, which was something so much greater and more mysterious than just having uttered a pack of lies, and let what was to happen next gradually formulate itself.
She had bought time, a resting-place, a space.
There were now many possibilities.
Perhaps she would simply lead him on and on into some dark chamber of doubt and fear.
Even the threat, the hint, of absolute hate could chill the blood.
One possibility which did not exist for Franca, since something in her had already killed it dead, was that one day Jack might tire of Alison, or Alison of Jack.
But the quaint idea did occur to her that she might simply go on and on perfecting her role, delighting simply in her ability to deceive, and never, till the end, making any use of her deception.
Might not that be the greatest thing?
Her work could then remain perfectly complete, unmarred by the unpredictable results of its emergence into the public world.
Was not it above the banality of revenge?
This image of an undamaged whole brought with it a doubt which Franca found piquant rather than disturbing.
Was her falsity really so intact?
Could she have spoken to Jack so ‘sincerely’ had she not in some secret part believed what she said?
Was she not indeed, not only trapping herself, but deceiving herself, being, to herself, a traitor?
Dear me, thought Franca, then perhaps I might be in danger of actually becoming as saintly as I seem!
Over this, for a moment, she actually smiled.
She ate the contents of the saucepan and some bread and cheese and an apple, and drank most of the wine.
Then she went to bed exhausted and, for the first time since her terror started, slept well.
‘I think I've found a place in the country.’
‘You mean somewhere to live?’
‘Yes.
Dad says he can't think here.
He wants to be settled somewhere quiet.’
‘You don't want to go back to Red Cottage?’
‘That dump?
Bloody no.’
‘Irina, how exciting!
How did you find it?
I would have helped you.’
‘I just asked around.
I'm cleverer than you think.’
‘Where is it?’
‘In Wiltshire — a lovely place called Sillbourne.’
‘Where Marcus can be a hermit.’
‘Well, he can be a hermit anywhere, but he wants to get away from traffic noise.’
‘So you've found a cottage?’
‘It's on the edge of a village, but quite secluded, there's a little river too.’
‘So he can have quiet walks.
I'm so glad!
May I come there often?’
‘Of course, dear Ludens.
We can't do without you.’
‘I can't do without you either, Irina.’
It was the day after Ludens's visit to Chelsea which had ended with his witnessing Franca's tears.
Ludens had reflected uneasily upon this episode.
Of course she started it by walking into the boudoir.
And then what else could he have done but what he did?
Yet she might blame him all the same.
Franca had her pride, and part of making her situation endurable must be the fiction that she endured it, if not cheerfully, at least stoically.
Indeed Ludens, who had long appreciated the quality of Franca's love for her husband, could, more than other observers, understand the nature of her lack of an alternative.
A dash of wry cynicism might have helped another woman, but that was not Franca's way.
Now however Ludens had stepped for a moment inside the charmed circle, and things between them could never be the same again.
On the whole Ludens decided it would be ‘all right’.
He and Franca had always been fond of each other.
She would rely on his discretion, and perhaps at the same time in some speechless way on his support.
He was glad that he had expressed to her, however blunderingly, what he felt.
He was glad that he had held her hand.
There was nothing here which could mar his relations with her, or of course with Jack.
Irina's news now drove these matters from his mind.
He was pleased, excited, also alarmed.
Would his ‘status’ be altered in some way by this new scene, perhaps simply by the change itself?
His daily visits to the flat in Victoria now seemed an essential part of his life.
He had told the others that he talked every day with Marcus, but this was not strictly, certainly not literally, true.
On some days Marcus said nothing to him at all, while at the same time making it, without word or gesture, clear that his presence was helpful.
Ludens, arriving, would have to intuit what was required.
If Marcus, usually to be found in his bedroom, was sitting upon an upright chair, his back straight, his hands on his knees, staring into space, in a posture presumably connected with some technique of meditation, Ludens would wait outside in the hall, or converse quietly with Irina in the kitchen.
If Marcus was sitting on his bed or walking about the room or looking out of the window, Ludens would sit near him either on a chair or else on the floor his knees up, his back against the wall.
He liked to sit on the floor, but was careful not to do so too often.
He was quite happy to be Marcus's dog, but it was possible that Marcus relied on his assuming some more dignified role.
He would wait for Marcus to speak first.
At other times he would find Marcus talking to Irina, and ready to go out for a walk.
During his conversations with Marcus, when they did take place, Ludens had the impression that Marcus was pursuing a consecutive line of thought, sections of which were randomly surfacing for Ludens's benefit, or even for Marcus's benefit, at moments when Marcus felt it might clarify his ideas to verbalise them aloud, and even to listen to a response.
These utterances, emerging from longer periods of silent thought, were often obscure, but Ludens had begun to feel that, not yet perhaps but soon, he would be able to frame a clearer idea of what Marcus was all the time thinking.
Ludens now craved for these sessions, and had even instantly, when Irina spoke of the cottage in Wiltshire, decided he would have to move there, reorganise his life, and set up house next door.
‘Is Marcus pleased about the cottage?’
‘Oh yes.’
‘Has he seen it?’
‘Not yet.’
‘What's it called?’
‘Benbow.’
‘Benbow Cottage, that's a good name.
Could I come when you take Marcus to see it?
I could drive you down.’
‘Yes, if you like, thanks.’
‘I'd love that.
Have you actually bought it?’
‘More or less.’
‘Does it need alterations?’
‘It's in very good order, awfully pretty and convenient.’
‘When will you move in — if Marcus likes it?’
‘Fairly soon.’
‘I hope he'll be all right there.
He's been so private and solitary here.
I hope people won't intrude or think he's odd.
Village life can be terribly unpeaceful!
I know, I grew up in a village.’
‘Did you?
Where?’
‘In Somerset.
My father still lives there in the house where I grew up.’
‘What does your father do?’
‘He was a schoolmaster, he's retired now.’
‘Is your mother still alive?’
‘No.’
‘Did you love her?’
‘I never knew her.
She left my father, or he left her, when I was born — or earlier!
I'm illegitimate.’
‘Are you?’
Irina looked at him with interest.
They were standing in the kitchen.
The sun, managing to slant down onto the red brick wall opposite the window, reflected a hot light into the room.
It was a warm day, the noise of traffic came through the slightly open window.
Suddenly conscious of it, Irina closed the window, reducing the sound.
She came back to stand near Ludens.
They had been talking in low voices.
Ludens had come early.
Marcus was still in there, probably sitting on the lavatory, where Irina said he liked to spend time.
‘Do you mind?’ she said.
‘Yes.
It's irrational, but I do.’
Ludens, about to say something more about his mother, checked himself.
Better keep such things decently buried.
‘Have you brothers and sisters?’
‘I have a halfbrother, and a stepmother.
They live in Portugal, I don't see them, neither does my father, we don't like them.’
‘Do you love your father?’
‘Yes, but I don't see him much.’
There was a pause.
‘I loved my mother,’ said Irina, ‘at least I was sorry for her.
She was always moaning and complaining, she was always ill with something, then she died of leukaemia.’
‘I'm sorry.’
‘How can you be sorry?
You never knew her, you can't imagine her.
Why do people always tell lies.’
‘Was your mother Jewish?’
‘Why do you want to know?’
‘I want to know.’
‘Yes.’
‘You resemble her.’
‘Yes, she was dark, not like Dad.’
‘What was her name?’
‘Judith.
Oh why all this?
Her parents were against the match because they thought Dad was a poor scholar.
When they learnt about the money they soon changed their tune.
My mother wanted to live a posh life and have dinner parties with other rich Jews and cook gefilte fish and wear a wig and dance with fashionable rabbis at weddings, you can imagine how Dad took to that.
She never got on with Dad, he was too sublime.
We were always hidden away somewhere, I was packed off to various boarding-schools, he gave us piles of money, he just didn't want to see us!
My mother thought if I'd been a boy Dad would have lived with us and been grand, or at least people would have noticed us.
So that was another mistake I made.
As it was we were just too much and he had enough trouble coping with himself.’
‘Were your family involved at all in — all that — were any of them in the camps?’
‘No!
He got it all out of books.
Her people cleared off to America.
His grandparents were bankers in Switzerland, his parents had a luxury home on Lake Geneva and later on they had a flat in London and another in Paris.
I daresay his ancestors were slaughtered in various pogroms somewhere or other, but so what?
Do the Jews have a monopoly of suffering?’
Irina, who did not dress up for Ludens, was wearing a simple faded old dress, frail with much washing, the sleeves rolled up well above her elbows.
She had been washing dishes when he arrived.
She spoke in a metallic tone of almost cynical exasperation, fixing Ludens with her intense dark stare.
But her hands sought each other in the nervous wringing motion which he had seen before.
Ludens, very stirred, very touched, by these precious and unexpected outpourings, and hoping to make them continue, said, ‘But did you get on well with your father?
Like that time when I saw you in Kent, you seemed to be all right together.’
‘We co-existed.
It's better now.’
‘I'm glad —’
‘Oh you're always glad about something.’
‘Why is it better?’
‘I've grown up, and he's more helpless, he's not so powerful and bossy.’
Ludens did not like this picture.
He was about to say something when Irina went on, ‘You remember the sheep.’
‘Of course I do.’
Ludens felt himself blushing.
He took a pace backward, dropping his eyes and raising his hand to his collar.
‘I dream about that sheep.
Was it a ram?’
‘Was it?
I don't know.’
‘Didn't you look ?’
‘No.
All I noticed was its eyes.’
‘I didn't see.
But I thought you, being a man, would have done.
I suppose if it was there all by itself it must have been a ram.’
‘It seems likely,’ said Ludens, raising his eyes and lowering his hand.
‘And you remember that rotten fence we kept on breaking pieces off the top of.’
‘Yes, yes.’
‘It had beautiful eyes.’
‘Yes.’
There was a sound of the lavatory flushing, then of Marcus emerging and going to his room.
Irina picked up some plates from the table and put them in the sink.
Ludens moved to the door.
It suddenly seemed terrible that Marcus was leaving the flat.
Ludens had become used to the flat, it had become home-like and lived-in, Irina had bought plates, table-cloths, bedspreads.
Marcus was safe here, hidden from the world.
In this village he would be unprotected, misunderstood, a victim.
People would gang together to destroy him.
And these afflicted abandoned mothers: it was as if his own mother were, for a moment, superimposed upon Irina's mother who was always moaning and complaining and ill.
And then the ram: yes, it must have been a ram.
Irina, turning on the hot water and vigorously mopping a plate, said, ‘Don't worry.
It doesn't matter.
Nothing matters much.
For instance your being illegitimate doesn't matter.
It's rather distinguished, lots of the best people are.
Go and see Dad.
Knock on his door anyway.’
Marcus said, ‘Come in.’
Ludens came in.
Marcus was sitting on his bed.
On this occasion Ludens decided to sit on the floor facing him, his back against the wall.
He pulled off his jacket and folded it up beside him.
Marcus was in shirt sleeves, looking rather more dandyish in a clean shirt, indeed a new shirt, evidently bought for him by Irina.
Ludens studied his face.
Marcus had looked, in this latest showing or manifestation, since he came to London, young and alert, not in the long-haired beauty of his very first appearance, but more in a sleek glowing tigerish handsomeness.
His reddish-blond hair, slightly faded, evidently not clipped, was a little longer but still close to his head, already curling, giving him perhaps the youthful or angelic look of persons in Italian Renaissance paintings.
Ludens, who had been watching this face attentively for some time, could now however read in it signs of care, a wrinkling of the brow, not marked exactly in any lines of flesh but as a cloud poised, the mouth and eyes narrowing as in thought or pain, the hints of a perhaps imminent older face.
All this too Ludens was aware of, anxiously, as an aspect of his, Ludens's, presence, and of a frustrated desire to communicate with him.
Ludens himself had never felt more alert, more finely tuned.
Perhaps in their very silences Marcus had been preparing him, feeding him somehow with his thoughts, with the quality of his deepest reflections.
Or am I just imagining all this, Ludens sometimes wondered.
When he wondered this he felt a deep sadness.
Ludens was by now, in an ordinary sense, more used to being with Marcus, less afraid of ‘saying the wrong thing’, and had resolved today to ask a crude question which had been troubling him for some time.
He said, ‘Marcus, do you mind if I ask, what really happened about Patrick, I mean, how do you yourself think about it?’
Marcus, surprisingly, smiled at this question, as if Ludens had asked him something rather simple or childish.
Gildas had, from the first sighting, maintained that Marcus had no sense of humour.
Ludens had replied that Gildas simply didn't understand Marcus's sense of humour.
To which Gildas had replied it must be a Jewish sense of humour.
Ludens, smiling himself, recalled this as he felt an obscure but reassuring complicity with whatever had made Marcus smile just that smile.
Marcus, now solemn, replied, ‘One answer is that I don't know what happened.
An unusual power was present.
Though what does that mean?
The event was important.
I was expecting something like that.’
‘You mean it was a sign?
So in a way I was the messenger?’
‘It proved something for me.’
‘Do you think he would have died if you hadn't come?’
‘I could answer that's none of my business.
For all I know he was already dead when I arrived.’
This startled Ludens.
‘Pat thinks he was!
So it was a miracle?’
‘Possibly.
If you want to use that word.’
‘Could you do it again?’
‘I don't know.
I hope I'm not asked to.’
The smile returned.
‘You mean lots of people turning up?’
‘I'm not thinking of them.
Just that the path now goes on beyond.’
Ludens was about to pursue the matter further when Marcus said, ‘I wish I could write poetry.’
‘Well, it's something you haven't tried yet!’
‘I wish I could experience it.
But I am afraid that this experience will be denied me.’
‘I can imagine, it must be intuitive, like discovery in mathematics.
as if poetic utterance were the thing itself.
After all, you were looking for a language — Marcus, what is it?’
Marcus, not answering this question, said, ‘I am confronted by several, quite different, dilemmas.
Or, one might say, by a parting of the ways, by several different roads.’
Ludens, tense, said, to provoke him, ‘Can't these ways be reconciled and seen to be ultimately only one way?’
‘That is the worst temptation.
It may even be that just here is where I have to stop.’
‘Do you mean that if you can just explain what the alternatives are you will have answered the question?
Or do you mean that's as far as you'll be able to go — not all the way?’
Marcus reflected.
He said, again not answering the question, ‘Of course I don't want to stop.
I want to go all the way .
But could I do it without — utterly —falling ?’
‘Into obsession, untruth, vanity, corruption?’
‘You know, Ludens, I have had to learn to talk, even to you.
Of course the thing really worth doing is the thing that is too difficult —’
‘I believe you should go on thinking,’ said Ludens, ‘and I believe you should write it down .
Marcus again smiled what Ludens saw as a mysterious complicit smile, as if Ludens were a talented tempter who was at the same time a fellow initiate.
‘In a way it is nothing new, these are the oldest thoughts in the world.
To give them life by thinking them again is hard enough.
At the one step beyond , where one imagines glimpses of a final formulation , thinking is no longer a source of satisfaction or even a rational activity, it is a form of torture, a sacrilege which is its own punishment.
And if one could even name it, its name would only ever be understood by very few persons.
This too is a doom which must be faced, to know that which only few can know, and which cannot be further explained.’
‘Mystics evidently felt this,’ said Ludens, ‘but philosophers usually managed to cover a number of pages!
You can't know how many people would understand you, or who these people would be, what they would do, perhaps it's like what you said earlier, none of your business.
Surely it's your duty to leave a record, to leave a sign, nothing else need concern you.
It's a risk you must take.
Even if you only wrote one page.’
‘You think it is a little thing to write one page?
Such knowledge is an experience which words can degrade.
That is part of the problem.
You have run after me to find out this thing as if it were just an answer to a riddle, or a joke which you remembered half of.
Well, I suppose it is a riddle — and it may be — a joke.’
Marcus, who had been leaning forward, relaxed his pose and began to massage his left hand with his right.
He let his left hand dangle, inspecting it as if it were an alien object.
‘If I've run after you,’ said Ludens with sudden emotion, ‘it's not just for that, it's because —’Words failed him.
He felt at this moment as if he held Marcus upon a silken thread which he must use all his intelligence and all his courage to keep whole.
It was as if Marcus were actually waiting for him to effect some magical release or communication.
He said almost coaxingly, ‘Come, come, tell me more.
We've only just met again after being apart for years.
How can I know what you've been thinking all this time?
Words can do something.
What is it like , what is it about ?’
‘Oh well,’ said Marcus, capturing his left hand again, ‘I suppose it's about what makes human consciousness possible, or rather it's about what human consciousness is , which is to say what, and how, the world is, how anything is.
You see what I mean when I say it's nothing new, it's been endlessly talked around .
How language makes the world, how thought makes being.
But it just may be that now , when we've got rid of so many wrong ideas,now, at last , is the moment when we might be able to frame — an answer.’
‘Go on, go on — what would be something like an answer?’
‘It's not anything to do with biology or psychology or any science or the old philosophies — it's something so deep that even the most delicately poised approach almost inevitably occludes it.
It is a place covered by a cloud.’
‘Language hides it?’
‘It is more as if the gods hide it.
In mathematics too there are such dark places.
One cannot just dig it out of language as I thought once.’
‘An experience, an action, a mode of life?’
‘True thinking is all of these.’
‘But are they alternatives?’
‘Wait.
I think the sort of answer you want is this.
What is sought is a device.
Something like an electrical circuit.
Something present in a flash, intuitively seen to be necessary, which cannot be otherwise.’
‘Marcus, like what ?’
‘Like Gödel's theorem or the Ontological Proof.’
‘Oh.
How can it be like both?’
‘Crede ut intelligas !
You want me to tell you something and I am telling you something.
When I say it's the sort of answer you want I mean it's the sort that might help you!
Since it is a crude oversimplification it might also mislead you.
I could have mentioned cogito ergo sum , only I detest that shallow but influential maxim, now I'm glad to say discarded.’
‘Oh, is it?
But the Ontological Proof is religious, it's moral, it's about how God can't not exist.’
‘I said like .
These are hints, pictures.
What is sought is not one thing among others, but the foundation of things.
As I said, something necessary , something which must be so.
Such a search cannot but be an ordeal, indeed a metamorphosis.
One must be worthy, an intense purity and refinement of thought is required, even one might say a kind of holiness.’
‘But you said that morality must be seen to be something superficial.’
‘I spoke of what is ordinarily called morality.
You see — Ludens, please concentrate —’
‘I am concentrating!’
‘At a certain point one is compelled to develop a conception of insight, or pure thinking, which is not recognisably ‘moral’, something which simulates, or is, the rising up of man into the divine, as if one were being driven into the godhead.’
‘I don't think ordinary morality is superficial,’ said Ludens, ‘I don't think it's just a convention or an illusion.
I think it's fundamental and, well, absolute.
Of course I'm not a philosopher —’
‘If it is absolute, then the occluded particle must remain invisible.’
‘Why?’
‘Because if morality has a status which cannot be challenged or transcended then the search itself is under judgment.’
‘So perhaps we ought not to seek — unless we wish to be — what we can't be —’
‘How do we know?’ said Marcus.
‘It may be that for a very few the search itself is a necessity.’
‘You said we must learn to believe in miracles.
But — could one do anything with it — if you found it?
After all, it wouldn't be like a magic ring.
It would be more like having a huge diamond on a desert island and sitting there all alone with your diamond.’
‘By doing something you mean doing something useful, something good.’
‘Coming back to ordinary morality, ordinary people, individuals.
It might give one power.
But that could be bad.
I'm sorry, I'm talking nonsense.’
‘We are both talking nonsense, let us continue to do so for a few more minutes.
There is something else I wish to say to you, later.
Perhaps one could not live with such knowledge.
One might die for it, or of it.’
‘You mean the knowledge itself would kill one, like a laser beam?
Or the gods would kill one?’
‘There are no gods unless we become gods.
Perhaps if ultimate knowledge is attained it must at once be transformed into a significant death.’
‘Do you mean a supernatural event?’
‘Those are rather crude words.’
‘Wait a moment.
If we understood it, the deep thing, we'd be gods and above morality.
But we couldn't live , as gods.
We'd have to sacrifice ourselves, to be transformed, instantly.
But, Marcus, I'm lost — you talked before about suffering, extreme suffering, pure experience of suffering.
Did you mean —?’
‘Pure, without resentment or hatred.
You see, Ludens, if one goes on far enough the thing collapses under its own weight.’
‘You mean your thought collapses?’
‘One seeks refuge.
You see, you see — There are moments when a great meaning, a great new meaning, a meaning for all mankind, comes near to us and can be uttered.
To partake in that utterance must demand superhuman courage, courage from the divine, an ability to think so intensely as to die even from pure thought — to die a death ordained, not for self-glorification, a significant and saving death.
Only one must be worthy — otherwise — if one attempts and fails, one dies like a poisoned rat, not the best death, but the worst death of all —’
‘Marcus, don't talk of death —’
‘Or loses one's mind — better to die.
Do you believe in God, Ludens?’
‘No, of course not.
And I know you don't either.’
‘Indeed.
But is there something where God used to be?’
‘No.’
‘Well — perhaps we need a new god — not a maimed monster — as any human must become — We need, after the Holocaust, a God that is no god.
We must adore emptiness and the extremity of pain.
You don't think the Jews have a mission to the world?’
‘Good heavens no.
Surely you don't think that?
I mean, you have a mission to the world, every great thinker has —’
‘Sometimes I seem to hear my ancestors speaking.’
‘Mine are silent.’
Or are they?
‘You know, my people spoke a special kind of Sephardic Spanish, a language called Ladino.
But I never heard that at any time.’
‘And now they speak to your soul.’
‘I feel their presence.
That, which I spoke of just now, gathers us.
We stand together under that sign of evil and pain.’
‘But these things are everywhere!’
‘It is the signal for today, something written in the heavens.
How can we sit and think after that —’
‘But you are sitting and thinking.’
‘I mean, perhaps there are modes of reflection which have become luxuries, ideas we dare not frame, we dare not permit ourselves —’
‘I know, I know, Marcus, just don't start on this,please !’
‘If you have ever been tortured you are tortured forever, you dwell in flames.
I, who have lived in peace, know this.
The focus of that suffering could maim or kill the contemplating mind.
The cries of the innocent accuse us.’
‘All mankind is crying.’
‘Yes, indeed.
Ludens, listen to me.
That concentrated evil, that supreme almost supernatural cruelty,teaches us that we are at a parting of the ways, man's salvation or man's destruction.
That is the omen.
The burden of salvation lies upon us, a gathering up of the suffering of all men.
It may be, I say it may be, that the Jews are once more called to make an utterance to mankind, to manifest, for a new age, a new holiness and a new divinity.
Our ancient wisdom is stirred to speech.
We have seen and suffered the sign of world change.
Because we are homeless, because we are outcasts, beggars, nomads, victims, we are called to witness, to represent the state of man upon the planet.
We have always been such witnesses and such representatives.’
‘So we like to think.
We might just as well say that the Holocaust was God punishing the Jews!
He punished us before, why not now!
That makes us feel proud.
Even if the message is designed for everybody, a warning shot from heaven to warn the whole human race, we're still special!
But, Marcus, nothing is more important than that there is no God, and no purpose in history, and no punishments, and no Jewish or any other destiny.
We just live in bottomless chaos and have to help each other, that's all.’
‘Surely there are times when there are thinkers who think for mankind, and peoples who represent mankind.
The Greeks and the Jews have been such peoples and produced such thinkers.
The Greeks have gone.
The Jews remain.’
‘Of course there are remarkable thinkers who emerge in times of crisis, I believe that you are one.
But why shackle yourself to that horror?
It was a particular thing, an episode, a historical event, one can't extract a world meaning from it, or a cosmic signal, history isn't like that.’
‘You call it an episode —’
‘I mean it's an object of historical study like any other.
Of course we feel it as a wound.
But other people have their wounds too.’
‘Why are you so upset?’ said Marcus.
‘You want me to talk to you.
All these days when I have been silent you have stared at me willing me to speak.
Now when I speak you are angry.’
‘Marcus, I'm sorry, I'm not angry, how could I be, I regard you as — you know how I regard you — I just don't want you to waste your time with those old mythological thoughts.
You didn't grow up inside that dark house.
Don't get shut up inside it now.
It's nothing to do with the thing you are looking for.’
Ludens, amazed at his own emotion, found he was kneeling on one knee.
He stood up and shook himself, like a dog emerging from water.
He dragged at his shirt and ruffled his hair and stamped his feet an swung his arms about.
Marcus, who had resumed his composed posture, his hands clasped on his knee, watched this performance with lifted eyebrows.
He seemed calm and thoughtful, and throughout his recent eloquent speeches had not raised his voice.
He said now, ‘You are right to check me.
Now please sit down on a chair, sit on that chair, please sit down .’
Ludens, hot and flushed, sat down, smoothing his hair and running his fingers over his face as if to put it too in order.
Marcus went on, ‘My mind is so pressed,compressed , thoughts fight each other like fishes in a net, blood flows.
I have deep doubts, deep fears.
The spectacle of extreme cruelty appals, it also fascinates, it may obscure the sin, which then acquires the dignity of a mystery.
If one thinks of what was done one must also think of those who did it.’
‘To forgive them?’
‘I'm not sure what that would mean.
Rather to join them.’
‘To understand them by identifying with them, like you said?
To — experience them?’
‘To attempt, in some intuition of evil, to understand them, to enact them, and so to activate and reveal the evil in one's own soul.’
‘To unmask and destroy one's own evil.
And so become a just judge — of theirs.’
‘To find one's own way to hell, to visit the underworld, one needs a pure heart or divine protection.
It is extremely dangerous.
My mind is full of dark thoughts and evil yearnings, terrible images which move me to wickedness, as if to some obscure crime which perhaps I have committed already —’
‘Demons.
How to have clean thoughts.
How to separate one's thoughts from one's obsessions.’
‘Did I say that?
Yes.
One might labour for years and then discover that one's thoughts simply concealed some devilish machine.’
‘That might not rob the thoughts of value.
Artists, and great artists, are often in this dilemma.’
‘I am not an artist.
I require the clearness of truth and its simplicity.
I need daylight.
But I wander in the dark.’
Marcus now leaned forward, bowing his head and closing his eyes.
A silence ensued.
The window was closed, reducing the traffic to a river-like sound of which Ludens now became conscious.
He wondered if Irina had gone out, perhaps to buy some more clothes.
Or was she listening at the door?
The room was tidy.
There was a cotton quilt, faded almost to invisibility, upon the bed, Marcus's summer jacket draped on a chair, a shirt folded up, shaving things grouped on a chest of drawers.
It was like some anonymous temporary room of an orderly penniless young man.
Ludens saw, on top of a closed suitcase in a corner, the curious light-brown cap which Marcus had been wearing when Ludens had seen him first, through the window of Red Cottage.
He was moved to ask, ‘Marcus, that little brown cap I saw you wearing once, what is it?’
Marcus opened his eyes.
‘I got it in India.
Someone gave it to me.
It's an old Congress Party cap.
I used to imagine it helped me to think.’
‘A thinking cap!’
The door opened and Irina came in.
She carried a tray with cups of tea and biscuits on it, which she laid down carefully on top of the chest of drawers.
She said to Ludens, ‘You do take sugar, don't you?
And I hope you like chocolate biscuits.
I have some plain ones too if you'd rather.’
‘Sugar, yes, and chocolate biscuits, fine, yes, thanks,’ said Ludens.
Marcus, accepting a cup from Irina, said, ‘Thank you, my child.’
‘Shall I put the biscuits on the bed?’
‘Yes, thank you, thank you.’
Irina disappeared.
Marcus put his cup on the floor, snatched a biscuit from the plate and held it absently between finger and thumb.
He observed conversationally, ‘I expect Irina told you we were moving.
She has found a little place in the country.
Here there is too much noise, as you see one can't even open the window.
Red Cottage was unsuitable for other reasons, but there was space and fresh air and I think I need these.’
‘I'll hope to see you there a lot.
I'm sorry I was so tiresomely upset just now, it's just that I want to protect you.’
‘I understand.
I'm grateful to you.
You're the only person I can talk to.
We won't always agree.
But look, there is another matter.
It's just one more thing — about Irina —’
‘Yes.’
‘I'm sorry I got angry on that — that first occasion — you know —’
‘It is I who need —’
‘I think I said to you earlier — I did, didn't I — sometimes I forget what I've said — that I wanted you to look after her.’
‘You said that,’ said Ludens, ‘and I will.’
He stood rigid before Marcus, who was now looking tired and relaxed, still holding his biscuit.
‘You like her, don't you?’
‘Yes.’
‘I'm just thinking about the future.
You are someone I know and trust.
I don't really know anyone else.
I don't know how she feels about Jewishness.
I hardly know how I feel.
But — you see — I want her to marry a Jew.’
‘Lift your end more to the right,’ said Ludens, ‘to the right , you fool!’
‘Sorry,’ said Jack, ‘I can't think how we ever got it up.’
‘Couldn't you just drop it over the edge?’ suggested Patrick.
‘No!’ said Jack.
‘We could not!’
‘It would simply get wedged between the upper and lower banisters,’ said Ludens, ‘can't you see?’
‘Suppose we lift the bloody thing right up on end?’ said Jack.
‘Then it'll fall against the window,’ said Ludens, ‘I can't hold it.’
‘I told you to take the feet off,’ said Patrick.
‘We've unscrewed the casters,’ said Jack, ‘the feet don't come off, they're fixed!’
‘If you turned it over ,’ said Pat, ‘you might be able to slide it.’
‘We tried that before you came,’ said Jack.
‘Do get out of the way, will you?’
‘There must be some method of edging it round the corner,’ said Ludens.
‘You keep saying so, why can't you find it!’
‘They don't know how to do it,’ said Patrick conversationally to Franca.
They were standing on the lower landing watching.
‘It seems so,’ she said.
The object in question was Franca's divan bed, the one she had slept on in the upstairs spare room when she had been looking after Patrick.
It was to be moved downstairs into Franca's boudoir.
The mattress was already down in the hall.
The bedstead, descending the narrower stairs from the second floor, had become firmly wedged between the banisters and the wall at the point where the stairs turned.
Things had changed at the house in Chelsea.
Patrick, much better but still weak, had become a paying guest (Jack paid) at Moxie's house, where Moxie had a self-contained flatlet, often let to a student, and where she could ‘keep an eye’ on Pat.
Moxie, no longer employed by Jack, had undergone a transformation.
Relieved of her professional role, she manifested herself as an attractive well-dressed young woman answering to the name of Suzanne.
Jack jokingly referred to her as an addition to the family.
In the circumstances (that is, of Jack's plan to have his wife and mistress under one roof) it had been necessary for Patrick to move, and Patrick, being distinctly better, had moved, or had been moved.
The same circumstances required that Franca should sleep downstairs; Franca had herself, promptly forestalling embarrassment, simplified the rearrangement by announcing that she would now occupy her boudoir; and letting Jack and Alison assent silently, and without having to murmur ‘please’ or ‘thank you’.
Irina and Marcus, said to be busy with preparations for their move to the country, no longer visited.
Patrick, so he told Franca, had been over to the flat at Victoria and had had a ‘talk’ with Marcus.
He said he had been invited to call upon them at their new house.
Meanwhile he turned up daily at Chelsea, sitting with Jack in the studio or Franca in the kitchen.
The person who was most patient with him was Alison, who let him read his poems to her and sometimes took him out to lunch.
Pat also went to see Gildas and Ludens, both of whom were feeling guilty because they had not offered to ‘put him up’.
Alison had not yet moved in.
The removal of Franca from the upper storey was perhaps the sign that her arrival was imminent.
She still slept at her flat, where Jack either spent the night, as under the previous arrangement, or arrived back very late ‘not disturbing’ Franca, who had until today (also without comment) continued to sleep in the upper bedroom.
Alison was in fact often absent, revising her television play and writing her next play.
Jack spoke ‘casually’ of Alison's intention to sell her flat.
When Jack and Alison were in the house together by day they were in the studio (where Jack was supposed to be teaching Alison to paint) or else in the drawing room, often watching television.
Franca, of course bidden to join them, sometimes did so, but soon withdrew to various ‘tasks’.
She sat in the kitchen or in her boudoir.
She was everywhere, smiling, busy, soft-footed, considerate.
Jack and Alison were going for a few days to Amsterdam.
They begged Franca to come too, and she declined so tactfully that they could all, without awkwardness, smile over the plan and even discuss it.
Franca naturally busied herself with genuine tasks, of which there were always plenty.
Jack did not like strangers in the house, so there was no regular charwoman, only the obliging person who could be summoned at intervals when Jack was away.
Franca liked cleaning.
She cleaned and polished and tidied and shopped and cooked and washed clothes and sewed buttons onto Jack's shirts.
She even once let Alison sew on a button and observed Alison's gratitude .
She watched herself, she watched them all, with amazement .
She watched.
Often, in her kitchen or her boudoir, she did nothing, she simply sat absolutely still and breathed, sensing her continued existence, preserving herself, taking refuge in a timeless present.
This state she spontaneously pictured as if she had become small, about the size of a jar of marmalade (this image appeared with a kind of authority) and had put herself away in a small square recess in a wall, just large enough to hold her.
The wall was in an interior which was almost dark.
It was silent and a little damp.
In this recess Franca sat breathing quietly, taking the air in by her nostrils and expelling it by her mouth.
In this stillness she recalled how once she had so much loved sleep, half sleep, lying with Jack beside her, relaxing into sleep.
This had always been even more precious than love-making, or was its most precious part.
And the words ‘peace, peace, peace’ came to her, as if they were (but could they be?) part of an old prayer, perhaps a prayer which her mother had uttered over her before she could speak.
She thought about her mother and her sudden mysterious death.
She forbade herself tears.
For sleep, she took sleeping pills.
Only in this motionless sitting could she now achieve bodily quiet, even sometimes, briefly, mental rest.
She had at times, almost as if it were a comfort, at least something accustomed, run through the fruitless litany of remorse: I ought not to have tolerated his infidelities, I ought to have stopped it at the start, I have colluded with his depravity, it is all my fault.
Oh the lies women believe, and will to believe and want to believe!
She recalled that fatal time when she had wept because she knew she had diminished Jack, had demoted him, had cracked the perfect image, had lodged in her mind that little black poisonous atom.
From this it had all begun.
She had thought less of him, he had thought less of himself.
At one time, even lately, she had thought that she could bear it, turning it all into pure love.
She had imprisoned her anger and hate in a part of her mind, as something unworthy which could be overcome.
Jack had said, and said again and again, that all would be well provided no one told lies.
But now she herself, her mind and her heart, was composed entirely of lies, the anger and the hate were everywhere, and worse, the calculation, the conspiracy, the dreams of revenge.
She found herself thinking, I have held my fire too long and lost the moment of action.
I should have screamed at the start — whenever the start could now be said to be.
As it is — Jack thinks I'm too quiet, dreamy, drifting away, not noticing things.
Perhaps he even thinks I don't care !
And if I were to start screaming now it would be too late.
They'd be sorry for me, they'd give me whisky and aspirins and send me to a psychiatrist.
The wicked mood of triumphant secret freedom which had come to her after her first performance of careful deliberate lying to Jack had, for the moment at any rate, left her.
She felt now a dulled sense of degradation: she felt depraved and diminished and shrunken and old.
She was, in a house full of strong young people, a little old woman, soon her hair would be white.
Only I won't wait for that, she thought, as she breathed quietly, feeling her bosom rise and fall and her heart beat — I'll be dead.
I'll kill Jack and myself after.
Or perhaps I won't do that.
I'll just vanish and live alone in a cottage beside the sea until I go quietly mad and drown myself.
And no one will even know.
She saw her long hair floating like seaweed upon the waves.
How, she wondered, could someone be so unhappy, so tortured by grief, and still not be mad, and still be alive.
Now however she was standing, part of what might be described as a lively merry family scene, upon the landing, watching the descent of the divan bed from the second floor.
Suddenly the problem was resolved.
The divan, lifted high at one end by Ludens, suddenly began to rush down the stairs, nearly overturning Jack and making a long scar upon the wallpaper with one of its feet.
Franca and Pat retired hastily, laughing.
Amid further merriment it was carried in triumph down the second flight of stairs, through the kitchen and into the boudoir where Franca had already cleared a place for it.
The mattress was brought in.
The pillows and bedclothes were already piled on the floor.
The badinage continued with Pat, Jack, Franca and Ludens standing round the kitchen table and talking all at once.
Franca, who knew that Ludens was looking at her and was determined not to look at him, looked, and a flash of understanding, perhaps simply of remembrance, passed between them.
Ludens said, ‘I must be going.’
Jack said, ‘Come up to the studio for a moment, I want to show you something.’
They departed.
Patrick remained.
The morning sunshine brightened the room, embellishing the cups and plates upon the dresser.
Franca said, ‘Would you like a cup of tea, Pat, and a piece of ginger cake?’
Patrick was still, to the surprise and admiration of his friends, keeping off alcohol.
‘No, thanks, Franca, dear, let's just sit down and be quiet together.’
They sat down at the table.
Franca wondered if the Irishman had noticed the ‘flash’ between her and Ludens.
‘Will you hold my hand, Franca, like you used to do?’
Franca gave him her hand.
She thought, men are always holding my hand these days.
What does it mean?
Everyone is sorry for me.
It will be Gildas's turn next.
Then she thought, Jack wants to take me in his arms and I won't let him.
If he took my hand I would withdraw it.
Yet I am his wife and I desire him.
There is something lethal in all this.
‘You know,’ said Patrick, holding her hand with a steady pressure in his large warm hand, ‘I'm very grateful to you, you were so kind to me when I was ill, you were loving to me.’
Franca was touched that he remembered, that he had been aware.
She said, ‘I cared very much.
I'm glad you knew.’
‘Oh I knew all right.
But you've abandoned me now I'm well, isn't it?’
‘I have not!’ said Franca, laughing and imitating his Irish intonation.
‘It's just that you're well and gone away and you don't need me and that's good!’
‘I'm not gone away, sure, I'm here.
And I do need you.
I've not all that many people.
I need you to tell things to.’
‘Tell me some then!’ she said, squeezing his hand and releasing it.
‘You know, I'm to live differently now.
I've been talking with Father O'Harte, and I'm come back.
I go to Mass and all.’
Franca was surprised.
‘I'm glad.
So you believe in God?’
‘Well, I don't know.
I believe in Holiness and the Divine Spirit.
Father O'Harte says God can look after Himself.
You know, a poet is a religious man.
I'm not to drink any more.
I want to be a real poet.
I can't yet, I haven't got me own voice, the poems are bad, yes, they're bad, little stunted things.
But I'll learn.
When you've been through death and live again you're changed all through.
I'm a new man, I'm a better man.’
‘So you think you were dead?’
‘I don't know, but I believe it, it's a mystery.
I had a vision of Our Lady.
I thought I'd go back to Ireland for a bit and go to Clonmacnoise.
Do you know it?
No?
It's a holy place.
I had a vision there too once long ago.
It's beside the Shannon, in a lovely curve of the Shannon.
I'll go there and kiss the stones, and I'll go and kiss me old mother who is living in Dublin with some nuns.
But I won't be off for long because I've to follow Marcus.’
‘To follow him?’
‘I owe him my life so I must give him my life.
Father O'Harte says he's a holy person, a sort of saint.
You know he's going into the country so I'm to go too and I'll live nearby in a little room or a shed, for I'm going to put my life in order, I'm crazed with living in London and in the pubs and getting drunk every day, no wonder I couldn't write poetry, for I couldn't think .
You know, the poet is the saviour of the age,he's the thinker now, he makes the language of mankind and preserves the experience of wisdom —’
As the rill of Patrick's soft-spoken speech continued Franca was thinking how handsome he was, his clear skin smoothly taut over the bones of his face, his cheeks faintly flushed, his fine ardent eyes dark blue, his thickly curling hair, growing again abundantly, almost black.
His small mouth was gentle.
She thought, he looks like an angel.
Of course he's a wild man, a fox, a seal, a sort of sprite — such a sweet man — I'm glad he spoke to me, I didn't think he remembered.
At that moment the door from the hall opened and Suzanne Moxon, formerly Moxie, appeared in the doorway.
In a second, as Suzanne looked at the seated pair, Franca realised something.
She thought, she's possessive about Pat, perhaps she's even in love with him!
Suzanne said, now smiling, ‘I've come for Patrick, to take him home.
He must have a light lunch and then rest.’
Patrick rose obediently and went to the door.
Franca said to Suzanne, ‘Won't you stay?’
‘No.
Must go.
Must take him back.
Car's at the door.
Cheerio!’
Behind Suzanne there suddenly appeared the figure of Alison Merrick.
‘Oh, are you taking Pat off?’
‘Yes.
He needs a quiet life.’
‘She evidently thinks he won't get one here!’ said Alison, after, amid exchanges of greetings, Suzanne and her patient had departed.
Alison came and sat down at the table with Franca.
‘Is there any of that ginger cake left?’
Franca fetched it.
‘Tea, sherry?’
‘No thanks.’
Franca was relieved that Alison had given up her guilty peepings and hintings and attempts at relevant conversation; only now her calmness and at-homeness were proving equally maddening.
‘Is Ludens here?’
‘Yes,’ said Franca, ‘he's upstairs with Jack.’
‘I must tell him, Heather Allenby's coming over again.
You know, she lives in France during the summer.’
So, thought Franca, all the young people are pairing off, like in a play.
Jack is to have Alison, Suzanne is taking Pat, and now Ludens is to marry Heather Allenby.
I'm the one who'll be left alone on the stage.
Except that I won't be alone.
I'll be looking after their babies — including Jack's.
And, she thought, I'll kill their babies, I'll drown them all in the bath.
As she gazed benignly at Alison eating ginger cake, she had a sudden very clear vision of the dead babies floating in the bath.
Alison had seen, through the open door of the boudoir, the divan bed against the wall.
She said almost inaudibly, ‘Oh —’
Franca got up.
‘Do go up to Jack and Alfred.
They're in the studio.
You can tell Alfred about Heather Allenby.’
She went through into the boudoir and began to pick up the bedclothes.
Alison followed her.
‘Let me help.’
In silence they spread the linen upon the bed, tucked in the corners neatly, dropped the pillows into their cases, extended the quilt When they returned to the kitchen Franca said, with a slight tone of insistence, ‘Thank you so much.
Now do go up to the others.’
‘I don't want to,’ said Alison, in a childish sulky voice.
‘Well, go somewhere then.’
Alison sat down, spread her legs, put her elbows on her knees, and drooped her head.
Franca said, ‘Are you feeling ill?’
Alison in the same aggrieved tone said, ‘I fell down on the pavement and cut my knee.’
‘Let me see.’
Alison lifted her skirt and extended one brown bare leg.
Her knee was covered with blood.
Franca quickly filled a bowl with warm water, poured in disinfectant, found a clean tea towel, cotton wool, and a roll of white absorbent kitchen paper, and knelt down beside Alison.
She dabbed at the wound, removing bits of grit, revealing a number of oozing scratches.
Alison winced.
Franca dried the wound with the paper, feeling as she did so the blazing warmth of the bruised knee, which was already swelling a little.
She felt too, as she mopped the trickling water from it, the smooth bronzed skin of the leg.
There was a mingled smell of disinfectant, of warm summer flesh, of Alison's bare feet in their open sandals, of the fresh cotton material of her drawn-back dress.
‘It's nothing really,’ said Alison.
‘Thank you so much.
It's ridiculous one should be so shocked by falling down.’
Franca stood up.
‘It'll soon stop bleeding, just dab it occasionally with the paper, here, don't use your hankie.
There's blood on the hem of your dress.
You should wash it out when you go upstairs.’
‘Oh — Franca —’
Franca looked down at Alison, at the brilliance of her red hair, at her long neck and throat, at her bare brown arms, at her white breasts, visible from above, at the glimpse of her paler thigh, still revealed by the disordered skirt.
She thought, yes, she is beautiful.
And in a moment she'll be holding my hand.
I've been elected everybody's mother.
Perhaps it's something to do with my desire for Jack which I'm checking at every second.
Perhaps there's some sort of aura.
What nonsense.
I must go away.
I won't stay here to have my contemptible revenge on Jack, to see his surprise when I drop the mask.
Those thoughts were vile.
I'll go to Molly Stein — no, not to her, she hates men, she'd say she told me so.
I'll go and stay at a hotel in some quite other place, somewhere I've never been before.
And I won't come back.
Perhaps I'll find that cottage by the sea and die there quietly.
Alison's wide trusting blue eyes were filling with tears.
She took hold of Franca's hand.
Upstairs in the studio Ludens and Jack had been talking.
‘What did you want to show me, Jack?’
‘Nothing.
I just wanted you alone.’
‘How's visual art?’
‘I can't do it any more.’
‘It'll come back.’
‘There's no guarantee.
Artists do just stop being able to do it.
Even Shakespeare did.’
‘He decided not to.’
‘How do you know?’
‘You should change your style.’
‘I know, I'm trying to, I can't, the power has been withdrawn.
I can't learn again now.
It's all to do with bloody Marcus.’
‘Why blame him?’
The sun was casting a pleasant subdued clear radiance through the brown blinds which had been drawn over the south-facing skylight.
Jack kept his studio as empty as possible.
His finished paintings were stored at the gallery, or in a room downstairs.
The studio contained two easels, chairs, stools, a desk, a bronze dancing Shiva about three feet high over which, today, one of Jack's overalls had been thrown.
‘It's probably a delayed curse,’ said Jack.
‘I expect he cursed me when he cursed Pat, only I was so healthy the effect was delayed, or perhaps my rotten paintings were the effect, and I only see it now.
I'll get ill I'll die, he'll have to do another resurrection job.
Pat's all right, look at him, he looks like some sort of Irish hero, and he's writing yards of poetry.’
‘Have you seen any of it?’
‘He read some to me and Alison.
She said she understood it.
She's very good with him.
At any rate it's not like that semi-conscious automatic rhyming stuff he used to spout.’
Ludens had picked up from the floor a sketch, acrylic on paper, representing (perhaps) a pale human figure emerging from a dark marsh or river.
‘Oh, a person!.
I like that.’
Jack snatched it from him and tore it in two.
‘I said I liked it!’
‘Well, fuck you!
I'm sorry, I'm not myself.
Or rather I am myself, my new self.
Don't worry about me, I'm better than I seem.’
‘I'm glad to hear that!’
‘I forgot to ask you if your car turned up all right.
I suppose I'd have heard if it hadn't.’
‘I meant to thank you.
Someone drove it right to the door and charged me nothing.
I owe you —’
‘Nix, nix.
How's Marcus?’
‘I wish he'd start writing.
Maybe he will when he's in the country.
You know he's moving, of course I told you.’
‘Everyone told me.
Irina told me.
That was before she got cross with me about her underclothes.’
‘What ?’
‘It was just a joke.
She'd bought some fancy underwear and was showing it to Franca and I came in and made some remarks.
Don't look like that!
You know, you underrate that little girl, she's not a naive miss, she's funny, she's witty.
She's even not bad-looking.
I hope she'll be all right in the country, it's not much of a life for her, but she'll look after herself.
Are you still having those conversations with Marcus?’
‘Yes.’
‘You'll miss that.’
‘I'll go and see him wherever he is.’
‘Ludens, dear Alfred, old friend, don't get fixated on that man, there's nothing left in him, he's an empty shell.
The glittering figure who impressed us so much is no more.
He's brittle, he's dry, why were we so impressed anyway?’
‘You taught him to paint.
He taught you to paint.
And can't you even remember what you saw with your own eyes in this house?’
‘The resurrection scene.
That was weird.
But there are many possible explanations.
You yourself say he's incoherent, and Irina says —’
‘Why don't you come and see him?
Are you afraid to?’
‘Yes.
And so is Gildas.
He's still got the power to hurt people.
He'll probably hurt you.
You ought to withdraw honourably while there's still time.’
‘Oh Jack, Jack —’
‘I don't want you to break your heart over this.
I need you, I need your support.
Why hasn't Gildas been here lately, is it because he disapproves?’
‘Possibly.’
Jack, who had been standing near his friend holding the torn halves of the sketch in either hand, went to the far end of the room and sat on the desk.
He tossed away the sketch, kicked off his sandals, then pulled off his socks and rolled up his trouser legs.
He undid his shirt.
‘Come here, Alfred.’
Ludens went along the room and stood in front of him.
‘You look so puritanical today.’
Ludens was wearing a white shirt and black cotton trousers.
‘You ought to get out in the sunshine.
You're as pale as a nun.
You disapprove, don't you?’
‘Yes,’ said Ludens ‘You think I shouldn't — Well, what the hell do you think?’
‘I think you shouldn't bring Alison to live here.’
‘You think I should keep two establishments and sneak furtively from one to the other like some sort of guilty adulterous cad?’
Ludens was silent.
He raised one hand and tapped Jack on the cheek.
‘All right, you think I am a guilty adulterous rotter.
Perhaps it's all a matter of style.
No, it isn't.
I want all this to be in the open, to be accepted , I want truth to be told.
Without truth we shall all sink.
If I keep Alison in another place as a semi-secret mistress this house will die, it will die of my untruth — don't you see — I shall lose touch with Franca.
Well, no, I can't lose touch with Franca, we're eternally connected, but she'd become — sort of holy, frail.
I must see her every day, she must face it full on and she, as, I must stay here, and so Alison must be here too.
Ludens, I'm in love, I'm desperate with love, I'm sunk in it, I'm ruthless, I feel as fierce as hell about this, I could kill anyone who stands in the way, I must have both of them, and I will , all right it may look like a battlefield, but what has to be done has to be done now and like this.
Peace will follow.
Then we shall see everything as inevitable and even good.
It will be good, it will be an achievement, they must learn to live together, they've got to, and they can , they can already , they're both so wonderful and so intelligent and they like and respect each other very much , that's absolutely clear.
I can make this happen .
Other painters did it, Rembrandt, Rubens —’
‘Wait a moment, they didn't have the girls there, at the same time, did they?’
‘Maybe not, but they both loved, and greatly loved, two absolutely different types of women.
Don't chide me, Alfred, try to understand .
You look like a young priest in your black and white, no, like a novice, an apprentice monk, you view the world with shocked amazement, you need a real woman in your life.’
‘I think you should talk to Gildas, go and see him.’
‘Why suggest that, what's the use?
You're just a pair of censorious bachelors!
If he carps we'll only have a row.
I might go and see him all the same, just to tell him as I've told you.’
That morning Franca had tried to break a cup.
She had dropped the cup on the stone floor of the kitchen.
She had dropped it, not thrown it.
It had failed to break.
She picked it up and said ‘Sorry’.
She thought, I can't even break a cup!
The episode of the divan on the stairs had occurred three days ago.
For two nights Alison had stayed in the house, couching upstairs with Jack, while Franca slept downstairs in her boudoir.
Nothing was said about this, it just happened.
Franca had now perfected a method of smiling at everyone, but never catching anyone's eye.
The episode of Alison's knee had been startling, but Franca had somehow shuffled it off, undramatised it.
She had behaved like a sensible mother .
Now, Alison and Jack were away, gone to Amsterdam.
Or rather, they would now be on their way back, since they had decided (Franca could imagine the little conversation, she thought of it as a ‘little’ conversation) to stay away only one night, instead of the three nights originally planned.
Franca was sorry about the change of plan.
She had said to herself, thinking of that absence, there's my chance!
But her chance for what?
She could not run away.
She could not .
Jack, at whom now she never looked though she always smiled had, in departing, kissed her.
He had hustled her out of the kitchen into the boudoir and kissed her on the lips, slipping his arm round her waist.
It's like kissing the housemaid, thought Franca, as she felt his big animal presence.
The image gave her an awful cold gratification.
Jack, releasing her, had then, almost formally, taken her hand and kissed it.
He murmured, ‘Oh my love, be kind to me.’
Franca replied in a bright clear voice, ‘Of course I will.
There, there.
Don't worry!’
This seemed to content him.
Perhaps now he was, like a child, content with little, not demanding detail.
Or perhaps he had reason to be content, since Franca had been, perhaps visibly, moved, or startled by his sudden gesture of kissing her hand, something which she could not remember his ever having done before.
Perhaps this portended some new way of their living together, based upon respect, courtesy, formality, even awe, as if Franca were an abbess, or a dowager empress, and he a local nobleman, privileged to be a frequent visitor.
Alison had kissed her too, with a would-be significant kiss, but publicly in the hall.
They departed, grinning and waving, in an early morning taxi to Heathrow.
Franca imagined their intense relief as their taxi turned the corner.
In the time since she had moved downstairs, and Alison had moved in upstairs, she had meditated much, almost as a detached spectator, upon the comparative stability of her incompatible moods, whereby she was, as it were, becalmed.
Her great deception, that cruel triumphant power by which she held her husband trapped and blinded, was held in tension between the constant possibility of a devastating revelation, and the equal prospect of an indefinitely continued impersonation of a kind of moral perfection.
The weird notion that she might be in danger of actually becoming one day as perfect as she seemed added a ghastly charm to her reflections, as she continued to envisage various methods of killing Jack.
This psychological edifice, to the creation and maintenance of which she now devoted her energy, she pictured as a kind of large machine erected inside her body, stretching it out and making her tall and rigid like a hard glistening monument.
Franca was amazed at her sudden power to develop vivid visual images of her mental states, a power which she had never exercised before, and which she thought of, not without satisfaction, as being perhaps a symptom of incipient madness.
However, when Franca found herself so suddenly, for two days and in such a new way,alone in the house , her vast restless self-awareness, her life energy, set her off in a fresh direction.
She had not reflected upon what, alone, she would be, had perhaps assumed that she would sit motionless as a statue with vacant eyes.
Instead of this, in the very act of shutting the door upon the departing couple, she became intensely aware of the house , as if she had now become the house.
Or rather, as she then, standing tense in the emptiness felt it, she had become something exceedingly small, smaller than the jar of marmalade and more mobile, as small as a mouse, or as an electric spark, which was impelled to run very fast, invisibly fast, round and round the house, altering it in some way which was now imperative.
She ran up the stairs and into the bedroom she had shared with Jack.
One of the oddities of the situation since her ‘descent’ was that most of her clothes had remained in the cupboards upstairs, she had felt unable to go and fetch them, and evidently the other two had felt too embarrassed to carry them down, or perhaps had simply not noticed the problem.
Alison would have had to decide where to put her own clothes, though perhaps she had left most of them still at her flat.
The bedroom was neat, though, as Franca noticed with a little surprise, a bit dusty.
Who would dust now, clean the bath, hoover the carpets, now that Franca didn't mount higher than the drawing room on the first floor?
Would they clean the place themselves or would Alison employ a maid?
(Franca pictured Alison as having a maid, not a charwoman.)
Or would they silently assume that Franca would do it, or at least arrange it?
Franca's tall glistening machine, still intact and in charge in spite of her having become a running spark, inducted these new, obvious, problems with a certain satisfaction.
Alison would have to deal with those matters, it was her task now.
Alison's clothes were neatly folded upon the floor or on the backs of chairs.
She had not, Franca found on opening it, ventured to hang anything inside the long wardrobe which stretched the length of the big bedroom.
Working frantically and fast Franca dragged her clothes out of the wardrobe, carried them onto the landing and threw them down the stairs.
In the space thus cleared next to Jack's, she hung up Alison's clothes.
She then searched all the rooms where anything could be found which could count as hers .
There were not many of these things: a few pictures, china, books, letters.
The debris of Franca's unhappy childhood had been swept away long ago.
She carried the ‘things’ down and put them in the boudoir, returning for the clothes which she had kicked aside which were still strewn upon the stairs.
She did not visit the studio.
The little ‘writing room’ had already been taken over by Alison, her typewriter on the table, her notebooks spread about.
This operation took most of the morning.
In the afternoon, with continued mouse-like haste, she sorted out the clothes and objects, some to be kept, some to be thrown away, some to be given away.
So far as possible she hid things, in a cupboard, under her bed, in an old trunk under the stairs.
She burnt letters and papers in the big stove.
So, she had done it.
But what for, to what end?
A preparation for flight, for siege, a form of hunger-strike, a form of suicide?
On the following day, the day of their return (only they were not to be expected until the late evening) Franca, who was so used to being by herself, was unable to perform any ordinary activity.
She wondered if she should prepare something for their supper.
On the previous days they had been out to some meals, but she had also cooked for them.
She supposed she had better invite Alison to cook, perhaps arrange a ‘rota’.
The details were appalling.
The quietness of the house, to which she stood listening, was a new quietness with an alien tempo.
She recalled with surprise the energy which had yesterday enabled her to race about the house.
The little mouse which had run so fast and so far would now sit still in its corner.
She saw the little mouse lying dead in its corner covered in dust.
She made some coffee.
Then washed up and tidied the kitchen.
Then she decided to wash her hair, thinking she might derive some comfort from this familiar rite.
She filled the basin in the downstairs bathroom and bowing her head plunged the heavy dark mass into the hot water.
She washed and rinsed it, dried it with several towels, then with a final towel about her shoulders, spread it out to dry, separating and kneading the long snaky strands.
She sat down on a chair in the hall beside the telephone.
She thought, I must do something, I must see to myself.
I'll ring up somebody.
I'll ring up Ludens.
She dialled his number.
‘Hello.’
‘Hello, Alfred, it's Franca.’
‘Oh Franca — Franca —’
‘Would you like to come over here for lunch?
It's just me.
Alison and Jack are away.’
‘Yes, I know, they're in Amsterdam —’
‘Well, would you like to?
Or for tea or for a drink?
They won't be back till this evening.’
‘Franca, I can't — Oh dear — I promised Irina I'd go over and help her pack — I said I'd stay all day — they're leaving, you know —’
‘Oh yes.
For the country.’
‘Franca, I'm terribly sorry, I wish I could.’
‘Then how about tomorrow?
I have to be out doing various things.
I could drop in at your place about five or six.
I don't want to interrupt your work.’
‘Oh dear, oh dear, I can't , we're supposed to be leaving tomorrow, or the day after, if we can get everything ready, there's so much to do.
I'm driving them down, and I'm going to stay a few days to help them settle in, I'll be staying at a pub —’
‘At a pub.
How nice.’
‘Franca, darling, I want to see you very much, you know that, but —’
Never mind, later on maybe.
I hope everything goes well at the country cottage.’
She put down the receiver abruptly and went into the kitchen.
Had something very nearly happened?
Ludens had sounded so moved, so stirred by some emotion.
Curiosity, pity…?
She sat down, spreading her damp hair and squeezing it in the ends of the towel, teasing it out between her fingers.
She sat for a while, checking an anguish which made her want to sob.
Suddenly she heard the familiar sound of the key being turned in the front door Alison came in.
‘Hello, you're back early.’
‘Yes, we decided to take the early plane after all.’
‘I hope you had a happy time, saw lots of pictures.
You should have stayed longer.’
‘Jack's gone to the gallery, he won't be home till the evening’
‘Oh.’
Franca thought, he's sent her on ahead to fix things up, to have things out, to clarify things, to establish the regime, how things are to be from now on.
What have they decided about me, I wonder?
‘Would you like some coffee?
You must be tired after your journey.’
‘No, thanks.
What a wonderful lot of hair you have, I've never seen it all down.
You look like a sibyl or something.’
‘A witch.
Yes.’
Though her hair was not quite dry Franca began to plait it very fast, letting a long thick plait materialise between her nimble hands, then tossing it over her shoulder and letting it hang down over the back of the chair.
‘Did you have a nice flight?’
‘Yes, yes.’
‘Wouldn't you like something to eat?
Good heavens, it's quite late!’
‘I'd like a drink,’ said Alison.
‘No, I'll find it.’
Alison was wearing a dark green shift, rather short.
Franca surveyed her long athletic bare legs and the smudge of the scar on her knee as she reached up to the high shelf of a cupboard.
She returned with a sherry bottle and two glasses.
Alison was bronzed by outdoor life, sunny walks and tennis.
She and Jack had been swimming in the Thames near Twickenham.
She poured the dark sherry into the glasses, and looked sternly at Franca.
Franca said, ‘I'm so glad about your TV play, isn't that splendid.
Are you pleased with it?’
‘It's terrible.’
‘Oh no!
But you're writing another —’
‘I wish I'd stayed a dancer.’
‘You can always go back.’
‘I can't go back.
There's something so special about being a dancer.
But I've lost it forever.
Won't you drink?’
‘I'll have a little, thanks.’
‘You're so temperate .’
Alison sounded very Scottish, very precise, very censorious, very Edinburgh, as she uttered the word.
She drank half her own glass and filled it up.
Franca sipped hers.
The strong sweetish sherry with its tawny smell shocked her, running suddenly like fire into her whole body, into her wits.
It came with some reminder of youth, of the south.
‘Oh Franca, Franca, Franca, what are we going to do?’
Franca decided that Alison had probably been drinking on the plane and was already a bit tipsy.
She pushed her own glass away.
‘We shall manage, I don't see any problem.
I wish you'd let me cook something for you, what about an omelette?’
‘Franca how can you lie about it!
You're not a liar, you're truth itself.
Don't talk to me like that .’
‘Well, don't shout at me.
If I could think of something useful to say I'd say it.
I don't see anything we can talk about.
Whatever it is we are doing, we are already doing it, and it seems to make sense.
So why not just let things flow on.
And please don't worry about me .’
‘Of course I worry about you!’
‘I'm sure you both wish me very well.
I wish you very well.
We understand each other.
We have already mastered the situation.
We can live at peace.’
‘Don't talk that non-talk to me!
And I'm not speaking for me and Jack, I'm speaking for myself.
Don't you see that it's all — well, what is it?
What are you going to do?’
‘Nothing.
Just go on quietly.
I suggest you do too.’
‘I can't make you out.
Do you really feel placid and inert and dozy?’
‘What a description!
No, I don't think so.
Now do tell me what you did in Amsterdam.’
‘We fretted about you in Amsterdam.’
‘That's thoroughly tiresome of you, I wish you'd stop.
I'm perfectly all right, don't you see.’
‘You aren't.
You feel violent and secretive and full of misery and full of fury.
How can you not feel that?’
‘Very easily!’
‘How can you tolerate me in this house?’
‘Oh Alison, don't be such a bore !
You have a completely wrong picture of me.’
‘Well, tell me the true picture.’
‘I go on quietly, there's no mystery and no problem, I'm a quiet peaceful person.
Do stop being so intense.’
‘You're lying again.
I'd like to take you by the throat and bang your head against the wall.’
‘That would be very unkind.’
‘So you've stopped loving Jack?’
‘No.’
‘You must hate him by now.’
‘No.’
‘You must hate me.’
‘I don't hate you, dear Alison.’
‘I'm glad you say that.
I love you.
I think I love you as much as I love him.’
‘Then that makes our ménage all the more convenient.’
‘You're trying to confuse me, but I won't let you.
There's something definite I want to say, but I can't get it out and you won't help me.’
‘Perhaps it is possible,’ said Franca aloud, talking to herself.
She drank some more of the sherry.
Listening to Alison she did, perhaps for a second only, see it as conceivable.
‘You mean it?
Jack is very very determined.’
‘Oh yes, he's explained it all to me’
‘He thinks he can just impose it.
He's like a dictator who's just come to power and does all the awful violent things at once, like changing the laws and murdering people and confiscating everything — then later on it'll all be taken for granted and he can play at being kind and good.’
‘What an interesting picture.’
‘But just.
Isn't it?
Have some more sherry.’
She filled up Franca's glass and her own.
‘Alison, my dear, don't bother me so.’
I will, I will.
I care.
I can't see this happen to you.’
‘You are seeing it.’
‘So you admit it's like that?’
‘Like what?
Don't simplify everything.
It's complicated, it's infinitely complicated, we can't analyse it, it's happened .
Let's just be calm and decent —’
‘You think it's something mystical that we have to undergo, I don't!
Franca darling, we've got to think .’
‘No, no, not think, please.’
Franca considered saying: if you don't like it why don't you clear off!
She decided not to.
She felt an affection for Alison, even a kind of relief in the ridiculous conversation.
‘Sometimes I hate men.’
‘Come, come, Alison.’
‘Don't ‘come, come,’ me.
I hate bullying mannish men.
I like gentle men like Ludens and Gildas and Pat —’
‘That's nonsense.
You love Jack, you love him very much indeed.
If you didn't you wouldn't accept his arrangement.
In fact it's a perfectly possible arrangement, I think I agree with him, others have managed it, why not us.
So he and I are happy.
It just remains for you to be happy too.
Of course I understand it's most difficult for you, you're struggling with your Scottish Protestant conscience.
You're talking to it at this very moment, you're talking it out, you're talking it down, and you want my help.
You want me to be angry, which I can't be, and then to be soothing, which I can be.
Alison, just see , that if you stop worrying all will be well.’
‘You're being too clever.
You're making it too simple now.
You can't feel benevolent and sympathetic, you can't just want everything to be nice, as if Jack were a child, and as if I were a child.
Or is that what you do feel?’
‘Look, at this very moment, by speaking openly like this, we are both doing the very best we can to make it work.
Isn't that what you want?
Isn't it what we all want?’
‘Franca, don't torment me!’
‘Really!’
‘It's the details , Franca, it's the details .
Jack has got some great general idea.
I had it too.
I had to have it.
The alternative was leaving him.’
‘Not to be thought of, I agree.’
‘Don't mock me.
I've never loved anyone as I've loved Jack.
And no one has ever loved me as he loves me.’
‘I'm not mocking, I know.
And this great love makes you both ruthless .
This is simply natural, it's a fact , you both know that whatever happens, even if God and the Devil were to stand in the way, you will have what you want.
This is what, out of consideration for me, you are now surrounding with talk about whether and how and why.
But let us regard that stage as over, there was a gesture to be made, and you have made it, and I am grateful!
I can live with the arrangement, I can live with the general idea, and the details will sort themselves out perfectly well.
They will because they must, they've got to.
We are all under necessity.
Let us be happy with it.’
After a pause Alison said, ‘Do you think it will pass and you'll pick up the pieces?’
‘No.’
‘Are you going to leave us?’
‘No!
Unless you want me to go, which I think you don't.’
‘You are essential .’
‘Precisely.
You'd be miserable without me!
I expect, now, I'd be miserable without you, both.
So here we are, that's what it's like, and that's the deepest we can go and the clearest we can get.
So now will you stop worrying?’
‘I don't know whether to believe you.
Why should necessity sort things out?
Necessity breaks things.
We haven't got close to the matter yet, we aren't really working at it.’
‘I think we are.
When we've come this far, when we've achieved all this , including our present conversation, we can take the rest in our stride.
By the way, I've brought all my clothes downstairs, and I've hung yours up in the cupboard in the bedroom.
I hope you don't mind.’
‘But there's nowhere down here to hang clothes.’
‘Alison, darling, you are priceless, you illustrate my point!
Do you think that matters, when we've waded through blood?’
‘What I said was stupid.
So you admit the blood?’
‘Never at all, as Pat would say!
It's just an idle metaphor.
Of course there are little things to get clear, but they're easy, they're child's play.
For instance, you know I don't have regular help, I've usually cleaned the house myself, well now I'm not going to clean upstairs except the drawing room, so you must do it yourself or else employ someone.
Isn't that detailed enough and isn't it, when we come to it, as we have come to it, a small matter?’
Franca drank some more sherry.
The bottle, once full, was now more than half empty.
Alison looked puzzled.
She frowned, gazing down at the table, she even bared her teeth.
‘You are deceiving me, Franca, and I beg you not to.’
‘I am being realistic, I want the best for all of us.’
‘You are so calm and wise, you are an angel.
For the other two, it's each for self.’
‘I think you are both being very considerate.’
‘Oh,Franca !’
‘Alison, you must set your life in order, and that will set ours in order.
You must settle down here and get on with your work .
I saw you had put your things in the writing-room.
Do type, by the way, it won't disturb me and Jack won't hear it in the studio.
So Jack will be working upstairs at his painting and you will be writing plays —’
‘And you?
What will you be doing?’
‘What I have always been doing.
Just being .
I'm good at that.
Not everyone can do it.
Look, I'll even clean the upstairs rooms after all if you want me to!
You see how far we've come!’
‘How far you've come!
Oh, my dear —’ Alison suddenly reached out a long brown arm.
Franca flinched.
Alison had seized hold of Franca's long plait of dark hair and drawn it out from behind the chair.
She began to unplait the end of it, moving her own chair closer.
Franca watched.
‘Franca, you are so beautiful, like an Indian.’
‘A squaw?’
‘No, an Indian Indian.
You'd look lovely in a sari.’
‘I'm not slim enough.
You'd look lovely in a sari.’
‘I'm not dark enough.’
‘No saris then.’
‘I love your hair.
What wonderful stuff.
It's so dark, yet it's so full of colours, and it's so cool.
Can you sit on it?’
‘Just, ‘That's wonderful.’
Alison stroked the unravelled ends of the hair.
‘You have beautiful hair,’ said Franca.
‘I've never seen such brilliant hair, and it will never turn grey.’
She touched the red curls lightly with her fingertips.
‘Franca, let's run away together’
‘Yes, let's!
You mean frighten Jack and then come back again?’
‘No, I mean go away and not come back.’
‘Go where to?’
‘To Heather's house in France.
She's often away, she wants me to go and live in it.
We could go there.’
‘Excellent idea.
You are drunk, my child.
So am I.’
‘In vino veritas .
Franca, I love you.
Let's forget about men.’
Jerking her chair further forward Alison put her arms round Franca's neck.
At that moment there sounded the unmistakable click of the key turning in the front door.
Alison sat back, shifting hastily away.
Patrick Fenman came in.
‘Patrick, dear,’ said Franca, ‘Alison and I have decided to run away together.’
‘Isn't that great?’ said Patrick, drawing up another chair and sitting down.
‘Can I come with you?
Let's go to Ireland.’
‘We thought of going to France.’
‘I'll come.
Except I can't, because I have to follow Marcus and where he is I will be.
You could come there too.
We could all live together nearby in different cottages and be dear friends.’
‘That would be lovely,’ said Alison.
‘Franca, girl, forgive me for walking in, I had the key, remember, from when you gave it to me when I was staying here when I was getting better.
I'll give it back now if you will, here it is.’
‘No, no, keep it, dear Pat.
We're an open community in this house now and we'd like you to be a member, wouldn't we, Alison.
I expect you'd like a drink, oh of course not, you've given up.’
‘I have not.
I've started again a bit, I'm sorry to say.’
‘Then I expect you'd like your usual Irish whiskey, it's still in the cupboard there.’
Franca set out a jug of water and a tumbler, while Pat found the whiskey.
Before he sat down he kissed the two women, first on the cheek, then on the lips.
‘Here's to friendship.
I will tell you — I feel happy.
Let us live near together and be kind to each other and love each other.
I'm a risen man, risen into a knowledge of God's peace.
Will I read you a poem about that that I've written now?’
The front door bell rang.
Alison ran out and came back with Gildas.
Gildas, thinner than ever, stood a moment, wrinkling up his face and holding up his drooping hands in a way which Jack called his insect pose.
Though it was a warm day, he was wearing his old faded high-necked sweater with a frayed shirt collar showing.
He was evidently dismayed by what he saw.
Franca thought, he came to see me , he thought I'd be alone!
She went forward and took his hand.
‘Gildas, come and have a drink.
We are all friends here.’
‘So I should have imagined,’ said Gildas, gently withdrawing his hand, ‘it's hardly news.
I see Pat is drinking, ought he to be?’
‘He is going to read a poem,’ said Alison.
‘Not if I can stop him,’ said Gildas.
‘All right, Franca, I'll have some whiskey too.
What's the matter with you all?
You have flames on your heads.
Is it Pentecost or something?’
‘Yes, it's the gift of tongues.
Sit down, man.
The girls were telling me —’
Alison and Franca spoke simultaneously.
Jack had entered unobserved.
Alison gave a muted scream.
Framed in the doorway Jack stood as a figure of authority, a heroic figure, it was like the return of Odysseus, as Franca said later to Ludens.
She had always thought of Jack as a Greek hero, indeed as that particular hero.
He brushed his blond hair back from his cheek with a swift gesture, leaving the hand poised on his shoulder as if touching some invisible insignia.
Frowning, he surveyed the scene with his prominent blue eyes.
How did he know at once that we were guilty, she wondered later, that we were, all of us, conspirators?
‘What are you all up to?
Why are you letting Patrick drink that whiskey?
Franca, you're drinking too, I think you're drunk.
You should be ashamed of yourself!’
Franca and Alison burst into wild helpless laughter.
‘I want to show you a picture,’ said Ludens, ‘a drawing.’
He put a piece of paper into Irina's hand.
‘Now, what is it?’
‘It's a bicycle,’ she said.
‘Yes.’
‘So what?’
‘Leonardo drew it.
Or one of his students did.
I copied it for you out of a book.’
‘Oh really?
So —?’
‘So Leonardo invented the bicycle!
Or conceived of it anyway.’
‘You told me that before.
Why do you show me this picture?’
‘I thought it might interest you.
I think of you as a bicyclist!’
‘Well, I suggest you stop doing so.
My bicycling days are over.
I never want to see a bicycle again, even in a picture.’
She handed back the drawing.
Ludens folded it and put it in his pocket.
‘I'm sorry.’
‘Oh never mind.
Shit, hell.
Dad's shirts won't be dry in time, they're still dripping into the bath.’
‘We can come back for anything that's left behind.
We can't take everything in one journey, anyway.’
‘I'll never set foot in this bloody flat again.’
‘Then I'll come back.
Don't worry , Irina.
You're sure you don't want to take anything from the kitchen?
That red saucepan, for instance.’
‘No, there's kitchen stuff at the cottage.’
‘We can buy food on the way down.’
‘There'll be food there.’
‘Oh — how?’
‘The people next door will put it in.’
‘That's kind of them.
You don't mind if we leave early tomorrow morning?
I don't know how long it'll take to get there.’
‘All right, all right .’
‘And if there's anything you want from Red Cottage I could fetch that too later on.’
‘Fuck Red Cottage.
I had years of hell there.’
‘Oh, how long —?
I thought you said a year —’
‘Years.
I can't remember, it was so awful it seemed a lifetime, why do you endlessly bother me, why do you carp so?’
‘Irina, I'm trying to help!’
‘I know.
You've been so good, you've worked so hard, I don't know what I'd have done without you, etcetera, etcetera, it's just that sometimes you exasperate me!’
‘Well, sometimes you exasperate me!’
‘I know.
I'm awful, I'm dreadful, I'm a drab, a slut, a bitch, a rotten apple, a slug, a black beetle, a beggar maid —’
‘Beggar maids wed princes in stories.’
‘Yes, in stories!
Never mention that again or I'll kill you.’
‘Never mention what?’
‘That!
You're hopeless .
You have no feeling , no sensibility — Sorry, Ludens, don't hate me.’
‘Don't be silly, I don't hate you, I love you.’
The ‘packing up’ at the flat at Victoria had taken longer than expected, and the departure to the country had been twice postponed.
Ludens had been busy helping Irina, what to take, what to buy, how to pack.
He had been out shopping to buy suitcases, coat-hangers, stamps, aspirins, tights, umbrellas, electric torches, hot-water bottles.
He had bought underwear for Marcus.
He had written to house agents about putting the flat on the market.
The packing, even with the new suitcases, presented numerous problems.
Irina was insistent that there must be only one journey and that everything must fit, with the three travellers, into Ludens's car.
Of course Ludens might come back to fetch things.
He was also resolved to clear the flat which was now (also to be arranged by Ludens) to be sold.
Ludens had, as he had told Franca, booked himself into a local pub, whose existence he had discovered by telephoning the village post office, and was quietly determined to remain there indefinitely.
During this chaotic period Marcus stayed in his room and was little seen.
Ludens had, however, come closer to Irina.
He had, he realised, wanted this closeness.
It was not exactly that he had pressed and she had invited.
They had simply simultaneously discovered a relaxed and cheerful modus vivendi together.
They got on well.
Ludens had never got on so easily with a woman, not even with Sylvia, who had always been ‘playing the feminine’.
Ludens and Irina jostled each other, shouted at each other , chattered to each other , argued a lot, laughed a lot.
Irina decorated her conversation with the swear words to which he had become more used.
(Who had taught her these words?
She had surely not learnt them at her boarding-school, whose high-minded staff and prissy pupils she had described to him, and whose old-fashioned upper-classy slang she sometimes employed.
He concluded that she must have been reading modern novels.)
During this time they had also become accustomed to a pattern of corporeal proximity, nothing like horseplay of course, or holding hands, or significant touching, but just an ordinary sort of being close together like two friendly animals in a stall.
During this time too Ludens had been conscious of an unusual sensation.
He was happy.
He felt needed, he felt secure.
He was on good terms with Marcus, content to know both that they would talk again, and that it was impossible to do so at the moment.
And Irina, although her speech remained ironic, scolding, teasing, her eyes gave him a welcome which stirred his heart.
And more than his heart was stirred.
Ludens had not forgotten Marcus's words concerning himself and Irina.
He had, however, and deliberately, put these words away as if in a cupboard.
They were not yet for everyday perusal.
Ludens had found space and time, amid his new sensations, to feel very sorry that he had not gone to see Franca when she had, so unusually, as he realised just afterwards, invited him.
She had even suggested coming to his flat.
It had indeed been, as it happened, impossible for him to see her at the times she suggested.
But he felt not only a sort of guilt, but a special remorseful intimate pain, to think that he had failed Franca when she appealed to him.
This was something which, for his peace of mind, had to be repaired.
So, on the previous day, before coming to Victoria, he had called unannounced at the house in Chelsea, hoping to find Franca breakfasting alone.
His fastidious imagination shied away from the details of Jack's new ménage .
He came by taxi (parking his car was always difficult in either place), arrived later than he intended, and was let in by Alison who had been crying.
Jack was in his studio, and the two women had been in the drawing room watching a video-recording of Alison's play about the ballet school.
Franca explained that Alison had been quite overcome by seeing the familiar school scene and the dancer, some of whom were professionals whom she knew.
‘I wish I hadn't given up,’ Alison was saying, ‘it was just lack of courage.’
The women, though rather nervy, seemed in good spirits.
As Ludens felt that Franca, who avoided his glance, was unlikely to contrive to talk to him alone, he soon took his leave.
Alison accompanied him to the door, where they paused.
In that moment Ludens felt sure that they were both remembering the scene beside the lake when Alison had been upset because Jack forced Ludens to behold him naked in her presence.
Ludens thought, she's a puritan; and he felt a sympathy with her and would have tarried, as he sensed that she wanted to talk to him.
But it was not a good moment, and they parted awkwardly.
Ludens was glad he had been to see Franca and felt sure, as he sat in another taxi bound for Victoria, that she had understood why, and in what frame of mind, he had come.
He also felt that Alison had, somehow, understood him, as he had, in some way, He had, as he returned to looking forward to being with Irina and Marcus, an obscure sense of his life being ‘in order’, as if deep sources were working benignly on his side.
This was a feeling he sometimes had, when he pictured his friends as ‘stationed’, like auspicious stars, close to him, protecting him, and offering him the privilege and pleasure of performing, in their respect, good deeds.
He was sure, at that moment, that he was harming no one, and indeed helping some.
Prone to guilt, however, he did wish that he had managed to see Gildas.
He often felt in the wrong before Gildas.
Something in Gildas accused him.
Perhaps it was just that Gildas was closest, he understood most, and although their friendship was impregnable, they could still hurt each other.
Something else which was working in Ludens's mind also manifested itself before he reached the flat, constituting a darker and more puzzling ingredient in his feeling of reassurance.
He was Jewish.
Well, he had always known that.
If it now came to him in a new way it was no doubt simply an aspect of his belongingness with Marcus and Irina.
Yet was this simple?
What did Jews do?
They observed holy days and rules of diet and put on black hats and went to the Synagogue.
Ludens felt no inclination to do these things.
They studied the scriptures and meditated upon the history of the Jews and their place in history.
Ludens was a historian, but certainly did not regard himself as a Jewish historian.
Jews believed in God.
Ludens did not believe in any personal God, least of all in the unattractive authoritarian figure of Jehovah.
Jews prayed and believed in something sacred and holy.
Well.
Gildas believed in something sacred and holy, and Ludens felt sure that Gildas prayed, whatever prayer was.
Of course, Gildas was a Christian, and Christianity, with its proliferation of images and chatter, made Ludens shudder.
Ludens had been disturbed by the strange conversation which he had lately had with Marcus, by Marcus's emotion, and by his own.
He had not yet, even, been able to make out how, if at all, Marcus's sudden Judaic piety connected with his original ‘quest’.
Perhaps it was something which he had discovered within the quest.
Or perhaps it was merely an accident that Marcus had picked up those utterances of his ancestors.
Jews were always prone to irrational guilt; and perhaps especially now.
If the Jewish destiny, and the message thereof, concerned suffering, then it must be the duty of every comfortable Jew to fix up some for himself.
About the Holocaust, Ludens had prided himself on keeping, as a historian, a cool head.
Of course it was the unspeakable thing that it was, about which so many details were now known, about which words failed.
Of course it made Jews feel more Jewish.
It made Ludens feel more Jewish.
But he did not think of it as a cosmic event which must somehow change the whole of human thought, altering philosophy and theology and closing the mouths of poets; such a view seemed to him superstitious , a denial of ordinary scholarship and ordinary hard-thinking rationality.
Perhaps indeed it did, as one thing among others, possibly the most extreme, stir up dramatic reflections about a God which is no god but a significant emptiness full of pain, and so on.
But these, he thought, are just pictures out of Jewish religious meditation, recurring under a new impetus, images and ideas also employed by Christian theologians and mystics.
Of course they deserve reflection, even a special respect; but they are not more fundamental than the chaos of history and the very various ordinary tasks of truthful thinking.
He thought, I must keep Marcus away from this high-temperature religiosity, it will waste his time.
As he thought this he felt in his heart a voiceless nameless twinge, like a tiny spark, which he chose to identify as a signal, which very rarely came through, from his ancestors who had lived in the Jewish ghetto in Warsaw.
The words ‘I love you’ just uttered by Ludens to Irina, had not come to his lips entirely by accident.
He had for some time, in the instinctive darkness of his mind in which so many heterogeneous problems were circulating, been wondering how, in what undramatic, as it were casual, not yet significant context he might utter them.
He was aware that what exactly the words meant was in a curious way less urgently important than the necessity of uttering them.
Now, it had come about.
Ludens had, as it seemed to him with helpless fascination, seen, in the last days, perhaps more obscurely weeks, his feelings about Irina undergo a transformation.
He recalled with amazement, as if it were years ago, his first shocked vision of the adult Irina, the shaggy, sullen, unkempt ‘gipsy’ girl standing at the door of Red Cottage who had not spoken to him, and whom he had even conjectured to be mentally defective.
Yet had he not had signs enough?
In fact Irina at the cottage door had not been his first sighting.
He had first of all, as if in some extraordinary dream, after struggling through the dark tunnel, seen her in bed, seen her dark bright eyes, reflecting the candlelight, gazing calmly at him; and he had imagined her to be a child, a boy.
The memory of that puzzling experience still disturbed and excite And then there were her bare feet in the stream and the tadpoles round her ankles, the cherry blossoms which she had thrown in his face, and above all the walk upon the airfield: there was magic there all right.
But of course how much better he knew her now, and how changed she looked with her smart dresses and her well-cut hair.
Yet all her looks, even the boy, seemed still to be summarised in her present being; even their very first meeting and the dreadful scene at the fence were somehow gathered in, redeemed and graced, as if reflected in the golden eyes of the ram.
Irina's intense slightly squinting gaze, the way her eyes seemed to splinter sometimes and crackle with light, her cat-like face, the dark down upon her upper lip, the way she wrung her hands, all blended now into a single presence.
Her dark straight hair glowing with its few reddish strands had been thinned and cut shorter in layers to show the shape of her head.
She had lost weight, she looked happier.
She had, since the resolve to leave London, become happier.
Even at home she put on smarter clothes.
She was wearing, under a shiny green apron, a simple dark-brown cotton dress with an amber necklace.
Bond Street shoes showed off her small feet.
Ludens, surveying her earlier, had been ready to laugh with pleasure.
Now suddenly his deeper feelings demanded expression.
Irina however had not picked up the seriousness of his last words.
Perhaps she had scarcely heard them, or had taken them as a mere mechanical rejoinder to her own ‘Don't hate me’.
She went on to speak of something else.
‘Ludens, please don't mind my saying this, I think you shouldn't get too involved with Dad's theories.
I can't help feeling you regard them as something awfully deep, like sort of magical formulae.
You ought to relax a bit, that would be better for both of you.
He's supposed to have high blood pressure and shouldn't get too excited.
I heard you both the other day raising your voices, I think you stir him up and lead him on.
If you see something in what he's after, it must be something that you provide yourself.
Really what he says is completely muddled, it just doesn't make sense.’
‘Who says so?’
‘I do.
He's talked to me about all that stuff too.
I may not be an intellectual but I'm not a fool.
You are encouraging him, you're making him feel he's a great man with a message and it's do or die.
Whereas really he's a helpless solitary person with a thoroughly confused mind.
He imagines he's thinking when he just sits in his room and dreams and mumbles.
He was a genius, well, I suppose he was —’
‘Of course he was!’
‘How do you know, you don't know mathematics, do you?’
‘Irina!’
‘All right, he was a genius, but he certainly isn't now.
You're doing him harm, making him think he's so wonderful.’
‘I think I am a better judge than you are,’ said Ludens.
‘You simply don't understand him, there's no reason why you should.
But listen, you evidently didn't hear me say something important.
I love you.’
‘What?’
‘I love you, I love you.
I'm in love with you.’
The third clearer formulation came to Ludens spontaneously.
He did not move closer to her.
They were standing in the kitchen, she near the stove, he near the door.
A slant of sunlight upon the wall opposite reflected a subdued brightness into the room.
Irina, who had been holding in her hand the red saucepan earlier referred to by Ludens, put it down and said, ‘Oh.’
‘I'm sorry if I startle you.’
‘You don't.’
‘You mean you expected it?’
Ludens smiled a little uneasily.
‘Well, I love you.
There it is.
But please don't worry about it.’
I won't.’
‘Good.
There's no need for you to do anything about it.
Now or ever.’
They stood facing each other, their hands hanging down, separated by a space of several feet.
Irina's face, which had been stiff, stony, suddenly gleamed, her eyes narrowed, splintered and glittered, then opened wide, her mouth relaxed.
She looked down at the floor and made the slightest movement with one hand.
Ludens instantly knelt down, first gracefully on one knee, then less gracefully on two, his head thrown back.
After a moment Irina covered her face.
Ludens rose slowly.
Then for another moment they looked at each other.
Someone was ringing the door bell of the flat.
She darted away past him.
Ludens followed.
She opened the door to reveal the dark shabby landing, the lift, and Patrick Fenman.
‘Oh, Pat, dear!’
Patrick grinned, entered, kissed Irina on the cheek and ruffled her hair.
‘How's himself?’
‘He's resting.’
‘So, well, I shall see him tomorrow evening.’
‘He won't be here,’ said Ludens.
‘I know, I know.
I'm coming too.’
‘To — to the cottage?’
‘Where else — where he goes I go.
I'm his jester.
Isn't it, Irina?
There'll be a little hole for poor Pat to crawl into, will there not?’
‘Yes, yes,’ she said smiling, half laughing at him.
‘And we'll sing there too, won't we?
Have you heard her sing?
She sings like an angel.
Now could you just do me a cup of tea, Irina dear?’
He followed her into the kitchen.
Ludens stood appalled.
So Patrick was evidently familiarly at home in the scene where he trod reverently as if on holy ground.
Where he had timidly knocked, Pat had climbed in.
It was for Pat that she had put on that dress, those smart shoes.
He had kissed her.
Perhaps since she came to London many men had kissed her.
She had called herself a drab.
Did she know the meaning of the word?
Marcus had said she was a ‘wild thing’ who needed to be ‘looked after’.
What had that meant?
He had said she was a virgin.
She had indicated she was not.
What, who?
Ideas which had already been darkly germinating in Ludens's overcrowded mind came vividly into view.
What about the gamekeeper, Busby?
She had seemed frightened of him.
He had seemed something like her gaoler.
Was it perhaps he who had taught her all those words?
Or — and this more horrible idea had been very obscurely with him for some time — how had he dared to entertain it?— perhaps Marcus — Marcus had spoken of evil yearnings, of a crime, perhaps committed already, perhaps in a dream — No, that was unthinkable, impossible.
Yet might there not have been some confused episode, something which, when Irina was much younger, had distressed her, appalled them both, something which neither of them in their childishness — for here Ludens saw Marcus as a child — had really understood?
These dreadful ideas, horrors from the past now poised to darken the future, occurred to Ludens in a sudden timeless flash as he stood by the still open door of the flat, hearing Irina talking to Patrick in the kitchen.
And he thought, I mustn't have these thoughts, I have no status here, I haven't even got the right to be jealous!
Anyway, what is it all about, Pat is my friend, when others had given up I strove desperately to save his life and I succeeded.
But it does seem so horrible to me that he will be, with them, near them, at the cottage.
So, she had sung for Patrick, but not for him.
How poisoned all my thoughts suddenly are, thought Ludens.
And I felt happy, and I spoke to her of love.
He stepped out onto the landing.
He called ‘Goodbye, see you tomorrow,’ and closed the door behind him and went to the lift and pressed the button
In a moment he heard the door of the flat open again and Irina was close beside him.
She put her hands onto his arms, gripping the stuff of his jacket, then leaned her head quickly forward onto his shoulder.
Ludens stood rigid, not attempting to hold her.
She murmured, ‘Thank you.’
The lift arrived and opened its brightly lit doors.
Ludens stepped in and the doors closed, dividing them.