

Is soil erosion really a problem?
Conflicting views
‘Of course arable land in some places is going out of cultivation because of erosion and other destructive forces.
But taken as a whole, the amount of arable land in the world is increasing year by year.’
(Simon 1981: 81).
This view forcibly made by Simon claims that land is like any other resource which, far from being finite as for example, the Club of Rome world models assumed (Meadows et al.1972: Mesarovic & Pestel 1976), actually becomes cheaper and more plentiful as technology finds and creates new resources and uses existing ones more efficiently.
In this context, soil degradation exists but, taken as a whole, is unimportant.
The more technically advanced agriculture becomes, the smaller is its dependency on natural endowments.
A similar opinion is expressed by Beckerman (1974: 239–40):
As regards the physical limitations in food supplies, there seems to be general scientific agreement that this does not constitute the real constraint…the vague counter argument that more intensive cultivation will ruin the soil is hardly convincing in view of the fact that soil has been farmed with increasing intensity in Western Europe for about 2000 years and there is still no sign that it is exhausted.
Most of the world's cultivable areas are, by comparison, either hardly touched or not yet touched at all.
Nor does the need for more fertilisers for purposes of modern agricultural methods pose any problem, as there are ample supplies of phosphates and potash.
Although addressing a different problem, Ruttan (1982) along with Boserup (1981) both put forward the idea of ‘induced innovation’ as the means by which research and development of agricultural technology is directed to address appropriate problems both by the state and farmers themselves.
Ruttan cites the contrasting examples of the USA and Japan.
In the USA where labour was the scarce resource, it was the process of mechanisation first with animal and later tractor motive power that facilitated the expansion of agricultural production and productivity by increasing the area operated per worker: while in Japan where land was the scarce resource, it was progress in biological technologies leading to  increased responses by varieties of paddy to higher levels of fertiliser application.
In both cases a process of dynamic adjustment to changing relative factor prices was achieved, and the appropriate innovations induced successfully by these implied price signals.
Ruttan believes that new agricultural technology and new institutions to develop it will be induced into existence to meet the challenge.
Therefore he places emphasis on the importance of each country ensuring that factor prices reflect scarcities, thus ensuring that new technology will always develop in the most efficient market-led directions.
However, he does not consider either the costs and returns to different groups in society nor different regions of the world.
Furthermore the issue of environmental degradation as a result of induced innovation is hardly given any attention at all.
Boserup on the other hand gives explicit attention to environmental degradation, but in such a way as to suggest that in some cases soil erosion actually induces desirable agricultural innovations.
In her most recent book (1981: 50) she gives examples where the destruction of topsoils in the reaches of a watershed, through population pressure leading to destabilising agricultural practices, had induced intensive agriculture in the valley floors which had been fertilised by the removal of topsoils further up-valley.
She quotes examples of environmental deterioration in China for example which started to be acute between AD, 1500–1750 and which induced long distance transport of night-soil, labour intensive digging of river silts, widespread terracing, and recycling of residues and wastes.
The ability of modern technology to cope with the problem of soil erosion is summarised thus: ‘Growing populations may in part have destroyed more land than they improved, but it makes little sense to project past trends into the future, since we know more and more about methods of land preservation and are able by means of modern methods, to reclaim much land, which our ancestors have made sterile.’
(Boserup 1981: 22)
Although these four authors address themselves to rather different problems, and do not appear to agree on a number of issues, their combined views on the importance of soil erosion are more or less consistent, and quite clear — its importance is exaggerated, agricultural technology initiated by both officials and farmers can respond satisfactorily, and the resources at disposal are massive and are constantly being created by technology itself.
This view is in complete contrast to those who maintain that environmental deterioration is widespread and of critical importance.
So contrasting is it that one may wonder whether its adherents are looking at the same thing at all: ‘As the eighties unfold, humanity faces a worldwide shortage of productive cropland, acute land hunger in many countries, escalating prices for farmland almost  everywhere…’
(Brown 1981 in an article entitled ‘Eroding the basis of civilisation’).
Two more quotations of many hundreds serve to make the point that the distance between the two views is so large that they are probably not going to be reconciled by proof or disproof of the physical evidence.
There is an environmental nightmare unfolding before our eyes…it is the result of the acts of millions of Ethiopians struggling for survival: scratching the surface of eroded land and eroding it further; cutting down trees for warmth, fuel and leaving the country denuded…
(Eckholm 1976: 77).
Effects of soil erosion in every degree of intensity can be found in Latin America, ranging from ravaged mountain slopes of the Andes to incipient dust storms in rangelands of the Argentine Republic.
According to preliminary estimates, twelve of the southern countries have been damaged by severe erosion to the extent of about 70 million acres out of some 140 million acres of land now in crops.
In six of these countries, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Honduras, Mexico and Venezuela, the estimated amount of land mined or severely damaged ranges from about 50 per cent to more than 60 per cent of the area appraised as arable (Bennett 1944. 63)
A study of a remarkable set of documents put together by USAID (the administration for foreign aid given by the United States) during the past few years entitled,Environmental Profiles , one for each country, shows in considerable detail the extent of soil degradation, alkalinisation, salinisation, waterlogging, and desertification world-wide.
Almost every nation in central and Latin America, Africa and South East Asia seems to be suffering from environmental decline, and although the basis of quantification might be questioned, at least there is the framework of a sub-regional, quantified data base on environmental decline.
Also references in this book to the extent of soil erosion are drawn from a wide variety of sources and go some way to corroborate the view that, whether it is important or not, environmental degradation is certainly happening.
Thus we do not intend to provide evidence here of frightening rates of soil loss and desertification throughout the world.
Eckholm's book (1976) does this more than adequately, and less recent accounts (e.g. Jacks and Whyte 1939: Hyams 1952) have also documented what has been seen as a widespread and serious problem.
The view taken here is that one can produce quite easily a catechism of doom, supported with prodigious rates of soil loss over millions of hectares (and some examples are given in this book).
However, attention is instead directed in this chapter to an ideological examination of the question of whether all this matters , and if so, how and to whom.
The view that will be taken is that it does matter very much, although not quite in the way in which previous writers about environmental doom have envisaged.
The rest of the book addresses itself to developing this approach.
How do we judge?
There are two interrelated issues about the rules of discourse on the subject.
The first is that of proof.
What constitutes proof, and is it possible?
In other words, can Beckerman or Simon on the one side, or Eckholm or Lester Brown on the other (as examples of leading protagonists) be proved wrong?
The second is related and is a question of ideology, and at a more applied level, one of politics — whether environmental deterioration matters depends not only on proof but also on one's view of social change and development.
Let us start with the problem of proof.
The most pervasive characteristic of measurements of soil loss at different points throughout the world is their scantiness.
In a review of the present situation of soil degradation in ten countries of the Near East, Rafiq (1978: 9) states that: ‘in most countries only qualitative information is available,’ a view which Stocking (1978a) shares with reference to Africa.
The UN Conference in Desertification (1977: 177) also agrees: ‘Statistics are seldom in the right form, are hard to come by and even harder to believe let alone interpret.’
We can identify a number of interlocking and mutually reinforcing reasons why the situation prevails.
First, there are few resources in developing countries to measure soil loss.
Quite sophisticated equipment and trained manpower is required to make reliable estimates.
Furthermore measurement has usually to be made over a period of time.
Compared with the measurement of alkalinisation and salinisation, whose samples of soil can be easily gathered at one point in time and the electrical conductivity of saturation extracts gauged, the measurement of soil loss is more demanding.
Second, the range of data required tends to be demanding, for example see Skidmore (1977) and Skidmore, Fisher, and Woodruff (1970) for the sophisticated data needed to assess wind erosion.
Usually the physical data on soil loss has to be combined with a fairly detailed knowledge of land-use and its history, if the man-made contribution to erosion is to be reliably estimated over large areas (outside carefully laid-out experimental plots in research stations).
Then there is a group of more technical reasons which make statistical modelling and extrapolation more difficult, and inhibit attempts to overcome a shortage of resources for direct measurement by statistical estimation of soil losses.
There are problems related to the complex and varying manner in which symptoms of soil erosion appear through time.
Douglas (1981) summarised the time-dependent effects of soil eroding land-use practices in terms of changing soil erosion soil nutrient status, soil induration, weed invasion and crop yield, as well as upon the impact on rural incomes and the rural population.
It is clear that the timing of these impacts varies enormously between cases, and that long time periods are required for some impacts to emerge.
Furthermore, simple measurements of sediment at a point represent only the net result of all the processes going on upstream.
The measurements do not identify the spatial nor temporal source of sediment.
The sediment volume measured could have resulted from a long past phase of forest clearance in an upstream catchment — or a more recent event in a completely different location altogether.
In addition, the scale of measurement over which soil erosion occurs affects the measurement itself.
As Gardner (1981) points out in relation to the FAO/UNEP World Assessment of Soil Degradation mapping exercise (FAO 1979: Riquier 1978, 1982), the universal soil loss equation has been misapplied in the estimation of soil erosion in quite large territorial units.
‘In all but the most uniform of plains, the spatial anisotropy of soils, vegetation and topography is such that, at a scale of 1:5 million (that of the FAO/UNEP maps), a single meaningful measure of the parameters is not possible.’
(Gardner 1981: 2) General problems of the use and misuse of the universal soil loss equation are discussed by Wischmeier (1976) and Stocking (1978a); these contribute to the difficulty and extrapolation particularly over large areas implied by the scale of the FAO map.
The scale of measurement also affects the estimation of soil erosion because, as it becomes smaller, the problem of redistribution of eroded material within the areal unit becomes more serious.
Erosion may be very considerable, but, because the area of net measurement of soil movement is large, sedimentation may occur within the same unit and therefore net erosion is estimated to be small (see also Blandford 1981).
Further, the relationship between erosion and crop or livestock yield have not been reliably modelled.
There are separate models for erosion processes and others for crop growth processes, but the link between the two sets tends to be under-explored (Dumsday & Flinn 1977; Amos 1982: Ch. 2).
For example erosion rates in a vertisol will have very much less of an impact upon yield than in a granite sand.
One attempt to model only critical variables which determine yield has been made by Stocking and Pain (1983) where they concentrate upon the impact of erosive forces upon the availability of minimum moisture levels.
Finally, the question of proof about soil erosion demands that natural and man-made or enhanced rates of soil loss can be distinguished.
Partly this is a matter of time and related to the first problem discussed above.
Only a marked increase in erosion rates, coupled with evidence of changes in agricultural practice and/or  extent of agriculture, might in these cases provide sufficient evidence of accelerated erosion.
It has been recognised how difficult it is to attribute accurately the effect of humans on soil erosion (Stocking 1978b: 130) because of the uncontrolled nature of many other crucial variables, such as climatic change.
Therefore it is difficult to interpret such statistics as those of UNEP (1982), as well as others which calculate rates of topsoil loss per km 2 , except perhaps in cases where the rate is extremely high and where there is other evidence of obvious changes in land use.
Statistics quoted at length in UNEP 1982 have shown the amount of land converted into lower classes of production (relative to previous periods) by soil degradation and erosion.
UNEP (ibid.) shows that all classes of cropland are predicted to increase in area up to the end of the millennium, but that large quantities of land (most certainly concentrated in marginal environments) will lose productive capacity.
In the same report (UNEP 1982: 265), it is claimed that the total area being reclaimed by irrigation is probably about the same as is being abandoned through salinisation, alkalinisation and water-logging, and that these problems account for the loss of about 2–3 million ha of the world's best agricultural land each year.
The assessment of the seriousness of soil erosion is frequently done on the basis of the percentage reduction in yields as well as, or instead of , objective physical measures of changes in properties of the soil (e.g. Rafiq 1978: 36).
Tolerable soil losses inevitably involve political issues as well as technical ones (such as the natural rate of soil formation, or the ‘T’ factor as calculated by the USLE (Universal Soil Loss Equation) developed by the Soil Conservation Service of the United States.
In any case there are considerable technical problems in assessing the ‘T’ factor which is defined as the maximum rate of annual soil erosion which would permit high-level crop production to be maintained indefinitely (Schertz 1983).
Cook (1982) argues that the measure is political and moral without much rational basis and credibility.
At this point the discussion shifts to the question of ideology in assessing the importance of soil erosion.
The central issue here is the assumptions about future agricultural technology which are made when assessing tolerable soil losses.
Potential productivity losses are masked by new technologies, such as chemical fertilisers and improved crop varieties (Halcrow, Heady & Cotner 1982: 254).
If such advances are to be made and put into practice by the people working the land, then higher soil losses can be ‘tolerated’.
The degradation of many soils such as those in East Anglia, England, to the extent that they are scarcely more than a physical retention medium for chemical fertiliser and moisture (Kirkby 1980), does not have the same social and economic impact as degradation of soils where the land users do not have, and may be predicted not to have  in the future, the resources to make good the degradation by the application of massive doses of fertiliser (see also Heathcote 1980, Rennie 1982).
However, even in advanced capitalist countries, the economic effect of degradation and erosion may not be negligible.
Pimental et al.(1976) have estimated that erosion has reduced the production potential of American cropland by 10–15 per cent, and that an estimated 5 gallon equivalent of fuel per acre is being used to offset past soil losses, which amounts to about 4 per cent of total oil imports in 1970 (p.153).
In summary, four crucial questions to be raised in discussion of the positions of Simon, Beckerman and Ruttan are as follows:—
(a)
Will future agriculture and pastoral technologies be induced which will protect fragile and/or eroded environments or compensate land users for productivity decline due to environmental degradation?
(b)
If these technologies are developed, will they be accessible to current land-users of these areas?
(c)
Is there any evidence now of (a) and (b) occurring in the way that Boserup and Ruttan have indicated, and that they will continue into the future?
(d)
What level of soil erosion need occur before appropriate legislation is implemented and appropriate agricultural and pastoral technologies ‘induced’?
So it can be seen that what was originally a technical question of the definition of tolerable rates of soil loss is a crucial, and deeply ideological one, and therefore not amenable to the cut-and-dried standards of proof on empirical grounds.
However, let me put a view which though not provable, is perhaps persuasive — even if persuasion is the lowest form of proof.
The belief that agricultural technologies will be developed for marginal, ecologically fragile areas,and for the marginal poor farmers and pastoralists that live there is, it will be argued, a trifle heroic.
The examples of induced innovation in Japan and USA responding to the different and changing relative factor prices are the best available.
Induced innovation did occur for these great and developing nations because it was central to their national development and they both had particularly advantageous social and natural endowments at the time.
Simply, there was money to be made in research and development (both public and private) in these strongly growing economies.
Of course these nations induced appropriate agricultural innovations.
The development of the Green Revolution is another case in point.
This was undoubtedly a breakthrough of major significance, but it was developed with particularly strategic and world political objectives in mind: the containment of communism by increasing food production, and the reduction of US food-aid, were major impelling factors.
It provided  unparalleled opportunities for transnational companies manufacturing chemical fertilisers, pesticides, tractors and pump-sets to sell their wares to a vast new market.
Now, the issue here is not whether this was ‘good’ or ‘bad’, the motive humanitarian or base, but that it had a tremendous impact upon the agriculture of the Third World at least in Latin America, South and South-east Asia.
An excerpt from Lester Brown explains these opportunities which the Green Revolution offered multinational corporations:
Given the pre-eminence of the multi-national corporation in international development, it is surprising that it is accorded so little attention in development literature….
Although there are occasional highly publicised instances of expropriation…foreign private investment is growing rapidly.
According to the Survey of Current Business , American private investment abroad totalled $17 billion in 1930 and had reached only $19 billion in 1950, but then began to climb rapidly to $50 billion in 1930 and $87 billion in 1966….
Thus far only a small fraction of overseas investment of multi-national corporations has been allotted to agribusiness in the poor countries, but the amount is increasing.
Sales of farm inputs and opportunities for new investment in food processing and related activities are increasing in the poor countries in close relation to the acreage planted to the high-yielding varieties.
(Brown 1969: 64, 65)
The access of farmers of lesser developed countries to this package of new inputs, as is now abundantly clear, was limited.
It was the larger farmers who gained in practice, although there is still disagreement over why (whether seeds and fertilisers are scale neutral, but other inputs are not, or whether high yielding varieties (HYV's) are less robust and larger farmers have the necessary economic and political power to control growing environments better).
However, the creation of a new agricultural bourgeoisie in almost one of every country of non-communist lesser developed countries, as a result of the Green Revolution, has assured a self-generating demand or induced innovations of a particular type, which encourages both larger surpluses and mechanisation.
This growth of biological and mechanical agricultural technology may also have benefited small farmers and the landless, but only incidentally.
In other words it was not the demand signals of the small farmer and landless that generated the research development and diffusion of the Green Revolution technology but the interests of large multinational companies, and strategic considerations of the United States of America.
The crucial area of debate centres upon whether the signals from ecologically fragile and marginal areas will reach institutions and governments so as to induce appropriate innovations for those areas.
While relative factor scarcities may have provided the required signals where there is a lucrative profit to be made, it is not the case for fragile areas and the small farmers who live there.
Very frequently the signals from large farmers and highly productive areas  lead to competition for resources with those from small farmers and relatively unproductive areas.
It would be wrong, however, to dismiss completely advances in productivity-enhancing research which can be applied to steep-sloped and marginal areas.
For example, in Caquezo and Rio Negro in Colombia corn and potato yields have improved 200 and 90 per cent respectively on hillside farms which were able to adopt the improved technology (Sepuldeva 1980), although this example was only on a limited scale.
In Jamaica the use of hillside ditches and contour mounds produced sustainable yields of 38 t/ha/p.a. and reduced soil loss to 17 t/ha/p.a. while traditional cultivation methods only yielded 26 t/ha/p.a., with a rate of soil loss of 134 t/ha/p.a.
(Sheng & Michaelson 1973).
Ruttan (1982) also distinguishes from productivity-enhancing research another type called ‘maintenance research’ defined as ‘the research needed to prevent yield decline as a result of the evolution of pests and pathogens, the decline in soil fertility and structure, and other factors’.
This quotation is one of the very few places in his work where he actually mentions soil erosion.
There are a number of reasons why maintenance research is less attractive than productivity research in general, and particularly so for marginal areas.
Maintenance research tends to be undramatic, unglamorous, and only missed when it is absent.
It also may bring much lower returns, both economic, political and (in a bureaucratic framework) promotional, than spectacular breakthroughs in irrigated rice or wheat, for example.
In the case of ecologically marginal farms, inhabited by politically marginal farmers, maintenance research is doubly unattractive.
Some of these possibilities are hinted at by Ruttan in an earlier paper (1981).
However, the title of this paper restricts reference to developed countries only, but even here the normative suggestions about distortions to prices of factors and outputs (leading to inappropriate signals to research institutions) seem to amount to little more than wishful thinking.
‘Political dialogue’ is required and a dialectical interaction at the economies' political level between research scientists, research planners, research clientele, and the legislative process is required and hoped for.
His article outlines the failure of research programmes in Argentina, Peru and Colombia during the last fifty years (p.27) but does not explain it or help us to find a way round the problem.
By far the greatest part of maintenance research developed by institutions of state for marginal areas has been soil conservation techniques (outlined in Ch. 5), which, as this book shows, have had to be imposed by colonial powers to be ‘induced’ at all.
However, certain aspects of maintenance research for eroded areas remain characteristically neglected.
For example, Spears (1982) states that little research has been done on the cost of rehabilitation of severely eroded hillsides.
It is at present very expensive, in the order of $US500-$US 1000 per ha, and low cost methods have not been developed.
Other examples appear elsewhere in this chapter.
Of course farmers and pastoralists themselves have developed their own and usually effective methods of soil and water conservation which they had evolved themselves and suited their own social relations of production and ecological conditions, but which had been disrupted by the colonial experience (see Ch. 4 for examples).
Referring principally to those techniques of soil conservation developed by research stations and government institutions, many studies of the economics of soil conservation which focus on the private economic incentives for soil conservation, show that, although total benefits from a soil conservation scheme such as terracing may be more than the total cost, individual farmers usually lose income from these practices (Harshbarger & Swanson 1964, Holtman & Connor 1974).
Ervin and Washburn (1981) have shown that even with very favourable combinations of a low discount rate, a long planning period and a high level of individual cost sharing, private incentives are very seldom sufficient for the individual farmer.
In a difficult production situation, with high perceived discount rates and competition between small producers for many scarce resources, it is obviously an unanswered question as to who will pay for conservation works, or how cost-sharing or insurance will be arranged on a sufficiently large scale.
Productivity-enhancing research and development in many lesser developed countries have often been harmful, where they have been accessible to farmers of those areas.
The introduction of monoculture maize which replaced nutritionally and soil conserving mixed-cropping strategies in Africa is one example.
Belshaw (1979) illustrates the contradiction between research station agronomic techniques which favour planting crops in pure stands, and inter-cropping techniques which are by far the most satisfactory from the point of view of the reduction of soil erosion.
Pure stands allow accurate control of the plant population and mechanisation of weeding and harvesting (an implicit big farmer bias is evident here).
They allow effective and profitable fertilizer and pest/disease control treatments which can be calculated more easily.
They are congruent with the principal objective of increasing output of one crop (often for export and consumption in urban areas) rather than one to enhance the farm system as a whole.
They stand for modern, improved, and mechanised farming as opposed to indigenous and backward farming, and so on.
While there are many other advantages of inter-cropping than soil conservation, this type of crop planting technique is neglected and has been systematically eliminated in many lesser developed countries (see Beets 1982).
In the same publication as Belshaw (1979), there are some other interesting examples of the deleterious effects of exogenous  technologies upon indigenous ones in lesser developed countries many of them with strong implications for soil erosion, particularly Swift (1979) and Richards (1979).
Even within one crop, varieties are often introduced in an attempt to maximise yields, but succeed only at the cost of decreasing soil protection by foliage at times of heaviest rainfall (David Gibbon, personal communication).
The emphasis of almost all research and development carried out at research stations (and economic studies for national agricultural strategies as well) is upon particular commodities isolated from their social, economic and environmental context.
Farming systems research which studies the complex of decision-making by farmers as a whole system implies that the researcher spends time with the farmers rather than in the research station and adapts research needs on the spot — in the farmers' fields — to ongoing work by the farmers.
The problems that arise from the development of a new crop on a research station and the attempts to recreate it in economically and environmentally diverse farms outside can in this way be avoided (CIMMYT 1980, Biggs, 1981).
Environmental protection can easily be built into adaptive research, and becomes just another important but related consideration in induced innovation.
But it is just this sort of research which is hardly being practised at all(with a few exceptions: Conyers 1971; Okigbo 1981;, and a bibliography on farm systems by Gilbert, Norman & Winch 1980).
However, adaptive research is rather demanding upon scarce skilled manpower, and it also requires researchers to live for long periods outside the comfort and orderliness of the research station itself.
For this reason alone, it is not very popular with private state-sector research institutions.
Instead it is single cash-crops which attract most research, developed outside the context of the production situation in which small farmers in steep-sloped and ecologically fragile areas find themselves.
Thus the introduction of many cash crops, particularly peanuts, coffee, cotton and maize into ecologically fragile areas has had disastrous effects (and some of these are analysed in Chapters 8 and 9).
The existing biases of research and development are well known and include big as against small farmers bias; cash crop as against subsistence crop bias; maximum average yield as against maximum yields in bad years; irrigable as against dry land crops; and higher yields per unit as against higher yields per worker.
Innovation is induced very healthily along the lines of these biases as Ruttan suggests, but not along those enabling small farmers and pastoralists to maintain or transform their livelihood in areas of highest environmental vulnerability.
Three pieces of evidence noted by Posner and MacPherson (1981 fn.) support these arguments.
First, The World Bank estimates that between 90 and 95 per cent of public investment in  agriculture since World War II in Mexico and Peru has been in irrigated agriculture, and practically none in watershed management.
Second, the major impetus for colonisation schemes in Colombia, Ecuador and Peru was not to solve the problems of the pressing needs of the hill areas at all, but to increase aggregate agricultural production and reduce rural-urban migration without causing political upheaval as a result of land reform.
Third, a flat-land bias in research stations in tropical America is very marked.
So far research has focused almost exclusively upon export crops such as sugar, bananas, cotton and beef and products consumed in urban areas to the neglect of inter-cropped maize, beans, potatoes and barley.
Also most land classification systems put a ceiling of 10–15 per cent slope for annual cropping, thereby diverting researchers' attention away from the problems confronting hill farmers.
The next part of the discussion moves away from research institutions to farmers and pastoralists themselves, and concerns the accessibility of new agricultural technology to these people.
Yield-enhancing innovations are usually the only ones available through the network of state institutions.
However, these can only be taken up by larger farmers with access to credit, with a lower vulnerability to the risk that the innovations imply, and with the economic and local political power to assemble all the necessary physical inputs together in time.
If these new inputs had been in a form that small farmers in marginal areas could practically use, it could be hypothesised that the resulting extra incomes would encourage soil-conserving investments and would take the pressure off farmers to over-exploit the environment.
However, as Chapter 7 explains, yield enhancing innovations, particularly concerning cash crops, both tend to exacerbate soil erosion and accelerate differentiation of the peasantry (see Ladejinsky 1969, Griffin 1974; Pearse 1980).
Other examples of applications of high energy technology to agriculture and stock-rearing, such as deep boreholes in semi-arid areas are discussed by Cliffe and Moorsom (1979), and Kassapu (1979), where it becomes even more difficult for those with dwindling resources to avail themselves of soil conserving and yield enhancing new technologies.
An atomised peasantry of small farmers is one of the least attractive and the most difficult target populations for state-sponsored innovations (even if they are appropriate).
First, small farmers are many — while bigger farmers tend to be few.
Second, they do not seize opportunities for credit and new inputs, while large farmers are frequently able to look after themselves even without the aid of extension agents.
Small farmers too have limited room for manoeuvre to adopt new technologies.
The rural sociological literature of the 1960s of the diffusionist school has demonstrated to the point of overkill the problem of the laggard and  the small farmer (Rogers & Shoemaker 1971).
Environmental decline further limits small farmers' and pastoralists' ability to accept externally generated innovations.
This vicious circle is more precisely specified in Chapter 7.
Internal or autochthonous innovations, the sort which Boserup (1981) discusses under conditions of population pressure, do of course occur, and her book gives many examples.
However, it is striking that discussions of the state, of relations of production, and patterns of surplus extraction are almost completely absent.
Without these crucial areas of explanation, her theory of how innovations occur or do not occur seems remarkably fragile.
There are a number of processes which reproduce themselves through time and which keep poor farmers in perpetual poverty and force them to use their natural environment in non-sustainable ways.
These processes, excepting that of population growth, are largely unexplored.
While there are local adaptations of agricultural and pastoral practice to conserve soil, these processes ensure that they are usually not far-reaching, nor fast enough.
The necessity for speed in adaptation of agricultural technology exists because of these self-reproducing and self-reinforcing processes — fairly rapid population growth; political and economic neglect of marginal environments except where they can be exploited for the production of commodities for the national and international market; and a stagnant production per unit worker and area for the majority of the population.
The last symptom may seem tautological, but in effect it is self-reinforcing.
Once levels of savings and the ability to risk innovation decline (sometimes exacerbated by malnutrition and food shortages at critical points in the agricultural calendar) the necessity to ‘do something about it’ becomes all the more urgent and difficult.
Adaptations do occur, and the ability of peasants and pastoralists to adapt their systems of resource management are often impressive (e.g. Wilken 1974, Brokensha et al.1980; Denevan 1980; Beck 1981).
To give a brief example, in Nepal population pressure has in the last decade or so brought about many intensifications of cropping patterns such as the introduction of wheat as a winter crop.
More rapidly maturing early paddy allows an extra crop of maize to be harvested in irrigable fields; double-cropping of paddy on irrigable fields is now commonplace; and inter-cropping of squashes and beans in maize fields is being introduced.
But the pace of population pressure and the failure of fuel supplies (current demand is 546 kg per caput of firewood per year, and the maximum sustainable yield at present is 80 kg), have reduced the fertility of the soil, the supply of perennial irrigation and drinking water, and increased the rate of sheet and gully erosion (Banister & Thapa 1981: 87–94).
Whether it is a matter of a lack of knowledge on the part of indigenous cultivators and pastoralists that leads to excessive and  untimely tillage, the use of improper implements, the destruction of crop residues by burning and so on, is a moot point.
While FAO earlier reports (1960, 1965, 1966) and others (cited in Ch. 4.2) put these practices down to ignorance, there are many examples where knowledge is not the scarce factor, but the resources to put this knowledge into practice.
My own experience in Morocco, Zambia, India and Nepal is that there is an enormous variability in people's perceptions of environmental decline.
Some see it and have sound explanations, like one Magar lady in rural west central Nepal who gave a ten-minute lecture to me on the problems of the transference of fertility from forest to arable land, and changing uses of crop residues with increasing population pressure, that would have stood up well in a graduate seminar.
Others in the same country seem to have little notion of what is happening (e.g. Bajracharya (1981) from eastern Nepal).
Certainly no generalisation can be made except that the successful diffusion of the knowledge of soil conserving practices is often one essential change that is required — even although the knowledge may be possessed by some cultivators already.
Usually, as this book will argue, successful agricultural extension is a necessary but far from sufficient condition for implanting sound conservation practices (see Thrupp (1981) for a case study of the (jaded) peasant view of conservation in Costa Rica).
Solutions to population pressure, differentiation, and declining productivity through soil exhaustion and erosion, which lie outside the agricultural sector altogether, do not offer the same promise as they did in Japan, the USA or the United Kingdom during their industrial revolutions.
Outmigration to cities in search of menial jobs or part-time work in nearby plantations provide remittances and reduce food demand, but these activities also reduce labour availability and have been responsible for the collapse of old-established terracing systems in the Middle and near East, particularly Yemen and also in the Andean part of Peru and Colombia.
In some ways these experiences both alleviate the problem as well as reproduce it, since it enables some outside income to prop up a failing agricultural economy postponing either abandonment of the area and/or more radical transformations.
It is argued in this book that in many areas of the world where environmental fragility is an outstanding characteristic, there is a failure to adapt to a variety of new and related pressures, particularly population pressure and increased state intervention which is often extractive in nature, and also that such technically state-sponsored innovations that there are, tend to be inappropriate or inaccessible.
Thus there are twin reasons for this failure to adapt in these areas.
The first is from outside concerning the State and the second from inside, in that the inhabitants cannot adapt their own technologies fast or radically enough to maintain an increase in their incomes, nor  can they find a solution elsewhere by migration and a secure source of income outside the region altogether.
Consider now Simon's remark (1981: 84) that:
even such persons who worry about the ‘lost’ of land as Erik Eckholm, acknowledge that it is in our power to have more land if there is a will to work for it.
Today the human species has the knowledge of past mistakes, and the analytical and technical skills to halt destructive trends and to provide an adequate diet for all using lands well suited for agriculture.
To whom is the word ‘our’ addressed?
The argument made in this book is that it is not to all land-users.
Neither is it a question of ‘working for it’, nor, to put it the other way, that people do not have more land because they are not prepared to work for it.
They are excluded from using more land, and they often work onerous hours on the land which they do own for a pittance.
Lastly to talk of the human ‘species’ fails to differentiate between people whose circumstances are very different.
The approach in the opening quotation is the same as that taken in this chapter ‘taken as a whole…’.
Here we would never maintain the whole is suffering environmental decline, but that parts of it are, and this matters to the numerous people living there.
Aggregates tend to appeal to (comfortable) analysts.
There is a further sense in which a lack of access by land-users renders the aggregate view very questionable.
So far the political and economic aspect has been emphasised, but there is also a spatial one.
There are barriers to a free movement of people from areas of high to low population pressure.
Some of these can be expressed as a distance-decay function and indeed costs of migration may largely be a matter of distance as in the case of outmigration from island economies such as are found in the Caribbean or Oceania; others are political and virtually insurmountable, such as national frontiers.
The case of India and Nepal is a case in point.
Population density on the Nepal side of the terai is four times that on the Indian (Gaige 1975), but the physiography and soils are similar on either side of the border.
Another example is highlighted by some extraordinary satellite pictures (published in Glantz 1977: 6, 7) showing the difference in vegetative cover and population pressure (both human and animal) between the Republic of South Africa and Lesotho.
Moreover, the creation of political boundaries in the Sahelian countries during colonial and post-colonial times has actually contributed to the disruption of a carefully regulated system of pastoral movements and pastoral-agricultural symbiosis, leading to environmental deterioration and desertification (Franke & Chasin 1980: Ch.3 & p.98).
Policy-makers and commentators in many countries of the world have often assumed that small farmers and peasants in  mountainous and/or environmentally degraded areas will abandon their hillside plots if given other opportunities elsewhere, so that the state by various means can ease population pressure on steep slopes by encouraging or at least not inhibiting colonisation of new areas.
In fact hillside farmers tend to be very attached to their farms.
In many cases they have, through time, been attempting to subsist on farms that have become progressively smaller without becoming more productive.
However, they have consistently opted to eke out a living by temporary migration and wage labour rather than leaving in such numbers so as to exceed natural population growth, and thereby ease the pressure.
Colonisation schemes in many tropical American countries for example, have also proved to be extremely expensive (e.g. $US6000 per family in Bolivia, Curtis 1979), as is also the case of Indonesian policy of migration from Java to the outer Islands (see Booth & McCawley 1981 for detailed accounts of the failure of these schemes).
The traumatic effects of resettlement, whether as a result of dam projects or a state-sponsored attempt to relieve population pressure, often reduce the ability of the settlers to adapt satisfactorily to their new environment.
In other cases there is land to spare and at the same time extreme population pressure plus unequal landholdings, such as in Brazil, where there is a constant stream of immigrants to the marginal lands of the North-East and to Amazonia.
These migrants are either middle or large ‘farmers’ who can obtain credit for farming on very easy terms from a variety of government institutions (and in the hyper-inflationary economy of Brazil, easy credit amounts to a free gift of capital).
Then the immigrant purchases a large tract of land, and farms it without any expenditure on soil conservation, often without chemical or organic fertiliser, until yields have declined and degradation or erosion has set in.
He then abandons his farm, raises new loans and moves on.
Other immigrants are less fortunate and have very little capital.
For them there is frequently a cycle of desperate and under-capitalised farming followed by failure through drought or poverty-induced disease and malnutrition, with another enforced move to take more land into cultivation, while the land under previous cultivation erodes, or reverts to unproductive grazing land (Gilbert 1974, Deutsch 1977: 343 f.; Johnson 1978; Grainger 1980: 16).
The same process may also be happening across the border in the North East Oriente of Ecuador (Hiraoka and Yamamoto 1980).
However, these examples of Andean countries Brazil and Indonesia are all ones where there is land still available.
Colonisation (either planned or unplanned) and removal of population pressure are simply not possible at all in small sea- or land-locked countries (e.g. in the countries of the Sahel, Lesotho, Swaziland, Rwanda, Burundi, or the islands of Oceania).
In any case large-scale planned colonisation schemes have a very low success rate.
The last point about the relationship between farmers themselves and their natural environment concerns the production and preparation of food (including the cooking of it).
Here again it is a matter of ideological assumptions and the unit of study.
Trends in food production by continent, for example, show an increase except for Africa (FAO annual publications entitled The State of Food and Agriculture).
Here the level of aggregate production, even at the national level in many cases is not the problem, and I agree completely with Simon and Beckerman's repudiation of neo-Malthusianism and the Club of Rome's doom-dominated world model.
It is widely recognised that it is not production of food but the low level of demand for food that is the problem for many and for varied reasons related to the forces and relations of production in which people are involved.
A combination of vulnerable classes or groups living in vulnerable and ecologically marginal areas in many cases causes a failure to create sufficient income for food to feed themselves.
Again, it is, as Sen puts it, ‘the tradition of thinking in terms of what exists rather than in terms of who can command what’(Sen 1981: 8, quoted in Redclift 1982: 1) which ignores the vital question of access to food production and the fuel to cook it.
As Agarawal (1980: 150) in terms of wood fuel puts it, in the same way as Sen, it is not a simple technical problem but:
It is a problem of poverty and political economy.
It is an issue both of absolute shortages of the wood.. and the distributions of available wood supplies between different uses and users…its causes are seen to be closely linked to the distribution of economic and political power between classes and social groups which determines who gets how much of a scarce resource.
Many groups of people suffer from stagnant or falling rates of both food and fuel production alongside others who have very significantly increased theirs.
This is also reflected in an aggregate geographical sense where whole areas suffer from this problem, while others have markedly increased their share.
Here a hypothesis on regional differentiation, sometimes coinciding with social differentiation is attractive, although it is very difficult indeed to provide data to support it.
Areal data will not suffice by themselves, since it is quite possible for aggregate areal food production to increase in such a way that increasing numbers of people have difficulty feeding themselves.
Also ‘areas’ may refer to a few kms 2 or to whole countries, so that areas or pockets of declining food production may coexist with, and have no social access to, other areas of increased food production.
In these circumstances soil erosion is potentially of utmost importance to the livelihood of these vulnerable people, even if it is not happening at present.
As we shall suggest later, the relationships in which the inhabitants are enmeshed often encourage soil degradation and erosion in fragile environments — which has the effect of a vicious circle and makes it  even harder for transitional and progressive technical (and political) changes to be made.
In the words of Gallopin and Berrera (1979); ‘They (the poor) may be forced to destroy their own environment in attempts to delay their own destruction.’
A similar view is put by Allen (1980: 29).
Eckholm (1982) identifies a global underclass, produced and reproduced by social relations of inequality, which is an indictment in itself, but which also causes environmental problems across a wide range (not only soil erosion, but also urban pollution and disease).
The ways by which this class comes about and the implications and feedback effects to and from the natural environment are discussed in Chapters 6, 7 and 8.
Three brief case studies illustrate the related issues of population growth (without significant outmigration), stagnant production, poverty of most of the people of the area concerned, and environmental decline.
The first, is Rwanda where ‘given conditions of rapid population growth and limited natural resources, Rwanda faces a number of serious environmental problems’(USAID; 1981 p.
V).
Deforestation, overgrazing and shortened fallow periods threaten the fragility of Rwanda's soils.
One illustration of the extent of the damage is that in the Eastern Plains where domesticated animal off-take is 900–1300 kg/ km 2 , that of the wild ungulate biomass in unspoilt areas of a national park is in the order of 15,000 — 28,000 kg/km 2 .
Population pressure on land has led to increasing competition of less sensitive rotations which maximise the production of food crops with beneficial rotations which include nitrogen-fixing crops and forage crops.
An agricultural revolution of major proportions is required involving widespread (and costly) irrigation, reafforestation, land management practices including agricultural diversification and erosion works — otherwise an annual population growth rate of 3 per cent and an economic infrastructure which cannot make productive use of the growing population will precipitate a major crisis — and also accelerate soil degradation.
Fig. 2.1 illustrates these points.
If farms remain the same size as now (1.
1 ha), all farmland will be saturated by 1995 at a population of 5.7m., marked 4 on the diagram.
But existing mean farm size is too small for a vigorous, self-sustaining ‘take-off (which was estimated to be possible at a minimum farm size of 1.8 ha).
Under these conditions, saturation has already occurred (in 1977) at a population of 3.8 m., marked 5 on Fig 2. 1.
Increasing failure to grow enough food on the part of farmers leads to a decline in productivity through a lack of energy and malnutrition particularly at times of peak labour demand, and an attempt to substitute less soil-conserving crop rotations.
The second case study is Swaziland.
Tables 2.1 and 2.2 from Roder (1977) tell a sombre story.
Efforts to reduce stocking densities have met with little success due to the significance of cattle as a source of wealth and prestige rather than a source of income (IBRD 1977a; Doran, Low & Kemp 1979), so that herd size has actually increased between 1968–77 in spite of government efforts to reduce it (this being discussed further in Ch. 7).
The last example is situated in tropical Latin America and is taken from Posner and MacPherson (198 1, 1982).
The proportion of the national area of thirteen tropical American countries described as steep sloped is very high — 80 per cent for Honduras, Panama, Haiti and the Dominican Republic and not less than 50 per cent for eleven of the thirteen.
Also these steep-sloped areas are very important contributors to the national total production of foodstuffs as well as fibres and export crops (particularly coffee).
Many of these areas also suffer from extremely serious soil erosion, although reports and impressions seem to differ.
For example, Eckholm (1976b) estimated that 77 per cent of El Salvador had severe erosion, and Low (1967) estimated that 87 per cent of Peru was losing more than 10 t. /ha/p.a. of topsoil.
Baldwin (1954) states that 42 per cent of Mexico had ‘accelerated erosion’ and so on, although as section 1 of this chapter suggests, it is difficult to know how to gauge the significance of these figures except in a general and qualitative way, which indeed may be sufficient.
Posner and MacPherson (1981) show that staple crop yields have tended to decline (Blasco 1979) or at best remain  stagnant (CEPAL 1976).
Population growth in the steep-sloped areas of these countries is expected to increase by the year 2000, by between 40 and 59 per cent in many areas (e.g. Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras).
The resulting situation is therefore very serious — both in a national sense, since these areas contribute significantly to food and export crops, and also in a regional sense since erosion, population pressure and poverty will probably increase, given existing trends and national priorities in research and investment.
These examples do not ‘prove’ a case, but they help, and there are many well-documented cases in which a variety of factors combine to produce evidence that erosion is important to land-users and to the national economy, and that neither research and development, nor local adaptations in agricultural technology will provide answers to these problems.
Lest the reader may point out that the examples so far are predominantly drawn from small countries and affecting only small populations, others, such as areas of China and India are discussed elsewhere in this book.
Social elements in soil erosion
Soil degradation and erosion is caused by the interaction between land use, the natural characteristics of that land and its vegetation, and the erosive forces of water and wind (Stewart 1970).
The focus of this book is upon the social element, but not to the exclusion of the physical parameters.
Clearly any case of soil erosion must be the result of this interaction and any ceteris paribus assumption about these physical parameters would be absurd.
The central question asked is why certain land-uses take place.
Why are no soil conserving practices a part of the on-going development and change of land-use practices, and why are adaptations to conserve the soil not sometimes made?
The answer to these questions lies in the political-economic context in which land-users find themselves.
The analysis must start therefore in areas which initially may seem remote from the physical processes which directly cause degradation and erosion.
One of the main problems in the discussion of the political economy of soil erosion is that it is difficult for author and reader alike to span the great variety and complexity of circumstances (both physical and social) under which soil erosion occurs.
For example, much of the foregoing discussion was making the point that soil erosion was important to many small producers in steep-sloped and/or semi-arid areas and it may have seemed that these people were the only ones to cause and suffer from the effects of soil  erosion; also that there were few or no cases where successful adaptations and advances in agricultural technology had occurred.
Clearly this cannot be the case.
Therefore generalisations made in the course of the book usually must be qualified heavily by such convenient disclaimers as ‘sometimes’, or ‘under certain circumstances’.
So that some of this variety can be displayed in a simple fashion at the outset, a listing of different political economic contexts under which soil erosion occurs is given below.
Lists are not meant as explanations, although there is sometimes an implicit taxonomy and even theory in a list, and the theoretical starting point of this book emphatically does not lie in this list.
A cursory examination shows that the items on the list are not mutually exclusive, and thus the criteria used for compilation are mixed and also not mutually exclusive.
The main purpose of the list is to illustrate complexity and variety of political-economic and physical circumstances of soil erosion.
The principal criterion used in the identification of different social elements in soil erosion is the relations of production under which land is used (and these are more carefully specified in Chapters 7 and 8).
(a)
Soil erosion and degradation can occur in peasant and pastoral groups.
Here family labour is employed, usually under the direction of a senior (and usually male) member of the household, and production is primarily for use rather than for sale, although the latter may be economically essential.
Some of these groups may be relatively undifferentiated, although considerable inequalities in access to land, pasture and family labour power usually exist.
Other important variables which qualify the impact of these relations of production upon the lives of these groups include the availability of land, whether there is population pressure under the existing production technology, and the degree of interference by the state (by way of taxes, conscription, price fixing, rural development projects and so on).
(b)
There are also peasant and pastoral groups that are characterised by marked differentiation, where a considerable proportion of the means of production is owned by another class altogether.
They can be hacienda owners where feudal relations with workers on the hacienda may still exist, or capitalist entrepreneurs (either owners or managers for very large corporations and transnational companies).
The social roots of soil erosion under these circumstances are more complex.
They derive from both the operation of large units (often highly mechanised and characterised by monoculture and high energy demands sometimes supplied from local sources); and the small peasantry itself which has to work for part of its income on larger enterprises.
The latter often are pushed off the most suitable  land for cultivation and are forced to make a living cultivating steep slopes or pasturing animals on a reduced amount of land.
(c)
Soil degradation and erosion also occur in centrally planned economies, where decisions are made to use land in a non-sustainable manner.
This arises from a number of causes.
A Bolshevik (and, it might be argued, a Marxist) ideology in which man's mastery over nature is essential in the rapid development of the forces of production is central here.
Also there has tended to be in earlier Soviet writing a sort of radical cornucopianism which has provided the ideological context of some technically disastrous decisions on the use of land.
Consider this stirring quotation and its possible ecological implications:
We must discover and conquer the country in which we live.
It is a tremendous country [referring to the USSR]but not yet entirely ours.
Our steppe will truly become ours only when we come with columns of tractors and ploughs to break the thousand-year old virgin soil.
On a far-flung front we must wage war.
We must burrow the earth, break rocks, dig mines, construct houses.
We must take from the earth…
(Burke 1956, quoting from The Great Plan ,(1929)
Pryde (1972) draws attention too, to the assumption of Marxian economics (but not perhaps all Marxian economics) that only labour produces value, and therefore that land, water and all associated resources are considered ‘free’ inputs in production.
This has led to some very unfavourable repercussions of natural resource use, for example the extension of wheat production into Kazakhstan under President Khruschev.
However, ideology apart, there is considerable evidence of a degree of senior bureaucratic bungling and the suppression of scientific reports which would have been embarrassing to the senior members of the bureaucracy if Komarov (1981) as the chief informant is to be believed, along with other writers such as Cherenvisinov (1964), Goldman (1972) or Kirby (1972).
It is difficult to sort out blatant public relations exercises from virulent anti-Soviet propaganda.
Although every ideology forms its own criteria and language of evaluation, it is doubly difficult to be discriminating and to carry through a particular form of objectivity when reading accounts of conservation in socialist or ‘socialist’ countries.
(The inverted commas here indicate that there is considerable debate about which countries can be called socialist.)
A reading of Pryde (1972) or Tregubov (1981) simply is not factually consistent with that of Komarov (1981).
Here one suspects that there is not so much a clash of ideology as one of gross distortion.
(d)
Erosion also occurs in advanced capitalist countries.
Here farms are privately owned (either by owner-operators or larger corporations), wage labour is employed, and the product is grown for the market.
Usually agricultural technology is closely linked to that of  industrial technology and is constantly innovating as private farms strive to remain competitive.
The direction of the technology is one of control over nature, yield maximisation, and at the same time reliability of quality, control over yields and harvesting dates; as a whole it responds quickly to the needs of the market.
Land use itself also quickly adapts to price signals, and the economic margin of cultivation can therefore change very rapidly.
However, if farms remain profitable, yield-increasing technologies tend to mask the effect of soil degradation and erosion and make up for declines in fertility that would have occurred if land had been cultivated with a constant level of technology.
There are a large number of other contingencies which crosscut these four political-economic contexts and modify them.
Indeed, the existence of soil degradation and erosion is contingent on an enormous variety of human and physiographic variables, and it is probably impossible and counter-productive to attempt a single theory of soil erosion.
Instead this book attempts to theorise substructures in a theory of soil erosion.
A number of contingencies discussed below are illustrative and not exhaustive.
Rural population densities are of prime importance in modifying the implications of the different relations of production under which land is used.
Frontier areas with low population densities attract particular kinds of exploitation of natural resources.
Large logging operations for the export of timber, or to supply local plywood pulp and construction industries, frequently do not bear the costs of ensuring sustainable yields and often ‘mine’ the natural biotic resources of areas and then upon their exhaustion, move on (see Ch. 8).
The phenomenon of the hollow frontier has been common where settlers cultivate land, which is virtually free to anyone with the capital and/or labour to exploit it, and move on when serious erosion sets in, leaving behind eroded soils.
In the history of the settlement of the United States the first white settlers in north America arrived in Virginia in 1607, and by 1685 there was a serious increase in flooding caused by forest clearance.
With rapid depletion of fertility in the Tidewater land many settlers moved onto the Piedmont where they mostly repeated their mistakes.
The expansion of settlement soon became based on a hollow frontier as settlement moved west leaving a trail of erosion and siltation behind until by 1939, Charles Kellogg felt that 75 million acres (28 million hectares) of this [(450–500 million acres/180–200 million hectares of eroded land)]were too worn out to return a living wage under any system of farm practices.
(Kellogg 1941).
Similar settlement histories have occurred in the Gangetic plain and Doabs of northern India (Schlich 1889: 187–238) and Brazil up to the present day.
High population densities on the other hand may modify the  way in which the land is used under given social relations of production, and indeed modify the relations of production themselves.
Where there is no further land for settlement and for people to set themselves up as independent farmers or pastoralists, there is an added reason for a land-controlling class to emerge, firstly because land hunger tends to differentiate a peasantry and secondly there is no alternative for those without enough land but to work for others.
However, high population densities are certainly not a prerequisite for inequalities and a class structure to arise.
Although population pressure is the most common attribute of these peasantries and pastoralists, there are many cases where declines in population through outmigration or apocalyptic disasters (e.g. Latin America during and after the Spanish Conquest, Boserup 1965: 62–63) have led to a coarsening of agricultural technology, a labour-saving cropping pattern, and an allocation of labour which can encourage soil erosion (e.g. Bunyard 1980 for Palestine).
However, in these cases too, it is the economic relations which farmers have with other more developed economies that cause these problems.
The nature of the state in which land-use occurs can also modify the broad classification outlined.
The type and degree of infrastructure such as roads and storage facilities, institutions such as banks, agricultural extension development projects, fiscal and monetary and pricing policy, the legal structure of land tenure and of environmental protection and conservation; the state's degree of intervention in international imports and exports — all these are part of an explanation of soil erosion.
In the analysis of all specific cases of agricultural technology, crucial aspects which may lead to soil erosion, cannot be ‘read off’ in a vulgar materialist sense from the relations of production under which they are applied.
First of all, there may be contradictions between the social relations of production and the agricultural technology used, therefore at a particular moment in time technology and social relations may seem out of adjustment.
For example a semi-feudal landlord in a developing country today may employ a large number of retainers or family servants who will work for cash rent, labour rent or a proportion of the harvest on his land.
This arrangement is an important part of the social relations of production.
However that same landlord may be introducing tube wells, tractors and high-yielding varieties of seeds, and therefore wish to get rid of the large number of inefficient workers to whom he may be partly responsible for housing, clothing, looking after their aged or sick, and also to whom a sizeable proportion of the additional benefit from these improved inputs would accrue.
This is a contradiction between relations of production and technology.
To take another example, peasants often form reciprocal labour groups  to cope with periods of particularly high labour demand (e.g. paddy transplanting, or preparing plots for burning in the forest for shifting cultivation).
However, many of the more advantaged peasants (either in terms of household labour power, control over land, or number of bullocks for ploughing) might like to grow crops for the market.
A change in crop mix, perhaps also in crop planting technology and field preparation has strong implications for soil conservation, but the additional inputs required, particularly of labour, put strains on the reciprocal labour arrangements.
Here again we have a contradiction and a society in transition (e.g. for India, Saith and Tankha 1972).
In short there is a dialectical relationship between agricultural technology and relations of production.
That potent and overworked word ‘dialectical’ can be explained (after Howard & King: 1975, 21) in the following way:
‘…the main idea is that social phenomena are seen as existing in relation to each other, and continually developing in and through such relations so as to form at various phases contradictory forces that generate qualitatively new formations.
Thus social reality is seen always as in a state of becoming something else.'
The second reason why a simplistic relationship between agricultural technology and relations of production cannot occur is that there are frequently many important local variations in technology which can only be uncovered by detailed analysis of settlement histories and cultural development.
The path which an agricultural society will move through history, particularly with regard to the development of its agricultural technology, is determined by a highly complex reality.
Relations of surplus extraction, population growth and the relevant characteristics of the environment are only three sets of variables amongst many others.
Further development of Boserup's thesis is required to uncover the reasons behind environmental degradation on the one hand, or successful intensification of land use on the other (for a review of some of the major issues, see Brookfield 1982).
In conclusion, there is a wide variety of social and physical contexts of soil erosion.
The social relations of production under which land is used is a key and pervasive element in the explanation of soil erosion; it also goes some way to explaining the nature of the state — which intervenes and influences the use of land in all sorts of ways.
However, there are many cross cutting contingencies which have to be analysed fully in an explanation of any concrete instance.
A review of techniques and policies
A distinction between techniques and policies
At the outset there is an important distinction to be made between techniques on the one hand and soil conservation projects, programmes or policies on the other.
A technique refers to the mechanical or agronomic method applied, and in any one conservation project there may a considerable variety.
The choice of technique is a vital one in a conservation project, programme or national policy for two related reasons.
First, it will determine the technical success of the project in a ceteris paribus sense — that is to say, that provided there are no social constraints upon the successful application of the technique, it will fulfil the objectives of the project or policy (typically in terms of reduced erosion, increased yields of crops, pasture or forest).
Second, the choice will impinge upon the social, economic and political life of the direct land-users involved, as well as village leaders and local and national politicians, and involve administrators, extension agents and other government personnel in particular ways.
The distinction between technique, and project or policy is clearly drawn from this evaluation of conservation in Tanganyika:
We have already seen that most conservation schemes failed in Tanganyika.
However the reasons for their failure cannot be found simply in an examination of the physical factors of the soil and environment.
With some notable exceptions such as the use of terracing in the Ulugurus, most of the measures involved could have been successful in physically preventing soil erosion.
However, the colonial administrators were wrong in their particular approach to the problem and it is here and in the reaction of the Africans to colonial attitudes that we can find reasons for failure.
(Berry & Townshend 1973: 250)
A conservation policy has a number of components.
First, a method of identification of the geographical areas in need of conservation has to be devised (e.g. land classification), as well as the identification of other associated causes of soil erosion that may lie outside these areas altogether (e.g. land tenure legislation).
Second, it has to be decided who chooses these areas (the farmers, the district governor, the foreign consultant, or a committee in the Ministry of  Agriculture), and likewise, who chooses the criteria for the choice itself.
Third, the choice of conservation techniques and/or other policy measures is another important component of a conservation policy.
Fourth, the means of implementation is vital in terms of who does the policing of fenced-off pastures or restrictions on land-use, and how extension, new inputs and other specialist skills are to be delivered to the farmers or pastoralists themselves.
Fifth, the question of who pays, who benefits, and who loses is an essential one to be addressed by any conservation policy.
Lastly other related policy issues at the national level, which usually involve wider considerations than soil conservation are an integral part of any conservation programme.
Thus a conservation policy involves a wide ranging set of economic, political and social issues.
So it is the success of an implemented programme or policy, rather than the success of a conservation technique at a trial stage under research station conditions, which should be the chief objective of evaluation and critical analysis.
This implies that evaluation of techniques should be a sub-set of more ambitious terms of reference.
It is not surprising that for every evaluation of a conservation programme or policy, there are perhaps ten of conservation techniques.
There are a number of reasons for this.
First, there are the considerable methodological problems of economic evaluation of whole policies and programmes in terms of costs and benefits, particularly the latter (Amos 1982).
Second, trials of conservation techniques usually originate under controlled conditions of the research station, or large plantation, where there are facilities for detailed and undisturbed instrumentation.
This further encourages the evaluation of techniques in terms of physical targets rather than of other wider objectives in actual practice (i.e. in a sizeable project, or programme).
There is a considerable number of evaluations of pilot or small projects involving a small catchment and a handful of farmers (such as those undertaken routinely by FAO, IBRD, or other bilateral aid agencies).
These pilot projects represent in principle a transition phase between research station and the real world.
However, one suspects that the transition is illusory since the formidable constraints to translating techniques into widely-adopted practice only become fully apparent when the project is big enough potentially to have a significant impact.
It then runs into problems of political opposition of local people, enforced differentiation between winners and losers in the countryside, and may expose the inadequacies of the agricultural extension staff, agricultural engineers, support staff and the like.
In short, replication often becomes impossible.
This general tendency in soil conservation evaluation derives from similar problems identified by critics of the existing approaches to agricultural research, namely the lack of a  continuous outreach to and from research stations and farmers, and the conducting of programmes under conditions that do not exist for the farmer/pastoralist who is supposed to adopt them (Biggs 1981).
Third, in many cases policies are not evaluated because they often tend to be unsuccessful.
Admittedly there is a sense in which this assertion is tautologous — if they are so seldom evaluated, how can one say they are often unsuccessful?
As the next section attempts to show, the case is largely made in reverse — there is very little written evidence of successful programmes and sizeable projects, and most partial evaluations and comments on conservation policies indicate failure.
The point here is that techniques get evaluated and researched but programmes and policies do not, with the result that the ‘social factors’ which block policies tend to go unresearched too, or at best identified piecemeal, although lip-service to their importance is sometimes paid.
It is an almost universal assumption that a conservation policy is a set of conservation techniques — and very little else.
The ‘state of the art’ of soil conservation is clearly in a sorry mess: ‘The need for soil conservation was emphasised by Bennett (1955), Jacks and Whyte (1939) and many others…but so little has been achieved that most recent reports…are virtually  undistinguishable in factual content and sentiment from the earlier studies.’
(Morgan in Kirkby & Morgan 1980: 303).
Certainly a reading of the soil conservation literature through seventy years or so exposes the lack of substantive progress in the identification of the problems and even the technical solutions (with the possible exception of the demonstration of the importance of rainsplash in soil erosion).
In the English language literature, Malcolm (1938, although apparently much of this work was written as far back as 1910), Glover (1946), Rounce (1949) and Hyams (1952) alongside those mentioned in the quotation above, are all striking, original works, marked by their intimate knowledge of local agricultural practices and the general processes of soil erosion.
Recent literature has not dated these classics — an indication of a lack of its ability to transcend them.
The techniques themselves
This section reviews briefly the range of techniques which are available at present.
Readers are directed to a number of standard texts on the subject (Hudson 1971; FAO 1977a; Morgan 1979; Webster & Wilson 1980).
Although this book is not concerned directly with techniques themselves, a political-economic analysis of soil erosion and conservation must start with them.
The section  takes the form of a list and is meant as an introduction for social scientists who are not familiar with conservation techniques.
For those who are in the professional fields closest to conservation techniques, this section will not offer them anything new.
They are of two different types, mechanical protection works and agronomic methods, although they are usually used together in any soil conservation project.
Mechanical protection works are permanent structures of earth or masonry which are designed to protect soil from water erosion, and to conserve water as a resource by means of interception, diversion and deceleration of surface and sub-surface run off.
These include gully control structures; waterways and storm diversion channels in or above cultivated areas (sometimes planted with grasses, sometimes floored with stones or concrete); storm dams of earthen, concrete or stone and wire construction; and terraces.
The latter have a very wide variety.
Indeed, contour ploughing, contour brushwood planting, and ditch-and-bund constructions could be said to be types of terrace.
The oldest mechanical conservation measure is the bench terrace which consists of a series of steps cut into the slope on the contour, of which the forward edge can be lined with stone or planted with bushes, trees or grasses.
They clearly require very large labour or capital inputs and are only suitable where either very high value crops can be grown, and/or in areas of high population density.
They are found around the Mediterranean, particularly for vine growing; in semi-arid areas such as Yemen and Peru; and in many localities of the humid tropics where population densities are high such as the Philippines, Java, Sumatra, China, the Himalayan foothills, Rwanda Burundi, Uganda and the Cameroons (Goudie 1981: 136, 127–39, for a general review of the physical processes of soil erosion and human efforts to control it).
Other types of terrace also exist, such as the ridge terrace where a ridge of earth on the lower side and a channel on the upper side provide the mechanism for increased water retention and infiltration, and reduction and deceleration of surface run off.
These frequently need large amounts of earth moved, particularly the broader-based ridge terrace, and are therefore frequently built by terracers or graders.
The disposal of run off from most types of terrace needs careful construction of a system of drains and channels usually designed on the basis of calculations (or informed guesses) on the probability of the intensity and duration of storms.
Agronomic techniques of conservation are perhaps more in terms of preventing the start of the process of removal of soil particles, by the introduction of farming practices which will provide stable yields through time.
Most conservation schemes combine both mechanical and agronomic techniques, and in many instances they are complementary.
For example, gully erosion can be treated  by mechanical means (e.g. a masonry drop structure with apron), cutting back the gully head to stable ground and planting it to grass and/or trees, and following a variety of agronomic measures above the gully to reverse practices which brought about sheet and then gully erosion in the first place.
Agronomic techniques were developed rather later than mechanical ones, following the identification of the importance of rainsplash as a major element in the erosion process.
During the 1950s, and by the 1960s packages had been designed in the United States, which were then transferred to the very different physical and social conditions of the Third World.
Since then international agencies such as ICRISAT and IITA have been undertaking further research on the more fundamental adaptations that now appear to be required (Hudson 1981).
The techniques refer to new or modified agricultural practices to reduce soil degradation and erosion.
Their recommendation to farmers is usually based upon an ad hoc or more systematic land capability assessment.
This suggests a ‘suitable’ crop or land use and there may be very different weightings given by different land-users and government agents to what is regarded as suitable.
New tillage practices are encouraged which seek to increase vegetative protection of the soil and reduce the effects of wind erosion and direct splashing of rain on the soil.
Rainsplash washes elements downslope and reduces infiltration capacity by dispersing clay particles into the large interstices of the soil.
New tillage practices also reduce loss of soil moisture to increase yields, build up humus formation, and encourage a net increase in the natural production of soil nutrients.
To these ends, longer and new crop rotations can be introduced.
These usually involve increasing plant diversity, contour ploughing, inter-cropping, minimum or no-tillage systems, and grass strips (with or without grass-covered storm channels or bunds, and with or without brushwood planting along the contours between strips).
The development of forests, either by wholesale (re) planting of watersheds or in smaller areas such as  gullies and riverbanks, in other small lots such as fuelwood plots, on terrace-backs and field boundaries for fuel and/or fodder, or in lines for the additional purpose of windbreaks, is also an important element in most conservation schemes.
Pastures can be reseeded, and the quality of livestock increased by breeding programmes, increased veterinary services, improved supplementary feeds and fodder crops, all of which aim to increase yields and reduce the number of stock on degraded and eroded pastures.
Many of these techniques of conservation have already been developed by cultivators and pastoralists themselves.
There are many examples cited of local soil conservation: tie-ridging of the Kara and the Matengo pit system reported by Ranger (1971) for Zambia, contour ridging and inter-cropping in Tanzania (Stocking 1982), ‘denshering’ in western Cameroon (Kassapu 1979) and a variety of techniques discussed by Richards (1975).
However, many of these locally developed techniques have been discontinued for reasons that are discussed later in Chapter 8.
There are also negative measures in the sense of restriction of land-uses, and exclusion of people and/or livestock from certain areas.
Although ‘conservation policies of land-use should be positive and encouraging, not restrictive’(Hudson 1971, 79), they frequently include these measures, which aim to stop certain agricultural or pastoral practices which are identified as harmful.
These include shifting cultivation: for example, in Zambia where it is nationally outlawed, or in certain areas such as Sukumuland in Tanzania (Berry and Townshend 1973).
Alternatively all cultivation can be banned from specific areas such as river banks (as in Kenya), watersheds or very steep slopes.
Other restrictions apply to the felling or cropping of trees, even the collection of forest litter, either altogether (where forests are ‘no-go’ areas) or on a rotational basis (as suggested by Glover (1946) for hilly areas in the Punjab).
Restriction of livestock with similar variations is also a frequent negative element in combinations of conservation techniques.
A similar classification of soil and pasture conservation is succinctly provided by FAO (1977b) and is reproduced in summary form on Figs. 3.1 and 3.2.
A review of conservation policies
Even a brief and superficial review of national soil and pasture conservation policies indicates that, with a few significant exceptions, their results fall far short of their intentions.
While pilot projects and research station experimental plots often attract encouraging reviews and progress reports, programmes and policies almost universally have run into serious difficulties.
The review here cannot claim to have gone into any great depth, but its purpose is correspondingly modest, and that is to provide some support to this generalisation.
Maybe techniques of evaluation (important though they are) need not be sharp when faced with a strong weight of empirical and impressionist evidence of the failure of conservation efforts to halt the deteriorating environmental situation in substantial areas of the world.
In a general sense the evidence examined in Chapter 2 (that in many parts of the world, soil erosion, floods, soil degradation and deforestation were probably getting worse) could be used in a crude sense to show that conservation policies have not succeeded.
However, more evidence is needed about soil conservation programmes themselves.
The sort of evidence for success that   one may look for is the fulfilment of the general objectives suggested by FAO (1976b)— that is, the increase of food production and standard of living of the people by means of soil and water conservation policies.
Thus, a rapid review of conservation world-wide can be expected to provide evidence as to whether there exist programmes which have fulfilled these general objectives for  substantial numbers of people (say, at least, tens of thousands), without insisting on precise standards of measurement.
In this brief scanning of national efforts, the reasons for success or failure, the political-economic conditions under which they were made, and the technical details of conservation practices are only briefly mentioned.
It is also assumed in this review that it is only officially sponsored programmes or policies that are being discussed.
There are plenty of ‘success stories’ where governments have not intervened, or where it has not even been acknowledged that farmers and pastoralists have quietly got on with the business of conservation for themselves, and frequently provided sustainable surpluses for the market as well.
It is instructive to start with the USA, which in many senses is the country on which much of the methodological, legal, technical and institutional aspects of conservation policies of other countries have been modelled.
A number of far-reaching evaluations have recently taken place, culminating in the Soil and Water Resources Conservation Act of 1977 (abbreviated to RCA).
Rasmussen (1982:3) asks the question ‘…that might be raised today…is why erosion remains a severe problem after forty-five years of cooperative efforts by farmers and the federal government to solve it’.
The title of Cater's article (1977), ‘Soil erosion: the problem persists despite the billions spent on it’, speaks for itself.
A more equivocal comment that perhaps best sums up the evaluations that led to RCA has been made by Timmons (1980): ‘While these measures [in soil conservation]have seldom attained goals, increases in soil erosion were minimised and occasionally soil losses reduced.
Despite these efforts, erosion losses remain excessive and may have increased during the 1970s [and this trend]may continue indefinitely into the future.’
However, the sophisticated methodology of land-use planning, as well as the policy instruments of the programme, have recently been shown to be very fragile and unable to prevent large areas of land previously left uncultivated (because of susceptibility to erosion), being once more put under the plough.
Cook (1983) traces the impact of the decision to sell grain to the Soviet Union and the government's renewed intention to use food as a political weapon, upon the expansion of 27 million acres of arable land and a large increase in the annual rate of soil loss.
In spite of a long-established programme, with the best technical expertise in the world, the programme over the years has achieved a very mixed success.
Its importance in soil conservation practice is world-wide partly because much of the international literature on the subject in popular and scientific journals is written by Americans, and partly because of the American foreign aid programme in which conservation plays an important part.
Large numbers of American aid personnel advise many of the governments of lesser developed countries.
However the  methodologies in assessing soil erosion hazard, as well as policy instruments, may well not be applicable outside the United States.
Moving now to lesser developed countries, a general review of conservation programmes of Algeria, Tunisia and Morocco (Bensalem in FAO 1977a: 159) concludes that ‘soil conservation practices in North Africa have been focussed mainly on corrective mechanical measures, which in most cases have been insufficient or not suitably adapted to counter erosion problems’ He goes on, like so many other commentators, about the lack of applied knowledge of both the appropriate technical options (e.g. the successional capacity of the native plant cover which can be used to rehabilitate degraded land), but also, very significantly, ‘there are soil conservation and dune afforestation schemes dating back thirty years, some succeeding and others failing, but without explanation of why’(p. 159).
Another older FAO report (1966) suggests that a total lack of local participation in conservation measures was the major reason for widespread failure.
Heusch (1981: 423), commenting on conservation in the Rif mountains, Morocco, comes to the conclusion that:
soil erosion in the Rif is the by-product of the submission of highlanders under more dynamic groups of high living standards.
This leads to a neglect of conservation management…the soil conservation expert is thus requested to propose technical and educational solutions to socio-political problems, whilst the sociologist is given the task of obtaining the approval of the population for measures taken without its advice and real consent.
This quotation has many interesting strands, some of which are explored later on in this book.
Nigeria's soil erosion problem has been recognised as extremely serious but conservation has only become a national concern during the Third National Plan (1975–80).
Olayide and Falusi (1977: 1 15) comment that ‘past government efforts in soil conservation have been very meagre and have had little impact in solving the erosion problems’.
Moving into Central and Southern Africa, Zambia's post-colonial conservation programme is seen by Robinson (1978b) to have been adversely affected by the preceding oppressive colonial efforts at conservation.
Politicians are reluctant to popularise or enforce measures against which many campaigned prior to Independence and ‘the majority of farmers remain unaware of the causes of erosion and unconvinced of the need for or value of conservation measures’(ibid.: 28).
India's long-established conservation and forestry programmes are well documented in terms of plans and normative statements about the future, but lack evaluations.
Agarawal (1980: 109) points to failures of social forestry programmes also documented by Alvares (1982).
Agarawal also points out other failures of forestry and fuelwood projects in Java (p. 105), and Upper Volta (p.166), mainly blaming a lack of a community of local interests.
Bali (1974) talks of  the need for reorientation of the whole of conservation policy in India, while Ranganathan (1978) attributes failures of past efforts to inter-departmental rivalry and lack of extension.
Also Patnaik (1975), Parikh (1977), Gribbin (1982), and Kulkarni (1983) leave little doubt of the glaring failures of Indian conservation.
Perhaps the two most comprehensive critical reviews of the Indian soil conservation are the Centre for Science and Environment's The State of the Indian Environment (1982) and Cahill's report for the FAO (1981).
The former concentrates on what is actually happening, comprehensively outlining the growing problems of deforestation, desertification, soil erosion, flooding, siltation, as well as a decline in standards in health, housing and industrial pollution control.
From both this report and that of Cahill (ibid.) it is quite clear that the problem is severe and getting worse; and that the national soil conservation programme is not dealing with it:
.. looking into the future, what is important is not so much the extent but the rate of progress with soil conservation.
At a completion rare of one percent per annum the total task would take 100 years.
The actual rate of completion per annum over the last 27 years has been less than one half of one percent…thus even at several times the projected rate of progress, the great bulk of the conservation task will be incomplete at a time when the most vigorous additional demand is placed on land from massive upsurge of population.
(Cahill 1981: 2)
Thailand's efforts to stem serious erosion problems resulting from the extension of cultivated land as a result of population growth and an expansion of a market for commercial crops, and large-scale destruction of forests by logging companies and (to a lesser extent) local cultivators, are reported to be largely ineffective (Kilakuldilok 1981), El-Swaify et al.(1982).
Kilakuldilok attributes this to a familiar list of reasons — institutional weaknesses in all aspects of conservation, lack of political will, rapid population growth, and lack of a coherent long-term policy.
There have been a small number of fairly successful conservation projects, notably Chang Mei, and at Ma Sae (UNEP 1979: 83), but they do not materially detract from the view that Thai conservation policy is not succeeding in reversing national trends of rapid forest clearance and increasing erosion hazards.
Malaysia's efforts are also judged to be inadequate (MacAndrews and Sien, eds. 1979: 30; and by Hamzah bin Abdul Majid, also in MacAndrews and Sien, eds.: 54).
South Korea's reafforestation and erosion control programme is one of the few that has enjoyed considerable success.
Although there had been a long established tradition of community and private forestry schemes, it was not until the launching of the Saemol Undong (or New Community Movement) in 1970 that it was possible to conceive of a nation-wide forestry policy and programme.
A ten year Forestry development Plan was initiated in 1973, and it was  organised largely within the institutions and objectives of Saemol Undong , which emphasised effectively a broad-based approach to achieving rural welfare, an incremental step-by-step planning by villagers for their own village with an emphasis on short-term gains in income, and adequate government back-up services.
Physical targets were mostly achieved four or five years ahead of schedule (FAO 1982a: 67), although there were shifts in the emphasis between sub-targets (e.g. from fruit and nut trees to long rotation species).
The whole programme consisted of reforestation, nursery operations, tending operations, and erosion control (hillside treatment and sand-dune fixation).
The political will came at a critical time when it was very necessary to keep the food costs component of the total wage bill (including the foreign exchange component) as low as possible to allow rapid and profitable industrialisation.
Since most of the surplus food was from the lowlands with irrigation water originating in the highlands, widespread deforestation in the latter areas had had very serious effects upon the ability of South Korea to feed itself.
In addition large rural-urban income differentials and massive urban migration contributed to a very unstable situation from about 1962–70.
Thus, in South Korea there were exceptional circumstances in the political economy of the country that led to a highly vigorous programme of rural uplift, of which conservation was only one part.
For a more general discussion of South Korea's development, see Brandt (1978) and ESCAP (1979).
China's conservation efforts have received a good deal of attention and it has been difficult to sort out myth from reality.
This was partly due to the West's indifference to information gathering until recently, the lack of scientific and cultural exchanges until China became a member of the UN in 1971, and extreme xenophobia on the part of the Chinese government engendered by the Cultural Revolution.
It is undoubtedly one of the major conservation programmes of the world.
Very favourable accounts by Sandbach (1980) and Qu Geping (1980) have recently been qualified by Howard (1981) for the highly vulnerable loess soils; some reservations and the need for further mobilisation of the masses as expressed by Dequi et al .
for the Winding River Valley (1982); and a number of more damning commentaries on China's forest policies (Eckholm 1976, Smil 1979, Delfs 1982).
Undoubtedly there have been numerous policy turnabouts, most noticeably at the time of the Cultural Revolution when forestry resources were misused for unsuitable land reclamation (Gustafsson, undated), which in certain particularly vulnerable areas may have exacerbated the destructive floods of autumn 1981.
But the combination of the daunting task of national reconstruction after the Communist victory in 1949, the neglect of conservation for centuries, and a variety of purely physical factors making for great erosion hazards, must also be taken into  account.
Thus, as in the case of the USA, the size and complexity of the programmes, mixed successes, and the possibility that programmes have significantly reduced soil losses, or even the rate of decline rather than improved yields, point to the need for a longer and more sophisticated assessment than is given here.
In Latin America, the state of soil erosion programmes is even worse (Preston 1980).
Freeman (1980) estimates that 80 per cent of Bolivia's farmlands and grazing areas are eroded in varying degrees, and rangelands are degraded down to 10 per cent of their original productivity.
He estimates that between 35- 41 per cent of all useful land is affected by erosion.
In response to this situation ‘the national government has made no response to the problem of erosion, and none is planned’!
Paraguay does not even have a department or other state institution which is supposed to initiate soil conservation and range management.
In the case of Brazil, evidence (presented elsewhere in this book) points to widespread erosion, particularly in the Selva and in the Serrao of north-central and north-eastern Brazil.
In one consultant's report it is stated ‘Brazil has no institutions that are capable of undertaking the task of achieving soil conservation and preventing land degradation.’
At the Federal level there is an Office of the Co-ordination of Soil and Water Conservation, but it has a tiny staff and its position within the Ministry of Agriculture does not enable it to have much influence on land-use decisions.
At State level, there is simply no administration at all to carry out conservation, although at present State Soil Conservation Commissions are in the process of being formed.
It comes as no surprise that Brazil's rural credit policy actually encourages farmers to follow bad farming practices and there is no countervailing influence to change it.
The activities of both large transnational and national companies as well as small-farmer settlers on the northern frontiers of settlement have often been disastrous to the long-term productivity of the land, but have gone on unchecked (Barbira-Scazzocchio 1980).
This very brief review of about ten conservation programmes cannot make the case that all national policies fail.
The authors and quotations mentioned, however, are representative of a wider literature of evaluation, but it is the absence of favourable comments which supports the view that this small sample is representative of most other lesser developed countries.
Why do policies usually fail?
Introduction
In this chapter we will examine various explanations of why most soil conservation policies do not work.
An analysis of the mode of explanation itself is helpful since it makes explicit many unstated assumptions on which these explanations rest.
The conclusion will be that these explanations have recently developed in promising directions.
However, most still fail to state explicitly their political value judgements and are unaware of their ideology.
One of these promising directions has been the realisation that conservation is as much about social processes as physical ones, and that the major constraints are not technical (in the agricultural engineering sense), but social.
Here are four illustrative quotations from the recent literature:
Land-use patterns are an expression of deep political, economic and cultural structures; they do not change overnight when a ecologist or forester sounds the alarm that a country is losing its resource base.
(Eckholm 1978: 167)
The theme of this paper is that knowledge of soil conservation techniques should be improved, but the most pressing need is to put into practice what is already known.
Past experience of implementing soil conservation programmes has been disappointing and the paper tries to identify the more important reasons.
(Hudson 1981: 15)
While socioeconomic criteria may often exist in the minds of planners, there is an alarming failure to relate social and economic needs to acceptable forms of conservation.
In the final analysis, if the small farmer and peasant of the Third World cannot or will not take conservation to heart, no amount of model-building, empirical plot studies, erosion risk assessment or legislation will result in the preservation of the soil's resources.
(Stocking 1981: 377)
What should be said is that there is still a most definite need for research in some neglected, technical areas, but more particularly in integrating the social and economic factors as they occur in a local situation.
Without this integration the results of existing technical research cannot be applied in less than the present high risk of failure.
(MAB 1979: 9)
However, these ‘social factors’ are not subjected to the same systematic analysis as the technical ones, and they remain unconnected, irksome and somehow immovable under prevailing analytical frameworks.
The analysis which follows in the succeeding five chapters attempts to show that they are irksome; and indeed many are immovable without other deep-seated changes in society; and that these cannot be advocated or struggled for on the grounds of soil conservation alone.
Our starting point lies in the identification of the social factors which help to shape the perception of the problem of soil erosion by those who attempt to intervene in land-use decisions through government action.
Most of the attempts to include social factors in the study of erosion and conservation, as the four illustrative quotations show, imply that the social problems start with ‘them’, the land-users themselves.
Here we argue that a comprehensive analysis should broaden the scope of the analysis to include conservationists and governments.
Many readers (and this author too) might therefore find themselves as objects of analysis.
The analysis of soil erosion includes those with political power and asks embarrassing questions about their own view of the problem, and from where it derived.
It points out that peasants and pastoralists may seem tiresome and contrary, but this is an interpretation of political-economic relations which envelops the perceiver too.
When official conservation often does not work, part of the problem may lie in the assumptions which the conservationist, government servant or politician may make about the cause of failure.
These causes range from backwardness of peasants, lawlessness and lack of discipline by land-users, and inefficient implementation procedures, to lack of ‘political will’.
Behind each cause lie assumptions about the way in which society does and should operate.
Appealing to rather different sentiments, there are strong grounds for arguing that scientists should take social responsibility for the technology they develop.
Some scientists would still maintain that science is neutral, and it is the politicians who select and implement their inventions in particular ways and who should therefore shoulder the blame for undesirable consequences.
In a less dramatic and analogous fashion, soil conservationists of all kinds should be able to take a social view of conservation techniques.
Bunting (1978) in more general terms disclaims this responsibility and states that with the introduction of high-yielding paddy it was to be expected there were social problems but it was up to the politicians to ‘do something about it’.
The view that, somehow, science (here, agricultural technology) is neutral and it is the fault of ‘irrational’ politicians or pressure groups is a widely-held one — even if a little sheepishly.
Oasa and Jennings (1982) go further and show the disdain and  hostility that the International Center for the Improvement of Maize and Wheat (CIMMYT), and the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) showed for the comments and criticisms of social scientists about the social implications of the technology that these institutions were developing.
These criticisms were ignored (although delivered by persons of world-wide reputation such as Carl Sauer), received a hostile and defensive reaction, or were absorbed by transforming them into a technical issue — rather than facing them as a social and political one.
This last point is one which is developed here in relation to soil conservation.
The charge of political bias laid at the door of critics, and the claim that their own scientific activities were neutral, leaves only one way out — to make out that the problem lies in technical factors of production that constrain maximum yield performance in maize, and not in the interrelationship between social conditions of inequality and the new technologies which CIMMYT and IRRI were developing.
The next section discusses a model of soil conservation which derived from the perceptions and objective political economic conditions of the ‘colonial period’, stretching from about 1880 — 1960.
Since that period has passed, and we can benefit from hindsight and a somewhat altered world view, the social factors which moulded this model can be more readily recognised.
During the past twenty years or so, many soil conservation programmes in lesser developed countries have been initiated, financed and often partly staffed by foreign aid institutions, particularly multilateral agencies such as the Food and Agricultural Organisation, and the World Bank, and also the biggest bilateral agency, USAID.
These institutions are very different from the colonial ones of the past, but none the less many of the assumptions that lie behind today's conservation policies and projects remain intact.
Furthermore, much of the writing and even foreign staff in conservation institutions are derived directly from colonial administrations.
Foreign aid is so important in conservation policy-making in lesser developed countries because, with a few exceptions, most newly independent lesser developed countries had either no official conservation organisation whatsoever (as in Latin America with the exception of a couple of Southern Brazilian states) or had experienced the colonial model mentioned above, principally in Africa, South and South-east Asia.
For both reasons, there was either virtually no official concern about soil erosion or a reaction against enforced policies which were firmly linked to the colonial regime.
Under those circumstances, foreign aid agencies saw a vacuum which they felt themselves able to fill.
Because of the deeply embedded social issues in soil erosion and conservation and the particular political-economic relations between donor agents and lesser developed countries, new problems tended to arise, and these are discussed in section 3.
The classic or colonial approach to erosion and conservation
It would be an unjust and simplistic generalisation to claim that most conservation policies and official reactions to soil erosion followed a single set of assumptions.
However, it.
is possible to identify a syndrome of implicit assumptions in many lesser developed countries' conservation policies and in more academic and general commentaries on the subject, and to follow them through to particular elements in explicit policy.
Few actual conservation policies contain all these elements and it is difficult to attribute them in every case to implicit value judgements.
A ‘classic approach’ implies a static, long-established, well-recognised and highly valued approach on which particular policies in the future may be based.
Both the theory and practice of soil conservation are in a process of change, albeit rather slowly, and in the opinion of the author often in directions that are not very promising.
In spite of this caveat, the implicit assumptions on which policies are based have only slowly evolved from a colonial, Euro-centric and messianic intellectual frame of reference which has endured the waning of empire and the regaining of political independence of most former colonies.
This is described below.
The classic approach identifies four major problems in rectifying soil erosion.
Environmental problem/solutions
The problem is identified as primarily an environmental problem with environmental solutions.
The opening chapter of this book has put an alternative view, and in spite of an awareness of the importance of ‘social factors’ in environmental degradation, there is very little evidence of effectively implemented policies.
If soil erosion is principally identified as an environmental problem, then the ‘degrees of freedom’, and policy options which derive from concomitant changes in the social sphere are thereby closed.
Therefore there is a logical tendency to preclude from view the social reasons why people are using the land in such a way as to cause excessive soil erosion, and so most conservation policies do not address them at all.
Problems of a lack of alternative sources of fuelwood for poor people, unequal landholdings, political constraints placed upon the pastures of nomads, poor prices imposed by the state for the produce of rural areas and so forth, tend to lie outside the terms of reference of most conservation policies.
When purely environmentally-dictated policies (such as forest closure or forcible destocking of pastures) do not work because the social context has been analysed insufficiently, force is often contemplated  (or, in administrative language, better and tougher implementation and environmental protection).
This frequently ends up with the state attempting to protect the environment from the majority of the people who use it.
For example, the Agricultural Department of what was then British Kenya, when faced with the Wakamba who had marched on Government House as a protest against compulsory destocking in 1938, said:
…unless some pressure is applied to urge improved methods and practices, and unless such pressure is continuously applied…it will not be possible to save the fertile areas of Kenya from deterioration…without the application of compulsion under legislation to enforce improved agricultural practices.
(Clayton E. (1964) citing the Agricultural Department of Kenya)
A more up-to-date but similar sentiment advocating a tough approach:
Admonition alone does not appear to be enough.
A strict legal regime of soil conservation must be established.
(MacAndrews and Chia Lin Sien 1979:30)
Policy ‘solutions’ of this kind tended to favour erosion works (often paid for by labour inputs on the part of farmers themselves), terracing, reafforestation and pasture closure, implemented by compulsory destocking or exclusion from certain vulnerable areas.
They were frequently imposed by colonial regimes using force where necessary.
In colonial Ruanda-Burundi, several weeks of free labour had to be given each year by the commune to build up terraces, bunds and other erosion works.
The paysannat system in the (then) Belgian Congo had similar compulsive elements (Dumont 1970: 36).
Mismanagement of the environment
The problem is blamed on the land users themselves, who are seen to have mismanaged the environment because of lack of environmental awareness, ignorance, apathy and just plain laziness.
The more pejorative epithets have disappeared in the post-colonial literature, except for one or two extreme examples like Kon Muang Nan (1978) who holds the view that the shifting cultivation practised by tribal people in northern Thailand is the most dangerous national problem and one which undermines national security.
The practice should be eliminated or the people expelled from Thailand altogether, he claims.
Here are two more highly pejorative explanations of soil erosion:
The natives are simply running wild and ploughing up large areas of land every second year.
Not only are they ruining good soil through bad farming, but destroying all the valuable timber.
This is a country that can support a lot more natives if properly settled.
The main offenders here are non-indigenous natives who have cleared areas ad acres of the best soil, farming it very poorly and  working it as though it were a private farm…there is no rotation of crops and no manure applied which means he will soon be looking for another 100 acres of good soil to ruin.
(Inspection Report to Chief Native Commissioner, Southern Rhodesia, 1938, in Stocking 1978b)
One might ask why the non-indigenous whites who ran private farms (and thereby improperly ‘unsettled’ other natives) are assumed to ‘use’rather than‘destroy’all the valuable timber.
Farmers are well known for their conservatism.
The African agriculturalist is no exception and is very tenacious of the customs and methods practised by his forefathers…the poor farming methods and soil depleting practices prevalent among peasant cultivators stem from ignorance, custom and lethargy…the main obstacle to overcome is the native's lack of understanding of the need for the prevention of soil erosion.
(Clayton 1964)
Here are three more restrained, post-colonial examples, but none the less with the same implication:
Inadequate knowledge of basic factors resulting in excessive or untimely tillage, improper implements, poor use of the right equipment, burning of crop residues, and excessive livestock grazing have all contributed to erosion on cultivated land…
(FAO 1960: 1), leading to such a condition which should not happen if all people who use and work the land could have the advantage of scientific knowledge relating to soil and water conservation.
As quickly as possible all countries should adopt an enlightened land-use policy and provide means of carrying it out.
(FAO 1965: 13)
It is basically a problem of the misuse of land…particularly in pastoral areas, much of the problem results from the customs, value systems and attitudes of the people concerning grazing lands and livestock, together with the lack of government mechanisms for effective control.
(FAO 1980: 56)
The most recent and important example comes from the proposed Forest Bill of India which is at the time of writing about to come before Parliament.
It illustrates many points in this chapter, but above all the point about blaming forest users.
The bill identifies much of the blame for the tremendously high rate of deforestation in India as belonging to the adivasis or tribal peoples, who have been systematically marginalised and impoverished for over a thousand years, and who have now retreated into the mountains and remaining forests of central India (a close-up case study is provided of a tribal group, the Sora, in sect. 7.4).
The Bill suggests prevention of the adivasis using the forest, very heavy fines (double if infringements are perpetrated at night) and powers of arrest without warrant by forest officers.
Ample evidence exists of the real destroyers of the forests being private contractors who supply the timber demands of industry (Centre for Science and Environment 1982; Gribbin, 1982).
The policy implications of this view of the problem are spread across a continuum from agricultural extension to educate farmers  into new and more modern farming practices at the one end, to compulsory erosion works and outlawing practices at the other.
Again the root of the problem was perceived to be the cultivators or pastoralists themselves, and that blame originated from land use by them under their own free will.
If ‘they’ can be made to change by education or compulsion, then the problem of soil erosion and pasture degradation would be solved.
Overpopulation
Another problem identified in the classic approach is that of overpopulation.
Any Solution to the problem of (environmental) deterioration must first cope with the basic cause; overpopulation.
(FAO 1980: 57)
The whole issue of the politics of population growth rates in relation to natural resources and production technology is a highly complex one, and not discussed in any great detail here.
However, it is enough to point out that there are similarities between the ‘overpopulation’ view and the view that farmers and pastoralists should be educated out of their ignorant, lethargic and traditional ways.
Both identify the cause of the problem as beginning and ending with the land-users themselves…they should change their habits of production and reproduction, and the problem of soil erosion would be largely solved.
In some policies the two problems are seen to be combined where the systems of farming collectively called shifting cultivation have reached a point where their carrying capacity has been exceeded, and fallow periods have become so short that degradation and erosion have set in (Allan 1967).
The policy implication here is that family planning programmes are linked strongly with conservation programmes (as in Kenya or in India in Sanjay Gandhi's Four (and later Five) Point Programme which included both family planning and reafforestation).
Involvement in the market economy.
The last problem identified in the classic or colonial model is that cultivators and pastoralists who cause soil erosion are insufficiently involved in the market economy.
Involvement in the production of surpluses for sale in the market implies modern methods of cultivation and improved productivity, so alleviating the ‘population problem’, and the awareness of financial inducements, and incentive to undertake soil conserving agronomic practices and/or erosion works.
The policy implication of this view is a programme to help those farmers who can help themselves to grow cash crops.
A quotation (provided by Randall Baker, private communication) from a recent Australian funded cattle ranching scheme in Fiji illustrates both the unquestioned assumption that development must imply modern commercial development and the disparaging attitude towards existing social and economic organisation:
The Fijian traditional communal system of livelihood has a tendency to restrict initiative for commercial expansion and development so that there is a need to modify commercial values to meet with the demands of modern commercialism, This, in a nutshell, is what the Yalavou project sets out 10 do.
(Fiji Government 1982: 71)
A case study of Kenya (Baker 1981) admirably illustrates many of these points, and Fig. 4. 1 from Baker is reproduced summarising many of the points made above.
The political and economic origins of this approach to soil conservation go a long way to explaining it.
It was an approach not of the land-users themselves but of their rulers, and therefore it is necessary to discuss briefly what the colonial rulers' political and economic interests were, and in what way they related to the people of colonised areas and to the natural resources they found there.
Considerably more detail is given in Chapter 7, and only an outline of the major points as they contribute to understanding of this approach to soil erosion appears here.
It is interesting to note that soil conservation as a national policy, supported by the various apparatus of state (agricultural extension, the law, and law enforcement agencies) was largely an African colonial phenomenon (French, Belgian and British), with a smaller constituent from colonial India and the Dutch East Indies.
Therefore the fact that most of the illustrative material comes from Africa, and not from Latin America, is not by chance.
First of all, although colonial policies varied considerably through space and time, one of the chief resources for colonial regimes was land.
Either local cultivators and pastoralists were cleared from the land completely and it was reserved for European immigrants, or in some cases (like Uganda and larger parts of Tanganyika) local cultivators were encouraged, or forced, to grow crops for sale either as export crops or as food crops to feed the mining workforces in southern Africa (for longer accounts of the processes of settler immigration and colonial policies, see Rodney 1972; Palmer & Parsons 1977).
One of the major implications was extreme overcrowding of the local population in terms of their usually extensive farming systems.
Usually too, the European took the best land as in Algeria, for example, where 20,000 European farms were established on a third of the cultivable land (about 2.5m. ha.) while some 630,000 Algerian peasants were confined to 5m. ha.
of dry, hilly and thinly soiled areas (Stewart 1975).
Similar displacements occurred and Africans were confined to reserves in Kenya, or to tribal trust lands in Zimbabwe (Southern Rhodesia) and at the present time in the Bantustans by the Republic of South Africa.
A similar displacement occurred much earlier in the New World where the enconomienda system was established in Latin America and a plantation economy in the Caribbean islands, both of which suddenly displaced local cultivators.
The existing cultivation systems often caused serious erosion as a result of the ‘instant overpopulation’ which ensued.
Similar fates befell pastoralists where large areas of seasonal pasture were denied them as in Kenya in both the Masai territory and Karamajong.
By assuming the political economic circumstances of this displacement as given, of course it seemed natural to the colonial administration that the condition of environmental deterioration was the fault of the cultivators themselves.
Second, it was in the economic interests of the colonial (and home) administrations to persuade or force the cultivator to grow produce for the market either because it increased the cultivator's taxability and therefore he/she could contribute to the infrastructural administrative and policing costs of the colony; or, where settlers  would or could not do the job, it would provide a source of cheap food for the mining workers, particularly in southern Africa.
Hence the motive for commercialisation of the peasant created a convergence between a philanthropic desire to improve the lot of the peasant and to serve the economic interests of mining companies and colonial administrators.
Many other contemporary examples of both national as well as international institutional policy in which the market is seen as the only means to improve peasants' and pastoralists' incomes and to increase their contribution to the national exchequer can be found in Heyer, Roberts and Williams (1981).
The introduction of new cash crops such as groundnuts (particularly in the Savannah areas of Africa south of the Sahara), coffee, cotton and maize both by European settlers and to local cultivators throughout eastern and southern Africa, was strongly supported by all colonial administrations.
Research stations undertook research for the larger (white) commercial farmers and most African cultivators were actively discouraged from producing in competition with settler farmers (Brett 1973).
However, the introduction of these crops often had serious consequences for soil conservation such as the cultivation of groundnuts in Mali and Niger (Franke and Chasin 1980), and pure stand maize cultivation and cotton.
The repercussions of the introduction of cash crops have been analysed in detail in postcolonial times (Dinham & Hines 1983), particularly upon a reduced capacity of households to grow enough food for themselves, upon nutrition, and upon their ability to withstand drought and other, socially-induced, disasters (Copans 1975; O'Keefe et al.1977).
Of course, a set of policies on soil conservation was not simply determined by a few major economic and political interests of colonial powers alone.
For one thing, they varied enormously from place to place (e.g. the distinctions between the policies of the colonial administrations of Kenya and neighbouring Uganda, Brett 1973; Leys 1975), and between Anglophone and Francophone Africa.
They varied through time, and there were also important contradictions between local governors who understood well these deleterious effects upon cultivators and pastoralists, and their paymasters both in the colony and metropole (Brett, ibid.
Chapters 6 and 7).
Last, but not least, there was an attitude of mind of the rulers towards the ruled, varying between paternalism through uncomprehending distaste to outright racism.
Africans received laws, fines and even imprisonment for certain agricultural and pastoral practices (and the other restrictions which enabled Europeans to realise their economic interests of the day), while European settlers received physical infrastructure, loans, and an agricultural extension service backed by research stations which researched commercial crops for commercial farmers.
What evidence is there that these overt policies and covert assumptions have outlived the political and economic structures which brought them into being?
After all, most countries which were colonies in the past, have regained their independence.
There are two lines of argument here.
The first is that the conservation policies themselves still have many of the assumptions of the colonial model.
Some post-colonial examples have already been given, and more appear in Chapter 7.
The second argument is that many structures of appropriation of surpluses from peasantries and pastoralists which were established during the late colonial period still exist.
While political independence is a contemporary and important fact of life in all but a handful of countries, the economic incorporation of their economies into the world economy continues and deepens.
The aspects of this process which affect land-users are discussed in detail in Chapter 7.
Briefly, the incorporation of an economy into the world economic system involves an extension of the market mechanism between producers and consumers in the lesser developed country with other countries or transnational companies, and thereby a closer political relationship between other trading partners and national or international financial institutions.
Incorporation is both affected by the effects of the internal class structure of the lesser developed country and, as it deepens, becomes a determining process of social development or retrogression.
Although the approach of this book makes its political stance clear, it is not its intention to undertake a wide-ranging critique of various models of social change.
It is not necessary for readers to agree completely with the ideology of the approach to arrive at some of the same conclusions about soil erosion as found here.
For example, if readers agree that incorporation is the only feasible and desirable route to social development (e.g. Bauer 1976: 66f.), then soil erosion has to be counted as an inevitable cost.
However, the reader could still maintain an internally consistent position by advocating ‘incorporation’ as the only feasible route to modernisation and development, at the same time as acknowledging the linkages between these processes and soil erosion.
To expose the contradictions of the world economic system by identifying soil erosion in lesser developed countries is like expecting the tail to wag the dog.
Soil erosion is one of its many contradictions, and for reasons amply discussed in this book, it is one of the most diffuse and complex areas of analysis.
It is not one to rally the world's peasantries, pastoralists and other land-users to change the social conditions which bring about soil erosion in the first place.
We return to this point in Chapter 9.2.
Foreign aid and conservation programmes
Many conservation programmes in lesser developed countries have been initiated, financed and partly staffed by foreign aid donors, both multilateral and bilateral (of which by far the most important financially and intellectually has been USAID).
Given the fact that soil conservation as a government policy was a colonial phenomenon, it is perhaps not surprising that in post-colonial Africa at least, foreign aid tended to move into the vacuum left by the colonial administration.
Also, the USA exported its long experience with trying to deal with its own soil erosion problems, as a part of foreign policy to its sphere of influence in Latin America in the 1950s, where there had been an almost complete lack of government concern over soil erosion.
Foreign aid has received a number of critical analyses, the best known of which is by Lappé et al.(1980) and, in relation to the activities of the World Bank, Payer (1982), and these will not be reviewed here.
In a sentence the kernel of the criticism is that foreign aid tends to serve narrow donor interests and those of the classes in recipient countries that will most benefit; that it incorporates the lesser developed country into dependent relations with industrialised nations; and that through a series of bureaucratic filters, special interests and general bungling, frequently does harm not good.
Soil conservation programmes, by the nature of their objectives and the distribution of personal rewards (which are usually meagre since there is little money to be made out of them) are immune from many of the more trenchant criticisms of foreign aid policies and programmes.
However, the fact that soil conservation and other related programmes are delivered through foreign aid institutions poses additional problems for their success.
The elements which are essential in most conservation policies are often contradicted by the limitations and objectives of foreign aid.
Table 4.1 below summarises some of these contradictions.
The results of these contradictions tend to follow a pattern.
First of all there is the project document of which the format and content are so often quite unsuited to tackling the formidable tasks required for a successful conservation programme.
Typically there is a short anodyne introduction to the economy of the recipient nation, emphasising the need for conservation and the nation's laudable attempts to meet it.
There is seldom any serious political analysis either of the ruling class(es) and how they express their interests through the state and its institutions or of ‘civil society’ where the conservation is supposed to happen.
There are obvious reasons why not, but its absence contributes to a continuation of failed projects because authors make heroic assumptions and quantify them to produce fanciful targets.
Political-economic analysis could help professional economists both by providing a critique of their   ideology, and also in assessing what is feasible, who will benefit and lose from their policies, what will tend to be done or left undone in the project and so on.
The project document continues with a good deal of detail about the erosion works, areas to be covered by different treatments, and the expected benefits.
An economic appraisal is provided usually on a before-and-after, or with-and-without the project basis.
Here, most of all in the project appraisal, does quantification mystify and legitimate in the name of objective economic analysis.
Busy bureaucrats, accountants, division chiefs and so on can always check the budget to the last dollar, suggest improvements to the ‘organigram’ of the project, add a foreign-training component and so on.
On the other hand it is a lengthy task, based on shrewd local knowledge and acute economic and political-economic judgement, to appraise the appraisal.
So the organisation of personnel, budget, physical specifications of buildings, office equipment, etc. take up the rest of the project document and its appendices.
There is little time, and little scope for an in-depth analysis of the political-economic context of the conservation programme.
Lest this account seem unduly cynical, it must be added that the individuals involved are subordinate to the functional constraints of their job.
They are not paid to raise unnecessary dust in the formulation of a project; they are paid to design a project to spend earmarked funds in a way that they see as ‘best’.
Even those who are acutely aware of these constraints have to be content with doing their job to the best of their ability, although they may be aware of the probable shortfall in impact of the whole project.
The project is then signed by representatives of the donor and recipient country and implementation starts.
A search through a considerable number of mid-term and final reviews and evaluations of conservation projects by the author produced an interesting pattern.
However it is a very difficult and time-consuming operation to read through the evaluations and to compare them to the original project document.
Here are some of the findings from a search through project documents and reviews:
(a)
Physical achievements with an exact specific output are usually reached, such as buildings, most erosion control works, training programmes, aerial photography, mapping sub-projects and so on.
(b)
The build-up of trained personnel and institutional development also usually goes according to schedule.
(c)
The development of agronomic research into soil conserving practices also (in four cases where the search discovered projects with this component) seems to have occurred at the research station, and on the land of a handful of farmers.
Outreach to land-users in the project area was in all cases ‘slower than expected’, or seemed to have been forgotten altogether in the evaluation.
(d)
Where conservation was part of a wider package of rural development programmes (e.g. in integrated rural development projects), the physical outputs were achieved on target such as construction of storage facilities, target areas planted under some  improved varieties of crops, the planting of trees in big plantations, the establishment of sawmills, agro-processing plants, mills and packing stations.
However, other more ambitious targets such as reducing the rate of soil erosion, improving the offtake of pastures and the diffusion of soil conserving land management practices almost always were not achieved.
Benefits were distributed socially and spatially less widely than anticipated.
This summary of findings does not refer to all foreign aid projects.
It is the combination of the particular elements required by successful conservation projects with the particular political, economic and logistic constraints under which foreign aid has to operate, that limit the fulfilment of objectives.
The problems discussed in this section are not necessarily separate from those outlined as deriving from the colonial model, indeed they frequently overlap.
When they do, the results are all the more dismal.
Some explanations for failure, and some reassessments
Chapter 3 has suggested that many soil conservation policies fail, and section 2 of this chapter has identified an historical model of the conceptualisation of the soil erosion problem and its policy solutions.
Although many elements of that model still exist today, there is also quite widespread dissatisfaction with it, and there has been some attempt to find out why, and to modify these elements.
Although this effort has been piecemeal and has occurred in widely differing contexts, the direction in which it is moving can be identified.
Still, many of the most fundamental ‘social factors’ behind the conceptualisation of the causes of soil erosion and the role of government have still not been analysed coherently, and remain at best labelled and hidden in a number of black boxes.
Here are some of the reasons that are commonly found in contemporary documentation for failures in conservation programmes.
(a)
Conservation techniques do not conserve soil in practice because of technical failures through inadequate or misapplied research.
These range from the collapse of concrete-walled and widened terraces constructed by the Israelis in occupied territories (Bunyard 1980) to repeated failure of inflexible concrete check dams (nowadays frequently replaced by gabion), breached bunds, inadequate storm channels and inadequate knowledge of the requirements and performance of grasses and trees.
Other examples include Nobe and Seckler for Lesotho (1979); Robinson for Zambia  (1978a 1978b); Coulson (1981); Rapp (1975) and Rapp et al.(1973).
(b)
Conservation techniques do not fit into agricultural and pastoral practices and therefore are not applied by farmers or pastoralists.
An extended example of local conservation techniques being neglected or even discouraged and government initiated ones being encouraged (and later on forced upon the local population) is given by Berry and Townshend (1973).
Table 4.2, adapted and added to the original (ibid: 246) indicates the techniques, their origin and their acceptance.
One or two extra and up-dated pieces of information are supplied (Eco-Systems 1982).
Inspection of Table 4.2 shows that those techniques already practised by local farmers, which the colonial government also encouraged and wished to extend, were accepted.
Those introduced by government which were similar to those already employed (e.g. contour ridging) were also accepted.
Others ran into practical difficulties.
For example, contour banks in the Mbeya region led to rat infestation; wide grass strips and contour hedges often used up too much land.
Boxed and broad-based terraces required an enormous amount of labour, reduced yields and proved unstable.
Coercion had to be used to get local farmers to undertake these (technically dubious) measures.
Many conservation schemes in southern and central Africa demanded a reduction in stocking rates and thus in the major form of storage of wealth, capital and prestige (Stocking 1981a, for Swaziland; Cliffe 1964, in Tanzania).
In Java, Pickering (1979) reports in detail problems of the same kind.
Ridge and tree planting on very steep slopes met resistance when the trees grew enough to shade food crops planted in between and were savagely pruned back.
Constant supervision of seedling trees was also a problem.
However, this technique was better accepted on poorer lands where food crops were less attractive relative to fuelwood.
Bench terraces were technically effective, but ran into problems with the marginal farmer who was unable to sustain the temporary loss of food crops which terracing usually entails.
Lastly, a scheme for silvipasture involving quite an intricate technology combining livestock-rearing, fodder grasses and fuelwood, needed considerable capital and physical back-up on the part of farmers, the larger operators of whom were successful.
Bonsu (1981) reports the results of experiments to reduce erosion in a savannah soil of northern Ghana by means of a number of agronomic practices, including the leaving of crop residues as a mulch.
One wonders how successful this was bearing in mind that residues are used there to feed livestock, as fuel to cook food, and to construct roofs for houses.
Indeed, one could posit the hypothesis that this technique, if enforced, would put more pressure on sparse thorn/acacia resources, or possibly animal dung as cooking fuel   rather than as a fertiliser.
The commonly promoted answer to these problems is more research into the decisions and practices of users (UN Desertification Conference, Nairobi 1977).
This is perhaps one of the few areas in which more research may provide genuinely useful insights for more realistic conservation programmes.
(c)
Conservation is hampered by existing land tenure conditions.
In many countries with very unequal land holdings, land reform is considered an essential prerequisite to a successful soil conservation programme (e.g. Baker 1980, for Peru; and Eckholm 1976: 55), in order to encourage secure and long leases of land so that tenants would invest in conservation and in some cases provide marginal farmers with more land and therefore income to be able to afford conservation measures (FAO 1977a: 27).
Eckholm (1976: 55) recounts the case in Ethiopia before the land reform of 1975 when peasants, forced to work on a reafforestation project, planted the seedlings upside-down as a protest against oppressive land tenure conditions.
This example shows the indirect effects of tenure upon the attitude of subordinated peasants who had to plant trees on someone else's land.
The same author goes on to say that there are cases where land reform, or at least the break-up of large latifundia or estates, had actually accelerated environmental decline, as in Bolivia in the 1950s or after the emancipation of serfs in Russia in 1816.
The major constraints which tenure conditions impose upon conservation programmes that discourage private initiatives to invest in conservation practices are short leases which tempt the tenant to remove as much plant material and nutrients as possible from the soil within the period of tenancy; insecurity of tenants in longer leases; uncertainty of compensation to tenants by landlords for conservation works at the end of the lease; and a lack of an accepted means by which landlord and tenant can share these outlays in the first place (Barlowe 1958).
(d)
A lack of participation by land-users in government sponsored conservation.
This explanation clearly overlaps the previous one where conservation cuts across existing agricultural and pastoral practices.
Presumably preliminary consultation by conservation agencies and institutional involvement of local people in plan formulation and implementation would avoid these clashes.
However, it goes further than that and implies a lack of awareness of the need for conservation, of future private benefits for individual households and the village (or larger local community) as a whole, leading to a failure to mobilise people to give their labour for construction (even when it will be paid for), for maintenance work, and for enforcement where discipline is required (to control lopping of small seedlings, to exclude livestock from reafforested and other areas and so on).
Bringing about community participation in forestry programmes would usually require a more equal pattern of land ownership and control than exists in most LDC's, that is, require redistributive land reform.
Cooperation is rarely found to succeed amongst those who are unequal in material terms since it becomes difficult both to ensure an equal distribution of costs and benefits.
(Agarawal 1980: 161)
This is an important but different explanation from that which attributes failure of conservation programmes to the conservation agency (e.g. the Ministry of Forestry, the Environment, or ad hoc project staff) being ineffective in getting local people to cooperate with them .
Indeed, internal dissensions between different groups of local people may lead to indifference on their part to government personnel and their efforts, but the causes and remedies of the two  explanations are different.
In Nepal, a number of inequalities in the distribution of costs and benefits of various conservation programmes and related projects for increasing agricultural and fuelwood production can be identified (Blaikie 1981, 1983).
Households with less privately-owned land which had to rely on the ‘public economy’(the forest) for livestock rearing rather than private land, were less willing to see restrictions placed upon access to forests or to others' private land for stubble grazing in cases where fodder tree planting on terrace backs was being advocated.
According to one source, it was an immensely slow and difficult process for the British and Nepalese project personnel to get the village panchayat (village council) to agree to communal efforts necessary for conservation, seed replication programmes, seedling nurseries, terrace improvements, terrace-back planting, woodfuel lot planting and stock improvement, because of the  vissiparious effects of perceived (and real) different costs and benefits of various parts of the scheme.
This was used as one of the major defences of the British aid programme in Nepal which was to concentrate their efforts in villages with a predominant presence of ex-Gurkha soldiers which would encourage both better rapport between British field officers and farmers, as well as an (ex-) army-style sense of organisation, discipline and work-practice within the village itself.
In these villages, it was argued, a lack of common purpose would be less pronounced.
Taking a counter-example, the success of a project reported by Veblen (1978) for an area in western Guatemala was attributed to the institution of communal forest holdings, or ejido , which has favoured preservation of the forests of Totonicapan.
Communal overexploitation was averted first because of inter-personal face-to-face relationships involved in the design and implementation of forest preservation by a small community where enforcement and the meting out of punishments was a matter for the forest users themselves; second, because of the existence of a special interest group (carpenters); and third, the shared and fierce desire of the people to remain as independent of outside influence and control as possible (p. 434).
Another isolated success story is reported by Shaxson (1981, reported in Morgan 1981) in India where a village finally decided to restore its hill-grazing area and plant fuelwood trees, the scheme being designed and implemented locally.
It is instructive to compare these accounts with another proposed project (FAO/UNDP) reported by Velloso (1981) in Honduras where an effective linkage between the community and Honduran entrepreneurs for the proper exploitation and industrialisation of forests was hoped for.
The Comayagua Plan includes a hydroelectric plant to fuel a planned woodpulp and paper factory; an experimental nursery to test possible future forest products; and the creation of employment opportunities to compensate local people for the  necessary reduction in their livestock rearing.
The achievement of local participation seems very remote, and a lion's share of the benefits will probably accrue to more powerful elements (entrepreneurs and outsiders).
Other more coercive measures are almost bound to be used when participation breaks down — a general issue which will be returned to later.
Turning to the relationship between direct land-users and conservation agents, lack of participation of the former has been attributed to governments not involving the people in the design and implementation of the project.
Where government introduces measures that exclude people from resources long since used by them, the people come to view the project as a zero-sum game (Thomson in Glantz, ed. 1977), where their loss is exactly others' gain, and conservation will not in the long run lead to an increase in their incomes.
A lack of government efforts to involve local people is often contributory to the design of projects which cut across existing agricultural practices and tenurial arrangements.
But also in another sense, conservation has frequently been seen as an imposition, so much so that many local people rioted, formed armed resistance and used the issue as a nucleus for organising wide-ranging political dissent in eastern Africa against the British colonial administration (Young and Fosbrooke 1960; Cliffe 1964).
In the colonial context, the word ‘participation’ had an uncomfortable ring about it, quite alien to the ideology of the political ‘status quo’, and the colonial administration and agricultural extension service knowing what was good for the African cultivator.
Another example, in Algeria shortly after independence, is discussed by Stewart (1975: 31):
The central criticism of the 1960 programme has always been directed against its allegedly authoritarian character.
The treatment was to be decided by experts, and the people had simply to accept it.
Their acquiescence was to be encouraged by a campaign of information and by mobilising convinced peasants to persuade recalcitrant ones, but nothing could stop the tractors from moving in on the appointed day.
Successful attempts to get local people to participate in official conservation programmes may have increased in post-colonial times, but there are many cases of governments choosing coercion rather than participation, for example:
The soil conservation efforts (in Lesotho) were no more successful in increasing agricultural output than were those installed by the British during the pre-independence period.
And again, since no erosion research data were collected, their effects on soil losses are unknown.
But the record shows clearly that they were definitely more expensive and at least as disruptive of local village life…as the earlier British programs had been.
(Nobe and Seckler 1979: 157)
The case studies by Rapp, Berry and Temple (1973) which were referred to earlier in this chapter also illustrate all the major reasons for failure of conservation in Tanganyika and post-colonial Tanzania  -technical incompetence and incompatibility with existing agricultural practice has already been mentioned — also attempts at coercion of peasants to build erosion works (p. 1 17, 250), and a lack of participation, with an excess of petty restrictions (p. 251).
Even where the government pays for the mechanical means of conservation entirely (and thus avoids the problems of a lack of capital or labour on the part of the farmer, his inability to forgo food crops for a season, and the reduction of his perception of the risks involved even if his private resources are sufficient), such an act engenders apathy on the part of the farmer, who regards the work as belonging to the state (FAO 1966: 172, for a project in Morocco).
(e)
Institutional weaknesses.
These causes of failure are attributed to ‘problems at the top’, although of course these must be linked to problems further down, particularly of lack of participation of local people, inappropriate conservation measures, local enforcement and so on.
It perhaps seems the easiest problem to tackle if the viewer also is located somewhere near the top (e.g. a foreign advisor, international academic, or senior bureaucrat or politician in the country involved).
This perhaps explains the predominance of recommendations for institutional reform, compared with the other deeper-seated changes in civil society which are implied (and later analysed) in this book.
A commonly recognised problem is a lack of coordination in conservation policy which comes about because the wide-ranging issues implied in its brief are traditionally dealt with by separate ‘line’ ministries.
Here soil conservation does not stand alone in this, and rural development in general suffers from the same problems which have generated a large literature in the improvement of planning and administrative systems.
In some cases, there are competing institutions for policy-making and implementation of soil conservation (such as in FAO itself) as in many governments of lesser developed countries.
In response to this a separate central organisation with special powers is often suggested.
Sandbach (1980) cites a United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) report published in 1976 which states that seventy countries had created central organisations concerned with the environment.
For example, at the time of writing every nation in South America except Paraguay has such an institution.
A different but not exclusive approach is to insist upon a conservation element being included in most rural development projects.
This is sometimes quite difficult if funded by governments, but even more so if funded by bilateral aid, where the donor may have its own ideas on the subject.
Furthermore they may be different ones from other bilateral or multilateral agencies, making a coordinated national conservation programme rather difficult.
The case of Nepal illustrates this.
In 1982 there were  sixteen forestry/conservation projects and conservation elements in six integrated rural development projects (each with a different donor agency).
Some of these are included in the Sixth Five Year Plan, and some of which have been tacked on to ad hoc annual plans.
There are scarcely monitored nor integrated into a national conservation plan.
In Kenya a new Ministry of the Environment and other far-reaching institutional reforms are currently before parliament.
Inter-departmental squabbles are blamed for failures in India (Bali 1974; Ranganathan 1978).
Effective legislation is another area of institutional strengthening often advocated.
Although there are many laws on the statute book (often dating from colonial administration), they have either become dead letters or are not integrated into a coherent national conservation programme (FAO Soils Bulletin No. 30, 1976b, lists various legislation for different countries).
Indeed, many of the conservation statutes in Kenya, Zambia, Zimbabwe and Tanzania, which the post-colonial governments have resurrected or only slightly redrafted, date from the British administration.
These statutes were ironically among the main foci of opposition during those countries' independence movements.
In the case of Thailand, legislation has been on the statute books for at least twenty years, but its Constitution of October 1976 and Interim Constitution of November 1977 contain no mention of environmental protection at all, as also is the case of the Philippines (Shane, in MacAndrews and Chia Lin Sien, eds. 1979).
However, from evidence cited by Shane (ibid), it is not so much the lack of legislation but the unwillingness or inability of governments to enforce existing measures adequately which is the more fundamental problem.
Policy implications: from black boxes to systems black boxes
The response to these five perceived difficulties has been various.
At the most analytically simple, the difficulties remain as unexplored discrete entities or black boxes, which then have to be removed or steered round in the formulation of a conservation project or policy.
In rather the same way as in some Basic Needs Strategies, a checklist of desirable attributes of a good strategy can be compiled (Blaikie, Cameron & Seddon 1979).
A drawback to this response is that merely bearing a desirable attribute in mind does not necessarily remove the problem.
Its advantage is that it is at least problem-orientated and gives the impression (which is sometimes justified) that one has the means to solve it.
The more abstract the mode of analysis of the problem and therefore the more connected the items  on the check-list become, the less likely that one can solve them alone.
However, even a rudimentary enquiry into the problems discussed above shows that they are connected in obvious ways.
Local participation is achieved because, and as a result of, appropriate conservation measures which do not cut across existing practices and irreducible means of earning a livelihood.
Effective programme formulation and implementation by government to provide external inputs to appropriate skills is essential for local participation and implies effective and coordinated administration, and so on.
Furthermore, all the items on the check-list themselves, such as local participation, effective administration by government and consonance between conservation measures and existing agricultural and pastoral practice, require deep-seated political economic preconditions.
Community participation in conservation can occur under a variety of different circumstances, but one can identify some that make it easier.
For example, inequalities of political power and access to land should not substantially weight the costs and benefits of conservation measures to or from particular groups or classes at the local level.
Also there should be an effective and widely respected authority which can solve disputes and give penalties in the case of infringement of mutually agreed codes of practice.
Finally there should be a trusting two-way communication between externally provided skills (e.g. water engineers, agronomists, planners,) and local land-users.
These three facilitating conditions are predicated upon the nature of the local political economy-who has power and how it is exercised; upon the nature of the state, and the interests and ideology of people who serve in government (e.g. bureaucrats, forest police, or politicians).
Hence there is a painful dilemma for the policy-maker between treating a problem as a black box which will not go away but whose size does not seem intimidating and is amenable to exorcism by benign rhetoric and minor policy adjustments; or as a more diffuse, analytically complex and sophisticated explanation of why most of the problems exist.
The choice that this book tends towards is the second, and the ensuing problems are discussed in Chapter 5.
The discussion so far does not imply that piecemeal improvements of conservation programmes have not occurred.
While research on the agronomic side of conservation has taken considerable strides during the past fifteen years for all its problems of misapplication, there have also been some advances in the thinking on the socio-economic side of soil erosion and the resulting design of conservation programmes as well.
This is particularly important in the ideological vacuum which was left by the retreat of empire from Africa and Asia where much soil conservation had been designed by colonial administration.
Three different ways can be identified in  which piecemeal improvements to the conceptualisation of the soil erosion problem have been transcended.
They are:(a) a new attempt to understand the interrelatedness of the current problems that beset conservation policies;(b) to stimulate flows of information between land-users and institutions of government; and (c) linking conservation with wider development efforts.
An awareness of the way in which the reasons for erosion are connected has implied the necessity for inter-disciplinary study.
This has led to a change in the way in which both physical and social data are collected and combined in an effective conservation policy, or, as Pickering (1979) puts it, in such a way as to ensure the technical validity of a conservation technique is appropriate over the same area as its social validity.
One approach is to hire a sociologist to peer into the black box (the quotation from Heusch 1981: 423, and p. 46 in this book about the role of the sociologist is apposite here), in a similar way to anthropologists who sought to tell colonial administrators how to avoid irritating the people they governed (although, according to Feuchtwang 1973, the administrators did not take much notice of what they had to say).
It is the experience of other sociologists on similar missions that their findings are frequently cast in a negative role — that certain conservation measures will not succeed or will actually do harm — and also that they are frequently overridden or relegated to writing a disparate chapter in a project document or report entitled ‘Social constraints to soil and water conservation’.
Under these circumstances at least a gesture towards listening to the local people has been made.
In other reports, however, these findings are actually incorporated into a project or programme — although whether those parts of the project are actually implemented is another matter.
Another approach to handling inter-disciplinarity is to educate agricultural engineers and administrators into the way of being sympathetic at least to these social factors.
A recent publication spells out the need for more inter-disciplinary awareness (UNESCO 1979a: 5):
Engineers are often most concerned with the attainments of a high level or technical competence which has resulted in the gradual erosion of the general level of social awareness and perspective necessary for an engineer to serve his community usefully…
There are numerous examples where there has been an effort to apply an engineering solution to a problem without taking adequate account of all its parameters (tube-wells and salination, road building and rural income distribution).
Seminars, courses, systems analysis, panel discussions, case studies and simulations are some of the solutions suggested.
How far this approach can hope to have an impact is rather doubtful.
Also engineers are singled out here as the culprits when it could well have been social (and technically incompetent) scientists!
Lastly, inter-disciplinarity is assisted not only in the logistics of using knowledge, but in the epistemology and methodology of that knowledge itself.
Here systems analysis has helped considerably.
Such works as Odum (1971), Dumsday (1971), Dumsday and Flynn (1977) and Rieger (1978–9a & b) are examples in that field.
Systems analysis has important advantages in that it can handle both complex biophysical relationships (which is more difficult in a rigid mathematical programming approach) and can include the effects of policy instruments and other hitherto exogenous social and economic variables.
The disadvantages are that the technique is very ambitious, is sensitive to data inaccuracies and incompleteness, and technical problems of model validation are formidable.
However, even if it is a matter of putting different variables in boxes on a sheet   of paper and following through likely relationships qualitatively — a far cry from what is usually meant by systems analysis — it is a further intellectual advance on the black box approach to ‘social factors’.
Fig. 4.2 from Rieger (1978/9a) is an example of this approach.
It gives a good intellectual overview of the problem and a ‘map’ in which can be located detailed close-up studies, which at the same time do not lose sight of the general context in which they are made.
In the context of lesser developed countries with acute problems of data collection and interpretation, a systems approach rather than systems analysis will be more viable.
Modelling farming decisions by means of farming systems research is also another promising avenue.
In this approach farming decisions are not analysed in isolation from each other or from non-farm employment (something which is advocated in Ch. 5 especially, and operationalised in a decision-making model in Ch. 6).
The second trend in current conservation thinking concerns the relationship between the programme and its clients or government and land-users, and has taken a number of different forms.
New thinking in rural development planning in general has only been taken up piecemeal by conservation planners and commentators in the international literature and they have been idealistic and exhortative in tone.
Chambers (1983 forthcoming, and in shorter form 1980 a and b) has exhorted government officials to be aware that ‘in developing countries poor rural people and rural poverty in general are underperceived or misperceived by those who themselves are neither poor nor rural’.
The most relevant aspect of his advice concerns ‘rural tourism’ as one inevitable relationship between government and the rural people, which introduces biases in development programmes in which the poorer are neglected because they are inescapably the most remote and difficult to reach; and in which university education and professional training blinker and condition researchers and planners so that they see problems of poverty in terms of their own specialisation and through filters of supposedly superior knowledge and status.
French (1982) specifies ‘ten commandments’ for renewable energy analysis which has much of the same spirit as the advice of Chambers.
These are: do not harm; be reality led and not technology-driven; filter your data well; find net present value; set your calendar to local time; master the unquantifiable; be replicable; provide no subsidies; keep track of what you do; and think small.
Most of these homilies and others of this genre are most relevant to conservation planners and are discussed indirectly elsewhere in this book.
This is an appeal deriving from a politically specific stance which is liberal in outlook, implying the importance of improving living conditions for the poor, and from the ability of the aware and self-critical planner to do it through the state machinery.
Other developments of better government outreach to rural land-users advocate the need for more local research, although the methodology of local research remains unspecified.
Chapters 6 and 7 attempt to develop one which enables local situations to be studied in relation to wider concerns, and, to use ugly but accurate jargon, to ‘theorise the conjuncture’.
Such calls have be.en made by Hudson (1981) for conservation, although they are far more frequently made by agricultural economists and agronomists who are concerned with interactive research by farmers and research stations (Biggs 1981).
A ‘top-down’ comment by Holdgate (1982) also makes a plea for relevant local research which can be applied and its resulting policies replicated.
Lastly, conservation has been seen as just one element in rural development efforts, and conservation elements have been linked with agricultural extension, institutional development (cooperatives, regulated markets, government-supplied services, and so on), and the provision of infrastructure (storage, roads, buildings, etc.)
(Adamson et al .
1982).
This has one most significant aspect in that soil conservation is not singled out as a specific and separate problem to be solved by a particular policy — it is conceived of as normal practice and must be incorporated into the business of improving incomes for farmers.
Many integrated rural development projects have conservation elements built into them, but, judging by evaluation reports, these are acknowledged to be difficult to measure, slow to bring benefits, and are often neglected or abandoned.
Many bilateral and multilateral aid agencies have rightly upgraded the importance of monitoring and evaluation in their activities, and as Chapter 2 has indicated, quantification and measurement of the impact of soil conservation are essential.
None the less diffuse benefits from conservation accruing over a long-time horizon and  targeted very widely among the rural population are poor candidates for adoption and funding.
What cannot be justified quantitatively cannot command large resources.
Thus the inclusion of conservation elements in rural development projects tends to be more a conceptual advance than a practical one, and to be an item in a project document rather than an output.
All these three new developments are in the direction which this book advocates, but they do not go nearly far enough.
A further extension of these new developments requires a new approach to the whole issue of erosion and conservation.
This approach must first identify and question three fundamental assumptions on which most conservation thinking currently rests.
These are:
(a)
The causes of the problem of soil erosion lie only in the actual place in which the physical symptoms are felt.
A new approach must also recognise they also derive from wider non-location-specific  political-economic relations, and also in other places that may be far from the affected area.
(b)
Soil conservation programmes and policies, particularly those formulated by expatriates, assume the state to be neutral, able to mediate between competing interests, and to intervene above them to apply rational policies for the maximum aggregate benefit.
Thus conservation problems can be more readily solved by better planning carried out by the apparatus of state (ministries of agriculture, local development offices, forest rangers, or research stations).
(c)
Putting (a) and (b) together, another related assumption becomes clear.
Land-using practices are economic activities, in which political-economic relations may be crucial (e.g. the ownership of the land, the distribution of that ownership, the crops grown for the market or for self-provisioning, the existence of wage labour, and so on).
Conservation policies must affect these relations.
Some of those involved lose, some win, others will be unaffected.
Economic and political interests are therefore affected — in the countryside and in the government.
By not considering these interests explicitly, most thinking on conservation policy cannot link conservation with a whole set of wider issues deeply embedded in the patterns of power within a state.
In the next chapter these assumptions are further questioned and new ones are suggested.
Upon these a new approach is constructed.
A new approach — with new problems
Two paradigms
One of the major problems of building a theory of soil erosion is the high degree of contingency which always accompanies any explanation of soil erosion at a particular place.
As Chapter 2 has indicated, soil erosion has occurred in many different societies and periods of history — in feudal Europe, the Soviet Union, Tsarist Russia, the United States in the 1930s, and in present-day peasantries and under widely differing physical conditions.
Essentially, in an explanation of a case of soil erosion, there are two sets of specificity to be tackled -that of the physical system and that of the social/economic system, and they both have to be brought together and analytically integrated.
An omission of the first would lead to a failure to specify the physical processes of soil erosion, their spatial variability and interaction, and indeed the immediate causal variables such as slope, soil structure, vegetative cover, land use, rainfall intensity and so on.
To take an extreme illustrative case, one can imagine a situation where broadly similar relationships exist between direct land-users (pastoralists or peasants) and other groups and the state, and they develop historically in a steep-sloped area and in a plains area nearby.
In the steep-sloped area, a situation might have developed where overgrazing and deforestation occurred as a result of onerous taxation and loss of land to colonisers, leading to virtual environmental collapse.
The same economic and social conditions in the plains area might have led only to loss of soil fertility but not to wholesale soil erosion and environmental collapse.
Therefore the subsequent histories of the two areas will diverge and a different relation between environment and people will develop in each of the two areas.
In this illustration a very obvious physiographic variable cannot be ignored and is integral as part of the explanation, as well as an explanation for human action.
The omission of the second (the social/economic system) leads to a purely technocratic and physical study of the processes of soil erosion and perhaps the immediate land-uses leading to it, without any analysis of other political economic relationships at the local, regional and international scales  which determine the actions of the land-user in the affected area.
The two elements tend to lie in different scientific paradigms.
The first is typically within the purview of the natural sciences and is the subject matter of agricultural engineers and soil scientists, while the second is within the social sciences and is studied by economists and sociologists.
There are considerable epistemological and ideological problems involved in the combination of these two elements, and these are discussed later.
There is also another separation of intellectual concerns which must be brought together in an integrated analysis of soil erosion and conservation.
There is the concern for the physical manifestation of the problem, a place-based concern for where it occurs.
This tends to focus on the physical symptoms of soil erosion and finds its expression in maps of soil loss or erosion hazard, but it also includes other spatial, tangible variables such as land use, stocking densities and the geographical expression of the flow of energy between people and the biosphere.
Therefore it is location-specific, place-based and conjunctural.
There are three ways in which the place-based, location-specific element is relevant to any analysis of soil erosion.
First, it clearly focuses on where the physical symptoms of the problem are.
At smaller geographical scales it is physiographic variables (those describing erodibility and erosivity) which best explain the spatial variations of soil erosion.
This is the conventional (and essential) domain of soil erosion studies as presently conceived.
Second, a place-based concern must be directed to the study of other places where perhaps there is no visible soil erosion problem, but where there are processes of spatial displacement of land-users.
For example, efficiently run coffee estates which conserve soil well, can ‘cause, soil erosion in other places, by displacing small peasants.
A capital intensive fruit plantation in the valley floor of a central American Republic can ‘cause’ soil erosion on hillsides which are being cultivated by peasants who have been dispossessed of more suitable land for cultivation.
In Lesotho, forestry programmes have taken grazing land out of use causing immediate pressure on remaining land, without a displacement of the actual homes of land-users.
Third, other places which feel the effect of soil erosion downstream in the form of deposition and floods must also be part of the place-based analytical concern for soil erosion for two reasons.
First and more obviously, direct curative measures (e.g. flood protection) clearly are within the domain of a soil conservation policy.
Second, there may be various political reasons for including these areas in a comprehensive analysis for accounting purposes.
For example, the benefits of a soil conservation programme will be felt  not only by the direct land users who are causing the soil erosion, but by others who may be subjected to less severe crop losses, deposition of gravel on cultivated land, loss of livestock and building or siltation of canal irrigation networks.
Therefore political and economic accounting of the costs and benefits of soil conservation programmes for others outside the directly affected areas is potentially relevant.
Sometimes those persons may live in a different country (as in the case of Nepal and India, for example), which may well create both problems and opportunities for the funding and joint cooperation of soil conservation ventures.
An estimated $US600 m. annual damage occurs in India due to flooding and siltation, much of which is caused in Himalayan watersheds in Nepal (Gribbin 1982, Thompson and Warburton 1982).
There is also the concern of the non-place-based or non-location specific networks of economic social and political relations acting directly and indirectly upon land users.
It concerns relations between people, and not just between the direct land users and the environment.
Land-users are taxed, sell their produce in the market, work for or employ others, have unequal access to land or other agricultural inputs and are part of the processes of agrarian change such as commercialisation, accumulation, disinvestment and differentiation.
Many of these relations directly or indirectly affect land using decisions which lead to environmental degradation.
It is these processes which are amenable to the analysis of political economy, and involve the objective identification of different economic interests in the countryside as well as the town.
It is true that these processes may well have a spatial expression in a specific situation, but there are others to which it is difficult to attribute any physical manifestation, or by definition which cannot have a spatial expression at all.
For example, the state may regulate the ownership of land through land tenure, or give foreign franchises and concessions, and may pursue national pricing policies for agricultural produce.
These processes, too, are subject to political and economic analyses and are often intimately bound up with land-users who are responsible for accelerated soil erosion.
Both these elements are needed in an understanding of soil erosion conservation, but hitherto it is only the first which has usually been considered — and only in the first of the three location-specific senses at that.
The integration of social factors
These ‘social factors’ then, are part of both the place-based and non-place-based concerns described above.
In the former, they find  expression in land-use patterns, the spatial patterns of agricultural technology including the diffusion of innovations, price-distance relationships of inputs and outputs, spatial patterns of size of landholdings and other more complex ‘eco-class’ relationships (invoking spatial displacement and marginalisation of weaker groups, which will be discussed later).
In the latter, they are the political-economic structures within.
which land-use decisions are made.
A check-list of these social factors is given below, but any analysis of the processes mentioned above will combine the items of the check-list.
Following a ‘bottom-up’ analytical approach, we start with the smallest decision-making unit which uses land, usually centred on a hearth, involving a family, extended family or occasionally a larger unit.
This unit is the smallest one which collectively makes decisions about its allocation of labour and other privately controlled resources (though it may not necessarily own them, in the sense implied by private property).
There will be definitional and ultimately theoretical problems in a few cases where land-use decisions are shared in a complex manner between a small group like a household, and a larger community.
However, in the majority of cases, we are talking about a household constituting a nuclear or extended family, or a pastoral group controlling a flock or herd.
Although land-use decisions are made by the household, these may well not be made equally by all members of it, and this may be significant in the perception of conservation and any government sponsored conservation programme.
So, a prior starting point should be the politics within the household itself.
The general division of labour in peasant and pastoral households is significant — it is women who frequently collect water, fuel, forest litter and fodder, and indeed in some societies do most of the agricultural work as well, except ploughing (as, for example , in parts of South Asia).
However, cropping decisions, the purchase of inputs and marketing are often done by men (with important exceptions, for example in West Africa).
In cases where women (and the children they directly control) collect forest products of one type or another, it is they who are most aware of any deterioration in resource availability, but who are often an inaccessible but important target group in agricultural extension efforts to get conservation methods accepted.
There are other possible inequalities within the household, frequently concerning both gender and age.
In many societies it is the older males, including the ‘head of household’ who allocate labour, control access of young men to women for marriage, and make other major decisions.
It is their voice which is heard, and they often are the opinion-makers in the household and in the local community.
Their views frequently are less innovative (not necessarily in a pejorative sense) than the next generation over whom they have considerable  control.
Whatever the politics of decision-making within the household, male dominated, elder-dominated, or more egalitarian, it is usually necessary to pursue these enquiries first.
At the level of the household, land-use decisions are often only a sub-sector in a range of income opportunities, and this range has to be fully specified to include the most common forms of income generation since land-use decisions are affected by these other forms.
Thus non-agricultural activities should be considered alongside those which directly use land, and this is particularly important where there is widespread rural-urban migration with or without a remittance economy (e.g. South Yemen where outmigration to Saudi Arabia and the Gulf has led to the abandonment of terracing; the Rif in Morocco and Algeria; the Nepalese hills; Lesotho and other labour reserves of Southern Africa; or the Andean highlands where many of the male population have migrated seasonally or permanently to the coastal cities).
Chapter 6 formalises a decision-making model in which a household may take up a number of different income opportunities according to its capability and the ‘entry costs’ of such opportunities.
Many of these opportunities are expressed in terms of different crops and associated agricultural practices (inter-cropping, mulching, or tie-ridging) which have direct implications for soil erosion.
The political-economic structures behind the range of choices is the next necessary analytical step and opens up wider concerns at the local, national and international level.
At the local level, certain decisions concerning land use and deployment of labour may be made by village councils, whose range of authority, extent of public acknowledgement of penalties, acceptance by people, and their distribution of power have to be considered.
Sometimes effective land-use management and watershed management requires a number of institutions of this kind to agree, which may well be even more difficult because of unequal costs and benefits of conservation measures between different communities or villages.
The state, government and administration
The nature and interrelationship between these entities is a difficult and debated subject, and readers are referred to some of the best-known texts on the subject.
Here a simple conceptualisation as is serviceable for the purpose of this book is made and it follows the main elements of Miliband's [1969].
However, it cannot be proved or disproved in any final way and is unavoidably a political statement.
None the less, it is necessary to make explicit what the state, government and administration are, and what they do.
Many  commentaries without such an explicit and analytical statement, bewail the lack of political will, expertise or rational planning, without offering any explanation as to why these qualities frequently do not exist to carry out effective conservation.
First of all the definition of some terms is needed.
The state is a most problematic term since, as Miliband [1969: 46]put it, ‘the state is not a thing (and) does not, as such exist’.
The state stands for, in an abstract sense, the final repository of agreement of the people to be ruled, and therefore an ultimate legitimation, backed up in the last instance, by the state's claim to the monopoly of legitimate use of force.
So for example, the inclusion of conservation principles in the constitution is a symbolic statement to which all people ‘should’ give their allegiance, and it is the duty of all governments to uphold and abide by it.
The government on the other hand speaks and acts in the name of the state.
It may be a weak government and, although formally invested with state power, does not or cannot use it.
The government or political executive has as its instrument for the business of governing, the administration or bureaucracy, which extends through the ministries and departments, to a variety of institutions such as public corporations, banks, and others (particularly the institutions of education and the media).
The crucial difference between a social democratic view of the state and the one taken here, is that we recognise that the bureaucracy itself is political in the course of exercising its executive powers, particularly in the realm of policy-making at the upper levels and in implementation at the lower levels.
By extension, then, conservation practices left undone, legislation remaining unheeded, projects that only serve to keep research officers in salary and which never leave the experimental station (those things not done) are also political acts and not just omissions, or non-events which do not need explaining.
Although there still exists the notion that administration should be or is apolitical and merely a neutral tool of the government, this is palpably not so in practically all states, industrialised or less developed or ‘socialist’.
Senior civil servants have tremendous power, particularly where government is weak, changes are frequent, or their political leaders lack technical or administrative expertise (or have misplaced confidence!).
The administration itself is of course no monolith and does not act as a single bloc, pursuing its interests whatever they may be.
At the top there are very senior bureaucrats who, with their counterparts in the military and judiciary, form a state elite.
In some lesser developed countries, particularly in central and east Africa, it has been called a ‘bureaucratic bourgeoisie’, a term which is discussed below.
Recruitment to its ranks is highly selective in terms of social and  educational status, and it perpetuates itself by spending parts of its accumulated surpluses on privileged education, often abroad, for its favoured sons (and occasionally daughters).
The term ‘bureaucratic bourgeoisie’ to describe this state elite has certain problems, and used strictly should refer to managers of state-owned enterprises.
However, this class may actually enter into economic activities for private gain using, for example, its privileged position to secure credit at favourable rates of interest, obtain monopolies and franchises in import and export businesses, start up industrial enterprises, speculate in urban property and so on (for a debate about the bureaucracy in lesser developed countries, see Coulson 1975; Leys 1975: 193f.).
An example comes from Williams (1981, p.23) when he discusses the beneficiaries of a large World Bank project in Nigeria: ‘these rich beneficiaries are drawn from army officers, government officials, contractors, merchants and members of the office-holding aristocracy, who purchase land in anticipation of benefits from the project and from cheap bank credits’.
In many countries this elite acts as the chief negotiator with transnational companies and therefore its members become beneficiaries from negotiations with logging contractors, purchase of agricultural estates, permission to sell agricultural inputs, purchase of agricultural inputs, and other policy measures.
The distinction between individuals in government and the senior civil service, banks and corporations is often more blurred than in western countries, and therefore this elite tends to form a coherent and powerful set of economic interests,(although these may be contradictory and are usually very diverse) and are not only represented in government but often are the government.
At the same time this is not to deny there are administrators and administrations which claim to act, even want to act, in a disinterested way.
An analysis of Indian administrators (Wood 1976) shows how the liberal democratic ideal of the disinterested administrator carrying out the orders of his political masters, left him, in independent India, with relatively low-status and low-income compared to those in commerce or business.
This created a tendency for the administrator to facilitate the flow of benefits which the state frequently confers upon private enterprise to private businessmen for a return, and, indeed, involve himself in a variety of legal and illegal activities for which the post of senior government servant is advantageous.
Lastly, after government, the administration, military and judiciary, a fifth element of the system can be identified which Miliband (1969) calls the various units of sub-government — in a sense the extension of central government but also a voice of the periphery, and thus a channel of communication between the two.
This element is most readily identified in a federal structure such as the USA, Brazil, India or Nigeria, but is also significant in local assemblies, as well as in centres of district and regional administration.
The politicians and bureaucrats at this level can have a profound effect upon the local people, and can obstruct, alter or intensify central government actions.
So the bureaucracy at this level will not necessarily fulfil the economic interests of its masters in any simple way.
Only a small fraction of the bureaucracy can directly benefit from its position of high office and crucial monopoly or oligopoly in negotiations and policy-making.
All have career structures, which have varying degrees of opportunity.
For those at the lower and middle grades, job security and risk-minimisation in decision-making may be their most important considerations in the execution of their duties, since government employment in many lesser developed countries is relatively secure (compared with other jobs available), with special privileges such as pensions, health services, government schooling and housing.
At the lowest levels of the government machinery (the village clerk, the forest policeman, and the agricultural extension agent), there are additional contradictions.
For these people day-to-day life is much more concerned with general social intercourse with farmers, pastoralists, small businessmen and local politicians, chiefs, headmen and so on.
As a result lower level or petty bureaucrats frequently have to rely upon local people for economic perks (access to a small plot of land, or to credit on favourable terms, or the rent of a house).
Local conservation officers, forest guards and rangers therefore find that ‘rational’ conservation policy is tempered by a web of social and economic relationships with various members of the public at the local level.
Thus considerations of job security, avoidance of reprimand, and conditions of work, are further tempered by reciprocity and reliance upon local people.
These various forms of differentiation within the bureaucracy are vital in the understanding of the formulation and implementation of conservation programmes.
Conservation programmes seldom bring opportunities for personal advancement for senior bureaucrats, unlike other activities such as the issue of import-export licences, the handling of foreign business, and the control of access to state-controlled markets.
Therefore in a positive sense, conservation does not attract bureaucrats or quasi-official middlemen.
Indeed many mediocre and/or failed bureaucrats tend to be ‘promoted’ to conservation by their more thrusting and successful colleagues.
However conservation policies also affect the careers of bureaucrats and elements of sub-government in a negative sense, putting them in difficult positions since these programmes usually include policy measures which are directly injurious to the interests of the state elite in their private economic capacities.
Usually conservation programmes and  individual projects have a number of elements, some contrary to the interests of the state elite, others neutral, and occasionally others which could provide opportunities (e.g. contracts for earthworks, labour recruitment for building of dams, or tax advantages for conservation undertaken on private land).
Also conservation programmes involve potential clashes with landowners, politicians whose constituencies are adversely affected, forest contractors who would like to fell trees without official controls and so on.
Lastly conservation programmes often fail, and senior bureaucrats may have to take the blame.
Having provided the briefest outline of the relationship between state, government and state machinery, let us show how it is helpful in the analysis of soil erosion and conservation.
First, it provides a more convincing explanation of the failure of conservation than ‘a lack of political will’ or ‘powerful vested interests’or other dark and unspecified reasons.
There are clear reasons why state power should encompass the means to conserve soil, reafforest and so on, but why do governments not do it successfully?
Seeming contradictions can be explained in situations where conservation policies may be drawn up in some areas (perhaps financed by foreign aid, and attached to prestigious foreign fellowships and enhanced salaries for senior officials)— but in a neighbouring area a carte-blanche logging contract is offered to a transnational company.
Successful conservation may well imply a cutback in commercial crops and therefore a reduction in foreign exchange on which the state elite depends for its imported luxuries, foreign travel and education.
Where there is state intervention in food prices, these tend to be low to favour a political alliance of various classes who live in towns.
Pricing may well be a critical factor in returns to farmers and to decision-making about extension of cultivation, and precise agronomic practices with direct implications for soil erosion, and yet prices of foodstuffs for urban-based elites are naturally a highly sensitive political issue.
Thus what is done, and what more commonly and significantly remains as rhetoric, can be explained.
Second, this type of analysis shifts primary attention away from the preoccupation of conservation policy-makers, academics and consultants with institution-building, training government officers in environmental awareness, tightening up and rationalisation of administrative and legislative procedures.
All these reforms may be necessary, but alas, so far from being sufficient that a reassessment of future conservation needs to be made.
Empirical justification for this gloomy remark is all too evident in Chapters 2 and 3.
Third, such analysis links national political-economic processes relevant to erosion and conservation to international affairs, mediated in a great variety of ways by the state systems of different  countries.
Apart from the efforts of transnational companies already mentioned, there are other strategic and financial considerations.
As was mentioned in Chapter 3, the American decision to sell grain once more to the Soviet Union in 1977 wiped out the Soil Bank established in the 1970s and caused ploughing up of marginal land and a marked increase in erosion rates (Cook 1983).
The American blockade of Cuba threw the latter's post-revolutionary land-use planning into confusion and caused wholesale cultivation of food crops on very vulnerable steep slopes.
The deterioration of international relations between the USA and many Latin American countries saw the withdrawal of American aid which financed soil conservation efforts there.
Lastly the effects of the world recession and specifically the price rise of oil in 1973 have put pressure upon national funding of conservation programmes; encouraged the use of woodfuel or dung; reduced artificial fertiliser application rates; exacerbated the foreign exchange position of most lesser developed countries and discouraged government and private initiatives in conservation.
The advantage of the method of analysis suggested here is that these international influences are not treated as isolated and exogenous instances, as if operated by deus ex machina , but are explicable and connected within the context of the workings of the world economic system.
These views are similar to those of Heyer, Roberts and Williams (1981) who discuss rather broader issues of rural development.
They also stress that the assertion that rural development serves all or almost all interests is a necessary myth.
The contradictions and convergences between national and international aid agencies have to be assessed in the design and implementation of rural development projects.
International organisations have to deal with ‘governments who in most cases do not represent their peoples, and certainly not the poor peasants’(p.2).
One of the major reasons for the widespread failure of rural developments is that it usually does not serve the interests of the people at whom it is ostensibly aimed.
Instead, it benefits big business, contractors, consultancies, construction firms, government officials, international experts and academics.
The point made here and in Heyer, Roberts and Williams (1981) is that these conflicts of interest and how they are expressed in governments (and outside) have to be recognised.
In summary, soil erosion problems can be analysed in a framework of Chinese boxes, each fitting inside the other.
The individual within a household, the household itself, the village or local community, the local bureaucracy, the bureaucracy, government and nature of the state, and finally international relations all represent contexts within which actions affecting soil erosion and conservation take place.
A specific analysis must identify these contexts and the relationships between them.
The expression of class interests in erosion and conservation
It is when the physical phenomenon of soil erosion affects people so that they have to respond and adapt their mode of life that it becomes also a social phenomenon.
When this response affects others and brings about a clash of interests — and it usually does except in areas of extreme remoteness and low population density — it becomes a political phenomenon as well.
In this section we examine the clash of interests which soil erosion brings about, and we ask whose interests they are and how they are pursued in the face of conflict.
The major determinant of the response to soil erosion is the degree of political power of the class(es) or group(s) involved.
Starting with classes and groups with very little power indeed, their response is the weakest.
For those, such as the rural semi-proletariat and the absolutely landless with little control over the means of production with which to meet their needs, even individual responses are denied them.
In essence their class position often forces them into using the environment destructively and inhibits any adaptive response to its inevitable deterioration.
Any individual act of self-denial or investment (e.g. leaving small saplings to regenerate the forest, or investing in an improved method of cooking food) is frequently not repaid — a classic tragedy of the commons does not respect individual and isolated remedial action.
Peasants and pastoralists who have more control over the use of private land and/or flocks can carry out both new agricultural practices (mulching, inter-cropping, zero-tillage or improved cultivation), and invest in private erosion works such as terraces, bunds, gully-head protection, etc.
However, political action is required to tackle the more systemic and widespread symptoms of environmental deterioration such as the destruction of the forest, wholesale sheet erosion across a large area, or the threatened collapse of a whole tier of paddy terraces.
It is then that a conflict of interests may arise.
It may arise simply because the risk of deterioration of a resource may be unequally shared among affected people, or because the fruits of personal sacrifices will be enjoyed by others, or discounted future benefits do not justify present sacrifices and are distributed unevenly.
For example labour inputs for erosion works and temporary dislocation of food production, fuel supplies and fodder for livestock may be borne by one group more than another.
Very often those without enough political power to influence the course of events resulting from erosion and from official conservation programmes, are those who are politically subordinated in other related ways.
For example, in Mali, resources flow from the poor peasant to the urban sector where a variety of powerful classes  live and realise that surplus.
A state marketing system gives derisory prices for commodities produced by peasants and later exported to earn foreign exchange spent by the bureaucratic bourgeoisie and other privileged classes, or consumed as foodstuffs at cheap prices.
However, 80 per cent of the revenue generated is spent on civil service salaries, and yet the government by imprecation if not implication blames this peasantry for sheet and gully erosion.
Lipton (1977, 1982) in his thesis of ‘urban bias’, while being strongly criticised on various grounds, has many examples of this phenomenon.
He paraphrases his thesis as follows:
Small interlocking urban elites — comprising mainly businessmen, politicians, bureaucrats, trade-union leaders and a supporting staff of professionals, academics and intellectuals — can in a modern state substantially control the distribution of resources.
In the great majority of developing countries, such urban elites spearheaded the fight against the colonizing power.
Partly for this reason urban elites formed, and have since dominated the institutions of independence — government, political parties, law, civil service, trade unions, education, business organisations and many more.
But the power of the urban elite, in a modern state, is determined not by its economic role alone, but by its capacity to organise, centralise and control…
Rural people, while much more numerous than urban people, are also much more dispersed, poor, inarticulate and unorganised.
That does not make them quiescent but it does diffuse their conflicts.
(Lipton in Harriss 1982)
Moving now to collective political responses, the problems of political protest by the peasantry have been widely discussed by Shanin (1973), Alavi (1973), Cohen et al., eds (1979).
The specific protests against soil conservation policies and other related issues (such as the taking away of land for settlers, plantations or the removal of forests) have tended to follow the same pattern — of violent, politically primitive, and usually short-lived protest involving marches on towns or centres of perceived political power of their oppressors and occasional guerrilla warfare (e.g. the Mau Mau movement in Kenya, although the issues involved were much wider than soil conservation).
Examples of peasant or pastoralist protest where official conservation policies were a catalytic or a leading grievance are Kenya (Heyer et al.1981: 100), and the 1982 attempted coup, Tanganyika (Young and Fosbrooke 1960; Coulson 1981: 56), Zambia (Robinson 1978a: 32); and the Chipko movement against commercial logging companies in the Indian Himalayas (Albert 1979; Lean 1981; and for peasant struggles in general, Cohen el al .
1979).
In the vast majority of cases, soil conservation measures were seen by land-users to be a symptom of oppression either by a colonial regime or by small interlocking urban elites.
From some of the evidence in Chapters 4.2, 6.1, and 7.2 to 7.6, we may agree with them.
Larger landholders may have equivocal and varied responses to  official attempts at conservation.
On the one hand, if erosion is seen to jeopardise the longer-term profitability of the farm, government assistance in the form of agricultural extension, grants for land management works, advantageous pricing policies and subsidies are welcomed.
On the other hand, government interference is often resented, and in liberal democracies the ‘farm lobby’ is frequently quite powerful — in the United States, for example.
Well-organised farmers with economic and political resources are frequently instrumental in getting their governments to organise and even partly fund conservation services, as in the predominantly German immigrant farmer community in Rio Grande de Sul of Brazil.
In any concrete analysis, there are four questions to be asked:
1.
what precise groups and classes are affected adversely by soil erosion?
2.
what power does each of them have in the state apparatus (principally the legislature, the army, police, certain key ministries and their line agencies down to the local level), and outside it — in the countryside, Chambers of Commerce, the shop-floor, and so on?
3.
in what ideological terms do these classes or groups perceive the problem of soil erosion — causes, blame, solutions?
4.
is the problem of soil erosion perceived to be important enough for them to unite on this issue so that their combined power leads to a coherent response?
Two case studies will illustrate these ideas.
It will be argued that the circumstances of Nepal and Zambia are not unusual in that a set of political preconditions for a successful soil conservation policy are not present, and only exist in very rare circumstances (the most outstanding examples being the Republic of South Africa, and South Korea).
Usually the classes and groups most adversely affected by soil erosion are politically weak, disunited and spatially separated.
In the case of Nepal (Blaikie 1983), the major impact of environmental degradation is felt by two groups.
The first are the poorer urban dwellers — these are largely made up of junior office staff, workers in the retail and hotel sectors, petty retailers and petty commodity producers and the unemployed, old and sick.
Quite high proportions of their incomes are spent on fuelwood, and prices have rocketed during the last ten years — from Rs 20/- per load to Rs 50/-in Kathmandu, from Rs 7/- in Pokhara in 1973 to Rs 20/- in 1983.
A shift to kerosene is very costly and nowadays fuel for cooking may absorb to up to 15–20 per cent of a poor household's income (see Schroeder 1977, Ives 1981).
The second group are the farmers in the hills, although there are considerable variations between regions and watersheds.
Farmers in the terai or plains are not really affected except by flooding — although for physiographic reasons most of the flooding occurs to the south of the border with India.
It is in the terai where large landlords (often absent and in Kathmandu on other lucrative, non-agricultural pursuits), are well established, rather than in the hills.
It would be reasonable to guess (although without corroborative evidence) that landslides, gully and sheet erosion, and a general decline in soil fertility would affect the livelihood of poorer and small farmers more critically than the strongly surplus farmer in all areas.
The power that small hill farmers and poorer urban dwellers have in the state apparatus and in society at large is negligible.
The most powerful classes in Nepal include the rentier landlord — both urban (in Kathmandu involved in renting houses to shops, aid personnel and in the hotel business), and rural (in the terai with large estates, run on a share-cropping basis, and/or with a relative or manager overseeing operations).
Then there is the merchant class — discreet and acting behind political figures whom they control with large inducements and dealing in the import of foreign luxuries, and the export of rice, both legally and illegally.
Finally there are the contractors, who arrange labour (and sometimes materials) for the multifarious aid projects such as road construction, buildings, and hydroelectric plants.
For each of these, environmental deterioration is virtually irrelevant.
The ideological terms in which the affected groups perceive of the environmental crisis are not politically sophisticated — in fact they have very little political content at all.
The phenomenon of soil erosion tends to be understood in terms of a mixture of sound and quite sophisticated ‘engineering’ principles which is implied in a classification of landslides and erosion, and the supernatural.
The urban poor have many other issues alongside the escalating price of fuel — particularly imported inflation manifested in high prices for cloth and imported household items, high urban rents and low salaries at the bottom end of the public sector.
Furthermore, the causes of fuelwood scarcity must seem remote and diffuse to the average urban dweller.
It comes therefore as no surprise that these classes are disparate, weak and ideologically unsophisticated in terms of facing the problem of soil erosion and deforestation.
The impact of foreign aid upon environmental degradation is therefore doubly interesting, and here the need to transcend a crude determinism of economic interests is necessary.
The ideological approach to the problem of soil erosion in the international aid and academic communities cannot be ‘read off’ or predetermined by the relative strength of direct economic interests, as there is often a degree of autonomy of these ideas from economic determinants.
After all, the national interests of donors and the multilateral agencies they finance would be much better served by other projects than soil conservation which is a difficult, diffuse and problematic area for foreign aid with goals that are very long term and difficult to achieve.
The interface, therefore, between aid personnel involved in the field of environmental conservation and government institutions in Nepal is interesting and one found in many countries elsewhere.
On the one hand, individuals usually on a short-term contract with a job to do face on the other hand a bureaucracy with mixed feelings about the importance of environmental deterioration.
The role of rhetoric becomes crucial here — it serves to keep the flow of foreign funds from drying up and to disguise the endemic problems of implementation of these projects.
The case of Zambia offers a contrast to that of Nepal.
The population of Zambia is less than half Nepal's, in a land area of more than ten times as large.
In spite of low population pressure in an aggregate sense, there has been considerable degradation and erosion in the clay-rich soils which are usually the most fertile, and also in the north where rainfall intensities and runoff tend to be higher (Robinson 1978b: 15).
Erosion has also occurred as a result of overgrazing (particularly in the Zambesi Valley), the monoculture of maize and over smaller areas, tobacco, and of some European settler farmers who profitably exploited land in the Eastern Province during the tobacco boom but were not prepared to invest in long-term conservation measures.
Yet in spite of a considerable erosion problem, there exists no conservation service as such, with only two ecologists at central level who are supposed to give adequate guidance for land use at the national level.
At the provincial level there are Land Use Planning Officers, although their time is largely taken up by the supervision of settlement schemes and in planning state farms (Stocking 1981b).
The question arises as to why there is so little official action to combat soil erosion.
The present distribution of political power and the structure of the economy largely derive from Zambia's (Northern Rhodesia) colonial history.
Chapter 7.3 examines the colonial impact upon agriculture, and this example confines itself to a very brief exploration of the colonial experience.
The area that is now Zambia attracted the attention of British colonisers because of its mineral wealth.
Copper, lead and zinc were mined in the centre and north of the country.
The economic structure of the countryside near the line-of-rail, linking the mines with ports via South Africa, was transformed to provide labour for the miners on temporary labour contracts in which the miner's family would stay behind on the family farm.
Also, Africans were expelled from some of their lands to make way for European settlers who then farmed commercially to sell their produce to the mine workers and other urban dwellers.
The  Zambian economy became extremely lop-sided, in that it relied inordinately upon copper exports.
Rural areas and subsistence-level farmers were neglected or actually excluded from the benefits which copper exports made possible in terms of schools, health facilities, agricultural inputs and credit (Bwayla 1980, Klepper 1980, 1981, ODG 1981).
Copper mining was responsible for 66 per cent of the country's gross commercial product, 60 per cent of government revenues and 95 per cent of export earnings (Quick 1977: 381).
Since independence was regained in 1964, Zambia has become increasingly urbanised.
Indeed, perhaps 50 per cent of the population now live in towns — the highest level of urbanisation in Africa (Simons 1981).
The town represents overwhelmingly the focus of political power in Zambia today.
First, well-developed mineworkers' unions have been able to influence policy-makers, particularly with regard to pursuing a cheap food policy.
Second, the political party which was instrumental in gaining independence and which has governed Zambia since (the United National Independence Party or UNIP) was and still is based mostly in towns, particularly in Lusaka, the national capital.
Third, the ‘bureaucratic bourgeoisie’, inflated in numbers and enjoying large incomes by African standards, paid for by copper exports, is in control of the state apparatus and decision-making (see Szeftel 1980 for a more detailed and sophisticated analysis).
In short:
The elite live mainly in cities and provincial capitals: the seats of government, headquarters of UNIP, the ZCTU and mass media, centres of financial institutions, and the location of major mining, industrial and commercial enterprises.
These power centres attract people as honey attracts bees.
Operating from them, decision-makers acquire urban habits and perspectives.
(Simons 1981: 24)
All urban groups contrive in maintaining cheap food prices-as well as international capital and contractors who have interests in copper mining in Zambia (in order to keep the pressure of union militancy for higher wages from squeezing profits).
Therefore rural people have tended to have large surpluses extracted from them through low prices enforced by parastatal marketing boards.
Also miners' families are not supported by the ‘bachelors’ wages' paid to the miner himself.
Therefore family farms also cross-subsidise the profits from copper mining.
Commercial farmers (increasingly Africans who have taken over in the wake of the slow European exodus since Independence) are still relied upon to provide the bulk of the urban demand for foodstuffs, particularly luxury items such as beef, milk, and cheese.
Smaller family farmers have been neglected and offered derisory prices for the products they mostly sell (e.g. cassava and honey, see Chambers and Singer 1980).
Soil erosion would only affect these urban interests if it  significantly threatened food supplies.
Two important factors prevent this from happening.
First, foreign earnings from copper have been used to purchase shortfalls in indigenous production.
These shortfalls have increased in recent years due to cultivators avoiding cash crops altogether which attract poor prices, bureaucratic and policy-making bungling, and to a general neglect of the building up of physical and institutional infrastructure to aid farming.
Second, there is as yet no land shortage, and new land can still be taken into cultivation without much problem.
The case of Operation Food Production launched in 1980 is such an example, where enormous state farms have been set up to solve the ‘food problem’ once and for all.
Therefore, soil erosion is a problem faced by small farmers and pastoralists who are politically weak, by large commercial farmers, who can either move on or, in the case of Europeans, leave Zambia altogether.
The financial support of the state apparatus and the ‘spoils and patronage’ system that is a part of it, lies in mining, not in small farmer production.
For an introduction to the political economy of Zambia, see Turok (1981).
New problems
The first problem after adopting this approach, is the size and scope of the analytical task.
From a more conventional approach which encompasses land use, maps of soil erosion, and the designation of technically feasible conservation measures which can be accepted within the constraints operating upon land-users — a difficult enough task in itself — an expansion is suggested to the present programme which seems to involve the political economy of the whole world in every instance of soil erosion.
However I would suggest that the problem is more apparent than real.
Certainly it must be admitted that there are a number of relevant issues about development in general on which prior opinions have to be formed — one of the most important is the relationship between rapid population growth and soil erosion which has been briefly discussed in Chapter 2.
There are those concerning the nature of the state and the extent to which governments can conserve the environment.
Lastly there are those concerning the development of capitalism, particularly whether it is beneficial for the mass of people living in lesser developed countries or whether it could or will become so.
Admittedly then, those seeking a comprehensive analysis, will have to have some a priori position on these issues since they all profoundly affect or are affected by environmental degradation.
An isolated study of soil erosion and conservation by itself will not provide the answers to these broad  controversies.
However a bottom-up approach (which always bears in mind the criterion of relevance to land-using decisions leading to environmental deterioration) will leave many areas of local or national economic analysis aside.
A journalistic facility for finding and talking to knowledgeable people, reading the right reports and informal commentaries, plus a number of more academic and analytical papers, should enable the researcher following the general methodology outlined here to explain soil erosion in a particular country.
There is a second related problem — that of the terms of reference of the concerned individual for effective action.
The question arises who is this analysis for, and who does what about it?
This is perhaps the most difficult one and brings up a number of fundamental contradictions.
The approach followed here is simply not a policy-orientated one, although it may be helpful to that purpose incidentally.
It is primarily an explanatory one, it connects problems and explains why they are problems, and who for, and so does not set up bite-sized problems for the reformer to tackle one by one.
It is no coincidence that bureaucrats, foreign aid consultants and ministry officials persist in seeing their role in this manner and trying to solve piecemeal, separate problems.
Indeed, without other far-reaching changes in the way people make decisions, this may be the only feasible strategy, and this possibility is discussed in Chapter 9.
The conclusion reached there is that environmental degradation is and will be frequently beyond the power of the state, and will only become a possibility as an incidental result of other fundamental social changes.
In the light of this general conclusion which will be substantiated from Chapter 7 onwards, it becomes clear that sharpening the tools of policy-making and increasing the ‘expertness’ of government personnel should no longer be the central concern.
This in turn creates one of the most difficult problems of all, a personal one which many government servants, and agents or consultants must feel.
It seems almost inconceivable that a project plan, policy document, or even a more abstract methodological contribution on conservation, if well-organised and technically sound, will not have a beneficial impact in the real world.
To fulfil the terms of reference for the task, to work hard, and to create a product that is innovative, internally consistent and well-written gives satisfaction.
It is very understandable for the person not to want to be aware that it probably will not fulfil its purpose.
To blame irrational politicians, political constraints, administrative incompetence, or farmers' traditional beliefs may ease the personal contradiction, but it is analytically naive.
Third, there are epistemological and ideological problems  associated with the bringing together of issues which have hitherto been studied in one or other of the natural or social sciences.
On the one hand as was mentioned at the outset of this chapter and in Chapter 2, the physical relationships which determine rates of soil erosion have been examined within natural science disciplines of hydrology, agricultural engineering and agricultural botany.
On the other hand the social relationships that determine how people use their environment have been studied in such disciplines as economics, sociology and political science.
The point at issue is that both sets of disciplines tend to have different conceptions about the domain and status of proof in the pursuit of knowledge.
Whether they should share a common epistemology is a debate which it is possible to avoid head-on in this context.
The view here is that while the activities of physical sciences, too, are amenable to a social explanation, there are de facto different modes of explanation and substantiation.
Some of these can be attributed to the subject matter for study itself (‘the objects of study are so utterly different that they require fundamentally different methods and forms of explanation and understanding’ Benton 1977: 12).
This is perhaps believed by practitioners rather than being a view that holds up to epistemological scrutiny.
Members of academic, research and other government institutions are divided into two separate scientific communities-the natural and social between which there is little effective cooperation and a lot of envy, disdain and competition for scarce resources.
In the attempt to combine the analysis of physical processes of soil erosion with that of human agricultural and pastoral practices, the expectations of natural and social scientists over the status and domain of proof tend to be irreconcilable (for further discussion readers are referred to more detailed texts such as Winch 1958; Bernal 1969; Benton 1977; Gregory (1978).
The main problem seems to derive from the positivist expectation that social explanation of soil erosion should be tested in the same way as most natural science ones.
While strenuous attempts to subject hypotheses to empirical evidence must be made, the limits of ‘proof’ must be recognised too.
There are always a priori assumptions of what we call an ideological nature, which are not amenable to proof, but which may helpfully be amenable to explicit and prior communication.
The assumptions about the state and the world economic system which section 3 above discussed, must lie outside and beyond an effort to prove by means of empirical verification.
For example, one can prove beyond a reasonable degree of doubt that a conservation project reduces the rate of soil removal.
One cannot prove in the same way that senior bureaucrats do not implement effective conservation because there is no extra financial inducement and it could involve them in embarrassing political contradictions.
Family planning and soil conservation programmes — a comparison
As the foregoing critique of current soil conservation programmes shows, there is a broad range of relevant issues about the nature of development itself.
Many of the reasons for widespread failure of conservation programmes and policies are the same as for failures in some other development programmes in lesser developed countries.
An illustration is given of another important policy issue which has many political and economic similarities as well as the history of its thinking and policy formulation.
This is family planning and will be followed through with special reference to one of the world's largest national programmes — that of India.
The evolution of the philosophy behind family planning during the last twenty years has moved rather quicker than that of soil conservation so that the present thinking and problems may indicate that in general terms, this critique of conservation policy is not new, but the transfer of ideas merely overdue.
Both family planning and soil conservation are activities which governments attempt to get people to undertake.
Both are essentially private activities decided upon by persons within the household or in small groups and involve the deepest and most fundamental concerns in life.
Due partly to the propagation and acceptance of various theories of development,(e.g. Coale & Hoover 1958 and Ehrlich et al 1973) and perhaps to the direct pragmatic experience of government, states have seen fit to try and persuade, induce or coerce the people to undertake new patterns of reproduction or agricultural practice.
One of the major problems with this is that the private benefits accruing to households or families who take up either family planning or conservation measures are often not clear — either as perceived to exist by households themselves or even as calculated by economic models.
There is a considerable and divided literature about the private benefits accruing to a household with a small family (Ohlin 1969, saying that children are not a good investment, Caldwell 1978 and White 1976, suggesting a positive asset value for children).
Much of the calculation depends upon the choice of discount rate which, it might be added, exists in the mind of the economist (and rather foggily at that) rather than in the minds of a couple about to sleep together.
In a similar way many economic models cannot show a positive return to soil conservation measures except on very productive land with high susceptibility to erosion (Harmon, Knutson & Rosenberg 1979: Ervin & Washbourn 1981, for examples in the USA).
In the case of the land-user, implicit discount rates tend to be very high, particularly for the disadvantaged.
Fuel for today and food for this season are vital concerns now, and for such people  Keynes' aphorism that ‘in the long run we are all dead’ may be appropriate.
In the case of the couple or family considering the costs and benefits of a future child, the explicit consideration of rates of discount is rather different in that children are perceived to be a positive asset from early on in life but particularly after fifteen years or so when they can work effectively on the farm (and so replace costly paid labour at times of peak labour demand) or as a wage labourer.
There is in many societies a strong economic, political and psychic advantage in having male children, so the proposition of preventing any births, precludes that possibility, and those benefits are perceived to be real as soon as the (male) child is born.
In both cases too, those private choices in some cases bring about the tragedy of the commons (Hardin 1972).
Private benefits from more children in the same way as adding an extra livestock unit to the communal pasture are positive, but the public benefits may be negative.
Each extra livestock unit added means less pasture available per unit to the detriment of the whole herd.
Within a given political economy where there is a ‘free’ market for labour (taking this, hypothetically as given), labour becomes so plentiful and therefore cheap that it cannot make a living.
Second, there is a different sense in which private individuals may not want to conserve soil or have a small family other than the most obvious that it may not benefit them.
Many societies have been conserving the environment perfectly well for millennia, and have integrated conservation into cultivation practices, but not as an explicit programme.
Similarly children have been spaced or limited when required by a variety of means (e.g. abstinence after the birth of a child, or delaying the age for cohabitation).
Family planning practice as made possible by an operation such as vasectomy or tubeligation, or the use of physical contraceptives makes the prevention of birth explicit and deliberate.
Even where religious textual condemnation does not exist as in some societies, there is a strong cross-cultural feeling that such acts are ‘against nature’ or God.
In other words, although people have been conserving soil or limiting children for a long time, an explicit and out-of-context definition of a single element in people's lives (conservation, small families) will tend to be distrusted and misunderstood.
Third, technical problems of conservation and contraception have frequently caused suffering among their unfortunate adopters.
Examples of technical failures of mechanical means of soil conservation have already been given in Chapter 5.
In the case of family planning, the inter-uterine contraceptive device (IUCD) was launched in India in the mid-1960s before adequate research showed that many women were physically unsuited to it, and it needed a high level of professional judgement on the part of the paramedical staff inserting it.
Oral contraceptives too have had long-term effects  upon the health of users.
Many cases of infections after vasectomy operations have been reported in India (Blaikie 1972, 1975).
In both cases inadequate research led to inadequate technical measures being launched and has, in places where the worst effects were felt, put both programmes back decades.
Apart from the reasons why people resist or avoid government-sponsored conservation planning — because of the lack of clear, perceived private benefits — there is a second similarity between the two programmes.
The issues ‘awakened’ by these programmes lie deep in the political economy.
A falling birth-rate is brought about by a large number of changes in society.
An inadequate list may include reduction in infant and child mortality better employment prospects for educated children making investment in education worthwhile and therefore a cost related to the number of children; women's status in the household and extent of emancipation in making decisions; education of parents and enrolment rates in education for children, and women's participation in the formal labour force (where pregnancy implies unavoidable loss of earnings).
To alter these variables, and to a sufficient degree and in sufficient combinations, requires a wholesale change in the fabric of society.
In the same way, soil conservation involves an almost equally wide range of social and economic changes.
However, in both cases, piecemeal changes with a coherent programme can also have a definite effect.
‘Programme’ effects can sometimes be isolated statistically, and in the case of family planning have not been insignificant.
However, in both cases successful programmes have only occurred when other deep-seated conditions in society have been present which are favourable to reductions in the birth-rate or to effective soil conservation.
For policy-makers, the problems of research and measurement of a large number of important variables, often of a non-quantitative kind, have been severe both in population studies and in soil conservation.
Perhaps it might be claimed that the major important variables in measuring population growth rates and their causes are technically easier than those measuring soil erosion rates and their causes.
However, as experience in family planning programmes throughout the world has shown, a lack of academic knowledge was not the major problem in achieving their modest attainments, but the inability of governments to shift the major socio-economic variables which encourage the continuation of large families.
Some progress was made upon a few, particularly the reduction of major epidemics of malaria, cholera, smallpox and yellow-fever.
Others such as the improvement in the status of women, or educational followed by enhanced employment opportunities for children particularly to disadvantaged and poor sections, are much more difficult to achieve (Cassen 1980).
So it is with conservation policies.
More research is not a call made usually by conservationists — quite the opposite, in fact (MAB 1979: Holdgate 1982), with the exception of a number of specific technical issues.
It has been a lack of progress on other fundamental changes in society that has made effective implementation of either programme so difficult.
In the case of conservation, an effective family planning programme (!) and alternative employment for landless and small farmers outside agriculture reduces pressure on agricultural land, pasture and forest.
A more remunerative price structure for agricultural products and other measures to raise incomes for the poorest may encourage the use of purchased alternative fuels other than wood or cowdung.
It may also help the farmer to bear the immediate costs of conservation measures, and an effective decision-making structure to secure the active cooperation of land-users themselves.
Lastly, both programmes have almost universally been politically unpopular in the countries where they have been launched.
Not a single political party in India up to the Emergency of 1975 supported the family planning programme publicly.
Likewise many East and Central African leaders avoid conservation policies since these reminded the people of the coercive colonial policies imposed by the British.
In both cases, the ideas of a very influential but small number of people in the United States (individuals as well as institutions) backed by large foreign aid funds (and a wealth of expertise, particularly in soil conservation), were responsible for the presence of both family planning and conservation programmes in many lesser developed countries.
In an historical analysis of the growth of neo-Malthusianism in US foreign policy, the importance of a high-ranking State Department official, one Philander Claxton Jr, was vital.
He was able to ensure that the strong anti-natalist movement penetrated the highest offices of state and was responsible for enormous sums being spent in US foreign aid thereafter (Simon 1981; Warwick 1982).
Thus political leaders of lesser developed countries found themselves part of a government that had officially accepted a family planning programme or soil conservation programme (or both), but were aware that there was widespread opposition locally to both.
Thus there are four major areas in which family planning and soil conservation policies are similar — the attempt on the part of the state to change private action where private benefits are not clear; the deep-seated nature of the key or determining variables in the achievement of the policies' objectives; the problems of researching a highly complex field, and the realisation that knowledge of how the key variables operate is not enough, and the fact that these policies are almost universally unpopular with politicians and people in general.
It is not surprising therefore that the history of thought about the two policy areas is in some ways similar, although that  of family planning is in many ways a decade ahead of conservation.
To return to the case of the family planning programme in India, the 1961 national census provided some very sombre projections of available food supply per caput.
The ideology of family planning for the lesser developed countries, plus the formidable apparatus to diffuse it to world leaders was ready, and was translated into American and later multilateral aid for India to set up a nationwide family planning service.
The clinical approach to family planning in which medical staff advised upon and provided services at the hospital was replaced by an extension approach in which a vast array of extension agents and network of services in the countryside was set up, using many techniques of marketing and advertising adapted to the Indian context.
A policy objective was identified to reduce the crude birth rate in ten years substantially in order to spread the small family norm.
Extension services were set up to focus upon a target population of every couple, the wife of which was aged 15–44 years, backed up by medical services and financial incentives to adopters.
In this way the private benefits of the small family norm, it was hoped, would be adopted.
There were many problems, predictably, and acceptance was very uneven, concentrated in cities, the more prosperous rural areas, and in literate, middle-class couples (Blaikie 1972; 1975, IBRD 1977a).
There were murmurs too that other constraints to a small family norm had been grossly neglected, particularly the only slowly falling rate of infant and child mortality in many backward areas.
Also the notion that only households with very specific demographic characteristics and specific patterns of access to land find it in their interests to have fewer children gained some publicity (Mamdani 1976).
It was not until the UN Conference on Population in Bucharest in 1973 that a more radical critique of family planning programmes was launched and widely discussed at international level.
Also in India, there appeared a number of radical critiques of its own programme which both contributed to and benefited from the conference on population at Bucharest (e.g. Weissman 1970).
Here an attack was launched on neo-Malthusianism which was considered by its critics to be politically conservative and which, it was claimed, shifted the burden of blame for underdevelopment to those with the largest families.
Rapid population growth was argued to be a result of poverty rather than a cause (and causes were identified elsewhere in the relationship between developed capitalist and underdeveloped countries).
The perception of high infant mortality itself was a symptom of poverty and this fuelled a continued desire to have a large family as an insurance against the death of existing children.
Landlessness was also seen as an element of poverty and encouraged large families so that children could earn and remit wages.
Mamdani  (1976) has put forward analyses which attempt to show that it is in the economic interests of many rural couples not to adopt family planning.
In short, rapid population growth was a result of poverty and this asked fundamental questions about access and control over the means of production as well as the technical means by which they were developed.
Neo-Malthusianism was further attacked in ways already discussed in Chapter 2, but also drew what in the authors' opinion was a misplaced and utopian analysis from the Marxist literature based solely on a critique of bourgeois ideology, without serious attention being given to the effects of rapid population growth in any social formation, transitional to socialism or towards any other social order.
(See also Cassen 1976 for a call for more convincing radical population studies.)
The genesis of political consciousness towards conservation programmes arose in very different circumstances, but its development has been moving in the same directions as family planning programmes.
Conservation programmes arose both within the United States, and, more or less independently, in the colonies of sub-Saharan Africa.
As Chapters 3 and 4 have indicated, a coercive conservation policy for African cultivators existed alongside a voluntary and financially supported one for white commercial farmers.
The enforced high population densities endured by Africans due to the expropriation of land for white commercial farmers, threatened to make existing agricultural and pastoral practices very harmful to the long-term productivity of land.
The conservation measures put forward by the British and Belgian colonial authorities were highly demanding of labour and moreover symbolised the logic of expropriation and more general exploitation by the colonial powers.
While freedom movements in central and eastern Africa were stimulated by these coercive policies, an effective means of ideological diffusion did not lie in the hands of African cultivators nor their leaders, and therefore the analytical lessons to be drawn did not find their way into the international conventional wisdom about conservation.
However, there is here an instructive similarity between the two policy areas in question.
Both identified a single problem and devised policy solutions without an acknowledgement of the possibility of political change and the removal of the root causes of ‘the problem’.
Had this acknowledgement been made, both a high birth-rate and environmental degradation would appear symptoms of a wider malaise.
There were two further developments of the family planning programme of India after Bucharest which are relevant to conservation programmes of today.
The first was an accelerated attempt to broaden the focus of the family planning programme to include the broader concept of family welfare planning — an ingenious verbal massage of an increasingly tarnished image, but one  which did acknowledge the need for a better delivery system for family health including better preventative medicine, pre- and  post-puerperal care and advice on household hygiene which would lower infant mortality rates and improve the health of the family.
Other measures were unfortunately not undertaken seriously; unlike better health provision they impinged directly upon the political and economic interests of dominant classes or groups.
Adult literacy campaigns (particularly for women), rural employment generation, and land reform or land redistribution which all might have helped to provide a decision-making environment for a small family, as well as other benefits for their own sake, remained at the stage of inaugural addresses, or insignificant pilot projects.
A true ‘population programme’ in the broadest sense failed to emerge.
Conservation thinking has begun to grasp a few of the same nettles.
It is now commonplace to read of the importance of local participation, the problem of unequal landholdings, the direct and indirect effects of large-scale commercial farming in the tropics, and ‘powerful and vested interests’(see Ch. 5).
A few notable articles discussed in the following chapters have taken this further and laid out the implications of successful conservation.
The second development in family planning in India was of a very different kind and involved the attempt by the state during the Emergency of 1975/76 to step up the programme.
It appeared as a leading policy under Sanjay Gandhi's Four Point (later Five Point) Programme following the first official policy document (National Population Policy: a statement by the Government of India, 16 April 1976).
A highly coercive and administratively effective set of measures were instituted and carried out.
In the case of the state of Maharashtra a compulsory sterilisation bill outlining heavy prison sentences for non-sterilisation in certain cases actually reached the State Assembly (Economic and Political Weekly , 10 April 1976, p.550).
Political will (backed by force — as it had to be in the view of the highly ambivalent public reaction to the programme hitherto) had come with a vengeance (Gwatkin 1979: 29).
During the year 1976 the highest level of enthusiasm for family planning endured, more than 8 million sterilisations were reported, more than three times the number in the preceding year…these meant a nearly 50% increase in the proportion of Indian couples estimated to be protected by modern contraception achieved within a matter of months.
But also, by the time the programme drive came to an end [when the Emergency ended and with it the effective coercive powers of than government], millions had suffered harassment at the hands of government officials bent on implementing it, many, perhaps hundreds, had died from it; the political leaders who had willed it were out of power, and in disrepute, and the programme itself was in total disarray.
(See also Banerji 1977;Economic and Political Weekly , Editorial, 27 March 1976; and with reference to the backlash effect, Bose 1978)
What is also clear is that it was the weaker and poorer sections of the public that were harassed most.
Ironically it is they who have a birth-rate which is falling less quickly, thus ‘justifying’ that harassment.
This is a direct parallel with conservation programmes that concentrate on small peasant farmers and those marginal semi-proletariat which find themselves eking out a living charcoal-burning, cultivating the steepest slopes, or in shifting cultivation without sufficient fallow-periods — an issue which is explored in detail in Chapter 7.
In the case of the conservation policy of India, similar failures to that of the family planning programme have already been noted in Chapter 3.
The private benefits to conservation have been extremely ill-distributed, which reflects the underlying dominance of certain classes and groups in Indian government (the industrialists, the capitalist farmers and senior bureaucrats).
Between 1951 and 1980 the total area brought under afforestation schemes was 3.18m ha, and 2.2m ha (nearly 70%) were plantations for industrial purposes.
The beneficiaries are overwhelmingly large landlords and industrial capital.
The beneficiaries are not small farmers except in a few isolated cases where costs and benefits are seen to be equally shared (e.g. in Sukhomaj Village which is discussed in the CSE report, p. 14).
Second, the cause of the problem has been clearly identified as nomads and graziers who are politically very weak, and who have had much of their livelihood taken away and upon whom the heaviest penalties for ‘trespassing’ on forest schemes fall — in the same way as in the days of the Emergency, when aggressive family planning ‘drives’herded vagrants, petty thieves and other vulnerable groups into camps for more or less forcible vasectomy.
The débâcle for the Indian family planning programme tells us something already clear from conservation programmes under colonial administration.
Coercion is possible when there is a government willing to use state power, but it also fails — not solely because coercion as a means to an end tends to fail but because both programmes, in order to achieve any impact, involved very large numbers of people, even the majority, which implies serious problems for the logistics of coercion and of mass political backlash.
States that are exploring a tough policy which borders upon coercion like Kenya will either find that open political protest will challenge the power of the state, or that like family planning in India, an onslaught upon the least economically and politically powerful is only temporarily feasible.
More passive forms of resistance such as stealing wire and fence posts which exclude people from afforestation projects, ring-barking plantations, setting protected pastures alight, collecting firewood by night and so on, are resorted to and are almost beyond the power of enforcement agencies to stop.
Those who advocate tough policies, particularly those who do not seriously  question the broad political economic context in which they might be implemented (such as Hardin 1977; Hardin & Baden 1977), underestimate these difficulties and some obvious lessons from history.
In summary, family planning programmes in  lesser developed countries since the 1960s have a good deal of light to throw upon soil conservation programmes.
Acknowledgement of the failure of  targeting upon soil erosion as being the problem is long overdue.
A full analysis of the causes of soil erosion is required.
If a mixed metaphor can be forgiven, Pandora's box remains black, and must now be opened to the light of day.