

THE NORTHERN IRELAND CIVIL RIGHTS ASSOCIATION
To Derry we went on October the fifth,
to march for our rights, but oh what a myth!
They beat us with batons, they beat us with fists,
they sprayed us all over with water.
from ‘October the fifth’(civil rights song)
NICRA was the best-known civil rights group but it was neither the first nor the only organisation to agitate on civil rights demands.
It was, however, the most important group within the civil rights movement and it initiated the events that led to the creation of a mass movement.
For a time it provided an umbrella beneath which the other organisations came together.
It began life as a counterpart to the NCCL, but even in this it was not original; in 1962 a Northern Ireland Council for Civil Liberties (NICCL) was set up.
In June 1962 the NCCL had adopted a resolution from the Connolly Association calling for an inquiry into civil liberties in Northern Ireland; the NICCL seems to have been set up in response and as its first action, in July, it held a meeting to prepare a memorandum on civil rights to present to Mr Justice Bose of the International Commission of jurists, who was visiting Belfast.
Martin Ennals of the NCCL visited Northern Ireland in September 1962 to investigate the situation but he was rebuffed by the Nationalist leader, Eddie McAteer, who told journalists that an inquiry at this stage would be inadvisable.
This was a considerable about-turn; in March a delegation of Nationalist MPs and councillors had met Home Secretary Rab Butler to present a dossier of complaints about discrimination.
But now McAteer said that ‘no matter what truths might be revealed by such an investigation they could only be interpreted as weapons of war at this stage’.
He was anxious, he said, to create the best possible climate for the Orange–Green talks.
Following the visit, Sean Caughey, secretary of the NICCL, issued a statement which said that his council had told  Ennals that an impartial inquiry by an independent body in Britain could do much to redress the grievances of the minority.
It said that the Special Powers Act was preventing British standards of justice from prevailing in Northern Ireland, and went on:
The mass  disfranchisement of thousands of citizens in local government, the disgraceful manipulation of constituency boundaries, the enforced political tests for government jobs and legislation, such as the Flags and Emblems Act, were some of the shackles on individual freedom which would never be tolerated in England.
Yet the British Government was responsible under Clause 75 of the Government of Ireland Act for everything that goes on in Northern Ireland.
Caughey's statement paralleled the ideas about ‘British standards of justice’ and the responsibility of the British government under the Government of Ireland Act which were later put forward by the CSJ and the CDU, but in Caughey's case they were able to coexist with a strong commitment to republicanism.
Shortly afterwards the NICCL disappeared from public view and Caughey resurfaced as secretary of the (republican) Political Prisoners Release Committee.
He was an example of the contradictory crosscurrents of nationalist and republican politics in this period.
Although in 1962 he had appealed to the Government of Ireland Act, in 1963 he described it as a ‘constitution of bondage’.
In July 1964 he was fined for singing the Irish national anthem, ‘A Soldier's Song’(in Irish) at a republican rally in Ballycastle, County Antrim.
In 1965 he resigned from Sinn Féin, of which he had been a vice-president, because of its refusal to recognise the legitimacy of both governments in Ireland.
In the early 1970s he was editor of the Provisional republican newspaper in the north,Republican News .
Following the winding up of the Political Prisoners Release Committee, Caughey became secretary of a small group called Irish Union, which, in its personnel, provided a link between the NICCL and the later Wolfe Tone Societies and NICRA.
The chairman was Jack Bennett, a former member of the CPNI; he came from a Protestant background and had led a campaign in the late 1950s to get the CPNI to return to the pro-republican line of the Irish Communists in the 1930s.
Another prominent member was Fred Heatley who, like Bennett, was a member of the Belfast Wolfe Tone Society and later of NICRA.
NICRA itself originated at a conference of the Wolfe Tone Societies held in Maghera, County Derry, on the weekend of 13–14 August 1966.
The societies had been created in 1964 out of the committees which were set up to organise the 1963 commemorations of the bicentenary of the birth of Wolfe Tone, the leader of the United Irishmen and martyr of the 1798 Rising.
Their ‘primary objective was a united, independent and democratic Irish Republic in accordance with the principles of the 1916 Proclamation and the Democratic Programme of the First Dáil’.
Fred Heatley described them as ‘an autonomous adjunct of the Republican Movement’, and Roy Johnston called them ‘a Fabian Society to the Republican Movement’.
The intellectual leaders of the Wolfe Tone Societies were two Dublin academics, Roy Johnston and Anthony Coughlan.
Johnston had been a founder member of the Irish Workers' League (the Communist Party in the Irish Republic), and both were involved with the Connolly Association during periods spent in England.
Johnston was important as a systematic thinker who put together a package of ideas on the links between Marxist and republican politics.
He had the distinction of being viewed with deep suspicion by Seán Mac Stíofáin and William Craig, who both saw him as being responsible for leading the republican movement in a Communist direction.
It is clear, however, from examining some of his writings, that by the mid-1960s his nationalism was far stronger than his Marxism.
In an article published in 1966 Johnston identified the failure of Irish governments in the 1920s and 1930s as one of not having acted to ‘assume full control over the reinvestment of the economic surplus’.
The article advocated a policy of economic autarchy, with the exclusion of foreign investment and legislation to ensure that ‘gombeen capital’ was invested in Ireland.
The state ‘could have developed along managed capitalist lines, such as a small nation occasionally cam do, for example, as Norway’.
In 1968 he advocated a ‘national revolutionary programme’ which would seek to unite ‘workers in industries threatened by ‘monopolistic rationalisation’’, small farmers, emigrants and ‘technically qualified intellectuals’.
This programme would have ‘social objectives appropriate to the contemporary situation, and quite distinct from the classical European path of nation-building.
This programme may be successful in helping a small nation to  emerge from the grip of imperialism even though under considerable economic domination’.
Johnston's Communism, therefore, had been transmuted into a nationalism which emphasised economic independence, state planning and the unity of a wide range of social groups in the tasks of nation-building.
When Johnston joined the republican movement in 1965, at the invitation of Cathal Goulding, IRA chief of staff, he was probably some distance to the right of some existing members of the movement and he was responsible not so much for leading the movement to the left as for crystallising a more coherent political strategy.
Through the Wolfe Tone Societies, Johnston and Coughlan initiated projects such as a Co-operative Development Trust which assisted in the creation of co-operative enterprises along the lines of those started by Father James McDyer of Glencolumbcille in County Donegal.
They also agitated against the Anglo-Irish Free Trade Agreement of 1965 and argued for a strategy of building republican support through involvement in agitation on social and economic grievances, as well as by a principled stand for a united and independent Ireland.
The republicans were active in influencing the direction taken by NICRA as well as in its creation.
Goulding himself was present at the Wolfe Tone Societies meeting in Maghera in 1966.
To understand the significance of their involvement, however, and the direction in which republican influence took the civil rights movement, it is necessary to examine carefully the political strategy of the republicans in the mid-1960s.
The abandonment of the 1956–62 IRA military campaign was highly ambiguous and from outward appearances it was possible to interpret republican actions as either preparation for a renewed onslaught or as a delicate operation to keep the movement together while its direction was fundamentally changed.
It is clear, however, that important innovations were being made in republican political activity.
A document taken by the Garda Síochána (the Irish police force) from a leading republican, Sean Garland, in May 1966, and later published as an appendix to the Scarman Report, contained a good deal of evidence of plans for intensive military training, but it also outlined some of the new political initiatives being taken by the movement.
It began by stating the need for an organisational form which could attract trade-unionists and for a ‘radical Social and  Economic programme’.
Committees should be created to deal with such issues as housing and co-operatives, which would work with other radical groups and with individual members of the Irish Labour Party and trade-unionists.
There would have to be extensive education within the movement: here the document indicated that social and economic agitation would be given a much higher priority than purely military activity:
The present form of recruit training will be changed.
This change will replace the emphasis now placed on arms and battle tactics to a secondary position and be replaced by an emphasis on Social and Economic objectives…
A recruit…finds that there is a lot of unromantic and possibly boring work to be done before he gets a chance to use his military training.
This accounts for the high turnover in membership…the recruit having seen emphasis laid on military activity is not prepared for the political activity which must come before it.
The document proposed that the basic unit of the movement should be the local cumann (branch), with factory-based cumainn wherever possible.
These should have specialised sections that would agitate on different issues and among different sections of the population.
Elections were to be contested up to the level of Dáil Éireann when the movement had built up sufficient support.
There was a quixotic suggestion that elected representatives north and south should meet to set up an alternative national parliament which would proceed to ‘legislate’ for the whole country.
This, it was suggested, could lead to a situation of ‘dual power’, which might come to a head over the ‘nationalisation’ of some foreign-owned factory which would be ‘occupied’on behalf of the Irish nation.
In June 1968 William Craig read out in Stormont lengthy extracts from a document published in the secret IRA journal An tÓglach (the volunteer).
This contained several passages which gave credence to the idea that the nature of the IRA and its aims were unchanged:
To re-unify our country.
To force the withdrawal of the British Army of Occupation.
To abolish the existing Governments of our country, North and South, and replace them with a true Democratic  Republican Government owing but one allegiance to the Irish people.
A commitment to armed force was stated unambiguously:
For mark this well: our enemies will never concede or surrender their Power, Position or privileges to anything but armed men who are determined, committed and trained in every field of Revolution.
The main thrust of the document, however, was to point out the lessons drawn by the leadership from the failure of the 1956–62 campaign:
1
The fact that the people saw no connection between the fight in the North and the idea of improving the Irish social conditions, etc.
2
A lack of resources…money and the right type of weapons.
3
The lack of an efficient publicity ad propaganda machine.
4
A dwindling of public support both North and South making it virtually impossible for men to operate on Guerrilla lines — one of the basic ingredients for a successful guerrilla campaign is the support of wide sections of the people.
This comes only from an awareness and understanding of the reasons and nature of the struggle.
It was not enough to have modern weapons and ‘the best of young Irishmen’ if the people did not understand the nature of the freedom for which they were fighting and that
this freedom we talk about is worthy of their support because it is for them we fight; it is for the establishment of a social system that is going to provide them with the opportunity and the means to develop all that is best in them and the Nation.
Propaganda by itself was insufficient; they must involve themselves in social agitation and make it known that the republicans were involved:
For instance in one area recently there has been a series of protests and demonstrations regarding poor and inadequate housing conditions, the majority of the members of the committees which were responsible for organising the protests are members of the IRA.
They are known publicly as such.
Further, an Army section actually helped the occupants of houses threatened with eviction to barricade their homes, and actually stayed with the family for a week to help them resist eviction if need arose.
These documents demonstrate a commitment to developing broadly based, open political agitation, but they contain little about a civil rights strategy in the north; such a strategy could be deduced from the analysis which they contain, but the documents give no indication that it had been proposed in any detail.
The Wolfe Tone Societies, as the section of the republican movement most directly involved in creating NICRA, had the most thoroughly worked-out civil rights strategy.
In August 1966 their bulletin Tuairisc (information) published a long analysis of the political situation facing Irish republicans.
The civil rights initiative was put in the context of a changed situation brought about by the Anglo-Irish Free Trade Agreement and the moves to join the EEC.
These were seen as products of a new strategy on the part of Britain to ensure its continued domination of Ireland:
Britain now hopes to ensnare Lemass back into the United Kingdom.
The free Trade Agreement will do the trick…a situation in which the old-fashioned Unionist intransigence which served Britain so well in the past will also be outdated as no longer so convenient to imperialism .
The contacts between the Lemass and O'Neill governments were seen as having been brought about by pressure from Britain, and as a result ‘O'Neill has got his orders to play down discrimination’.
A liberalisation of the north, particularly in its treatment of Catholics, was a prerequisite for these new methods of domination, which would involve the economic integration of north and south.
Concessions from the Unionists were necessary to enable Lemass to sell the new arrangements to public opinion in the south.
But this strategy might not work out as the British government hoped; the resultant ‘unfreezing [could]release the political energies of the people’, and it could lead to a situation in which Protestant workers were weaned away from Orangeism and united with their Catholic fellow workers in the Labour movement:
How can Unionism possibly survive when Protestant and Catholic are no longer at each other 's throats, when discrimination has been dealt a body-blow?…
This is the most progressive outcome to the present situation…the destruction of the machinery of discrimination…the unfreezing of bigotry…the achievement of the utmost degree of civil liberties possible, freedom of political action, an end to the bitterness of social life and the divisions among the people fostered by the Unionists…
They would permanently weaken the basis of Unionism, and towards these objectives the energies of the progressive people in the North should be bent in the coming months.
This would not occur automatically.
The Unionist government would try to make the minimum concessions and strong pressure would have to be put on it:
There can be no doubt that the policy of Republicans must be to ensure that everything is done to make this demand more strong, vigorously organised, widespread, well-expressed and heard not only in the North but in Britain and throughout the world .
Force O'Neill to CONCEDE MORE THAN HE WANTS TO OR THAN HE THINKS HE CAN DARE GIVE without risking overthrow by the more reactionary elements among the Unionists.
Demand more than may be demanded by the compromising elements that exist among the Catholic leadership.
Seek to associate as wide a section of the community as possible with these demands, in particular the well-intentioned people in the Protestant population and the trade union movement.
Civil rights, electoral reform, an end to gerrymandering and to discrimination in housing, jobs and appointments, the legal banning of incitement to religious discrimination.
These are the essential demands of the present time.
The article went on to disavow the use of violent methods:
Above all, actions must be avoided which would serve to solidify the disintegrating Unionist ranks — all irresponsible adventures, anything which could be construed as provocation.
There may well be people who think, for example, that it may be a good thing to throw a bomb at some orange hall, because Orangemen have thrown bombs at Catholic halls.
But this would undoubtedly be playing into the hands of the enemy at the present nine.
Let us choose our own battlegrounds and not be provoked.
At the present time the strength of the Catholic and nationalist forces in the North lies in their political discipline and restraint.
Let the Unionists expose themselves and rend one another asunder.
Why should we join in and help them to unite against us?
Another document,Ireland Today , published by the Republican Education Department in 1969 when the civil rights movement  was already an established fact, gives further evidence on republican strategy:
The achievement of democracy and civil rights will make the way open for linking of the economic demands to the national question.
Those who see the former as an end in itself…insofar as they comprise the present leadership of the NICRA…may be expected to lose interest as rights are gained.
They must then be replaced by more consistent people.
It was necessary to work for the ‘maximum co-ordination of efforts between the principled radical elements’ and to win support from the NILP and the trade unions.
It was also
essential that the civil rights movement include all elements that are deprived, not just republicans, and that unity in action within the civil rights movement be developed towards unity of political objectives to be won, and that ultimately (but not necessarily immediately) the political objective agreed by the organised radical groups be seen within the framework of a movement towards the achievement of a 32 county democratic republic.
The republicans, in other words, were keen to push the civil rights agitation further and to use it to build a radical coalition which would set its sights, eventually, on a united Ireland.
But it should be noted that this document envisaged a definite stage of development in which Northern Ireland would be significantly changed as a result of success in achieving the reforms being demanded by the civil rights movement.
A further stage of more radical agitation, including the objective of a united Ireland, would follow.
It is unclear how quickly this stage would follow the preceding one, but clearly this more radical phase was predicated on a successful achievement of the limited demands of the civil rights movement.
Another Republican Education Department document, published in 1970, offers further clarification.
A section, which the editor notes was originally written in 1967, discusses ‘Tactical Objectives’ in Northern Ireland:
The major obstacle to the development of radical national ideas in the six counties is the lack of any form of communication between the Movement and the people.
There is an extreme need for a paper which would inform the general public of the stand point of the 
Movement.
The existence of a ban on the legality of the Movement makes the position even more difficult in that it is practically impossible to even get a hall in some areas in which to hold a meeting.
Both these facts point to the high priority of the struggle for civil liberties.
In taking this up, however, it is necessary to realise that non-Republican people in the North are not disposed to agitate to get full civil rights for Republicans; they have to be involved in their own interests.
This means that the civil rights movement in the North will have to involve Catholics on the issue of the local government election register which is weighted against them by property qualifications.
In other words, the republicans saw the civil rights movement, at least in part, as a means of achieving the legalisation of republican political activity.
Once this had been achieved they could campaign more openly for a united Ireland on the basis of uniting Catholic and Protestant workers, small farmers and the lower rungs of the business community for an independent, democratic, united and self-sufficient Irish Republic.
Military action, although retained as an option for the future, did not figure as part of this strategy.
Exactly when, where, how and if it would be resurrected was extremely vague.
It is clear, however, that it was not regarded as a useful adjunct to the civil rights agitation.
For all practical purposes the republican leadership saw its movement as being in a phase of activity which would concentrate on non-violent, political agitation.
The initiative of setting up NICRA was very much that of Johnston, Coughlan and the Dublin Wolfe Tone Society.
The Belfast Wolfe Tone Society ‘had always maintained a sturdy independence, but somehow lacked the interconnection necessary to become an effective ideas forum.
Contact with the Belfast Republican and Labour Movements was tenuous, there was no link with Queen's at such a level as to influence student ideas’.
Among the people most prominent in Belfast were: Jack Bennett; Fred Heatley; Liam Burke, a veteran Belfast republican and adjutant general of the IRA from 1942 to 1943; Alec Foster, a former headmaster of the Royal Belfast Academical Institution and a rugby international; and Frank Gogarty, a Belfast dentist who was a chairman of NICRA in later years.
One of the achievements of the Belfast Wolfe Tone Society was  the publication in 1967 of a pamphlet by Fred Heatley on Henry Joy McCracken, a Protestant and a hero of the United Irishmen and the 1795 rebellion in the north.
This had prompted the Ulster Museum to put on an exhibition about McCracken and BBC Northern Ireland and Ulster Television to feature the bicentenary of his birth.
The following year the Belfast society promoted the commemoration of another Irish patriot, James Connolly.
A meeting in February 1965 brought together representatives of the Wolfe Tone Society, the Communist Youth League, the CPNI, the QUB Republican Club, the Republican Clubs, the NDP and Dúchas, Council of Irish Tradition.
A series of lectures was arranged, as well as a céilí and film show.
On 9 June there was a parade down the Falls Road to the house in which Connolly had lived while he was in Belfast.
There a commemorative plaque was unveiled by Connolly's son, Roddy Connolly.
The event was marred, however, by the refusal of the Young Socialists to march behind the Irish tricolour, which they described as a ‘bourgeois flag’.
It had been included in the first place On the insistence of the republicans, who refused to march without it.
The following weekend a similar parade in Derry was called off when its route through the city centre was banned; an alternative route through a Catholic area was not acceptable.
In June 1969 a proposed Connolly commemoration parade through Belfast city centre was bitterly opposed by loyalists.
John McKeague of the Shankill Defence Association forecast that thousands of loyalists would gather in Royal Avenue to prevent it marching.
The police restricted the parade to the Falls area and the organising committee then called it off so as to avoid compromising the principle of working-class unity.
However, four members of the organising committee tried to hold a silent protest march over the proscribed route but were chased by loyalists.
The events surrounding the Connolly commemorations were an important indicator of the difficulty of reconciling Ulster Protestants to nationalist pageantry, no matter how much it was stressed that the traditions being commemorated included the Protestants.
Since most of those involved in organising these commemorations were also involved in NICRA, and both were initiated by the Wolfe Tone Societies, the events illustrate how deep-rooted was their belief that it was possible to bring about unity between workers in  both communities in Northern Ireland, provided the right political formula could be found.
It was the Dublin Wolfe Tone Society which suggested a civil rights campaign.
Roy Johnston recalled: ‘The August 1966 Maghera conference of the Wolf e Tone Societies…discussed a memorandum on civil rights prepared by the Dublin Society…with some of the Republican leadership present, convincing the latter that this constituted a valid way forward.’
The meeting was attended by representatives of Wolfe Tone Societies in Dublin, Cork, Belfast, Derry and County Tyrone.
The first political business was to denounce the Unionist Party, following a UVF attack in Malvern Street in Belfast, which, they said, had shown the ‘rapid moral disintegration of Unionist ideology’.
In something of an afterthought the Irish News of 15 August 1966 recorded that ‘a discussion took place on the desirability of holding a convention on civil rights for the purpose of drawing up a civil rights chart’.
According to Fred Heatley, a letter was read from the Dublin Wolfe Tone Society which outlined the proposed civil rights strategy.
It was a long document which took about forty minutes to read and it was not greeted with warm enthusiasm.
Michael Dolley and Jack Bennett were severely critical; Fred Heatley and Billy McMillen were doubtful about the emphasis given to the trade-union movement — McMillen pointed out the vast difference between trade unions in the north and in the south.
Cathal Goulding was generally in favour but agreed that some of the phraseology could be altered.
However, the broad strategy was accepted and the Belfast Wolfe Tone Society began discussions on the proposal with other interested people.
After these discussions it was decided to drop the Wolf e Tone Societies tag, and an ad hoc body was formed which organised a seminar on civil rights on 25 November 1966 in Belfast.
The main speakers were the president of the Irish Anti-Apartheid Movement, Kadar Asmal, who was a South African-born lecturer in law at Trinity College Dublin, and Ciarán Mac an Áilí, a Derry-born Dublin solicitor who was a member of the International Federation of Jurists and president of the Irish Pacifist Association.
It was agreed that another meeting should be called to launch a civil rights body and this took place on 29 January 1967.
Tony Smythe and James Shepherd from the NCCL in London were  present and there were over one hundred delegates from a variety of organisations, including all the Northern Ireland political parties.
However, Senator Nelson Elder of the Unionist Party walked out after an argument over capital punishment for the murder of policemen.
A thirteen-person steering committee was elected to draw up a draft constitution and a programme of activities.
Its membership was drawn from the Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers Technical and Administrative Staffs Section (AUEW TASS), the CSJ, the CPNI, the Belfast Wolfe Tone Society, the Belfast trades council, the Republican Clubs, the Ulster Liberal Party, the NDP, the RLP, the Ardoyne Tenants' Association and the NILP.
The committee subsequently co-opted Robin Cole, who was one of the most liberal of the Young Unionists and chairman of the QUB Conservative and Unionist Association.
In February the committee issued a statement deploring Ian Paisley's campaign against the visit of the Church of England Bishop of Ripon.
It convened another meeting on 9 April to present the draft constitution and this meeting Officially brought NICRA into existence.
The new constitution, which was based on that of the NCCL, emphasised the association's character as a body which would make representations on the broad issues of civil liberties and would also take up individual cases of discrimination and ill-treatment.
The five objectives of the association were:
1 To defend the basic freedoms of all citizens.
2 To protect the rights of the individual.
3 To highlight all possible abuses of power.
4 To demand guarantees for freedom of speech, assembly and association.
5 To inform the public of their lawful rights.
These objectives said nothing about concrete grievances over discrimination in housing, employment and the electoral franchise.
They underline the character of NICRA at this stage as an organisation which, like the NCCL, was concerned with the defence of legal and constitutional rights and the grievances of individuals, not with militant protest.
This phase was to last a year and a half and it was a period of general ineffectuality.
As Fred Heatley described it:
The first eighteen months was a time of frustration.
William Craig, to whom most of our complaints were directed, usually delayed in replying.
When he did he usually denied that the complaints were justified — even when a civil rights officer (myself) was physically thrown out of Hastings Street [RUC]Station!
Yet we did detect an easing off in harassment of Republicans and of itinerants.
But the most annoying aspect of the early period was the lack of real interest shown by our first council members — at times we couldn't muster up the required six members for a quorum at the monthly meetings.
The work of documenting abuses, which had been begun by the CSJ, was continued and the association intervened on behalf of a group of travelling people who were camped on Belfast's Shore Road.
But although in December a national opinion poll in Northern Ireland found that 43 per cent of those interviewed thought that there should be legislation to outlaw discrimination, NICRA seemed incapable of tapping the support of this large, sympathetic minority.
In February 1965 the first annual general meeting of the association saw some changes of officers and in the membership of the executive committee, but no change of direction nor amy indication of a breakthrough.
It was probably inevitable, therefore, that as one committee member, Ann Hope, put it:
In the spring of 1968 there was much rethinking within the CRA [Civil Rights Association]leadership; the tactics of Martin Luther King in America had been absorbed inasmuch that it was felt by some that only public marches could draw wide attention to what we were trying to achieve by normal democratic means.
But there were members on the EC [executive committee]who didn't relish either the trouble this would create or were too constitutional in their thinking.
To some extent NICRA had already become involved in public protest action.
In March 1967 Craig had announced a ban on the forthcoming commemorations of the 1867 Fenian Rising and had proscribed the Republican Clubs.
NICRA denounced these measures as a violation of the rights of freedom of speech, assembly and association and was represented at protest rallies over the Republican Clubs ban and the banning of the 1968 Easter Rising commemoration in Armagh.
NICRA's official history records that the  association ‘was slowly coming to realise that a ban on demonstrations was an effective Government weapon against political protest and that although letter writing to Stormont was a fine form of occupational therapy, it was unlikely to bring amy worthwhile results’.
By the summer of 1965, therefore, the leadership of NICRA was open to proposals for protest action.
On 19 June, Austin Currie raised the question in Stormont of the allocation of a house in Caledon, outside Dungannon, to a nineteen-year-old unmarried Protestant woman, the secretary of a solicitor who was a Unionist parliamentary candidate.
A Catholic family who had squatted in the house was evicted to make room for her, and a number of other Catholic families in the area were also denied houses.
Currie himself squatted in the house to draw attention to the case.
Fred Heatley, on behalf of NICRA, addressed a protest meeting in Dungannon on Saturday 22 June.
In July, NICRA's executive committee was meeting in Kevin Agnew's house in Maghera; Currie had phoned Fred Heatley and asked to be allowed to put an idea to the committee, and he was invited to address the meeting.
He proposed a march from Coalisland to Dungannon, ending with a rally in the town's Market Square.
The committee was at first divided over the proposal, with Betty Sinclair opposing the whole idea of protest marches, and a decision was deferred to a later meeting, which agreed to go ahead and fixed the date for 24 August.
An important factor was the support given to the proposal from both the republicans and the CSJ, which as a Dungannon-based group was particularly important.
A statement issued prior to the march claimed that there was support from the Nationalist Party, the RLP, the NILP, the NDP, the CSJ, the Irish National Foresters, the GAA, the AOH, the Derry Housing Action Committee (DHAC) and the Wolfe Tone Societies.
The RUC initially agreed to the proposed route and to the meeting in Market Square.
But Senator William Stewart, the Unionist chairman of Dungannon Urban District Council, intervened and forecast that there would be trouble if the march was allowed to proceed to the centre of Dungannon.
John Taylor, the Unionist MP for South Tyrone, also made representations and the Ulster Protestant Volunteers, a body led by Ian Paisley, announced a meeting for the same time and place as the civil rights rally.
The police  responded by re-routing the march to the Catholic sector of the town but NICRA refused to accept this, since it would have implied that theirs was a sectarian march.
Some two thousand people assembled in Coalisland and proceeded, accompanied by nationalist bands, to Thomas Street in Dungannon.
There they were met by a cordon of police, standing in front of a barrier of police tenders.
A group of about 1,500 loyalists, including Ian Paisley and Unionist members of Dungannon council, were gathered behind the police tenders, with a gap of about fifty yards separating the rival groups.
A platform and public address system were set up by NICRA stewards in front of the police cordon.
But before the meeting could commence a group of young demonstrators attempted to break through the police lines to get at the counter-demonstrators, who were jeering, shouting slogans and singing party songs.
This onslaught was driven back by a police baton charge in the course of which four youths were slightly hurt.
But appeals from the platform succeeded in dissuading the civil rights supporters from making any further attempt to breach the police cordon, and the trouble was contained.
The meeting was chaired by Betty Sinclair, who reminded the supporters that their objective was to demonstrate for civil rights, for jobs and for houses: ‘We are asking you to listen to the speakers, and what we have done today will go down in history and in this way we will be more effective in showing the world that we are a peaceful people asking for our civil rights in an orderly manner.'
Austin Currie condemned the police action in blocking their route, and said that NICRA would be organising more parades, which would not stop at Thomas Street: ‘O'Neill and those Orange bigots behind him [will]realise once and for all that we are on our way forward.
We will keep going with disobedience and anything else that is necessary to achieve our aims.'
He said that looking out from the platform towards the town reminded him of the late President Kennedy looking out over the Berlin Wall.
The regimes in Czechoslovakia and other Eastern European countries were no different from the regime in Dungannon.
Gerry Fitt reiterated the point about Czechoslovakia (the Soviet invasion had occurred a few days before).
What had happened in Dungannon, he suggested, was no different from what had happened in Prague: ‘We ordinary people have been walked over by a  militant force.’
They were there to demand fair play in the allocation of housing and jobs; he was not the enemy of the counter-demonstrators and NICRA had people of all religions demanding the same social justice.
He promised to draw the attention of the government at Westminster to what was happening in Dungannon.
He ended by saying that the lights would not go out until they had achieved civil rights and a thirty-two-county republic.
Jack Hassard, an NILP member of Dungannon Council, condemned the ban on the Market Square meeting, which had only been notified by the police at twelve o'clock the previous night.
Pleas for housing made at council meetings, he said, had fallen on deaf ears.
Many Protestants, like himself, were in favour of civil rights.
Joe McCann, secretary of the NDP, said that the meeting bore witness to the failure of the Unionist Party to keep faith with the British traditions it professed to admire.
In return for the money received by Northern Ireland from the British taxpayer, the Unionists had turned the British flag into a party-political symbol and had made a mockery of the British tradition of social justice.
Other speakers were Erskine Holmes of the NILP and T. O'Connor of the Republican Clubs.
After the meeting was over and the main demonstration had dispersed, some civil rights supporters succeeded in infiltrating to Market Square by a roundabout route.
There they staged a sit-down and were batoned by the police.
In a press statement issued afterwards, NICRA said that the events in Dungannon had proved the need for a civil rights body in Northern Ireland.
It condemned the police for failing to control the counter-demonstration and for not ensuring the right of the NICRA marchers to demonstrate peacefully.
It praised the stewards who had kept order on its side.
However, its supporters were not unanimous; a statement issued by the Belfast Young Socialists condemned the police and also accused NICRA of selling its principles by not leading the demonstration into Dungannon.
The Cameron Report's judgement on the march was that
it is significant that this first civil rights march, unaccompanied by any provocative display of weapons, banners or symbol was carried out without any breach of the peace.
It attracted considerable public attention and was also regarded as proof in certain circles that many elements in the society of Northern Ireland whose ultimate political  purposes differed in very marked degree could cooperate in peaceful and lawful demonstration in favour of certain common and limited objectives.
As we have seen, there were in fact two minor clashes with the police and the presence of bands playing nationalist tunes could be interpreted as provocative.
The organisers kept control of some of their supporters only with great difficulty.
Bernadette Devlin recalled that in its early stages ‘the whole thing had a sort of good-natured holiday atmosphere’, but when they realised that the police had re-routed the march
the whole atmosphere changed.
Most of the people…hadn't really thought about civil rights; they had come, with a sort of friendly curiosity, to hear something.
I do believe that then for the first time it dawned on people that Northern Ireland was a series of Catholic and Protestant ghettoes.
The meeting got very angry, though it was still a passive anger, with very little pushing and shoving of the police.
Some men were calling out that we should force our way through, and the lines of the march were breaking formation and crowding the police.
The trouble was kept to a minimum as much because of the novelty of the situation as anything else.
No significant section of the marchers had formed a determination to defy the police, and the RUC, for its part, seems to have behaved in a generally good-natured way.
It was clear, however, that such restraint could not survive a serious clash between civil rights demonstrators and the police or counter-demonstrators.
Shortly after the Coalisland — Dungannon march, NICRA was approached by the DHAC with a proposal for a march in Derry.
The DHAC was a coalition of radicals from the local Republican Clubs and the left wing of the NILP; they had organised a series of imaginative protests in Derry to draw attention to bad conditions and discrimination in housing.
Since NICRA had already targeted Derry for a march, there was ready agreement and a delegation from NICRA travelled to Derry to discuss arrangements with the DHAC.
According to Eamonn McCann, who was a prominent member of the DHAC:
It was immediately clear that the CRA knew nothing of Derry.
We had resolved to press for a route which would take the march into  the walled centre of the city and expected opposition from the moderate members of the CRA.
But there was none.
No one in the CRA delegation understood that it was unheard of for a non-Unionist procession to enter that area.
This seems highly unlikely.
There had been violent clashes between police and nationalist demonstrators in the mid-1950s in Derry city centre and only the previous June the Connolly commemoration had been banned.
A more credible explanation is that the NICRA leadership was unwilling to accept that its marches should be treated as sectarian and provocative.
Adoption of this route, however, did not necessarily mean that the association would defy the police in order to march on it.
NICRA probably meant to register its protest but to stop short of an actual confrontation, as it had done in Dungannon.
This interpretation is supported by a letter written by McCann, before the march, to Michael Farrell, leader of the Young Socialists in Belfast, in which he gave an account of the meeting between NICRA and the DHAC:
The police are more than likely to ban the march.
[Betty]Sinclair adopted a ‘cross that bridge when we come to it’ attitude, which means that she wants the back door left open for a sell-out.
I think one would have to push for a ‘we are marching and that's that’ position.
The DHAC and the Republican Clubs will push for that but I can't see anyone else.
In the event, the more fateful decision was not the proposal of a route within the walled city but making the starting point for the march the railway station on the Protestant Waterside.
This meant that the entire route was prohibited and there was little scope, as in Dungannon, to march peacefully to a token, non-violent confrontation with the police.
The ban was imposed by Minister of Home Affairs William Craig after the Apprentice Boys of Derry had announced a procession at the same time and over the same route as the civil rights march.
They claimed that this was an annual event and it does seem that the date coincided with a regular initiation ceremony for new members of their organisation.
But the ceremony was usually held in the morning and would not, therefore, have clashed with the NICRA demonstration.
Fergus Pyle of the Irish Times was at the station when the expected delegation from Liverpool arrived on the morning train.
He was told that they were  unaware of any plan to switch the ceremony to the afternoon and that arrangements were the same as in previous years.
After Craig had announced on Thursday 3 October that the Apprentice Boys march was to be banned and that the civil rights march would not be permitted to take place within the walled city or in the Waterside ward, an emergency meeting of the NICRA executive committee was called.
The committee was divided over whether or not to proceed with the march but it agreed to send a delegation to Derry to consult the local people; this meeting began on the evening of Friday 4 October and went on until 1 a.m. on Saturday.
Conn McCluskey of the CSJ held out strongly against defying the ban but the DHAC representatives made it clear that they would go ahead in any case, and this seems to have swayed the NICRA members.
Eddie McAteer made a public call for the march to be postponed, but Fred Heatley, John McAnerney and Betty Sinclair visited him at home to persuade him not to pull out.
He told them that he did not like the company they were keeping —— presumably the DHAC — but he did participate.
The parade formed up outside Waterside railway station, on the opposite bank of the River Foyle to the city centre.
There was police intervention almost immediately; an NILP loudspeaker van, which was making announcements, was stopped and its three occupants were taken to Victoria RUC station where, one of them later told the Belfast Telegraph , they were charged with incitement to defy the ban on the march.
At the head of the parade was a blue banner bearing the words ‘Civil Rights March’, which had been carried on the Coalisland — Dungannon march.
In the front rank were Ivan Cooper, Eddie McAteer and Gerry Fitt.
Behind them were Austin Currie, Proinsias Mac Aonghusa and David Green of Citizens for PR in the Irish Republic, and three Westminster Labour MPs, Russell Kerr, Ann Kerr and John Ryan, who had travelled directly from the Labour Party conference with Gerry Fitt.
Placards proclaimed such slogans as ‘Police State Here’, ‘The Proper Place for Politics is in the Streets’, ‘Class not Creed’, and ‘A Dhia Saor Éire ’(God free Ireland).
The turnout was much smaller than for the Coalisland — Dungannon march, at about four hundred.
County Inspector William Meharg of the RUC warned the crowd that no march was permitted in ‘this part of the Maiden City’.
He advised them, for their own safety and that of the women  and children present, to leave the area.
He later reiterated the warning and told them that the police would have to see that the prohibition order was enforced.
Ivan Cooper asked the crowd to behave responsibly and stressed that NICRA did not want any violence or bloodshed.
The original route would have taken the march up the steep slopes of Simpson's Brae and Distillery Brae to Spencer Road and then to the upper tier of Craigavon Bridge.
The police had blocked this way and the marchers set off along Duke Street, trying to find another way onto the bridge.
The police hastily threw a cordon across the end of Duke Street and here the first clashes occurred.
Fred Heatley believes that he was the first marcher to be arrested.
He had arrived late with other NICRA leaders from Belfast, and seeing the march moving off, he ran to its head.
On reaching the front, he claims, he was kneed in the groin by a policeman, dragged behind police lines and ordered into a Black Maria.
Fergus Pyle saw a Young Socialist being hit on the head by a baton and a ‘girl in a mini skirt carrying the Plough and Stars [flag]wrestling with a constable, and a few men grabbing and fighting with policemen’.
It was at this point that Gerry Fitt, Eddie McAteer and Austin Currie were injured.
Paddy Kennedy, an RLP councillor who was himself taken to hospital with suspected broken ribs, said that he had seen Fitt fall to the ground and he had appeared to be on his knees when he was struck by a baton.
During these first scuffles the blue civil rights banner was seized and ripped by the police.
There was a brief attempt at a sit-down in front of the police lines, and a ragged snatch of ‘We shall overcome’ was sung.
Then an impromptu meeting, on the model of what had happened in Dungannon, was held.
Michael Farrell of the Young Socialists said that the protest was over housing, gerrymandering and discrimination: ‘We are met by police with batons in their hands.
Is that democracy?’
Betty Sinclair said
it had to be made clear that the Civil Rights Movement was not anti-constitutional.
In all the negotiations for the march and the meeting the police had been co-operative.
The Association would have changed the day if the Minister had consulted them, but he had banned it without enabling them to change their plans.
However, she declared, ‘We want to make our case that, for certain people in Northern Ireland there are no civil rights.
Have we made that clear?’
There were cheers when she added, ‘There may be people here who think you have to spill blood for this.
That would mean you are playing Mr Craig's game.'
Eddie McAteer repeated Betty Sinclair's plea for restraint: ‘Join with me in wishing that no one should be exposed to hurt here today.
I advise you to make your way in a wee walk to the Diamond.’
Eamonn McCann said that events had shown that the old policies would get no one anywhere: ‘I don't advise anyone to charge that barricade,’ he said.
‘I also want to make it clear as a private individual that I cam do nothing to stop them.’
Ivan Cooper and other speakers were less ambiguous in calling for restraint and Betty Sinclair came back to ask the crowd to disperse quietly.
But almost immediately violence broke out again.
Some of the crowd attempted to strike up with ‘We shall overcome’ but they were interrupted by a police loudspeaker announcement, which was shouted down; this was probably an order to disperse but very few could have heard it.
At this point some of the protesters started to throw their placards over the heads of those in front at the police.
Then the police, with batons drawn, advanced on the crowd.
Retreat for marchers fleeing them was blocked by a cordon at the other end of Duke Street, where police also charged the demonstrators.
After the action had lasted for a few minutes, County Inspector Meharg, through a loudhailer, ordered: ‘The police will hold their hands, please.’
Fergus Pyle reported:
Instead of a pause, this announcement was the prelude to a methodical and efficient movement forward by the police, hitting everything in front of them.
Some people in the crowd tackled them back and poles from the placards were flying through the air.
from my vantage point I saw nothing in the few seconds between the County Inspector's announcement to have incited what appeared to be a concerted start by the police.
The police carried on down Duke Street, clearing the crowd in front of them as demonstrators screamed hysterically.
Detachments of police went after individuals and when the street was nearly clear, water cannon were brought in.
Later it was alleged that the RUC sprayed not only those who remained on the road but also groups sheltering in shop doorways and the first-floor windows  of houses, some of which were open.
Passers-by, and others who had taken no part in the demonstration, were also soaked.
Kenneth Orbinson, an Ulster Television cameraman, gave evidence at the trial of those arrested on 5 October: he said that he had been sprayed while filming from the window of a flat in Duke Street; but his film was not admitted as evidence.
A small number of demonstrators followed McAteer's advice and took a ‘wee walk’ to the Diamond on the city side of the river, infiltrating in groups of two or three.
A Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament banner was unfurled and carried round the war memorial before one of those carrying it was arrested.
A crowd gathered and shouted at the police, provoking another baton charge which forced them down towards Butcher Gate and the Bogside.
Stones were thrown at the police and a number of shop windows were broken.
By this time the original confrontation between marchers and police had given way to a general battle between the police and young residents of the Bogside, most of whom had taken no part in the march.
A barricade was built in Fahan Street and set on fire and a continuous fusillade of stones was thrown at the police sheltering behind Butcher Gate.
Attempts were made to disperse the stone throwers with a water cannon, but its progress was halted by a barricade; police trying to clear the obstruction returned fire with stones which had been thrown at them.
The battle lasted for several hours and at about 10.30 p.m. there was a further clash as a crowd charged the police and was dispersed by a counter-charge.
After this a section of the crowd marched to the Guildhall, from where they were driven back up Shipquay Street towards the Diamond, where two baton charges were needed to disperse them.
Violence continued into the following afternoon and evening; petrol bombs were thrown and shops looted.
There were many stories afterwards of what appeared to be gratuitous police violence.
A young Derry woman was walking past a group of police who were pushing and kicking a man.
As she passed, she said, a policeman had struck her in the face with a baton, ‘and I hadn't opened my mouth to him’.
John Ryan MP claimed to have seen a policeman remove a woman's glasses and then strike her on the head; she had appeared, to him, to be over sixty years of age and a bystander.
Other stories of bystanders who  suffered included that of a man going home from his work in a bookmaker's shop in the Waterside when he was set upon and batoned.
A railway worker, also making his way home, was caught up in the riot and, as a result of baton blows, was deafened in one ear and had to have sixteen stitches to his head.
Martin Cowley, a reporter with the local nationalist newspaper, the Derry Journal , was put into the police van beside Fred Heatley, his head streaming with blood.
He told Heatley that he had been walking along the footpath when the police had made a baton charge.
He had shouted that he was a reporter but he was struck several blows on the head and shoved into the police tender.
The Irish News reported that the police had struck at the testicles of male demonstrators but none of the other papers reported this.
However, a medical certificate was read out in Stormont some days later, which reported that a medical examination of Eddie McAteer had found an oval bruise below his right groin, about one inch away from the scrotum.
McAteer could not remember having been struck there and made no claim as to how the injury had been caused.
A famous film clip, which has been shown countless times, shows a NICRA supporter in front of the police line, appealing for restraint before suddenly doubling up, apparently in agony.
At his trial in December, Eamonn Melaugh, a prominent Derry republican, testified that he had seen a demonstrator struck in the groin.
The most bizarre story concerned Margaret Healy of Anne Street, Derry.
She was a polio victim and only four feet nine inches tall, with curvature of the spine.
She was running down Duke Street, away from the baton charge, when she was arrested.
Both the nationalist Irish News and the middle-of-the-road Sunday News reported what happened.
She told the former:
I lifted a broken placard that was lying in the centre of the road to throw it into the side when two policemen pounced on me.
They accused me of going to hit one of them with it…they put me in a police van and took me to Victoria Barracks where they kept me for two hours.
At the police station, she said, she was told first that she would be charged with assault and then that she would be charged with disorderly behaviour.
But eventually she was released without a  charge being made.
Later, relatives of another polio victim told the Derry Journal that he had been beaten up by a group of policemen when he went to buy cigarettes on the evening of Sunday 6 October.
Not all policemen behaved brutally.
Fergus Pyle reported that ‘many of the officers, probably local men, went no further than duty required.
I heard one man say ‘bastards'’ as a group of policemen went past him.
One of them rounded on him, grabbed him by the arm, but only asked him for his name and address.’
A QUB woman student, a member of the NDP, recalled having told a group of policemen early in the events that their conditions were as bad as those the demonstrators were protesting about.
Some had been hostile but others were quite friendly.
Later, after a friend had been batoned, she approached a group of policemen and remonstrated with them.
One had raised his baton but the others opened a gap for her and let her through.
After the first clash, when the crowd was halted in front of the police cordon, some of the women had argued with the police and told them that they too were victims of the ‘system’.
This was either ignored or taken with good humour.
According to Fred Heatley, the demonstrators who were detained in Victoria RUC station were well treated.
The Cameron Report found that four policemen were injured during the clashes in Duke Street and a further seven during the later clashes at the Diamond and on the fringes of the Bogside.
The total number of civilian casualties was seventy-seven, most of whom had suffered bruises or lacerations to the head.
Only four people — two policemen and two civilians — were detained in hospital.
The report suggested that there were severe shortcomings in police tactics.
Lord Cameron came to the conclusion that there had not been a baton charge in Duke Street but that many policemen had drawn their batons individually and when ordered to disperse the march, had then used them indiscriminately.
The situation was made worse by the fact that the officers who had originally been blocking Simpson's Brae moved down to the rear of the march and then, unaware that their colleagues were dispersing the head of the demonstration, were confronted by protesters running towards them.
Here too, the report found, there was indiscriminate use of batons.
The use of water cannon was criticised as having been unnecessary and for affecting members of the public who had not been involved in the march.
The march organisers can also be criticised.
The choice of the Waterside railway station as an assembly point only made sense if the sole criterion was the convenience of demonstrators coming from other parts of Northern Ireland.
The Coalisland — Dungannon march had given everyone a good day out and had used up a lot of their energy by the time the moment of confrontation arrived.
The confrontation was predictable and planned, therefore relatively easily controlled.
The organisers were well prepared and able to maintain their authority.
In Derry things were very different.
The incipient differences between NICRA and the DHAC had never been resolved and the Derry radicals and their allies in the Belfast Young Socialists were determined to provoke a more drastic challenge to authority than had occurred in Dungannon.
Gerry Fitt, too, seems to have had aims at variance with those of NICRA.
He had brought three British Labour MPs to Derry and may have thought that the opportunity to expose the RUC should not be wasted.
The key leaders of NICRA arrived late, after the march had already started; if they had any plans for preventing a clash with the police, they were unable to put them into operation.
The demonstrators' tactic of walking into the police lines, while it was a principled assertion of their right to march, invited the violent response that followed and made further violence much more likely.
The throwing of placards by the Young Socialists provoked the RUC without damaging its capacity to inflict punishment on the crowd.
McCann's speech, with its suggestion that the police lines ought to be charged, while refusing to actually call for such action, seems to have typified the confused militancy of the radicals, who were suddenly precipitated into a conflict for which they were quite unprepared.
In later years the events of 5 October were to be polished into simplified and incompatible propaganda versions; it has to be stressed that the whole affair was a series of blunders and the violence resulted from a breakdown of control by the leaders of the march and the controllers of the police, and not from any pre-existing plan.
However, the judgement of the London Times of 7 October on the affair was probably widely shared by political and public opinion in Britain:
The refusal of Mr William Craig…to hold an inquiry into police methods in Londonderry cannot be the last word.
His assurance that the police used no undue force echoes exactly that of Mayor Daley in Chicago last month.
Nonetheless Mayor Daley had to should now persuade his colleagues to agree.
The reports of police brutality to individuals and loss of self-control in general are too uncomfortably convincing to be waved away by Mr Craig.
The Guardian asked: ‘If the police practice is to strike obstructive demonstrators on the legs, as Mr Craig claims, how did heads happen to be bleeding?’
In the aftermath of the events in Derry, Craig, members of the Government and other Unionists strenuously defended both the ban on the march and the actions of the RUC.
In an interview with William Hardcastle on BBC Radio 4's ‘The World This Weekend’, the text of which was published in the Irish News on 7 October, Craig introduced two themes which were to be repeated over and over during the next few days.
Challenged about the ban, he claimed:
‘The civil rights march was banned because they were proposing to march through areas that would provoke serious riot.’
He said that in Derry, down through the years, it had been established that Loyalists could parade in certain places, Republicans in certain places.
Mr Hardcastle: ‘But they don't regard themselves as a sectarian group either?’
Mr Craig: ‘This absolutely astonishes me.
We can see little or no difference, and indeed yesterday we unfortunately failed to arrest some very prominent IRA men, including Cathal Goulding from Dublin.
There is little doubt in police circles that it is, in fact, a Republican front.’
The Irish Times quoted Craig as claiming that a reason for banning the march had been that it posed a threat to the United States military base in Derry:
‘The authorities in Northern Ireland were quite satisfied that a substantial amount of explosives was in the area, and it might only be a matter of time until this sort of activity was renewed.’
The Minister said that all of the activities of the civil rights movement had indicated that it was predominantly a Republican body, and activities in Derry did not disprove that.
Genuine supporters of civil  rights in principle were extremely ill-advised to associate as they were doing with the IRA and Communism.
In the Stormont debate on the events of 5 October, Craig referred to NICRA as ‘an omnium gatherum made up of members of the Londonderry Housing Action Committee, the majority of whom are also members of the Connolly Association, of the Republican Party which includes well-known members of the IRA and Sinn Féin, of the Young Socialists and of the Communist Party’.
He went on to stress the likelihood of sectarian clashes had the procession followed the original route and he defended the actions of the RUC as necessary to avoid even worse violence.
Other Unionist speakers — the debate was boycotted by the opposition parties — who supported his judgement on the ban included the liberal Phelim O'Neill.
Several speakers also repeated Craig's claims about links between NICRA and both republicanism and Communism.
Many commentators pointed out later that there was, in fact, no trouble between the demonstrators and the Protestant residents of the Waterside.
The only confrontation in Duke Street, or later at the Diamond, was between police and civil rights marchers or their supporters.
It should also be noted that on this occasion the march was not accompanied by nationalist bands.
This is not proof, of course, that there was no reasonable expectation of trouble; the late announcement of the ban, however, gave credence to the assumption that it had only been prompted by the Apprentice Boys march, and that the Government, as in Dungannon, was allowing a loyalist organisation to manipulate the situation so that an opposition demonstration would be banned.
NICRA also had a reasonable complaint that the lateness of the ban gave them no time to negotiate amy alternative date or route.
Craig and other ministers were at pains afterwards to make it clear that irrespective of the likelihood of a rival parade, the march would not have been allowed to proceed through the Waterside or the walled city.
This cut little ice with NICRA, which rejected the claim that the march was in amy way provocative and accused the Government of suppressing free expression.
Craig seems to have been determined to undermine the association's credibility and to brand its members as troublemakers.
The accusations of republican  and Communist links were significant, and Craig obviously believed that it was reasonable to assume that the motives of NICRA were subversive.
It is important, therefore, to examine the nature of republican and Communist involvement in NICRA, and their motives, strategy and tactics within the association.
The Cameron Report found evidence of republican involvement in NICRA, but in a famous passage praised the way in which IRA stewards had kept order on demonstrations.
But the report missed the fact that the republicans, through the Wolfe Tone Societies, had been largely responsible for creating NICRA in the first place and some commentators have accused Cameron of naïveté about republican influence.
One of these, Patrick Riddell, asks:
If the sole intention of the Association were to secure civil rights for Ulster Catholics while accepting and loyally supporting the constitution of the Ulster state…why has it admitted to its counsels and membership, as it undoubtedly has, a number of men from an organisation pledged to the destruction of that state?
Riddell partly overstates the extent to which NICRA claimed to accept the constitution of Northern Ireland.
There is a difference between ‘accepting and loyally supporting’ the constitution and acting within legal boundaries to press demands for reform within the existing constitutional framework.
Riddell verges on suggesting that an organisation may be deemed subversive not simply if it works to undermine the state, but if its members have any mental reservations about the constitution.
Nevertheless, it is reasonable to question the motives of IRA members and supporters in NICRA, and whether their influence might, at some future date, have led the association into subversive activities.
Cathal Goulding gave an interview to the Belfast Telegraph of 10 February 1969 in which he readily admitted that republicans were involved in the civil rights movement.
However, he was anxious to stress that
we have not organised the civil rights movement and we have not infiltrated it…
We have issued no directive about it.
But we have encouraged Republicans to be active in it, always accepting the directives of the CR [civil rights]committees.
We have emphasised…that peaceful demonstration along the lines of CR is the true way to support its aims.
The Republicans are in the civil rights  movement the same as they are in the trade unions.
They are members of the community being denied civil rights.
It is not a specific IRA assignment.
Our attitude is that we want to see everyone in the six counties, whether Protestant or Catholic, active in the movement to attain civil rights for the people there.
The republican documents quoted show that the republican movement was much more centrally involved in the creation of NICRA than Goulding suggests.
They also show that political activity had by no means ousted the republicans' commitment to armed force; indeed it was seen as a necessary preliminary to the resumption of the military campaign.
But they do not prove that NICRA was a front for the preparation of such a campaign or that it was reasonable or wise to treat it as such.
Quite simply, the concept of agitation on civil rights, far less the creation of a movement to carry out such agitation, is missing from the documents.
They propose broadly based agitation on social and economic issues but nowhere do they contain blueprints that correspond with the objectives, structure or activities of NICRA.
There is also clear evidence that the republicans were not actually in control of NICRA in the period up to and including the 5 October march.
This cam be adduced from the fact that their internal document,Ireland Today , speculated about the replacement of some of the leadership of the association at a future date.
This would hardly have been necessary if at that time they were in a position to dictate the policy and actions of the association.
It is also necessary to distinguish between different sections and levels of the republican movement.
Although the civil rights strategy could not have been adopted by republicans without the approval of the leadership of the IRA — and Roy Johnston stressed the importance of its involvement in the Maghera meeting of 1966 —— this does not mean that the army council initiated the setting up of NICRA or that it paid any detailed attention to the work being done by republicans within the association.
Seán Mac Stíofáin indicates that the first time the leadership discussed the civil rights movement was when
a proposal arrived at Dublin HQ from the Tyrone unit of the IRA.
It asked that members of the Republican Movement be permitted to take part in a civil rights march to Dungannon from Coalisland…
The leadership unanimously gave permission and word was sent out  to all Republican units in the North to encourage as many people as possible to participate.
I emphasise ‘encourage’ because the leadership did not make it compulsory.
It was also decided that no known members of the IRA from the south would participate.
Even the Wolfe Tone Societies, the one section of the republican movement which had a well-worked-out strategy for the civil rights movement, were unable to implement their plans exactly as they had intended.
NICRA, in its early stages, differed in two important respects from the model proposed by the societies in August 1966.
They had emphasised agitation on the concrete issues of electoral reform and discrimination in housing and employment, but NICRA originally operated as a body which made representations on the broad issues of civil liberties and took up individual cases of infringement of rights.
Undoubtedly the republicans were influential in steering the association towards public marches but they had to persuade others within NICRA; they could not determine the matter in advance.
The other difference was in the way in which the association was organised.
Tuairisc proposed the creation of
local committees and groups…on the widest possible basis throughout the towns and villages of the North…
Civil Rights committees, electoral reform groups, community development associations, friendship clubs, it matters not what they are called, or how diverse they are in structure and organisation.
They should seek to organise the maximum number of people at local level to bring pressure to bear on local authorities, on Stormont, but particularly on Westminster.
This was a proposal for a loose federation of locally based groups; NICRA, however, was a centralised organisation based mainly in Belfast.
Had the Tuairisc model been adopted, there would have been no question of NICRA initiating demonstrations in Dungannon or Derry; this would have been the responsibility of purely local groups.
The form which NICRA took, therefore, was determined by the coalition of forces which actually came together to create it, of which the republicans were only one element.
Since a number of different initiatives on the issue of civil rights took place between 1962 and 1966, it was probably fortuitous that the one which led to the creation of an organisation was the Wolfe Tone Societies  conference, and even without their intervention, something very like NICRA would probably have emerged in any case.
The CPNI was involved in NICRA from the start.
From the early 1960s the party had seen the issue of civil liberties as a key area of agitation.
Its 1962 programme,Ireland's Path to Socialism , said:
In no other aspect of public affairs has the authority of the Executive been abused as much as in Civil, Religious and Democratic Liberties.
This is the outstanding feature which has enabled the Unionist Party to create divisions and govern unchallenged since the foundation of the Northern Ireland Parliament…
Abolition of all anti-democratic laws, an end to civil and religious discrimination, and an end to the rigging of electoral areas in the interests of the wealthy, can be accomplished by the united action of the people.
The organised Labour Movement is the force to lead the struggle for democracy and the rights of the individual to participate with equality in public affairs.
The Communist Party has this struggle as its foremost aim.
The 1966 congress of the CPNI adopted a ‘Democratic Programme for Unity’, which included demands for the electoral law in Northern Ireland to be brought into line with that in Britain, except for the reintroduction of proportional representation and the abolition of cash deposits by candidates.
The CPNI was not instrumental in creating NICRA but it was well represented on its first executive committee: Noel Harris of AUEW TASS, a CPNI member, was the first chairman; Derek Peters of the CPNI was secretary; and Betty Sinclair of the Belfast trades council was elected to the committee.
At the meeting which adopted the constitution, Ken Banks of AUEW TASS was added to the executive committee; he was close to the CPNI, although not actually a member.
However, at the first annual general meeting in February 1968, Banks and Harris were not returned to the executive committee and although Sinclair replaced Harris in the chair, Peters was replaced as secretary by John McAnerney of the CSJ.
Banks, Harris and Sinclair were probably elected because of their trade-union connections, but precisely because of these existing responsibilities, the first two could not devote much time and effort to what appeared to be a marginal group making little impact.
There is not much evidence of a determined drive by the Communists to control NICRA and even less that they had a great deal of influence.
The one member of the CPNI who was centrally involved in NICRA was Betty Sinclair; as secretary of the Belfast trades council she had more time to devote to it than trade-union officials like Banks and Harris.
Her involvement led one Unionist MP to comment after the events in Derry:
Last but not least we have the Communist Party led by that veteran Miss Sinclair, who is the chairman of the whole civil rights movement.
When we hear of the Communist Party appealing for law and order it seems to me that it is a matter of Satan rebuking sin.
There is no doubt about it that this programme is an Irish Republican Army programme sponsored and inspired by Communism.
In fact, Sinclair was a strong advocate of caution and moderation.
Her opposition to what she regarded as adventurism and ultra-leftism was shown in 1969 when she resigned from the executive together with Conn McCluskey, John McAnerney and Fred Heatley in protest at NICRA involvement with the People's Democracy (PD).
Eamonn McCann, in his letter to Michael Farrell describing the joint DHAC–NICRA meeting of September 1968, said:
The meeting was chaired by Betty Sinclair.
I brought up the question of bans and proscriptions and Sinclair finally stated that no red flags or ‘unauthorised’ slogans will be permitted.
I said, to push the point, that having talked to some of the YS [Young Socialists]…
I had no doubt that there would be a YS contingent with a red flag and that I would ‘react physically’ to any attempt to remove it.
Sinclair steered the discussion away into safer waters, but not before herself and McAnerney had agreed that ‘the Young Socialists are the biggest problem’.
An article based on interviews with Betty Sinclair shortly before her death in 1981 discussed her attitudes during the early months of NICRA:
During this time she wanted to exploit all the constitutional possibilities and consolidate a broad-based support around the civil rights demands.
This was why she initially opposed the first march from Coalisland to Dungannon, but the arguments of the Nationalists and the Republicans on direct action tactics had become dominant and she was outvoted.
She may actually have pressed her case with less vigour than is indicated above, since by mid-1968 it was abundantly clear that ‘broad-based support’ was not emerging and she may have suspended her earlier judgement in view of the success of the first march.
But in any case, her prominence in the preparations for the 5 October march, and her leading part in it, did not mean that she intended that it should lead to a violent outcome, and the mere fact of her CPNI membership cannot be taken as evidence for the existence of a violent conspiracy.
Accusations of republican and Communist domination of NICRA and attempts to link the civil rights movement to subversion and violence were to some extent understandable responses by Unionists to the events in Derry.
But they were a gross oversimplification.
Craig had been monitoring developments within the republican movement since 1966, when he had obtained intelligence from RUC, Garda Síochána and British sources about the IRA's turn to agitation on social and economic issues.
He had, correctly, seen the civil rights movement as a realisation of one aspect of the new republican strategy and he had observed that the turn to legal and open political work had not resulted in an elimination of the IRA's military capacity.
He had concluded that the new strategy would eventually lead to a resumption of the armed struggle, but, more dubiously, had gone on to suppose that civil rights activities could be treated as if they were an armed insurrection.
Twenty years later Craig was still convinced that he had been right.
In a BBC Radio 4 programme about the civil rights movement he said:
It gives me some satisfaction that those who laughed at me and poked fun at me now have evidence in front of their very eyes.
It's a pity it had to happen that way.
If people had taken me as a sincere, genuine man who was worried, I think we could have avoided all that has happened.
We've created in Ulster and Ireland a monster that will terrify the island for a good many years to come.
This is a typical conspiracy theory, which adduces the fact that something did happen as evidence that someone meant it to happen.
It also supposes that vigorous enough action in the early stages of the civil rights movement would have nipped it in the bud and restored Northern Ireland to stability.
In fact, Craig's actions contributed significantly to destabilising the situation.
His response was predicated on the idea that he was dealing with an IRA insurrection when he was actually faced with a group of unarmed demonstrators who posed nothing more than a difficult public order problem.
The chaotic and often brutal policing of the march contributed to the very problem which the RUC was supposed to control.
At the trial of those arrested on 5 October the police gave confused evidence about whether or not stones, as well as placards, had been thrown.
No coherent explanation was given as to why demonstrators, running away from the confrontation at one end of Duke Street, were met by a line of police barring their way at the other.
It also emerged that the police assumption that it was an offence to begin marching in the prohibited area was wrong.
No law had been broken until the demonstrators disobeyed the order to disperse, following the meeting in Duke Street.
This was a warning which, as Fergus Pyle reported, very few of them could have heard.
The result of all this was that the Government's claims about the march and its defence of the actions of the police carried very little conviction outside the ranks of its own supporters.
The events discredited the Government and fuelled the discontent that had created the civil rights movement in the first place.
Proof of republican involvement in NICRA prior to 5 October 1968 actually says very little about the civil rights movement .
NICRA was a small, self-selected group of activists, not a movement.
In theory, members of the executive committee were representatives of affiliated organisations and the committee was supposed to co-ordinate the efforts of the groups which supported it.
In fact, the executive was the association.
Executive members did all the organising work and very largely constituted the activists within NICRA.
Members of the CSJ, the NILP, the CPNI, the Belfast Wolfe Tone Society, the Republican Clubs and private individuals worked together because they had developed a personal commitment to the association, and not because they were directed by any outside agency.
Before the events in Derry on 5 October, the civil rights movement did not exist; there was only a small, isolated group of activists.
In the wake of 5 October, NICRA mushroomed into a movement with branches in most towns in Northern Ireland in  which there was a significant Catholic population.
Contacts were established with supporting organisations in the Irish Republic, Britain, North America, Australia, New Zealand and various countries in Europe.
Two other important civil rights groups emerged — the DCAC and the PD.
NICRA was the largest and most representative civil rights organisation but it was only one part of the civil rights movement and the original, pre-October NICRA was swamped by hundreds of new activists and thousands of supporters.
The emergence of this new movement transformed the political situation in Northern Ireland, producing sectarian tensions, instability, conflict and violence.
But responsibility for this should not, retrospectively, be fixed on the small group which initiated these events.
It is manifest that they were too weak and uninfluential to produce such a major upheaval by their own efforts.
In fact it was the television and newspaper pictures of police batoning demonstrators which proved to be the catalyst in transforming the situation.
The events in Derry crystallised the feelings of frustration and discontent among Catholics and the dissatisfaction with the lack of progress towards reform felt by a wide range of opposition groups.
They also put Unionists on the defensive, prompting them to make accusations about a republican and Communist conspiracy which stoked fears among their own rank-and-file supporters.
The civil rights marches created an opportunity for Ian Paisley to put himself at the head of plebeian Protestant resistance to the civil rights movement.
The use of the term ‘civil rights’ by NICRA inevitably invites comparisons with the Black civil rights movement in the United States.
The adoption of street marches, sit-downs, passive resistance and songs like ‘We shall not be moved’ and ‘We shall overcome’are evidence that the civil rights movement in Northern Ireland saw a close parallel between its activities and the struggle of Blacks in the Deep South.
However, on closer examination the parallel proves illusory, as Frank Wright points out:
Blacks were subject to far more drastic inequalities than were Catholics, therefore civil rights made far more difference to blacks than to Catholics.
Integration — meaning equal access to public facilities, political participation and equal citizen rights — was a coherent objective for blacks because most of the denials of equality were sustained by segregation.
However, where blacks had no viable method of expressing nationalism when disillusion with the achievements of civil rights set in, Catholics could revert to a nationalism which already shaped much of their previous experience.
Steve Bruce makes a similar point:
American blacks were always assimilationists because they had nowhere else to go.
There was never a time when any more than a handful of eccentrics advocated the establishment of a separate nowhere else to go.
There was never a time when any more than a handful of eccentrics advocated the establishment of a separate black nation-state.
The issue in America was, and still is, the relationship between two populations within a nation-state.
Concessions to blacks, while they did amount to debits from poor whites, were not major threats to the continued existence of the state…
The Ulster situation has always been quite different.
Perhaps some parts of the civil rights movement were genuinely, rather than tactically, assimilationist…
However, the speed with which many of its leaders shifted to more traditional nationalist and republican positions suggests that a large part of the movement was always ultimately interested in dismantling Northern Ireland.
These passages highlight some of the strategic and tactical problems involved in transferring the model of the Black movement in the United States to Northern Ireland.
But their flaw —— and this is particularly true of Bruce — is that they telescope the development of the Northern Ireland civil rights movement and retrospectively ascribe to it a coherence and a level of strategic thinking which it never had.
After 5 October 1968 a poorly organised and deeply divided movement attempted to apply some of the methods used in the Deep South.
But the situation had already run out of their — or anyone else's — control.
By then the extent to which the Black movement was an appropriate model was irrelevant.
Before 5 October 1968 the handful of NICRA activists had a very simple and extremely limited impression of what was happening across the Atlantic.
Given the absence of any mass movement, the only activity which they could propose was street marches.
This was risky and proved to be an extremely ill-advised tactic.
But it was precisely the kind of initiative which could be expected from a small, isolated and frustrated group of political activists.
It showed that they were ill-fitted to become the leaders of a mass movement, but no more than that.
They were not in control of all the factors.
They did not determine the actions of the  Ministry of Home Affairs nor of the RUC in Duke Street.
Nor were they in control of the young hooligans of the Bogside or the Paisleyite counter-demonstrators.
They were not, in other words, the leaders of a conspiracy to overthrow the Northern Ireland state.
DERRY AND ITS ACTION COMMITTEES
The gentle rainfall drifting down
Over Colmcille's town
Could not refresh, only distill,
In silent grief from hill to hill.
from ‘Butcher's Dozen’ by Thomas Kinsella
‘An Old City Faces a New Sorrow’ headline over Irish times report of events in Derry on 5 October 1968
Derry was the crucible of the civil rights movement.
It was of enormous symbolic importance as the second city of Northern Ireland, as the site of the legendary siege of 1689 in which the Protestants resisted the forces of James II, and as the town in which a Nationalist majority was denied control of local government by a particularly flagrant gerrymander of the electoral boundaries.
It was in Derry on 5 October 1968 that Northern Ireland crossed its Rubicon, and on the streets of the city in subsequent months Northern Ireland was, again and again, ratcheted nearer to crisis.
The events of August 1969 in Derry brought Northern Ireland close to civil war and the killing of thirteen anti-internment demonstrators in the city on 30 January 1972 precipitated the imposition of direct rule and the end of the Stormont parliament.
The first gerrymander of the city occurred in 1896, with the Londonderry improvement Bill; this created five electoral wards, one of which held the bulk of the city's Catholics, and enabled the Unionists to have a majority in the others.
In 1922, following a brief period of Home Rule Party — Sinn Féin rule, the abolition of proportional representation in Northern Ireland in local government elections and a readjustment of the ward boundaries enabled the Unionists to regain control of the corporation.
In 1929 the Northern Ireland parliamentary boundaries were drawn up so as to attach areas of the surrounding countryside to the city centre, creating the safe Unionist seat of City of Londonderry, while the mainly Catholic areas were put into the Nationalist seat of Foyle.
In 1936 the city was divided into three local government electoral wards, two of which elected eight councillors whilst the third ward elected four.
In the North and Waterside wards nearly eight thousand Unionist electors sent twelve representatives to the council, while the huge South ward returned eight Nationalist councillors on a poll of over ten thousand.
Unionist control of local government was resented because it represented minority control and the resentment was kept alive by accusations of discrimination in the allocation of council jobs and housing.
But there was resentment also at the lack of industrial development in the city and its surrounding areas.
A British visitor, Ian Nairn, described the state of the city in 1961:
This is one of the most unexpected and paradoxical of our cities.
It is one of the remotest places in the British Isles…for forty years it has been the victim of a real topographical tragedy…a manufacturing town of 50,000 people where a rural centre of 20,000 would have been sufficient.
Partition made comparatively little difference to its position as a market town for Donegal, but inevitably the industrial goods of Derry have to get to the mainland.
And for this it is as remote as Inverness…
So whenever a recession or squeeze begins, Derry is likely to feel it fist.
It is like being attached to the free end of a rope; a gentle pull at one end means a vicious kick at the other.
In the postwar era, government stimulus to industrial development failed to rescue the city.
Derry's first ‘advance’ factory was completed in 1951, but by that time sixty-seven new industries had been established in Northern Ireland.
The fragility of much of the industry attracted to Derry by government aid was shown by the Birmingham Sound Reproducers factory which was opened in the summer of 1967, employing 1,800 of the abundant supply of cheap young labour; by January 1968 it had closed down.
The more successful Du Pont synthetic rubber factory could never mop up the ever-growing pool of surplus labour.
Unemployment was a clear example of Derry's less-favoured status within Northern Ireland.
As Alan Robinson points out:
Before the…recession in March 1966, 5.9% of the insured population of Northern Ireland were registered as unemployed, but  in Derry no less than 10.1% were unemployed (23.3% males and 4.8%, females).
In February 1967, during the recession, unemployment in the province increased by 2.2% to 8.1% but in Derry unemployment increased by as much as 10% to reach 20.1% (23.3% males and 15.20% females).
Thus in discouraging industrial development, Derry's marginal situation results not only in high levels of unemployment but is responsible for relatively high levels of increase in unemployment during periods of national recession.
Derry's inequitable share of misery was also reflected in housing.
During the ten-year period from 1951 to 1961, 1,640 houses were built:
This number more than met the 1,119 houses that were needed in 1951 to eradicate undesirable overcrowding and subtenancy.
But, in the same ten-year period, no less than 1,278 new families came into being in the city, with the result that the number of houses built fell short of the number required.
This unequal share of wretchedness was itself unequally distributed within Derry.
The percentage of persons living at densities of more than two per room in 1961 was 5.7 per cent in the North ward, 7.9 per cent in Waterside and 21.1 per cent in the mainly Catholic South ward.
The contours of working-class Catholic life in Derry were marked out by unemployment, bad housing, emigration and close family and community life.
Nell McCafferty, the Derry-born writer and civil rights activist, poignantly remembered family prayers from the 1950s: ‘God send John a job; God send Jackie and Rosaleen a house; Holy Mother of God look down on Peggy in America and Leo in England; Jesus and His Blessed Mother protect Mary that's going out with a sailor.'
There was, of course, similar deprivation among Protestants in Derry but their numbers were fewer and a smaller proportion of the total Protestant population suffered such conditions.
Population remained static during the 1960s; the 1966 census showed a total of 55,681 living in the Londonderry County Borough.
At 3.8 per cent of the total population of Northern Ireland, this was the same as the 1961 percentage; it compared with a modest increase of o.86 per cent in the three counties east of the Bann (Antrim, Armagh and Down) and a small decline of 0.23 per cent west of the Bann (counties Derry, Tyrone and Fermanagh).
Belfast had declined by 2.3 per cent, but this is largely explained by government policies of funnelling population to other areas, policies which did not apply to Derry.
One reason for organising the 5 October 1968 march in Derry was that NICRA had always considered the city to be a natural focus for its attempts to raise the question of civil rights, but the demonstration was not the first attempt to organise around the issue in Derry.
In April 1964 the working committee on civil rights, which had been established at QUB in March 1963, carried out a survey based on interviews with four hundred people; an earlier survey had been made in Newry.
Among those involved were Bowes Egan and Eamonn McCann, later to become prominent civil rights activists.
The exercise led to a bizarre episode in 1967, when the mayor of Londonderry, Councillor Albert Anderson, produced a letter which he claimed had come from the working committee.
The text was reproduced in the local Unionist newspaper, the Londonderry Sentinel , on 22 February.
It said that as a result of these investigations the committee was satisfied that there was no evidence of Londonderry Corporation being guilty of discrimination.
Unfortunately for the mayor, the Londonderry Sentinel also reproduced the signature on the letter —‘Eamonn McCann, Secretary’.
There was no resemblance between this and McCann's real signature.
He commented:
I have not at any time or in any capacity written to Cllr Anderson.
The letter…is a forgery.
Moreover I can reveal that the findings of the Committee were certainly not those indicated in this letter; we found that Derry Corporation had for many years been carrying out a policy of anti-Rome Catholic discrimination in employment and rigid segregation in housing.
The local nationalist paper, the Derry Journal , gleefully published McCann's statement on 2 May, but there was no response from the mayor or the Londonderry Sentinel .
Nor was there an explanation as to why the letter, which was dated 10 June 1965, had waited for over a year and a half before being revealed.
The first involvement with Derry by NICRA was a visit by its secretary, Derek Peters, in August 1967.
He discussed prospects for activity in the city with Terence O'Brien, a Magee College lecturer who was a member of the executive committee of NICRA.
In  September, O'Brien called a meeting in an attempt to establish a Derry branch of the association but it never got off the ground; indeed even at the height of the civil rights movement NICRA had branches in north and south County Derry but in the city itself the principal civil rights organisation was the DCAC, which although affiliated to NICRA, was completely autonomous.
In 1967 no one in Derry showed much interest in the civil libertarian work of NICRA.
The city was dominated by material problems like unemployment and housing, which although related to the issue of discrimination, were more obviously tackled by campaigns that focused on the issues themselves.
In addition, Derry was a provincial town, distant from the corridors of power where lobbying could be carried out and it was not a natural locus for a pressure group like NICRA.
Another factor, however, was related to the city itself; the entrenched and static nature of politics in the city did not encourage activities which assumed that there was at least a little capacity for the political system to respond to popular campaigning.
Derry politics aroused nothing but distaste for working within the system among the few people who were interested in politics but who were not already involved in one of the two main parties.
The political leadership of the majority Catholic community was in the hands of the Nationalist Party and Derry's best-known Nationalist politician, Eddie McAteer, was party leader at Stormont from 1964 until the loss of his seat in 1969.
He had represented the rural seat of Mid-Londonderry for eight years when, in 1953, he challenged the incumbent MP for Foyle for the nomination.
The first Nationalist nominating convention resulted in a tied vote but McAteer won the second by a short lead.
He went on to win the seat, despite the fact that the former MP, Paddy Maxwell, stood as an Independent.
Although the Nationalists were almost unchallenged in the Catholic community, by the early 1960s their position was more vulnerable than it appeared.
For one thing they were a rural party in an urban environment.
Since the 1950s and the failure of the APL to gain a foothold in Belfast, the Nationalist Party had been mainly a rural phenomenon.
In Derry its elected representatives were, as in rural areas, mainly drawn from the ranks of small businessmen.
In the countryside this was natural since this social grouping was the focus of local communication and leadership, but in Derry it  meant that the Nationalist leadership was drawn too heavily from one social group.
And since the party was principally an election machine, it did not offer channels for new young talent.
Moreover, educated young Catholics were likely to be put off by the party's style of opposition, which could often appear even more obsessed with sectarian symbolism than the Unionists were.
For example, in August 1962 Alderman James Hegarty objected to the corporation paying its contribution to the equivalent of the arts council because, at sponsored plays and concerts, nationalists ‘were invariably insulted by the playing of a foreign [British]national anthem’.
In September he announced that the Nationalist councillors would not be attending a Battle of Britain commemoration service in St Columb's Cathedral: ‘We simply had no part in this,’ he said.
‘Our Government in Dublin declared its neutrality.’
The following June, Eddie McAteer said that the Nationalists would not be attending a ceremony conferring the freedom of the city on The Honourable The Irish Society.
They had accepted their invitations only in order to disrupt the proceedings, as they had done on a previous occasion in 1953.
But due to the death of Pope John XXIII they had dropped their plans.
In August they objected to a Battle of Britain parade, which they regarded as a recruiting drive for the ‘occupying armed forces’.
The following month they made a similar objection to the Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers beating the retreat in Shipquay Street.
In May 1964, McAteer criticised his Nationalist colleague, Patrick Gormley MP, for saying that he had no qualms about rising for ‘God Save the Queen’, or the loyal toast.
Even assaults on the Unionists over alleged cases of discrimination could rebound.
In January 1964, when Hegarty complained about imbalance in corporation employment, Alderman Gerald Glover, for the Unionists, was able to point out that according to the records, ninety-nine appointments out of one hundred were agreed by all members of the corporation.
In July, when Nationalists protested at the failure of the corporation to appoint Nationalists to committee chairs, the mayor pointed out that fifteen or sixteen years ago the Nationalists had said that they would refuse to take such chairs and that they would only take part in corporation affairs in order to disrupt them.
In the early 1960s, however, changes within Northern Ireland were beginning to create a degree of common interest between  Unionists and Nationalists in Derry, and they were brought closer together in resistance to the industrial and commercial decline of the city.
The priority for the O'Neill government was development in the area east of the Bann; the proposed new town of Craigavon underlined what was seen in Derry as neglect of the north-west.
In quick succession the city was faced with plans to cut the last of its rail links to Belfast and the closure of the ferry services to Heysham and Glasgow.
Then, in 1965, Derry was confronted with the Government's decision to accept the recommendation of the Lockwood Report and site the proposed second university for Northern Ireland in Coleraine — despite the fact that Derry already had a focus for third-level education in Magee College.
This created an unprecedented degree of unity across the sectarian divide.
The University for Derry Action Committee, formed under the chairmanship of John Hume, agitated for a reversal of the decision.
At a mass rally in the Guildhall, where McAteer shared the platform with Major Gerald Glover of the Unionist Party, Hume roused the crowd with a speech which made no reference to partition or traditional nationalist grievances, but emphasised the common heritage and common interests of all the citizens of Derry.
There was no doubt about the anger felt in the city.
Glover recalled in later years that ‘ninety per cent of the population was bitterly disappointed, and this became a tremendous grievance shared by both Protestants and Roman Catholics’.
Hume organised a motorcade from Derry to Stormont in which both Unionist and Nationalist politicians took part.
The annual meeting of the City of Londonderry and Foyle Unionist Party called on the Government to change its mind and site the new university in Derry.
Seventeen Stormont MPs were taken on a tour of inspection by the University for Derry Action Committee and one of them, Dr Robert Nixon, the Stormont Unionist MP for North Down, declared that they had been misled by the Lockwood Report and that there was no shortage of suitable land or amenities in the city.
The unanimity did not last long; E. W. Jones QC, Stormont MP for City of Londonderry and Northern Ireland attorney general, came under fire for supporting the Government on the issue and Dr Nixon was rebuked by Terence O'Neill for alleging that ‘nameless and faceless men’ from the city had conspired against the siting of the university in Derry.
Shortly afterwards Patrick Gormley MP  announced the names of seven Derry Unionists whom, he alleged, had opposed the location of the university in the city.
A petition calling for an inquiry into the allegations was signed by 15,118 people and a delegation headed by Raymond Wolseley of the Junior Chamber of Commerce went to Stormont to plead, vainly, for a change of policy.
The campaign petered out when it became obvious that the Government was not going to budge.
But it had established three important points: first, that there was potential to cut across established Green-Orange divisions in pursuing the interests of Derry; second, that some educated young Catholics who were uninspired by the Nationalist Party would work enthusiastically on a campaign which challenged traditional sectarian prejudices; and third, many people came to believe that a section, at least, of Derry Unionists was prepared to sacrifice the interests of the city to those of its party.
This reinforced distaste for party politics and the tendency to work along lines which challenged established political practices and institutions.
During the next three years, however, the initiative was seized by the radical left and not by moderate, cautious leaders in the John Hume mould.
This was a surprising development; Derry had a relatively weak Labour movement and had too small a population to create a sizeable pool of individuals who were prepared to stand out against the political and social attitudes of the majority.
In fact, the number of left-wing activists was never large but their impact was out of all proportion to their numbers because they found new methods of protest which caught the imagination of much larger numbers.
They were able to be original in their methods precisely because the Labour movement was weak and did not trap them in the confines of established institutions and procedures.
The state of Labour politics in Derry was described by a veteran, John Sharkey, writing to a friend in Dublin on 1 October 1962: ‘Labour in Derry has become a dirty joke.
It is an actual fact that eventually membership whittled down to about three or four.’
He had worked in Belfast in the late 1940s, and compared the Labour scene in Derry unfavourably with that of the larger city: ‘We may pride ourselves on being a city but politically we are still a small Ulster town.’
There was no branch of the NILP in Derry, ‘just a group that [Stephen]McGonagle mobilises at election time.
There is no other  forward movement, nor does there appear to be amy prospect for the future.’
The trade-union leaders and the ‘occasional professional man’ who would be the natural leaders elsewhere were too interested in being ‘respectable’.
The NILP branch in Derry had collapsed in 1949 under the twin blows of the party's electoral losses and its split over partition.
In 1962 the only focus for the local Labour movement was the trades council.
This was beginning to revive, with new affiliations like the Amalgamated Engineering Union and the Irish Transport and General Workers' Union (ITGWU).
In December 1963 it discussed whether or not it should contest the next local government elections but no decision was taken.
Almost certainly it felt that its position was still too weak.
In January it decided not to revive the May Day parade in Derry; there was not enough interest and most of the trade-unionists who would be likely to take part would be attending the Belfast parade.
The dominant figure in local Labour politics was Stephen McGonagle.
He was district secretary of the ITGWU and had stood on the NILP ticket a number of times before the split of 1949, when he went over to the Irish Labour Party.
He had been local organiser for the National Union of Tailors and Garment Workers but in 1952 he led a breakaway which two years later merged with the ITGWU.
The Irish Labour Party in Derry quickly collapsed, leaving McGonagle at the head of his own small Independent Labour group, which was little more than a personal election machine.
In the 1962 election he stood against McAteer, making it clear that he was just as committed a nationalist but criticising the MP for the narrowness of his appeal and calling on him to send his election literature to all voters, not just to Catholics.
He was defeated by 8,720 votes to 5,476.
At 38.5 per cent of the vote, this was a respectable result for a candidate who was only supported by a loose group of associates.
In 1965 a permanent Independent Labour group was formed, which ran McGonagle's ITGWU colleague, Seamus Quinn, secretary of the trades council.
The decision to contest the election was taken against McGonagle's advice, but the percentage result was almost a re-run of 1962, with 7,825 votes for McAteer and 4,371 for Quinn, a percentage of 35.8 for Independent Labour.
In the meantime the NILP had reappeared on the scene.
At a  meeting in April 1965 a Londonderry branch of the NILP was formed.
The meeting was addressed by Charles Gallagher, who was elected chairman of the branch, and by David Bleakley, Charles Brett and Vivian Simpson of the NILP administrative council.
Gallagher spoke about local problems and Bleakley and Simpson produced standard NILP denunciations of ‘Blue’ and ‘Green’Tories.
Brett spoke out firmly on the question of discrimination in housing, electoral laws and public employment.
This was not an opportunist concession to Derry's Catholic majority, since he also stressed that any weakening of the link with the United Kingdom was unacceptable to the NILP and that the constitutional issue should not become ‘a party shuttlecock’.
The secretary of the new NILP branch was Ivan Cooper, who had come to public attention the previous year when he resigned from the Bond's Glen and Claudy Young Unionist Association and had stood as an Independent candidate for the Londonderry Rural District Council.
He had become dissatisfied with the council's record on housing and its bias in favour of the farmers who composed its membership.
He polled 32 per cent of the total vote.
In March 1967 the NILP announced that it would contest all the council seats in the May elections.
The party stood on a detailed manifesto which addressed local issues but stressed that the NILP had ‘new ideas free from the old sectarian catch cries’.
It linked this to the economic problems of the city, claiming that employment was affected by the ‘sectarian image projected by the city fathers’.
A number of demands which were to be raised by the civil rights movement were taken up by the manifesto.
The NILP pledged an extension of the city boundary and the extension of the local government franchise to all citizens over the age of twenty-one, the abolition of the company vote, the realignment of electoral boundaries and the allocation of houses ‘solely on the basis of need’.
These objectives were wrapped up in a programme that included pledges on road safety, home helps for the elderly, bus shelters, a more comprehensive library system and the encouragement of tourism.
Many of them were possible only if the NILP got control of Stormont and were propaganda points in its ideological war against the doctrines of Orange and Green.
In the Catholic South ward the NILP polled 34.5 per cent, a similar proportion to that of McGonagle and Quinn in Foyle and an  indication that the existing political mould was not going to be broken easily.
In the Protestant North and Waterside wards it won 30 per cent and 27.5 per cent respectively.
Here the Unionists were challenged for the first time in many years but the NILP shared the anti-Unionist vote with Independents, who polled 4.5 per cent in North and 2 per cent in Waterside.
There was, therefore, a vote of about one-third of the Derry electorate which was being deployed against the established parties.
In the three years between its foundation in 1965 and the summer of 1968 the Londonderry branch of the NILP underwent a significant swing to the left.
Of the officers and committee elected in May 1965 only two names remained after the annual general meeting of 1968.
A majority of those elected in 1968 were later active in the civil rights movement and a number were involved in the DHAC at the time of their election.
Tensions between right and left flared up in a dispute over the May 1968 by-election in the City of Londonderry constituency, and this helps to illuminate some of the characteristics of the Derry Labour left.
In the 1965 Stormont general election Claude Wilton of the Ulster Liberal Party had polled 47 per cent, and some members of the NILP thought that he should be given a clear run in the 1968 by-election, in the hope of defeating the Unionist candidate.
He was a Protestant lawyer who had enormous prestige among Derry Catholics for his work in combating injustices against them in the courts.
The Liberals, in fact, had a much more substantial record of fighting sectarianism and discrimination in Derry than the NILP had.
However, the NILP candidate, Janet Willcock, supported by the younger members of the party, insisted on standing.
She was at this time secretary of the Londonderry branch of the NILP.
A former schoolteacher and the wife of a Magee College lecturer, she was of pronounced left-wing sympathies and in later years she became Bernadette Devlin's secretary in London.
She rejected all ideas of agreements with other parties and pledged Labour to fight Orange and Green until Derry was ‘rid of Toryism once and for all.
Anti-Unionism is not enough.
We reject the idea that it doesn't matter which anti-Unionist force opposes the Tory candidate.'
Her programme included electoral reform, housing allocation according to need and based on a points system, the extension of the Race Relations Act to Northern Ireland, and the provision of employment through  state investment.
Apart from the final point, these were no different from the policies being advocated by the Liberals.
The result was 9,122 for the Unionist candidate and 3,944 for the NILP.
Willcock had polled 30 per cent of the vote, 17 per cent short of Claude Wilton's result in 1965.
Writing about the episode later, Eamonn McCann, one of the leaders of the Derry Labour left, saw the result as a ‘glaring indictment of the continuing failure of the Northern Ireland Labour Party to make any impact on the electorate’.
He did not see the failure as a consequence of the refusal to unite all opponents of Unionism, but of the NILP's willingness to compromise in order to achieve such unity:
Labour needs a clear idea of its own raison d'être .
It must reject an analysis of Northern politics which consists of a simple division of people into Unionists and anti-Unionists.
Such an analysis, beloved of silly clerics like Albert McElroy, is an acceptance of sectarianism, and as such, can never lead to its defeat.
Too many NILP members, he asserted, were ‘unable to distinguish between the social force represented by Labour and that represented by Liberalism’.
He also insisted that ‘every compromise with the existing system leaves us less capable of changing that system’.
McCann was advancing a traditional Marxist view which insisted on the importance of economic and social class divisions as the basis of politics: but his analysis ignored the extent to which, in the intimate context of Derry politics, such divisions were blurred by local and personal factors.
He also ignored the extent to which the concrete policies of Derry Labour, as distinct from its rhetoric, were the common currency of all opponents of the Unionist Party, including the Nationalists, for whom he had boundless contempt.
McCann had returned to Derry in February 1968 after some years’ absence.
He had studied psychology at QUB from 1961 and made a reputation there as a debater, winning the Orator of the Year award in 1963.
He was expelled from QUB after a conviction which resulted from a too-well-celebrated student society dinner.
He moved to London where he worked as a gardener with the Greater London Council and became editor of the Irish Militant .
This fringe left-wing newspaper was produced by the Irish Workers' Group, a Trotskyist groupuscule which had a scattering of  supporters in Ireland but was strongest among Irish exiles in London.
McCann happened to be at home in Derry on a visit when he was invited to take part in a DHAC demonstration.
He stayed on, joined the NILP and because one of the leaders of the DHAC.
A highly talented writer and a compelling public speaker, he quickly became the best-known left-wing agitator in Derry.
The pioneers of left-wing protest in Derry, however, were the republicans, who also experienced an influx of young radicals during the 1960s, following the turn to left-wing political agitation by the new leadership of the movement.
Republicanism in Derry was weak — one activist has estimated that the total number of republicans of all shades of opinion in the city in 1968 was less than one hundred.
This was to the advantage of the young radicals; like the leftists in the NILP, they were not hampered by tradition and did not have to placate their seniors before or after embracing heresy.
The link with the Labour left was useful to both sides.
Especially after McCann's return to Derry, the NILP contained a number of talented writers and speakers.
The republicans, for their part, provided muscle, discipline and willingness to undertake risky tasks — it was the republicans who smuggled placards and banners out of the Bogside and across Craigavon Bridge to the Waterside, under the eyes of the RUC, on 5 October 1968.
The division of work between themselves and the Labour left put the latter into the public eye as spokespeople, and the republican contribution to developments has tended to be downplayed in consequence.
Without the republicans the Labour left would have remained abstract propagandists; without the Labour left, the republicans would have been less able to communicate to people in Derry and beyond.
It was a close partnership, made all the closer by the small numbers involved and the intimacy of Derry.
The Derry republicans had organised a Release the Prisoners Committee in 1962, but they then retired into obscurity until 1966, when six members were arrested for taking part in an illegal Easter Rising commemoration.
One of those charged was George Finbar O'Doherty, who was alleged to have given a command in Irish to the colour party.
Finbar O'Doherty was to appear in the pages of the Derry Journal numerous times over the next few years, under a variety of names, including George Doherty, George O'Doherty, George F. O'Doherty, Finbar Doherty, Finbar O'Doherty and Fionnbarra Ó Dochartaigh.
Eamonn McCann described him as a ‘passionate Republican, much given to violent rhetoric’.
Other prominent left-wing republican activists were Eamonn Melaugh and John White.
All were later to be intensely involved in the civil rights movement.
In October 1966 the Derry Young Republican Association held an open-air meeting to protest at the eviction of a family from a house in Creggan.
It denounced the corporation's housing record and claimed that ‘Rachmanism [is]rife in Derry’.
The Nationalist councillors, it declared, would be better taking up such issues than ‘attending functions behind closed doors at which toasts to the Queen are drunk’.
During the same month the Young Republicans barricaded themselves into a house in Harvey Street to resist the eviction of a family that had been on the housing list for eighteen years.
They left when they were assured that no eviction would take place until alternative accommodation had been found for the family.
In December they picketed the Guildhall and the local Unionist Party headquarters, and called on the unemployed to become more militant.
In July 1967 they were, once again, barricaded into a house in Harvey Street, this time to resist the eviction of a widow and her two teenage children.
The family was all that the Young Republicans could have wished for: the mother threw crockery at police and bailiffs and the son offered physical resistance when police broke through the barricades.
The eviction was successful but the family was quickly offered accommodation in Creggan.
It was this episode which occasioned Derek Peters's visit to Derry in August 1967 on behalf of NICRA.
In August the Young Republicans set up a front organisation, the People's Action League, which planned to campaign on the issue of high-rise flats, and picketed the Guildhall, calling for an extension of the city boundary and, on another occasion, at the siting of a new Michelin factory at Ballymena in County Antrim instead of Derry.
But the league made little impact and there was more success with the Derry Unemployed Action Committee (DUAC) which involved NILP leftists as well as republicans.
It was set up by about thirty young unemployed men in January 1965.
The DUAC quickly achieved considerable publicity when four of its members disrupted a corporation meeting.
The mayor was in the  process of proposing a motion of sympathy with Lady Churchill, following the death of Sir Winston, when James Gallagher of Creggan Heights rose in the public gallery to read a short statement on behalf of the DUAC calling on the councillors to sink their political differences and to unite in efforts to press the Government to establish new industries in Derry.
Further interruptions came from Eamonn Melaugh and Robert Campbell, but they desisted when the mayor offered to receive a deputation following the close of business.
In February 1965 the DUAC picketed a dinner in the Guildhall which was being addressed by Minister of Commerce Brian Faulkner.
At this dinner Faulkner claimed that only one in ten of Derry's unemployed had any previous industrial experience; the DUAC carried out a survey at the Bishop Street Labour Exchange which, they claimed, showed that 50 per cent of those interviewed did have such experience.
In May the DUAC called for a special ‘industries for Derry’ drive, with an office in the city as its focal point.
It wrote to a number of firms pointing out Derry's potential for industrial development.
In October it demanded to know what had happened to the seventy-acre industrial site and the industrial training centre promised by Faulkner and Minister of Development William Craig, and in February 1966 the DUAC lobbied the House of Commons at Westminster, led by Finbar O'Doherty, who was at this time its London representative.
The DUAC disappeared from view shortly after this, although it was revived in November 1968 in the wake of the 5 October demonstration.
It should be noted that while the style, rhetoric and actions of the DUAC were militant, its demands were not.
It called for greater and more concentrated effort along lines which the Government already accepted as the basis for solving the problem of unemployment.
It demanded development, investment, planning and greater government intervention, not an assault on the capitalist system.
It appealed for sympathy with the unemployed in a way which did not challenge the consensus about the problem.
It was characteristic of the radical agitational movements in Derry to echo ideas which were already widely accepted, but to put them forward in a more aggressive, combative and militant style.
The next action committee to be formed was the DHAC.
It was the most important of these groupings as it was directly responsible  for bringing NIGRA to Derry for the 5 October 1968 march and thus was the catalyst which turned the civil rights movement into a mass campaign.
It developed the direct-action methods of earlier campaigns into new and more dramatic forms and it took up an issue which was the central and most widely felt grievance of Derry Catholics — housing.
In Derry housing was a scarce resource; the city's house-building record was dismal, even compared with other Northern Ireland towns.
Between 1946 and 1967 Coleraine had built 109 new houses per 1,000 of population, Newry 144, Portadown 109, Larne 140 and Limavady 137; Derry's figure was 70.
Needless to say, the issue was the subject of regular battles across the floor of the Guildhall and in the Stormont House of Commons.
In February 1962, Eddie McAteer asked Minister of Health and Local Government W. J. Morgan for the numbers of houses which the corporation and the NIHT expected to finish in Derry that year.
When told that the total would be about 170, he asked if this was not ‘pitifully inadequate as compared with an annual enrolment of housing applicants of 400-odd, not to mention a backlog of 2,000’.
The minister had, in fact, outlined a programme of some 1,823 new houses, including corporation, NIHT and private developments, but 1,300 of these were to replace houses which were to be demolished in redevelopment, so that the plans did not envisage wiping out the existing demand for houses.
Even these plans were subject to delay; in November 1962, at a special corporation meeting, Alderman James Hegarty moved a vote of censure over delays which meant that 300 out of 500 houses planned in the autumn of 1960 had been delayed.
The 144 which were in progress included 18 high-rented flats at Deanfield and a redevelopment scheme of 50 houses.
The Unionists accepted that this was unsatisfactory and after the deletion of the reference to Deanfield Hegarty's motion was passed unanimously.
Hegarty also attacked the NIHT for the letting policy on its Belmont estate where, of 185 families, 48 were from outside the Derry area, 25 were policemen and 71 had made applications after 1 January 1959: ‘That makes 144 families who should never have been considered for housing at all,’ he said.
In January 1964, Councillor Patrick Friel (father of playwright Brian Friel), addressing a Nationalist protest meeting, said that 212 houses announced by the corporation included luxury flats and  other specialist accommodation, leaving only 22 of these houses for occupation by ordinary applicants.
The corporation had agreed to let houses to ten families from the local Springtown Camp; this left twelve houses.
In January there had been twenty-six fresh applications; the marriage rate in Derry was 420 per year and there were at least one thousand applicants on the waiting list.
He did not explain how this latter figure squared with McAteer's figure of two thousand; Nationalists and Unionists often threw figures at each other in this way but it was not always clear exactly what they meant.
In May 1964, Councillor T. J. McCabe compared Derry's housing record unfavourably with that of Lisburn in County Antrim which had built 1,556 corporation and NIHT houses since World War 11.
On a comparison of populations there should have been 4,500 houses built in Derry but only 3,000 had, in fact, been built.
Alderman Glover said that the corporation's record would have been better had they not handed over some of their schemes ready-made to the NIHT.
Alderman Hegarty claimed that of 250 houses in the Belmont estate, only 17 had been let to Catholics.
He quoted the case of a man who, he claimed, had sold a house in Omagh, County Tyrone, for £3,000 in order to move into a house in Belmont.
There were corporation employees whose first child was born in Belmont while other people were living in ‘dog boxes’.
The argument usually switched in this way from overall comparisons to individual cases, which was one reason why the dispute was so difficult to resolve.
However, in December 1967 a review of housing in Derry showed that a total of 4,420 ‘units of accommodation’ had been provided — 2,170 by the corporation, 1,745 by the NIHT, and 505 by private enterprise.
During 1967, 258 families had been provided with subsidised dwellings, 43 by the corporation and 215 by the NIHT; this included 169 families rehoused from condemned properties, so that only 89 of these households represented an overall addition to the housing stock.
In the year ending May 1967 only seven corporation houses had actually been completed.
The last monthly housing report to be issued before the abolition of the corporation in November 1968 showed that only four corporation houses had been built.
In September 1968 the executive sanitary officer in his annual report for 1967 said that over one thousand houses were occupied  by more than one family and in several cases seven or eight families occupied what was originally a single dwelling.
Rented accommodation other than corporation or NIHT houses was rapidly diminishing, since it was uneconomic for landlords to maintain rent-controlled housing.
Virtually all empty dwellings were now sold with vacant possession, at extremely high prices.
Many larger houses were being split up into ‘so-called flats’, and he called for protection for such families.
There were cases of families being made to leave by conditions being rendered difficult for them after they had made complaints to the corporation housing department.
Councillors received many heart-rending pleas from families who were being forced into emigration as the only alternative to their miserable and expensive accommodation; complaints about rat infestation were not infrequent.
The argument over housing in Derry soon came to be focused on am important issue of corporation policy — the question of extending the city boundary so as to include more land for housing and industrial development.
In November 1963, Councillor T. J. McCabe challenged the Unionists on the issue.
Between 1951 and 1961, he said, population had increased by 10,000, but 6,500 had left the city because they were unable to find accommodation.
In 1962 the increase in population had been 1,172 but in the same year only nineteen new houses had been built; land had to be found for new housing.
In September 1964 a special meeting of the corporation finance committee, which included all councillors, adopted an amended motion which gave the boundary extension subcommittee the power to include in its remit the progressive expansion of Derry, so as to maintain its position as the second city in Northern Ireland.
By the end of 1965 there was an accumulation of evidence supporting a boundary extension.
The city accountant had compared Derry's acreage, which had not changed for a century, with other Northern Ireland towns.
Derry had an average population density of twenty-five per acre, compared with towns that had extended their boundaries which had average densities of twelve per acre or less.
Reports from the city's sanitary officer, director of education, and city surveyor also supported an extension.
Nevertheless, the Unionist majority on the council voted not to submit these reports to the Ministry of Development, Londonderry County Council, or Londonderry Rural District Council, whose co-operation would be needed to extend the boundary.
In May 1967 the mayor ridiculed a Nationalist proposal to submit a draft memorial to the Ministry of Development asking for an extension.
He proposed instead that
we should build more intensively in some areas and build higher in many cases…
We could only acquire areas outside our own boundary with the consent of the two other local authorities.
We would need their agreement to build houses outside the city boundary and you know that this is part of what the Steering Committee will propose…
I therefore think that [the]motion is out of place at this time and that it is proposed for a certain purpose.
The most acute of Derry's housing problems was the Springtown Camp.
This former United States military base had been occupied by homeless families when the American forces left at the end of World War II.
The corporation had assumed responsibility for the site in 1945 and had purchased the land in 1957, although technically it was in the rural district area.
When the corporation took control, all the families living there had moved in from the city area.
In 1964, when the problem again came under scrutiny, there was a total of ninety-two families living in the camp but some of these had moved in subsequently from the rural area.
The corporation and the rural district council were in dispute about who should rehouse them.
The rural district council relied on the assumption of responsibility by the corporation in 1945, while the corporation denied responsibility for the former rural district families and claimed that the 1956 Housing Act had made the rural district council responsible for all the families in the camp.
Conditions in the camp were deplorable; the temporary buildings had deteriorated considerably and the site had few amenities.
In addition to the squalor, residents suffered from prejudice when they had to give a Springtown address.
Early in 1964 the Springtown Residents' Association staged a protest march to the Guildhall, which was reported in the Derry Journal of 31 January under the headline ‘Derry's Little Rock Calls for Fair Play’.
During a corporation debate the Nationalists pressed the Unionists to give greater priority to rehousing Springtown residents and to increase the total number of houses available for let.
They were told that consideration would be given to allocating houses which became  vacant to Springtown residents and that discussions had taken place with the rural district council and the NIHT about allocations of houses by them.
In June the Springtown residents launched a petition calling for the families living there to be rehoused before the winter and for the camp to be closed.
Later that month it was presented at Stormont with 21,428 signatures.
The mayor and the chairman of the rural district council met the Minister of Health and Local Government on the issue, and Eddie McAteer also raised with the minister the additional problem of thirty-one subtenants, mostly the sons and daughters of Springtown residents, who had not been mentioned in the statement issued following his meeting with the two local authority leaders.
In July 1964 the corporation, the NIHT and the rural district council came to an agreement to share responsibility for housing Springtown families over a period of time, but this did not end the problem.
Two weeks later Springtown residents staged a demonstration in the public gallery of the Guildhall, a tactic which was becoming a regular resort of protest groups.
A delegation of the residents complained that they were not getting the priority in rehousing which had been promised them and demanded to know whether or not they would be moved before the winter.
The mayor told them that he could not add to what had been said in the statement about the agreement between the three housing authorities.
The corporation meeting proceeded with Nationalist protests and barracking and interjections from the protesters, until the mayor ordered the gallery to be cleared.
Thereafter controversy over the issue subsided until June 1967, when eviction proceedings were taken against eleven families who had refused accommodation offered to them by the rural district council because it was at some distance from the city.
In the end the matter was resolved amicably and Springtown was cleared of residents and demolished.
It had, however, served to draw attention to the acute housing problem in Derry and like the HCL in Dungannon, it gave an example of effective protest and direct action.
A different form of direct action was taken by the Derry Housing Association, set up in October 1965.
The association was chaired by John Hume and drew on the self-help traditions of the credit unions.
It was inspired and created by Father Anthony Mulvey; he had been influenced by Father Eamonn Casey, later to become  Bishop of Galway, who had experience of setting up a housing association for Irish people in London.
The association provided flats for young couples who after two years were given a return of half the rent they had paid to be used as a deposit on the purchase of a house.
In the first year one hundred families were housed through the scheme.
Another project resulted in the erection of twenty-seven houses on the Buncrana Road, in the South ward.
But the association was frustrated in its attempts to build larger schemes in the Waterside and in the North ward on the site of the old Birmingham Sound Reproducers factory.
The corporation cited planning and zoning regulations for refusing these applications but it was generally assumed that the real reason was that the new houses would have been built in Unionist-controlled wards but would have been inhabited by Catholics.
Underpinning all of these disputes was a suspicion, amounting to a certainty in the minds of most Catholics, that the Unionists were unwilling to provide substantial new housing and to extend the city boundary because that would upset the existing political balance.
Because of overcrowding in the South ward, any major new development would have to take place in the other two wards.
This in turn would mean shifting Catholics into these wards.
A boundary extension would require new electoral boundaries and these could not easily be adjusted so as to retain Unionist minority control.
In addition, better housing conditions, more industrial development, and the fillip for the city that would result from siting the new university there would reduce the flow of Catholics from Derry.
By the mid-1960s opponents of the Unionists were firmly convinced that the party, both in the Guildhall and in Stormont, made a simple equation that what was good for Derry was bad for the Unionists and vice versa.
The bitterness created by these disputes and the importance of housing as an issue not only in Derry but in the United Kingdom as a whole in this period helps to explain the choice of this issue as a focus for agitation by the radical leftists of the DHAC.
The general bitterness also helps to explain why the DHAC was tolerated within the Catholic community.
The intensely provincial, Catholic and Nationalist environment within which the DHAC operated was not conducive to its kind of class-based, quasi-Marxist political rhetoric which would, ten years earlier, probably have unleashed a  backlash that it would have found difficult to survive; even the mild leftism of Stephen McGonagle had in the past made him an object of suspicion among Derry Catholics.
The DHAC did, in fact, provoke a backlash but it was by no means as intense as the persecution which many earlier Irish leftists had to suffer.
By the mid-1960s the influence of Irish McCarthyism was beginning to wane and there was a generally more tolerant atmosphere, which even Derry shared.
But what was probably more significant was the fact that the target of the DHAC, the Unionist administration at the Guildhall, was so widely execrated and the fact that the ammunition it fired had already been prepared by more traditional anti-Unionists.
The DHAC originated in the abortive attempt to set up a branch of NICRA in Derry.
One of those who had attended the initial meeting in September 1967, an independent radical Matt O'Leary, had been dissatisfied with the aims of NICRA.
He wanted a campaign of direct action and mass protest, not an organisation which would take up individual cases of discrimination.
He organised a meeting of some of the more militant people who had attended the NICRA meeting and about two months later the DHAC was launched.
It attracted some of the activists of the DUAC and leftists from both the NILP and the republican movement.
O'Leary was elected chairman and he immediately drew criticism on the committee.
During a DHAC demonstration in the Guildhall, Alderman Hegarty of the Nationalist Party called out to the demonstrators: ‘It is just unfortunate that you have come under the influence of card-bearing members of the Communist committee.’
In July 1968, O'Leary resigned from the chair because, he said, he had ‘become the target of agents of the establishment and their many Judases’.
In November he called a press conference to deny that he was a member of the CPNI.
He was a Marxist and might be called a ‘Christian Communist’, but he could not answer the question ‘was he a communist?’ directly, he could only state his beliefs.
The first DHAC demonstration took place when its members turned up, uninvited, to the March 1968 meeting of the council.
Despite the efforts of the mayor to stop him, one of its number read out a statement:
[The DHAC]regarded the Corporation as representing primarily the interests of property owners and business speculators and not the  interests of the working class of Derry.
They demanded that the Corporation immediately extend the city boundary and embark on a crash housing programme.
They demanded the immediate appointment of a rent assessment officer and a halt to all rent increases.
Tenants…were no longer prepared to accept the appalling housing conditions and would take whatever action was necessary…‘finally we believe that the only long-term solution to the social concerns which beset Derry lies in the establishment of workers’ power and public ownership of all land, banks and industries.
The formation of this committee marks the beginning of a mass movement away from the false political leaders and against the exploiting capitalist class who have in their wake a trail of human misery, degradation and decay.
During the reading of the statement the Unionists withdrew; the Nationalists stayed but Alderman Hegarty made his accusation about Communists.
Eventually the police were called and the protesters left quietly.
The language of their statement was more extreme and militant than that of earlier protest groups but the concrete demands were already the common currency of anti-Unionists in the city and, as such, were neither new nor especially radical.
An indication of the tension between these moderate demands and the DHAC's extreme rhetoric was the fact that almost immediately after this first demonstration there was a split.
Nine of the seventeen original members resigned, claiming that the DHAC was being used to further the aims of a ‘political group’.
They set up a new organisation called the Sub-Tenants' Committee, which would campaign ‘not on political but on humanitarian grounds’.
However, it quickly disappeared from sight and was never an effective rival to the DHAC.
In May the DHAC was back at the Guildhall, where Matt O'Leary told the corporation that its members ‘filled him with nauseation’.
Members of the DHAC showed their distaste for the Nationalists when Councillor James Doherty and some Nationalist supporters in the gallery created a disturbance.
The DHAC withdrew from the chamber and said that it ‘did not wish to become involved in another pseudo-sectarian Puck Fair’.
The DHAC's policy was to ‘go through all the existing channels before taking extreme action’.
i It been unsatisfactory.
Its next action was much more original.
One DHAC member had discovered John Wilson, his wife and two children living in a small caravan in the Brandywell.
Although one of the children suffered from tuberculosis, the corporation housing department had told them that they were unlikely to be housed.
According to Eamonn McCann:
Mr Wilson's case was tailor-made.
On 22 June, a Saturday, about ten of us manhandled the Wilsons' caravan on to the Lecky Road, the main artery through the Bogside, and parked it broadside in the middle of the road, stopping all the traffic.
We distributed leaflets in the surrounding streets explaining that we intended to keep the caravan there for twenty-four hours as a protest against the Wilsons' living conditions and calling for support.
We then phoned the police, the mayor and the newspapers, inviting each to come and see.
The mayor did not respond, but the police did, although they took no action and the caravan stayed put for twenty-four hours.
The DHAC announced that the exercise would be repeated the following weekend; although the police warned that they would have to intervene this time, the demonstration went ahead and was extended to forty-eight hours.
It was decided to block the city centre the next weekend, but during the week the Wilsons were given a house and eleven DHAC members and supporters were summonsed.
Among those brought to trial were Finbar O'Doherty, Eamonn McCann, Matt O'Leary, Eamonn Melaugh, Jerry Mallett and Janet Willcock.
All the defendants were bound over for two years on a personal bail of £350 and some were also fined.
After the hearing Willcock issued a statement saying that the action had been symbolic: ‘They could not move the hovels in which hundreds of decent men and women were forced to live in deprivation and degradation, or they would.'
She forecast that if nothing were done, violence would erupt.
That was why they had taken nonviolent direct action.
The members of the DHAC were delighted with the outcome:
It had very publicly been made clear that outrageous tactics worked, that blocking roads worked better than MPs’ intervention…
The court proceedings provided us with a platform; fines and suspended  sentences conferred on us an aura of minor martyrdom…
We really began to believe that we had the Nationalist Party on the run.
The next demonstration was on 3 July 1968 at the opening of a new carriageway of the Craigavon Bridge.
No sooner had the mayor cut the tape than five DHAC members ran to the centre of the road and sat down, holding up placards.
Finbar O'Doherty, John Lafferty, John Anthony Doherty, Neil O'Donnell, Roderick Carlin and John McGettigan were charged in connection with the event.
O'Doherty, who had not taken part in the obstruction, was fined £5 for allegedly leading the singing of ‘We shall overcome’(a charge he denied), and the others were bound over for two years on £50 personal bail.
Two Young Republicans, Carlin and O'Donnell, refused to enter bail and were sent to Belfast's Crumlin Road jail for one month, receiving a hero's welcome on their return.
In July, DHAC members accompanied three women and their seven children to the corporation housing manager's office to protest at the allocation of a house to a former Belfast prison officer.
The women complained that the officer could only have been on the housing list for a few weeks, while they had waited for periods of between eighteen months and four years.
In August the DHAC announced a public meeting at the Diamond with a list of invited speakers which included the Catholic Bishop of Derry, the mayor, three Nationalist councillors, a curate from St Eugene's Catholic Cathedral, the city's medical officer of health and John Hume.
As they had expected, none of the invited speakers turned up, but Eamonn Melaugh, who did speak, forecast violence if houses were not built.
The following week the DHAC picketed the house of a landlord who, they alleged, charged exorbitant rents and refused to supply rent books.
At the August meeting John White said that the DHAC intended to organise tenants' associations.
During that summer, tenants' associations which had been formed in Rossville Flats, Meenan Park, Shantallow, Rossville Street, Lecky Road and Foyle Hill set up a central council to coordinate their activities.
However, there is no evidence of any link with the DHAC.
Among the issues which they pursued were proposed NIHT rent increases, resettlement grants, poor soundproofing and finishing in their accommodation  and the refusal of the NIHT to provide a communal television aerial for Rossville Flats which would enable the tenants to receive Radio Telefis Eireann (the Irish television network).
The methods adopted by these tenants' associations were those of lobbying and persuasion and the issues they took up were specific grievances affecting their own members, not the problem of housing as it related to the political system in Northern Ireland.
The DHAC was concerned with homelessness and the poor quality of housing as part of an assault on the capitalist system.
It also contrasted with the tenants' associations in that it was not directly representative of those whose cause it espoused.
It was a loose group of freewheeling radicals who had chosen a particularly acute social problem as a vehicle for broader political alms.
By the summer of 1968 the DHAC had achieved, according to its lights, considerable success in attracting publicity and in embarrassing the political establishment in Derry.
But there was a problem about what to do next.
It would be difficult to keep up the momentum of its campaign and in addition it had created tensions within the two organisations from which most of its members came, the NILP and the republican movement.
It was under pressure, therefore, to find new issues and new methods of campaigning.
According to McCann:
By this time our conscious, if unspoken, strategy was to provoke the police into over-reaction and thus spark off a mass reaction against the authorities.
We assumed that we would be in control of the reaction, that we were strong enough to channel it.
The one certain way to ensure a head-on clash…was to organise a non-Unionist march through the city centre.
The summer of 1968 saw the centenary of the birth of James Connolly, the man who epitomised both socialism and republicanism in Ireland.
McCann suggests that the idea of having a march through the city centre to commemorate him was inspired by this desire to provoke the authorities; but given the importance of the centenary, it is likely that some kind of parade would have been organised in any case.
McCann throws doubt on his own assertion when he reveals that the Connolly commemoration committee, which had been initiated by the DHAC radicals, was thrown into a ‘welter of recrimination’ when the planned march was abandoned.
He suggests that this was because of a dispute over the carrying of the Irish tricolour; the NILP would not march with it and the republicans would not march without it.
He does not mention the fact that the police banned the parade from the city centre, thus testing to destruction the resolve of the radicals to confront them.
Janet Willcock accused the RUC of ‘trying to make a sectarian event out of an occasion which was intended to symbolise the non-sectarian nature of the ideals of Connolly’.
And it was this concern to avoid amy sectarian connotations which seems to have been uppermost in the minds of the organisers.
When the police tried to get them to accept a re-route through an entirely Catholic area, they abandoned the march altogether and confined the event to a rally which was held in the open air in a car park in Foyle Street.
This rally was addressed by Gerry Fitt, Betty Sinclair, Roddy Connolly, Sean Nolan of the Irish Workers' Party (the name of the Communist Party in the south), and three of the Young Turks from the Derry Labour and republican left.
Janet Willcock called for the unity of all radical opinion in Derry; Eamonn McCann said that Terence O'Neill could not be distinguished from Lord Brookeborough and that reference to liberal unionism was double talk.
The recently formed Council of Labour should summon a rank-and-file conference of all the radical political movements in Ireland and call on them to discuss the creation of an all-Ireland socialist party.
In Derry they should take their politics out on to the streets and he urged an extension of direct action.
Finbar O'Doherty presided and denounced the RUC ban on the original route: ‘On future occasions the question of a police ban at the dictates of their Orange masters would be a matter for meeting in a different manner.'
Despite the débâcle over the march, the rally had been a success and the DHAC returned to the Guildhall in late August for its largest and most successful demonstration so far, in the council chamber.
The Derry Journal of 30 August reported that shortly before the beginning of the corporation's monthly meeting, ‘the Guildhall foyer was crowded with men, women and children waiting to voice their protest’.
The NILP was represented by a strong contingent which carried the party banner and for the first time Ivan Cooper took a prominent part in the proceedings.
When the mayor ordered the lobbyists standing round the side of the chamber to move into the public gallery, Cooper protested that they had every right to be  there: ‘They are not peasants to be roped in.’
Eamonn Melaugh told the mayor that he would have to take the consequences of any violence caused in trying to clear the chamber.
In the event the crowd left quietly when the police arrived.
An impromptu meeting was held in the foyer, which began with the crowd singing ‘We shall not be moved’.
Finbar O'Doherty was cheered loudly when he mounted the stairway to address the crowd.
He called for working-class unity across the sectarian divide and accused both Unionist and Nationalist members of the council of not representing the interests of the working class.
Ivan Cooper called on the people of Derry to fight for their rights, ‘as the Blacks in America were fighting’.
Councillors were jeered and heckled as they emerged and the mayor was given the Nazi salute as he drove off.
While the meeting in the foyer was going on, the corporation gave a clear indication that it felt under pressure.
It adopted a motion from Councillor Doherty of the Nationalist Party, instructing the city architect to publish target dates for the completion of seven housing schemes and for all possible steps to be taken to press on with other housing projects.
However, a Nationalist motion calling for the setting up of a small committee to be responsible for housing allocations was rejected.
This would have abolished the system under which such allocations were the individual prerogative of the mayor.
Eamonn McCann later scorned this proposal as evidence of ‘political nappy-rash’, since such a committee would have a built-in Unionist majority.
The Nationalists, he said, had no idea of how to rectify Derry's social ills and alternated between ‘semi — hysterical outbursts of militancy [and]silly moderate suggestions…building and burning bridges simultaneously’.
The party's problem was that it was a Catholic organisation and could not see the class basis of the problems.
It could, therefore, only operate as a ‘movement of middle-class protest’.
However, McCann's assumption that because the DHAC espoused a theory of fundamental class antagonisms, this was accepted by all who applauded their actions, was not borne out by events.
The DHAC had proved that new and imaginative methods of protest could make an impact on the Unionist administration at the Guildhall, but for most opponents of the Unionist Party in Derry this was a reason for achieving a greater degree of anti-Unionist unity in order to press home their advantage, not to become equally  hostile to the Nationalist Party.
This was shown by the first major DHAC protest following the 5 October 1968 demonstration, when the committee supported an NILP delegation to the council on the housing issue.
There was uproar when the council refused to hear the delegation and the meeting was adjourned, the Unionists withdrawing but the Nationalists remaining in their seats.
Eamonn Melaugh went over to the mayor's chair and sat down.
He shouted to the protesters: ‘I ask you citizens of Derry, do you approve of a crash programme of 2,000 houses?’
There were cries of ‘yes’.
They also approved his call for an extension of the boundary and he commented, ‘This is democracy.’
He then vacated the chair saying, ‘on second thoughts, it is not a decent chair for a man to be seen in’.
When the Unionists returned they approved a motion for the council to go into committee, which would require the gallery to be cleared.
At this point a protester shouted to Alderman Hegarty, ‘I do not agree with your personal politics, but take the chair.’
There were cries of ‘take the chair’ and Hegarty walked up to the mayor's chair.
There was a minor scuffle between Hegarty and a Unionist councillor and before desisting, Hegarty shouted to the gallery: ‘Whom do you want to see in the chair?’
There were cries of ‘Hegarty’.
There was further confusion during which Hegarty told the Unionists, ‘You were the cause of October Fifth’, and Councillor Anderson called the protesters a ‘rabble’.
The protesters withdrew, but were angered by news that the council had again refused to meet the deputation, although accepting an amendment that the next general purposes committee would receive it.
The DHAC and NILP supporters sought to get back into the chamber; finding the doors locked, they got in through the mayor's parlour and were joined in the gallery by Alderman Hegarty and Councillor Friel.
Finally a police sergeant was called and the demonstrators withdrew.
What had occurred was precisely the sort of ‘semi-hysterical outburst of militancy’ which McCann had criticised, and far from exposing and isolating the Nationalists, an informal united front had been struck up and the politicians were being allowed to clamber onto the DHAC's bandwagon.
This was hardly surprising since the differences were ones of style and rhetoric, not of fundamental demands.
A week later, when the NILP delegation was received, the Nationalists were able to achieve concrete results by  having six important motions accepted, including acceptance of a points system and a committee for the allocation of houses.
The DHAC had softened up the Unionists by publicising the housing situation in Derry and causing embarrassment for the Stormont government, but it was the Nationalists, as elected representatives, who were able to press home the advantage and force the concessions.
The mayor also outlined plans which, if implemented, would have gone a long way towards mopping up the demand for houses in Derry.
It is a matter for speculation whether or not this would have been enough to cut the ground from underneath the feet of the DHAC, but in any case the situation had been radically transformed by the 5 October march and by the prorogation of Londonderry Corporation announced on 22 November 1968 by the O'Neill government.
Even before 5 October 1968 it was clear that the radicals around the DHAC were beginning to lose the initiative and would be unable to consolidate themselves as an alternative leadership for anti-Unionists in the city.
Eamonn McCann is frank about the lack of perspectives and the frenetic activity which characterised the Derry left.
‘Often,’ he notes, ‘we resembled a rather violent community welfare body rather than a group of revolutionaries.’
In so far as they were looking forward, it was with a much more gradual pace of development in mind.
McCann reveals parts of a ‘perspectives document’ which was circulated within the left of the NILP prior to 5 October.
This was realistic about the difficulties of achieving anything substantial within the conservative and sectarian environment of Derry.
It advocated action on housing and unemployment as a way in which Labour could begin to communicate with workers on both sides of the sectarian divide.
The NILP should ‘assume a quasi-educational function in tracing the connection between the political system and bad housing, unemployment and the negation of democracy’.
The Labour and republican radicals were essentially propagandists, not mass leaders.
Their direct-action tactics did not aim at involving large numbers of people in militant action; they were propaganda stunts designed to attract an audience.
They then harangued their audience with long and complex arguments about the exploitative nature of capitalism and the need for working-class unity which no one, apart from themselves, wanted to hear.
It was not surprising that after 5 October, leadership of the mass movement which they had evoked was gently, but firmly, taken out of their hands.
The 5 October march was very much outside the mainstream of Derry politics.
The members of the DHAC represented only themselves and NICRA was a group of well-meaning outsiders.
The smallness of the demonstration, compared with the Dungannon march, showed the modest scale of the organisers, influence, although McCann is probably right in saying that they made a mistake in starting it in hostile territory.
But the events of 5 October traumatised the city as a whole and the rioting which followed showed that there was serious danger of a major sectarian conflict.
The more respectable leaders of the Catholic community could not possibly sit back and leave things to the radicals of the DHAC.
An independent oppositional movement like the DHAC had emerged in Derry because of the narrowness of the Nationalist Party's politics.
But because it already occupied the existing space for electoral politics, the layer of educated and professional younger community leaders who might have become involved in politics was atomised.
John Hume is an example; he had become prominent in the credit union movement and from this had taken the leadership of the University for Derry Action Committee.
But when that failed, he retired from public activity in order to pursue his own business interests.
The events of 5 October convinced him of the need to get involved again.
Other leaders, like McAteer, McGonagle, Wilton and Cooper, also saw the need to unite in order to provide responsible and moderate leadership.
On Tuesday 8 October there was a meeting in the City Hotel of fifteen of the left activists, and it was agreed to call another demonstration on Saturday, 12 October, over the same route.
However, on the evening of Wednesday 9 October another meeting was called, also in the City Hotel.
This time about 120 people turned up, mainly business and professional people, clergy, trade-unionists and political leaders.
Their motives were later explained by the editor of the Derry Journal :
The new situation presented all the leaders of nationalist [sic]protest with a large and looming problem — how to harness the energies and enthusiasm of the people in a disciplined manner.
Unless the growing spirit of the movement could be harnessed  coherently, mob rule would replace Unionist minority rule.
Clear leadership was essential, and quickly.
Eamonn McCann was invited to take the chair and in War and an Irish Tour he relates:
We, the organisers of the march, would be interested in what they had to say.
Various speakers congratulated us on the marvellous work we had done over the past few months.
A few expressed their regrets, apologies etc. that they had not ‘been as active in the past as I would have liked’.
All now urged that we now all work together.
finally it was proposed that the meeting elect a number of people who, together with the original organisers, would constitute a new committee.
I explained that the meeting could elect anything it wished so long as it understood that the ‘original organisers,…would make up their own minds what status, if any, to accord those elected.
Eleven people were then elected from the floor.
McCann refused to be nominated; he took the quite accurate view that the meeting had been called in order to incorporate the militants, attach the lustre of their achievements to a new, more moderate group of leaders and thus deny them any significant influence.
But McCann found himself alone in his hostility to the new committee.
The other radicals who were present argued that they should join with the eleven newly elected people, ‘reasoning that since we held the initiative we would be able to force the pace, drag some of them along in our wake and force the others quickly to resign’.
McCann ‘stomped out’, denouncing the new group as ‘middle-aged, middle-class and middle-of-the-road’.
He thus denied himself any further influence, but the radicals who did join what was now called the Derry Citizens' Action Committee did not dictate the pace of events and had little which was distinctive to say or propose within the new body.
The strength of the DCAC was not simply that it had the backing of the existing leadership of anti-Unionist opinion in Derry, but also that it succeeded in attracting new people who had not previously been involved in any kind of political activity but who found unsuspected reservoirs of energy and initiative.
One such person was Dr Raymond McClean, medical officer of the local Du Pont factory.
A man of sincere, but unformed, liberal political convictions, he had been angered by the events of  5 October and had given medical treatment to some of those injured on that day.
Like many others, he attended the founding meeting out of a conviction that ‘something had to be done’.
He was bewildered by McCann's behaviour and felt too inexperienced to accept nomination to the committee.
He was, however, appointed as one of the leaders of the stewards who were to control the DCAC's first demonstration, which was to be held on 19 October:
I didn't say much at those early stewards' meetings, but realised very quickly that many of the very excellent people present were somewhat lacking in the ordinary muscle a steward requires to carry out his job quietly and efficiently.
As a result, during the next week, Micky McGuinness and myself toured the boxing clubs, the wrestling clubs and the youth clubs in the city, gathering as many new stewards as possible.
This demonstrated the advantages which the DCAC derived from its ability to attract fresh minds like McClean's and the good will it had from the Catholic community in general.
It also showed that the DCAC, unlike the DHAC, took seriously the likely outcome of its actions and prepared carefully in order to give effect to its determination to avoid violence.
This further increased its authority and enabled it to keep control over events, at least for the next few months.
Its authority was quickly established when it called off the demonstration called by the meeting of radicals on 8 October.
No one, not even McCann, challenged what was a fairly high-handed decision, given that the event had been called by a different body.
The first DCAC-organised protest took place on 19 October and consisted of a mass sit-down in.
Guildhall Square.
Between four thousand and five thousand people took part and the demands of the rally were for a crash housing programme, a fair points system for the allocation of houses and legal control over the letting of furnished accommodation.
John Hume, addressing the protesters, stressed that ‘we are a peaceful and dignified people, but…we are a determined people and we will stand for these social, economic and political injustices no longer’.
He went on to deny that they had amy political ends other than an end to discrimination: ‘It has been said against this movement that its purpose is to unite Ireland and to unite the working class…
We are not  dealing with political issues, civil rights is not a political issue but a moral issue.’
The speeches of Finbar O'Doherty and Eamonn Melaugh were more militant in tone but they did not demur from Hume's denial of what had been the central purpose of the DHAC — the unity of the working class around a material grievance.
Moreover, they were outstripped in militancy by Ivan Cooper, who pointed to the city walls and said: ‘We are denied the right to walk within these walls which are loved by every citizen…
In a peaceful civil rights march we will walk within the walls of this city…
We mean business.’
There had been a morning of heavy rain before the event and this must have reduced the expected numbers present and made it more subdued than it might otherwise have been.
Loyalist opposition was minimal; Major Ronald Bunting's Loyal Citizens of Ulster had threatened a counter-demonstration but this was banned by Minister of Home Affairs William Craig, and the RUC sealed off the stairways to the top of the walls and erected barriers which would prevent any clash.
In the event the Loyal Citizens failed to appear and the only incident occurred when a small group began to sing ‘God Save the Queen’ as the demonstrators struck up with ‘We shall overcome’.
The counter-demonstrators were quickly surrounded by stewards and they dispersed quietly.
Not long afterwards the protesters also dispersed, obeying the order of the chief steward to take with them the newspapers on which they had been sitting.
Good organisation, popular support and tacit collaboration from the police had enabled the DCAC to protest peacefully and responsibly.
The next event was just as successful, although it sailed closer to the wind.
On 2 November the ban on the 5 October route was challenged by fifteen DCAC members who walked it, accompanied by a large crowd who followed them on the footpaths.
On reaching Carlisle Square, at the city end of Craigavon Bridge, they were jeered by a crowd of loyalists, but stewards lining the square prevented any clash.
At Ferryquay Gate they were met by a blockade of loyalists which was being addressed by Bunting.
There was a brief sit-down by some DCAC supporters but stewards quickly cleared a path.
By this time the crowd following the marchers had spilled out across the roadway, effectively breaking the ban on a march within the city walls.
They gathered in the Diamond where Eamonn Melaugh's eleven-year-old-son Martin read the Universal  Declaration of Human Rights and the crowd sang ‘We shall overcome’.
Shortly before the end of the rally, Bunting and his followers made their way up Ferryquay Street towards the Diamond but they were blocked by the police and the rally ended peacefully.
Once it had dispersed, Bunting was allowed to hold a meeting in the Diamond and for a short time afterwards there was tension as rival groups of teenagers faced each other, but police and DCAC stewards persuaded them to disperse before any trouble broke out.
On 16 November the 5 October route was traversed again, this time by a mass demonstration.
The police imposed a change of route which involved marching to Craigavon Bridge via Duke Street, instead of Distillery Brae and Spencer Road, and to the Diamond via John Street and Foyle Street instead of Carlisle Road.
The DCAC accepted the change to Duke Street but rejected any further re-routing.
A crowd, which the Derry Journal estimated at 15,000 set off across the bridge, to be brought to a halt by the stewards thirty yards from the police barriers at Carlisle Square.
A delegation asked the police to clear the way and when this was refused, four DCAC members made a token protest by leaping over the barriers.
John Hume returned to the head of the march to ask the demonstrators to accept this as the limit of their defiance.
At this point a Union flag was waved by loyalists at the foot of Carlisle Road and there was a surge forward by DCAC supporters, but the stewards restrained them.
Eventually the crowd dispersed down John Street; any enthusiasm for the original route was dampened by the presence of a large crowd of loyalists who were being restrained by the police behind the barriers.
As it was, marchers approaching John Street had to dodge a fusillade of missiles thrown by the loyalists.
The crowd made its way to the Diamond where there were some minor brushes with the police before stewards restored order.
Some of the demonstrators were denied access to the Diamond by police tenders drawn up across Shipquay Street but after a time the RUC withdrew altogether and the Diamond was filed by the vast crowd.
Some loyalists who approached the Diamond from Bishop Street were restrained by the police and the rally ended peacefully.
Once again the DCAC had shown its ability to mount a peaceful protest and to maintain discipline over its followers.
But the committee's rank-and-file supporters were becoming increasingly  militant and ready to respond to provocation by loyalists.
Peace hung by the slender thread of the DCAC's moral authority.
Ray McClean describes his mild surprise on several occasions, when demonstrators accepted the authority of his steward's armband and obeyed his orders.
Had the crowd not been prepared to accept the directions of the stewards at Carlisle Square and had they made an attempt to follow the original route, there would have been a major clash with the RUC and the loyalists and large-scale violence.
It was in the course of these protests that the civil rights movement realised most fully its aims of defying authority without provoking violence or a direct sectarian confrontation.
But the increasing activism of its supporters, particularly young Catholics living in ghetto areas, made it more and more difficult to exercise restraint.
Following the 16 November demonstration, the DCAC was drawn into a series of fire-brigade operations, rushing around trying to prevent minor flare-ups.
There had been a foretaste of this the previous Saturday, when a loyalist march and rally, led by Ian Paisley, was held in Derry.
During a meeting at the Diamond police restrained attempts by loyalist and Catholic youths to break through their fines.
Several smoke bombs were thrown by Catholic youngsters who had gathered at Shipquay Street, stones were thrown and a policeman was knocked unconscious.
The police moved the youths down Shipquay Street, despite a brief sit-down which ended after an appeal by Paul Grace, chief steward of the DCAC.
A few teenagers refused to leave with the others, but after about ten minutes they joined the crowd in Guildhall Square where the recently revived DUAC was holding a teach-in.
On Monday 18 November the DCAC was faced by a number of spontaneous demonstrations which could have resulted in trouble.
The defendants arrested on 5 October were appearing at Derry courthouse and by the time the hearing was in progress, a crowd of about one hundred had gathered outside.
About fifty people attempted to gain entrance, but were held back by the police.
Paul Grace and Councillor James Doherty came out of the court and appealed for restraint, and after negotiations with the police about a dozen relatives of defendants were allowed in.
After the short hearing, the crowd, by this time about three hundred strong, carried Gerry Fitt and Ivan Cooper shoulder high down Bishop Street, through the Diamond and down Shipquay Street to Guildhall  Square, where there was an impromptu meeting.
There was a shod scuffle with police, who thought the demonstrators were trying to get into the Guildhall, but Cooper successfully diffused the situation.
They marched back to the Diamond and down Butcher Street, where they dispersed.
Some thirty minutes later a crowd of about four hundred dockers left work and marched through the city centre to their trade-union headquarters in Orchard Street.
They told reporters that they were protesting at a police attack on the demonstrators at the Guildhall.
They were addressed by their branch secretary, George Hamill, and by Vincent Coyle and John Hume on behalf of the DCAC.
Hamill assured them that he had sent telegrams on their behalf to Terence O'Neill and Harold Wilson protesting about the incident at the Guildhall.
They marched back to the docks and resumed work after another address by Hume.
The DCAC had earlier called off a proposal token strike by shirt-factory workers, but at about 3 p.m. about one thousand workers, mostly young women from some half-dozen factories, left work and marched up Strand Road, through Guildhall Square and via Shipquay Street to the Diamond.
They were addressed by Hume and McCann, who congratulated them on breaking the ban on city-centre marches.
They marched back to Great James Street, where they dispersed.
A group of about fifty teenagers who had followed them then set off on their own march through the banned area.
They dispersed quietly after a short meeting on top of the city wall, over Magazine Gate, which again was addressed by Hume.
The following day Ivan Cooper appealed for an end to unplanned marches; clearly the leaders of the DCAC were aware of the large amount of good luck, as well as careful planning, which had enabled them to avoid any major violent incidents.
On 9 December they responded to O'Neill's ‘crossroads’ address by announcing a moratorium on marches until 11 January 1969.
In the meantime there had been a major change in the political landscape of Derry, with the announcement on 22 November of the imminent abolition of Londonderry Corporation and the appointment of a Development Commission to run the city's affairs.
This fell far short of the change which the Catholic majority wanted — which was the transfer of power to their elected representatives — but the DCAC could afford to take a sanguine view of the change.
The clear implication was that, eventually, their full demands would be met and in the meantime the Unionists had been obliged to accept that they could no longer rule with total disregard for the feelings and aspirations of Derry's Catholics.
There was, therefore, something of a ritual character to the DCAC's statement on the appointment of the commission.
It expressed resentment at the failure of the Government to concede majority rule, but welcomed the commission in principle, reserving judgement until full details were available.
It pledged to continue the struggle for democratic representation but appealed to its supporters to continue to exercise restraint.
John Patton, press officer of the DCAC, refused to comment on plans for a fresh campaign but it was clear that the committee was extremely cautious about getting involved in further large-scale demonstrations.
Early in December it channelled its supporters' energies into a mass petition calling for the implementation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Northern Ireland, obtaining the signatures of nearly half the population of the city.
After the Queen's Speech at the opening of the new session of the Stormont parliament, it criticised the failure of the Government to give any commitment on a universal franchise and the Special Powers Act, but the only action it proposed was a low-key educational programme.
The year 1968 drew to a close and with it the life of Londonderry Corporation.
It was entirely fitting that it should end with a sit-in at the Guildhall by a number of homeless families and with a dispute over the allocation of houses.
The new year would see a disintegration of the unanimity of the DCAC's supporters; the committee had grave doubts about the wisdom of the PD march from Belfast to Derry, although it arranged material support and a welcoming rally for the marchers.
These doubts were confirmed when the march was savagely assaulted at Burntollet Bridge and again on entering Derry.
A Paisleyite rally in the Guildhall, and the DCAC rally to greet the marchers, led to serious rioting, and in the aftermath there were ugly incidents in which the police used violent and provocative tactics.
By March things had settled down sufficiently for the DCAC to mount a mass demonstration which successfully traversed the original 5 October route — this time without diversions, but this was the last occasion on which the DCAC was able to organise a peaceful  mass demonstration.
Already, by February, the unity of the committee had been disrupted by disputes over the incursion of some of its leading members into politics during the Stormont general election.
In August violence, which began in Derry, spread to Belfast where it led to serious sectarian clashes and resulted in the intervention of the Westminster government and the arrival of British troops.
In Derry the civil rights movement achieved its greatest moral authority and it was in the city that its authority first began to crumble.