

THE HRADČANY
The Castle of Prague
The Matthias Gate — the Na Baště Garden — the Spanish Halt — the Treasury of St Vitus — the Prague Art Gallery (Rudolf II Gallery)— the Royal Gardens — the Pavilion of Queen Anne — St Vitus, Cathedral — the Royal Palace — St George's Gallery of Bohemian Art — the Museum of Bohemian History
A visit to Prague must start with the castle.
It is here that so much of Bohemia's power, history, spirituality, and creativity is expressed.
The castle dominates the city and one of the best views of its imposing mass is from the opposite bank of the River Vltava in the Old Town (Staré Město) either by day, or floodlit by night.
From afar the appearance is one, not of a medieval fortress, but of an elegant, welcoming 18C palace, created when Maria Theresa commissioned her architect Nicolo Pacassi to regulate the conglomeration of medieval and Renaissance buildings that had accrued since the 9C.
He achieved this between 1753 and 1775, using a rather dull text-book style neo-Classicism.
Yet beneath the exterior lies a wealth of fascinating art and history.
As befits a building of such national importance, there are numerous myths concerning the castle's foundation.
However, according to the archaeology of the site, there was a defensive building and a small Church of Our Lady here from the 9C, founded by the Christian Prince Bořivoj.
Strategically set on the headland above the River Vltava, the castle commanded the trade routes between Vienna and Kiev, a perfect site therefore for communication and defence.
From the 12C until 1918, the castle was the official seat of   the king of Bohemia.
Since the proclamation of Czech independence from the Austro-Hungarian Empire in 1918, the castle has sheltered the president of the Czech Republic, and you may have to make way for an enfilade of black limousines or indeed for the changing of the guard every hour in their colourful new uniforms.
President Havel has had the dreary uniforms of the Communist state redesigned by Theodore Pištěk, the costume designer for the film Amadeus , much of which was shot in Prague.
Further theatre has been introduced by a bugler playing from an upper window of the castle on every hour.
It is worth arriving at midday for a positive fanfare.
Standing outside the castle railings with your back to the interesting buildings in Hradčany Square (Hradčanské náměstí) you get a preview of the importance of the role of sculpture in the fabric of Prague.
On the pillars between the railings tower 20C copies of Titans originally executed between 1767 and 1770 by Ignác Platzer.
He too, was responsible for the Eagle of Moravia and the Lion of Bohemia flanking the Titans.
Enter the first courtyard, which is the smallest of the three within the castle.
It is an unprepossessing beginning.
The courtyard is on the site of a ravine and its most interesting feature, the Matthias Gate, once stood alone at its entrance.
It now breaks the monotony of Pacassi's architecture, with its Meissen sandstone looking sombre against the cream façade of Pacassi's palace.
It was built as a triumphal arch for King Matthias in 1614.
The basic design derives from the Italian Serlio's Libro Extraordinario of c.1550, and the arch is attributed to Giovanni Maria Filippi, who was court architect first to Rudolf II and then to his brother Matthias.
Carved on the scroll held by some masculine putti is a statement of Matthias's brief period of power as Holy Roman Emperor.
Beneath, in the metopes, are the shields of countries ruled by the Habsburgs.
Much of Pacassi's work was later modified by the original hand of Jože Plečnik in the 1920s, when President Masaryk, the first president of the Czech Republic, commissioned him to redesign the State apartments and the castle gardens.
Plečnik's  modifications within the castle included the paving of this courtyard (later removed) and the monumental flagpoles on either side of the Matthias Gate.
In 1926 he was made Castle Architect.
Nine years later Masaryk resigned and Plečnik left too, amidst attacks on his designs by the conservation group the Friends of Old Prague.
Walk through the Matthias Gate and this great castle becomes increasingly fascinating.
Under the arch, look to your left at Plečnik's dramatic staircase rising through three floors, severe with its hypostyle of stumpy Doric columns (1927–31), later known as the Plečnik Room.
This contrasts strangely with the late Rococo interior of Pacassi to the right.
Touring the second courtyard purely visually for a moment, ahead to the right, lies the Chapel of the Holy Rood, now displaying the treasure of St Vitus' Cathedral.
This little building appears to be of the 19C but that is an illusion as the Chapel was planned by Pacassi and built by Anselmo Lurago between 1756 and 1760.
On the left is a fountain with a lion, the symbol of Bohemia, by Vincenc Makovský and Jaroslav Frágner, a work of the mid-1960s.
Frágner was the author, too, of the present paving.
Continuing anti-clockwise round the courtyard, to your left is a charming Baroque fountain, the work of Francesco de Tore and Hieronym Kohl of 1686, and a well which, like many in Prague, has its original wrought-iron canopy.
Continuing our survey, past the entrance into the third courtyard, on the left is the site of the Renaissance stables of Rudolf II, now the art gallery of the castle.
Next comes the passage and gate of 1603 by the Mannerist Giovanni Antonio Brocca.
This is the route to the Royal Gardens.
On the left-hand side of this passage is the façade of the Spanish Hall.
Before going any farther, I suggest you go through the opening to the left of the Spanish Hall to catch a glimpse of the small garden called Na Baště, ‘on the Bastion’, with its grand oval staircase leading to the entrance of the Spanish Hall and its neo-Classical pavilion by Plečnik's follower, Rottmayer.
The Spanish Hall and the Rudolf Picture Gallery are now used for state receptions.
Many of the greatest artists in Prague  worked on these important interiors, including the Fleming Adrian Vredeman de Vries at the beginning of the 17C.
But these rooms were much altered between 1865 and 1868 in a neo-Rococo style that was intended to blend with the 18C Rococo designs of Pacassi for the proposed coronation of Emperor Franz Josef I. In the end the emperor refused the crown of Bohemia deeming it too dangerous to accept it and upset the Hungarians.
The interiors are not open to the public but there is coffee to be had in the pavilion.
Returning to the second courtyard, start by visiting the Chapel of the Holy Rood.
There are excellent plans on the wall as you enter, describing its transformation from some early kitchens.
The present interior dates from 1852 when it was used by Emperor Ferdinand the Gracious, the last king of Bohemia who abdicated in 1848 in favour of his nephew but who lived on in the castle until his death, in 1875.
In the entrance, at the ticket office, there is enough of value and variety to give a taste of what must be one of the richest cathedral treasuries in central Europe.
The core of the collection dates from the reign of Charles IV but there are objects from the lo to the 19C.
The cases display a mainly 19C head reliquary of the grandmother of King Wenceslas, Ludmila; the 10C sword of St Stephen wrought by Ulfberth and a 13C mitre set with seed pearls.
Moving into the chapel itself, look first at the interior decoration.
The ceiling frescos depicting the Old and New Testaments are by Vilém Kandler, the paintings on glass by Jan Zachariáš Quast and the statue of St John Nepomuk is by Emanuel Max.
All these artists were the height of fashion in the middle years of the 19C.
The angels on the altar by Ignác Platzer and the Crucifixion by F. X. Balko are well worth looking at.
The glory of the chapel, however, rests in the contents of the display cases.
Note the series of great processional crosses of rock crystal and silver gilt, many studded with precious stones, baroque pearls and antique cameos, some with ingenious settings.
Many pieces of both 14 and 17C metalwork display a distinctive spiky naturalism which is  paralleled elsewhere in stone and wood.
Exquisite, too, is the 14C rock crystal flagon, possibly French, and the superb 13C cross decorated with the finest filigree work.
Here and in the adjoining passageway is some of the wealth and drama of the Counter-Reformation Church where magnificent rings, crucifixes and resplendent vestments played such a part in the ceremonial.
Leaving the chapel, go left across the square, to the Rudolf Gallery.
The Italian, Giovanni Gargiolli, may have been the author of its noble portals.
Inside, the collections here are not nearly as fine as those you will find in St George's or the National Gallery.
But they are worth looking at in that they give an understanding of royal taste in the 16 and 17C, and indeed their founder, Rudolf II, is considered to be one of the greatest European patrons of the arts (see p. 9).
His collections in Bohemia and those of succeeding Habsburgs are now mere shadows of their former glory.
Much was taken to Vienna, the capital of the Habsburg Empire.
The Swedes helped themselves in 1648 and Josef II held a number of spectacularly philistine art auctions at the end of the 18C.
The first room of the gallery contains the work of some of those artists favoured by Rudolf II, whose outstanding patronage gave rise to Prague's remarkable circle of Mannerist painters, sculptors, and goldsmiths, known as the School of Prague.
As Holy Roman Emperor, Rudolf II was the most important crowned head in Europe; as king of Bohemia he made his capital, Prague, a Mecca for the cream of northern artists, scholars, and philosophers.
Rudolf, who was born in 1552, and succeeded to the throne in 1576, has been described as one of the most ineffectual though one of the most cultured Habsburg rulers.
He cuts an enigmatic and sympathetic figure: a recluse who would go around his palace incognito dressed as a groom; a man who had his future foretold by Nostradamus; who employed the English occultists, Dee and Kelley; who dabbled in magic and yet was one of the greatest patrons of the Renaissance in Europe.
He prized the great masters of the high Renaissance, and collected around himself artists of the calibre of Hans von Aachen, Giuseppe Archimboldo, Josef Heintz and Roelant Savery.
He was advised in the arts by the century's greatest antiquaries, Jacopo Strada and his son, Ottavio.
As pointed out by the collector and historian van Mander writing in 1604, ‘Whoever so desires nowadays has only to go to Prague to the greatest art patron in the world at the present time; there he may see at the Imperial residence a remarkable number of outstanding and precious, curious, unusual, and priceless works.’
Alas, this is no longer true of what is left of Rudolf's collections.
In the entrance to the gallery is a copy of Adrian de Vries's bust of Rudolf with his distinctive profile.
Here too is Hans von Aachen's portrait of this maecenas, with his fleshy Habsburg lips.
He is magnificently dressed in damask decorated with peacock feathers, and wears the Order of the Golden Fleece.
Note also here the works of Bartholomeus Spranger and Cornelius van Haarlem, both important Mannerists.
On the left is Adrian de Vries's Adoration of Christ.
Continue through the succeeding rooms to the montage with a description of Rudolf's collections.
The masterpieces he once owned by Leonardo, Correggio, Veronese, Rubens, Holbein, Breughel, Dürer, and Titian are now scattered among the world's major art galleries.
He had a particular love for the work of Dürer and Breughel, two artists much admired by his grandfather, Maximilian I also.
Rudolf's gallery of Dürers was legendary.
It is well known that he organized the transportation of Dürer's Rosenkranzfest (a painting full of Habsburg symbolism, including the portraits of Maximilian I and Pope Julius II) across the Alps from Venice, with four bearers to hold it upright.
This great canvas is one of the few of Rudolf's collection to remain in Prague.
Rudolf's reign saw a growing interest in decorative arts of great refinement and opulence, as found in the work in gold and jewels of the Jamnitzers or the designs of the Vredeman de Vries family, the pietra dura panels of the Castrucci or the glass and cameos of the Miseroni family (see p. 121).
The third and fourth rooms were adapted in 1965 by F. Cubr and house paintings from the collection founded by the Emperor Ferdinand III.
Some of these came from the Duke of Buckingham's important collection, bought at auction in 1648 by the archduke Leopold Vilém, brother of the emperor.
Among these are the St Paul by d'Arpino, The Sacrifice in the Temple and The Building of the Temple of Solomon both by F. Bassano, J. Bassano's Noah's Ark, Tintoretto's Flagellation of Christ and an Adoration by Veronese.
In the fifth room are canvases from the Czech high Baroque, including works by Jan Kupecký, Petr Brandl and Jan Rudolf Bys, though these painters are best represented in the St George's Gallery.
A reassessment of the work of these artists is long overdue among western art historians, and many will find these paintings a revelation and a delight.
One of the great joys of looking at anything in Prague is that as yet there are few distracting labels in English, we are all forced to make our own discoveries and everywhere this is rewarded.
On leaving the gallery, turn right through the passage and on to the Powder Bridge from where there is a wonderful view of the 15C fortifications built by the architect Benedikt Ried of Piesting and of the towering cathedral.
The bridge once connected the castle to a complex of pleasure gardens, now largely vanished.
To your left, standing above the steep valley of the Brusnice River is the Riding School erected in 1694–5 by Jean-Baptiste Mathey.
Since the Second World War, this has only been used for storage.
The terrace by Otto Rottmayer stands on the site where Fux's opera,Constanza e Fortezza was performed to celebrate the coronation of Emperor Charles VI in 1723.
Rottmayer played an important role in Czech architecture between 1918 and 1939.
Sunday is the only day when the Royal Gardens are open.
To visit them continue to the main road and immediately turn to your right through the gates.
The gardens are the earliest example of Italian design in Bohemia and were laid out in 1534 by Giovanni Spazio for Ferdinand I. They were enlarged and altered by Jan Vredeman  de Vries in 1563 and, following the vagaries of fashion, were transformed into French Baroque style in 1730.
Until April 1990 the gardens were closed to the public as indeed they had been since the 50s when the tiny summerhouse through the gates on the right became the residence of President Husák.
Both the gardens and the castle are said to be undermined with escape tunnels built during the years of Communism.
If this is true, they illustrate the edginess of the Communist regime.
The gardens are now a mixture of municipal bedding and 19C specimen trees, all somewhat disfigured by eye-level lollipop lighting.
The garden buildings nevertheless merit attention.
On the right-hand path is the magnificent Ball Game Hall with its exquisite, though much restored sgraffiato decoration depicting allegories of the Sciences, Virtues and Elements.
This was designed by Bonifac Wohlmut and Ulrico Aostalli in 1567–9.
At the E end of the gardens is one of the most harmoniously and perfectly proportioned buildings in Prague.
This Summer Palace of Queen Anne or Belvedere, commissioned by Ferdinand I as a gift to his queen, was built by G. Spazio and J. Maria de Pambio between 1538 and 1552 to a design by Paolo della Stella.
It was given a hull-shaped upper floor by Bonifac Wohlmut between 1557 and 1563.
Its arcade, with a light elegance reminiscent of Raphael, was revolutionary in Gothic Prague.
Such classical purity was unknown north of the Alps.
It has been suggested that this was the first time a summer pavilion had been adapted from a Greek temple.
In the centre of the formal gardens laid out in the 1930s is the Singing Fountain by F. Terzio, cast in 1564–8.
In the corner, passing through the wonderful 18C grille, lies the Lion Court, the first zoological garden in Prague, designed for Rudolf II.
Refreshments are now served here.
Return to the castle and its second courtyard, then walk through into the final and greatest courtyard, past the limestone blocks of the Romanesque White Tower.
Immediately ahead is the W end of St Vitus' Cathedral.
This great Gothic building is now a gallery of Czech art of the 14 and 20C.
Most of the building of the cathedral took place during two periods of intense patriotism in Bohemia.
The first of these began under Charles IV.
It was he who, in 1344, the year in which Prague became an archbishopric, laid the foundation stone on the site of a Romanesque basilica, the remains of which may be seen in the crypt.
His architect was a Frenchman from Avignon, Matthieu d'Arras, who worked in the then fashionable high Gothic style.
Matthieu was also responsible for drawing up a plan of the New Town (see p. 138) but he died in 1352 before completing more than four chapels in the cathedral choir.
Charles IV summoned Peter Parler to Prague from Swabia and in his hands, St Vitus' became the most important architectural commission in Bohemia.
From now on Prague was to develop an exciting and original form of late Gothic architecture and it increasingly became the mainspring of the courtly ‘International Gothic’.
Parler's hallmarks lay in decoration: vaulting and sculpture poured from his workshops.
Decorative vaulting had been used to effect in England, but in Parler's imaginative hands, first the crazy vault and then the net vault, reached their full potential.
Parler completed the arcades and constructed the elevation of the choir with a net vault in 1371–6, finalizing the complicated support system in 1385.
The nave was begun in 1392 and the great crossing tower four years later, but they were never finished as the start of the Hussite Wars in 1421 put a stop to most artistic activity in the capital (see p. 6).
Parler died in 1399, but his sons John and Wenceslas carried on in Prague, Vienna and Milan.
Such art patronage does not come cheap.
During the 14C, Prague was the largest city north of the Alps and the king had the sole right to the silver from the mines of Bohemia and Silesia which John of Bohemia had acquired in 1331.
Prague, after all, was now the capital of the Holy Roman Empire.
To match the city's importance Charles was determined to make St Vitus' the pivotal church of his kingdom and of the Luxemburg dynasty.
In the E end is a shrine to the four patron saints of Bohemia, St Wenceslas, St Adalbert, St Sigismund and St Vitus.
The latter's relics rest on the main altar.
The  decoration of the elevation of the E end is symbolic.
At arcade level, lie the tombs of past Bohemian kings.
Farther into the light at gallery level are sculptures of those who helped build the cathedral: Charles IV, his mother, his third and fourth wives and his son, the two architects including the self-portrait of Peter Parler, the master masons and three archbishops.
This is a collection of strange bedfellows, but is an interesting reflection of the high esteem in which artists were held at the time.
Some of the representations are thought to be actual portraits.
If so, Parler's is the first self-portrait known in medieval art.
Amidst the blaze of light in the clerestory, are the idealized sculpted heads of the patron saints.
These were completed by 1385, the year of consecration.
In the reign of Charles's son, Wenceslas IV, the cathedral became the centre of liturgical reform under the preachers Konrad Waldhauser and John Milíč.
Hymns were sung in the vernacular, ecclesiastical corruption and the worship of images were renounced.
Indeed some of these reforms were later put forward by the Hussites but with the Hussite Wars, this great period of cathedral building came to an end.
Then it was not until 1861 that the Union for the Completion of the Cathedral started its work, carried along on a wave of Romantic nationalism.
The work was supervised first by Josef Kranner, then from 1871–99 by Josef Mocker, the Bohemian Viollet-le-Duc.
The cathedral was finally completed under the eye of Kamil Hilbert in 1929, in time to commemorate the death of St Wenceslas one thousand years earlier.
Outside, facing the W door it is difficult to remember that this is the most modern part of the cathedral, created at the same time as Prague's Functionalist architecture.
Ruskin's credo ‘decoration is the better part of architecture’ has clearly been put into practice here.
Begun in 1892 and inspired by the completion of Cologne Cathedral in 1880, the decoration was by a number of eminent artists and sculptors.
Note the portraits of the builders by Vojtěch Sucharda and the tympana by Karel Dvořák.
The superb bronze doors realized by 0.
Spaniel after designs of V. H. Brunner depict the legend of St   Wenceslas and St Adalbert, the 10C bishop of Prague.
The whole effect is evident proof of a fine tradition of Bohemian craftsmanship.
There are many glories to see in the cathedral but if you are short of time, I would recommend four ‘musts’: the Wenceslas Chapel, the Royal Oratory by Benedikt Ried, the window by Alfons Mucha and the tomb of St John Nepomuk.
These are indicated by an asterisk below.
Begin at the first chapel on the right dedicated to St Ludmila (1).
The stained glass window and the wall mosaic were both designed by Max Švabinský in 1933–6.
Emanuel Max created the Gothic Revival altar and statue in 1845.
The other statues are of 1921 by Karel Pokorný, and the superb grille was designed by Jaroslav Horejc in 1938.
The window in the Chapel of the Holy Sepulchre (2) illustrating the Deeds of Mercy is by Karel Svolinský and dates from 1932–3.
Note the fine early Baroque altar of 1674, two Italian paintings of the Presentation of the Virgin and The Holy Family, and the painting of Mary Magdalene by Aurelio Lomi.
The window in the Thun Chapel (3) is after a sketch by František Kysela of 1928–9, ‘Those Who Sow in Tears shall Reap in Joy’.
There is a neo-Classical altar with an Ecce Homo of c.1580 attributed to Giulio Licino and late Gothic reliefs from the 15C.
Note too the sanctuary lamps.
On the outer wall of the Chapter Library (4) there are some fine Renaissance epitaphs and tombstones.
The entrance to the tower is through the Hazemburk Chapel (5) which contains a fresco (1631) by Matthias Mayer.
The window is from a sketch by Cyril Bouda (1934).
On the first floor of the crossing tower hangs the Sigismund bell, at 18 tons, one of the largest in Europe.
It was cast by Tomáš Jaroš in 1549.
The clock is by Hans Bechler (1597).
Before continuing to the S transept, look at the fine Crucifixion sculpted by F. Bílek.
Go into the s transept with its rose window of the Last Judgement by Max Švabinský, 1935–8, the Emblem of Prague  City in metalwork by Karel Štipl, 1946, a statue of Christ by Čeněk Vosmík, a fine memorial of 1921 dedicated to those who fell in the Great War by K. Pokorný, and the statue of St Wenceslas by Karel Dvořák, 1922.
On the piers of the crossing is a fine Madonna dating from the early 16C, and a series of gilded wooden sculptures of patron saints by František Preiss, 1699.
In the E wall is a neo-Gothic door of 1925 decorated with mosaic after a cartoon by J. Šimák.
This leads to the Wenceslas Chapel.
We are now in the 14C part of the cathedral, the Wenceslas Chapel (6), designed and built by Peter Parler on the foundations of the s apse of the Romanesque rotunda.
Dedicated to St John the Evangelist and St Wenceslas in 1367, the latter's remains were reburied here, near the site where his murderous brother had lain them in the 10C.
This was the most sacred part of the cathedral and also of the castle itself.
Unfortunately it is not possible to enter the chapel.
The decoration is lavish as befits a bejewelled reliquary writ large.
The lower part of the walls are faced with 1345 semi-precious stones of Bohemian origin, such as cornelians, amethysts, chalcedonies, jaspers, chrysoprases and agates set in gilded plaster.
The chapel played an important part in the coronation ceremony.
Each new king presented himself here with his various dignitaries for a robing ceremony before proceeding to the High Altar.
The crown of St Wenceslas and the sacred coronation oils were carried to the High Altar from here too.
The wall paintings under the cornice are c.1370.
A second series of paintings followed in c.1470 to commemorate the coronation of King Vladislav.
The upper part was not painted until 1509 by the workshop of the Master of Leitmeritz for Vladislav's son, King Ludvík.
The Master of Leitmeritz was the most important artist working in Bohemia in the late Gothic period.
The central altar and the tomb of the patron saint was arranged by Kamil Hilbert between 1912 and 1913, when the chapel was restored.
The delicate stained glass of the windows is the work of S. Libenský and J. Brychtová and dates from 1968.
Note the limestone statue of St Wenceslas on the  cornice.
This is the work of Henry Parler of 1373.
The emblem of the Parlers, a runic square, can be seen carved in the base.
The statue was painted by Oswald, court painter to Charles IV.
In the corner, by the entrance, is a Renaissance bronze candlestick, the work of Hans Vischer of Nuremberg, 1532.
In the SE corner lies a ciborium in the form of a Gothic steeple, perhaps even a model of that planned for St Vitus'.
This is an example of outstanding metalwork from Peter Parler's workshop.
Note the small painting of St Wenceslas by the Monogrammist I. W., 1543.
Near the window lies the entrance to the Crown Chamber on the first floor.
This has been locked with seven locks since 1867 and contains the coronation jewels from the 14C.
The royal crown of Bohemia, or the crown of St Wenceslas, was the gift of the saint and was entrusted to the king for his lifetime.
It was re-made for Charles IV by his court goldsmith in 1346.
On three further occasions later that century more jewels were added, and so it remains today.
The sword of St Wenceslas dates from the beginning of the 14C, but the sceptre dates from the reign of Rudolf II.
The Crown Jewels were last seen by the public in 1978, during an exhibition dedicated to Charles IV.
Return to the chancel via the original Gothic portal with its pinewood doors and note the 13C bronze knocker in the form of a lion's head.
Against the wall of the chancel is the tombstone of the Lobkovic family (1590).
On the opposite pier is the monument to General Field Marshal Šlik, who was chancellor of Bohemia in 1723.
This is an important monument, the fruit of co-operation between the great Baroque architect F. M. Kaňka, and M. B. Braun, the greatest sculptor of Bohemian Baroque.
Continuing round towards the E end you come to a series of chapels.
Although they still retain fine Rococo grilles, these have been over-enthusiastically revamped in neo-Gothic style between 1870 and 1890.
The man behind the remodelling was the architect Josef Mocker and the work was carried out by official artists such as Čermák, František Sequens and Antonín Lhota.
In St Andrew's Chapel (7) or the chapel of the Martinic family, note the marble altar made in Rome by T. Achterman, c.1870.
The epitaph in stone of Jan Popel of Lobkovic dates from 1582.
The Chapel of the Holy Rood (8) contains fragments of 14C frescos; an icon from 1400, and a Lombardian sculpted Corpus Christi from the 16C.
Among the paintings of the 18C is a St John Nepomuk by Augusto Masucci.
This dates from 1729 and was presented to the cathedral by Pope Benedict XIII.
From here we descend to the crypt and find ourselves surrounded by the 11C remains of the Romanesque basilica.
The royal crypt was laid out by the architect Kamil Roškot in 1928–35.
The Royal Oratory (9) by Benedikt Ried is an extraordinary example of late Gothic art in Bohemia.
Its stone balcony was carved by Hans Spiess of Frankfurt in 1493 for Vladislav Jagiello, son of the king of Poland who became king of Bohemia in 1471, and then king of Hungary in 1490.
He died in 1516 after having transformed much of the castle (see p. 6).
The letter ‘W’ for Wladislaw can be seen in many of the oratory's decorations.
The sculpted figures of mineworkers with their lamps are the work of M. B. Braun from 1721–5 and are a salient reminder that without the silver mines of Jihlava and Kutná Hora royal patronage of the arts would not have been possible.
In the Chapel of St Mary Magdalene (lo) of the Wallenstein family, note the early Baroque altar with its modern statue by J. V. Čermák.
Against the walls lie the two Gothic tombstones of the builders of the cathedral, Matthieu d'Arras and Peter Parler.
Opposite, forming part of the choir screen, is a fascinating relief portraying the devastation of the cathedral by the Calvinists in 1620, an act of desecration encouraged by Frederick of Bohemia.
It is the work of the court joiner Kaspar Bechteler (1623).
One of the masterpieces in the cathedral is the silver tomb of St John Nepomuk.
The central section was made in Vienna in 1733–6 after a sketch by the celebrated architect Fischer von Erlach.
He worked in collaboration with  the sculptor Antonio Corradini and the goldsmith Jan Josef Würth.
The vases were modelled by J. A. Quitainer, and the angels spilling around the baldachin are by I. F. Platzer, 1771.
Here are fine reminders of the tenacity of the Baroque style.
The altar of the Chapel of St John Nepomuk (11) and oratory of the Vlašim family, which encases the relics of St Adalbert, is after a sketch of Kamil Hilbert.
The four silver busts of the patron saints of Bohemia date from 1699 and are by František Preiss.
The painting of the ‘Passauer’ Madonna dates from 1601 and the funeral monument of Bishop Jan Očko of Vlašim and the fragmentary frescos are from 1370.
The beautiful sculpted Gothic Madonna is of c.1500.
On the left wall is the magnificent bronze monument of Ludmila Thurn, 1558.
The grille, like that in all the other chapels, is of 1731.
On the altar of the Chapel of the Holy Relics (12), the Saxon Chapel or Sternberg family chapel, is a collection of reliquaries from the 14–18C and against the wall are the tombstones of the Přemyslid dukes Otakar I and Otakar II from the Parler workshops.
The one of Otakar I is superb and is said to be from the hand of the master himself.
The siting of these tombs dates to about 1376–7.
On the pillar is a cannon ball from the Prussian bombardment of Prague in 1757.
The Chapel of Our Lady (13) or Imperial Chapel was founded by Charles IV but the altar is of a much later date, to a design by Josef Mocker, 1903.
On the transverse beam hangs a Calvary of 1621 by Daniel Altman von Eydenburk.
The frescos depict scenes of the Life of St Mary and the Presentation of the Remains of St Vitus to the cathedral.
The Chapel of St John the Baptist (14) or Chapel of the Arnošts was founded by Archbishop Arnošt of Pardubice.
The original chapel collapsed and was rebuilt in 1863–4.
The terracotta figures in the arcade niches are by two pioneers of Czech modern sculpture, Václav Levý and J. V. Myslbek.
The ‘Jerusalem’ candlestick is a fine example of Romanesque metal-casting.
According to chronicles it was won as war booty by Czech warriors in Milan in 1158.
The stem is of later  date (1641).
Note also the Death of St Joseph by Francisco Trevisano, 1656.
The Renaissance family epitaph from 1582 in the Archbishop's Chapel (15) or Pernštejn family chapel was designed by Jan Vredeman de Vries, one of the most important of the northern Mannerists working at the court of Rudolf II.
Opposite the chapel is a monumental bronze sculpture dating from 1895 of Cardinal Friedrich Joseph Schwarzenberg by J. V. Myslbek.
Schwarzenberg was bishop of Salzburg and archbishop of Prague, yet managed to combine this holy status with being a member of the House of Parliament and of the Reichsstaat.
Around the choir is a wooden bas-relief depicting the flight in 1620 of Frederick of the Palatinate to Warsaw after his defeat at the Battle of the White Mountain.
It was carved by Kaspar Bechteler in 1623.
In the altar of St Anna's Chapel (16) or chapel of the Nostic family, note the early Gothic panel from 1266, originally from Trier Cathedral but given to St Vitus' by the Nostic family.
The sculpted Madonna dates from the 16C and a fresco of the life of St Anna is by Jan Sweers.
In the wall of the aisle in the Old Sacristy (17), formerly St Michael's Chapel, is a good example of a high Baroque confessional (1730).
J. K. Liška's St Maurice, The Baptism of Christ by Petr Brandl and J. J. Hering's Visitation are all fine examples of Czech Baroque painting.
In the interior is Parler's original vaulting with two pendant keystones, the remaining furnishings dating from 1730, and an array of portraits of the archbishops of Prague.
The frescos in the Chapel of St Sigismund (18) or chapel of the Černín family portray scenes from the Life of St Sigismund, and are Augsburg work from the late 16C.
He was the patron saint of the Luxemburg family.
Note too The Assumption by D. Alexius of c.1600.
The fine main altar is glorious in red lacquer, silver and gold and is by the architect F. M. Kaňka and the sculptor F. I. Weiss.
Note too the balustrade,(1735).
The walls of the chapel are studded with tomb slabs, mainly of the 16 and 17C.
From the 14C to the nearly modern, there is a perceptible drop in the floor level.
Standing at the E end, gaze upwards at the conception of space created by Peter Parler with his fine net vault of 1367.
In the chancel, the windows are after a cartoon by Max Švabinský, 1946–8.
The High Altar is neo-Gothic, 1868–72, by J. Kranner, decorated with enamels by František Sequens and reliefs by Ludvík Šimek.
The pulpit is early Baroque by K. Bechteler (1618).
The Royal Mausoleum is prominent in front of the High Altar.
On the tomb are medallions with busts of Charles IV and his four wives, Wenceslas IV, Ladislav Posthumus and George Poděbrady.
Reclining are the figures of Ferdinand I, his wife Anne of Hungary and his son, Maximilian II.
These are the work of the Netherlandish sculptor Alexander Collin, 1566–89.
The monument still retains its fine Renaissance grille by G. Schmidthammer, finished in 1591.
In the N transept is part of the choir screen designed by Bonifac Wohlmut (19), 1557–61.
Originally this enclosed the medieval interior of the cathedral but it was transferred to its present location in 1924.
Note the mixture of the early Baroque doors of the choir chapel dating from 1639, with the central modern part of 1929.
The organ dates to 1757.
The New Sacristy (20) contains copies of the busts from the triforium.
The wooden altar is by František Bílek, one of the finest Czech sculptors, and the wooden statue of Christ carved in 1899 has been in the cathedral since 1929.
The neo-Gothic spiral staircase (21) leads to the Treasure Chamber.
There is more than a hint of Art Nouveau in its decoration.
The New Archbishop's Chapel (22) has, since 1909, been the burial chapel of the archbishops of Prague.
The window is the work of Alfons Mucha in 1931.
Its subject is a celebration of the Lives of SS Cyril and Method.
There are similarities between a stained glass window and a poster and Mucha was a master of both.
Don't fail also to see the Assumption of the Virgin by Bartholomeus Spranger, 1593.
In the Schwarzenberg Chapel (23) the stained glass by Karel Svolinský illustrates the family tree of the Schwarzenbergs.
Set  in the altar is an attractive late Gothic panel from southern Bohemia depicting The Last Judgement.
In the chapel of the Bartoňs of Dobenín (24) the window and wall mosaics by F. Kysela, 1931–5 show the Eight Blessings.
The Gothic arch is a north Italian work from c.1400.
The bronze grille is by Karel Štipl, 1937.
Here too is the Reliquary of St Anežka by Karel Stádník, 1989.
As you leave the cathedral you pass on your left the former Old Deanery, rebuilt in 1662.
This conceals the remains of the Romanesque Bishop's Palace.
In the corner is a statue of St Wenceslas of 1662 attributed to Jan Jiří Bendl.
This third and largest courtyard, St George's Square, is in a uniform neo-Classical style by Pacassi.
On the far side of the square, the most attractive aspect of this façade is the fine wrought-iron balcony with figures of torchbearers from the workshop of Ignác Platzer.
The presidential offices nestle behind this and a balcony provides a fine platform from which the public can be addressed.
Here, as in Wenceslas Square, is an important public meeting place.
Although the courtyard has an undoubted 18C feel to it, there is much that is modern, by Jože Plečnik.
His is the monolith of granite, in memory of the victims of World War I and the tenth anniversary of the Republic in 1928.
Comparisons with Lutyens come to mind.
There is also an equestrian bronze statue of St George, for which Plečnik designed the base.
The original St George is an outstanding example of bronze casting in the ‘International Gothic’ style.
It foreshadows the work of Donatello or Verrocchio, but is decorated with minute details of nature so beloved by the ‘International Gothic’.
It was cast by Georg and Martin of Cluj (Klausenburg) in 1373.
The statue in the courtyard is a copy: the original is in St George's Gallery.
Now stand and view the s transept portal of the cathedral, or Golden Portal, which was formerly the main entrance from the Royal Palace.
How glorious it must have been when its mosaic, created in 1371 by Venetians using Bohemian glass, was newly installed.
At the time it would have been the only glittering example of this technique north of the Alps.
Alas, it is  difficult to see it now, due to poor restoration at the beginning of this century, but it does depict Charles IV and Elizabeth of Pomerania with Czech patron saints.
Beneath the mosaic the porch (Hostium Magnum) has beautiful triangular vaulting by Peter Parler of c.1366–7 above the door.
The door itself is by Jan Sokol and the modern mosaic is after a cartoon by Karel Svolinský.
The fine decorative grille in front of the doorway is by Jaroslav Horejc of 1954.
Look up at the Great Tower which was built by the sons of Peter Parler in 1396: -1406, with a Renaissance gallery by B. Wohlmut, 1560–2.
The dome dates from the same time as the courtyard façades, that is from 1770, but the fine clock and golden grille are from the Rudolfian period.
Continue to your right to see, in the corner, the covered gate to the Promenade Garden by J. Plečnik, 1927–34.
The bulls supporting the baldaquin are thought to be a reference to the peasant background of Queen Libuše's husband and co-ruler, the first Přemysl.
It may not be an accident that it has echoes of Knossos.
Alice Masaryk, with whom Plečnik worked on much of the castle, was fond of reflecting that Slovakia was the Greece of the Slav nation.
Note here how the architect plays with the idea of form being independent of material, the canopy being of bronze.
Behind the Baroque Eagle Fountain carved to a design by Francesco Caratti in 1664, lies the entrance to the Royal Palace.
The palace is made up of many layers of Bohemian royal history.
At foundation level is the Romanesque palace built by Duke Soběslav (1125–40); then comes the Gothic building with its Přemysl arcades of the 13C; next follows the palace of Charles IV, and finally the magnificent rooms created between 1477 and 1511 under Vladislav Jagiello.
Enter the palace, walk from the antechamber with its remains of a Romanesque tower, then turn left to the Green Chamber bedecked with the emblems of the associate judges of the courts.
On the ceiling is a Baroque fresco, The Judgement of Solomon which originally came from the Burgrave's House.
There follows the so-called Vladislav Bedroom with late  Gothic vaulting by Hans Spiess of 1486, and beyond, the room used to house the archives of the land rolls.
Return to the antechamber and enter the Vladislav Hall, on the site of the hall of Charles IV, surely one of the most exciting spaces created in 16C northern Europe.
Here, it is easy to imagine the coronations, banquets and knightly tournaments taking place.
During the time of Rudolf II and later it was used like some grand art market, the stall-holders setting up their wares in the window embrasures.
Since 1934 the elections of the presidents of Czechoslovakia have taken place here.
The most recent celebration was in December 1989, when Václav Havel was elected president.
A High Mass followed in the cathedral.
The most remarkable feature of the Hall is the ribbed vaulting by Benedikt Ried which unites walls and ceiling in one single undulating movement.
Yet there is no heaviness here: the ribs are pure decoration and do not even follow their expected course; they end abruptly as if there is no final solution.
Ried created this work of architectural bravado between 1493 and 1502.
English fan vaulting is the only comparable style and that is dreary copy book by comparison.
Leave the Hall, turn right and pass to the Louis Wing, built by Ried in 1502–9, a mixture of Renaissance and Gothic.
Originally the living quarters, its use changed after the great fire of 1541 which destroyed so much of the castle area and some of the Malá Strana (see p. 69).
Thereafter it became the offices of the Czech Chancellery and the Imperial Court Council.
Even more important however, it was from the eastern window here that Jaroslav Martinic and William Slavata, both fanatical Catholics and Habsburg supporters, were defenestrated by members of the Bohemian Protestant Estates in 1618 (see p. 10).
From the antechamber of the Czech Chancellery a spiral staircase leads to the early 16C hall of the Court Chancellery which contains original furniture of the time of Rudolf Il.
On the walls are copies of portraits of the Habsburgs from Rudolf II to Maria Theresa.
On 19 June 1621, the death sentence was passed here on 27 members of the Bohemian nobility and  gentry who had led the revolt against Ferdinand II.
The inlaid door was designed by Jan Vredeman de Vries, c.1600.
Return once more to the Vladislav Hall, walk to the end and turn right to visit the Observation Terrace.
This, together with the spiral staircase, was designed by Otto Rottmayer in 1951.
Through the portal by Giovanni Gargiolli of Florence, 1598, we pass into the choir of the All Saints' Chapel, formerly the seat of an independent Chapter.
It was built by Peter Parler between 1370 and 1387, but was rebuilt after the great fire by Ulrico Aostalli in 1579–87.
The High Altar was designed by Petr Prachner in the middle of the 18C and carries a painting by Václav Vavřinec Reiner.
Also note the tomb in the N of the chapel of St Procopius the patron saint of the Slavs, by F. I. Weiss, 1739.
On the walls hang a series of paintings by Christian Dittman, 1669, and several works from the important Rudolfine court circle, including a triptych by Hans von Aachen.
The organ is a rare example of the Gothic Revival style from the beginning of the 18C.
Return for the last time to the Hall and enter the Diet, with its throne of 1836.
This room, originally from the 15C, was revaulted between 1559 and 1563 by Bonifac Wohlmut, in sympathy with the Vladislav Hall.
There is a fine neo-Gothic tiled stove from 1836, but one of the most impressive things in the room are the fine frames surrounding the Habsburg portraits.
Leading off the Diet is the room of the New Land rolls built in the 16C and decorated with the painted emblems of the clerks of the land rolls.
The room contains original furniture from the 16 and 17C.
On the staircase, Ried's hand can be seen again in the rib vaulting of c.1500.
Note too the typical rhomboidal treatment of the ceiling, almost Art Deco in feel, but again a Bohemian invention.
The door on the right (note its fine handle) leads back into St George's Square.
Enter St George's Square and walk towards the arch into Vikářská Street.
On your right glance at the windows of the palace of 1493.
These are the earliest examples of the Italian Renaissance in Bohemia, with their delicate arabesques and acanthus leaves.
It has been suggested the windows were  executed by craftsmen from the Buda workshop of Matthias Corvinus, inspired by the Palazzo Ducale in Urbino.
Note too the cenotaph of St John Nepomuk by I. F. Platzer of 1763.
Nepomuk was the favourite Bohemian saint of the Counter-Reformation — a Catholic alternative to Jan Hus.
Nepomuk was martyred by being thrown off Charles Bridge under the orders of Wenceslas IV.
The story goes that Wenceslas wished to prove his queen was guilty of adultery and Nepomuk, as the queen's confessor, denied that she was.
But the real reason for his death was that, as archbishop of Prague, he challenged the power of the monarchy and won.
It is the story of Thomas à Becket all over again.
Leaving the Royal Palace you can see, next to the Cloister of St George, the New Deanery, built in a rather bleak neo-Gothic by Josef Mocker in 1879.
St George's, founded in 973, was the first convent in Bohemia for Benedictine nuns.
Its founder, Duke Boleslav II made his sister Mlada the first abbess.
The buildings were transformed rather successfully into a gallery for Bohemian art by František Cubr and Josef Pilar, in the 1960s.
This St George's Gallery should not be missed, particularly as the international importance of Czech art is at last being recognized.
Here are represented the ‘International Gothic’ style of Charles IV's court — a style that even influenced artists in that bastion of the Renaissance, Florence; the Mannerist art of the 16 and early 17C; and Czech Baroque, whose artists vied with those farther west in their range of subject matter and technique.
Give yourself time to look around.
If you begin to flag, there is an excellent café to revive you.
The ground floor of the gallery is given over to Gothic and ‘International Gothic’ art.
Emotion contrasting with courtly elegance is one of the keys to Bohemian Gothic.
The gallery contains a fine series of carved ‘Beautiful Madonnas’ mainly from the 14 and 15C, which illustrate well the so-called ‘soft style’— elegant swaying Virgins, regarding their wriggling children with a gentle smile.
These provide a poignant contrast to the series of moving Pietàs and Crucifixions.
Such extremes, responding to the influence of Christian mysticism are part of ‘International Gothic’.
There are contrasts too of Gothic fantasy and naturalism in the bronze St George, the original of the copy in St George's Square.
This integration of man with nature is further seen in the wood carvings of Master I. P. whose nationality is unknown but who arrived in Bohemia about 1520.
His major extant work is in the Týn Church in Old Town Square, but there is a small gallery of his carvings at the bottom of the stairs.
Also on the ground floor are some fine examples of Bohemian panel painting on limewood.
Under the Luxemburgs, in the 14C, panel painting was among the most important developments in European art.
The quality of Bohemian work, up until the Hussite Wars, is superb and much has survived.
Among the outstanding work in the gallery must be the series of panels of the Passion painted for the Cistercian monastery of Vyšší Brod in 1350–5.
Different hands have obviously been involved in this great polyptych.
All show an understanding of space but also a negation of it, and the exquisite colours and naturalistic detail make one think of the Italian Duccio.
The panels (1360–5) of Master Theodoric, painter to the court, are in a different vein.
His massive figures appear to explode out over the frames.
It is worth noticing the use of the frame as an important part of the composition, as with the later Madonna from St Vitus', c.1396.
Note too the treatment of the decorated background created with stamped gesso under the gilding, akin to the work of goldsmiths.
These panels came from the Chapel of the Holy Cross in Karlštejn Castle.
A delightful parallel to the sculpted ‘Beautiful Madonnas’ is the Madonna of Třeboň painted around 1380, and exhibited here.
Upstairs, in the first passage, are works by the artists who set the style for Rudolf's court.
Note the bronze by Adrian de Vries.
This is in fact a copy of the one stolen by the Swedes in 1648 and now gracing the gardens at Drottningholm Castle.
The original was dated 1545 and was one of the series Vredeman de Vries created for the great garden of Wallenstein (see p. 94).
The elongated figures of Bartholomeus Spranger  are well illustrated in his Resurrection, while the more etherial work of Hans von Aachen may be appreciated in his Annunciation of 1613.
Note the more classicizing forms of Josef Heintz, the curious nature studies of Joris Hoefnagel, 1575 — 82, and the wild, romantic landscapes of Roelant Savery.
Rudolf had a great love for the Alps and sent Savery there to paint them.
Karel Škréta belongs to the early Baroque.
His is a very rich use of paint seen both in his portraits and his religious paintings.
See his portrait of the Miseroni family of 1653.
The Miseroni were called to Prague to set up a workshop for crystal carving and gem cutting, and they laid the foundations for the Bohemian cut-glass industry.
One of the most charming portraits in the gallery must be that by K. Škréta of Marie Maximilián of Sternberg in pastoral costume.
There are some small displays of fine examples of 18C glass and other decorative arts but those who are particularly interested in this field should go to the Decorative Arts Museum (p. 120).
Other painters represented here include Michal Leopold Willmann who was doubtless influenced by Rubens.
His work contrasts with the refined still-life painting of Jan Rudolf Bys, a more classical artist in the French manner, especially when he is painting historical scenes.
Note the works of two great masters of Prague Baroque, the sculptor, M. B. Braun and the painter Petr Brandl.
Note also the 1709 portrait of the miniaturist Karl Bruni by Jan Kupecký.
Observe his glasses, his mussel shells for mixing the paint, the fine pencil which he appears to use on a copper base, but most of all note his ‘bohemian’ air.
There is an attractive painting of Orpheus by V. V. Reiner and some noteworthy works by Kern, especially his St John on Patmos.
There is a series of delicate cabinet miniatures by Norbert Grund at the end of the gallery which should not be missed.
Leaving the gallery you move out of the convent and into the Church of St George next door, founded in 921.
The early Baroque façade is misleading.
It was actually put up about 1670 after a sketch by Francesco Caratti.
At its side is the Chapel of St John Nepomuk (1718–22) by Filip  Spannbrücker.
The interior of the church suffered from the dead hand of the restorer between 1897 and 1907, but it represents one of the most monumental examples of the Romanesque in Bohemia.
One of the earliest buildings in the castle, it was rebuilt after the fire in 1142.
On the walls fragments of paintings of c .
1200 can still be made out.
St Ludmila's Chapel at the bottom of the steps at the side of the chancel contains a tombstone of 1380.
Here is also some good plasterwork.
The double curving staircase leads up to the chancel where a fine Baroque grille hides the tombs of the Přemyslid princes, founders of the church and convent.
In the crypt on the right stands a statue of St Bridget, a naturalistic allegory of Vanity carved in 1726 by an Italian, Spinetti in atonement for an act of violence he had committed.
In the St John Nepomuk Chapel are paintings and frescos by V. V. Reiner from about 1730.
Leaving the church and looking across the road you will see to your right the Renaissance portal of the Royal Palace, the All Saints' Chapel and the Institute of Gentlewomen.
This latter was a secular convent which always had a lady of the Habsburg family as abbess.
Originally the Renaissance palace of the Rosemberg family, it was redesigned by Anselmo Lurago between 1753 and 1755.
Turn left down Jiřská Street (St George's Street) passing on your left the early Renaissance s door of St George's and its Romanesque chancel.
Then turn to the left and enter a different world, a curious survival, the famous Golden Lane.
Contrary to popular opinion this row of picturesque houses huddled against the castle wall did not house the alchemists of Rudolf's court, but the craftsmen of the castle.
More recently, its romantic atmosphere has attracted several artists and intellectuals including Franz Kafka and the poet Jaroslav Seifert.
Now it contains some good bookshops and some shops that are tourist traps.
At the end of the street is the entrance to the Daliborka, a defensive tower of the 15C, once used as a prison.
Return to St George's Street where, on the left is the former Burgrave's House, built 1555–6 by Giovanni Ventura.
In the  1960s it was modified to make the House of Czech Children for the Pioneers.
Opposite at No. 36 is the Lobkovic palace, formerly the palace of the Pernštejn family, which was built in the second half of the 16C and restored in 1651–8 by Carlo Lurago.
It is now the Museum of Bohemian History and is well worth a visit.
The interiors are rich in stucco and fresco decoration by Domenico Galli and Fabian Harovník, and are full of interesting furniture, glass, ceramics and historical maps.
The street is closed by the Black Tower, part of the castle's fortification system dating from the first half of the 12C.
The tower was lowered by one floor after the fire in 1538.
The bastion in front of the tower offers a wonderful panorama of Prague.
To the s of the tower is the entrance to the southern Castle Gardens, adapted in the 1920s by Plečnik and connected with a complex of palace gardens in the Malá Strana.
These important gardens are sprinkled with small buildings by Plečnik including a neo-Classical pavilion (1925–6) with statues by I. Platzer.
In the adjoining Garden on the Ramparts stand two obelisks marking the place where the victims of the Defenestration fell in 1618.
The gardens descend thereafter in a series of terraces and pavilions by Plečnik.
From here too, the New Castle Staircase descends.
It was conceived in 1674 as a grand stairway bedecked with statues, part of the idea of a via sacra or Holy Way leading to St Vitus' Cathedral.
Alas, this was never completed.
A single solitary statue of St Filippo Neri by M. J. Brokof, has stood here on its own since 1715.
If you have time, it is worth climbing on to the observation terrace on the site of the tiny Chapel of Holy Mary of Einsiedel which was part of the Theatine Monastery below.
From here you can see the Old Town, the New Town and the district of Vyšehrad stretched out along the other side of the Vltava River.
Return through the castle courtyards into the Hradčany quarter.
The Castle Area
The Sternberg Palace (National Gallery)— the Museum of Arms and Armour — St John Nepomuk — the Nový Svět (New World)— the Černín Palace — the Loretto — the Strahov Monastery — Petřin Hill
Leaving the castle behind you, turn left down the hill and look out once more over Prague, over the Malá Strana or Lesser Town founded in 1257 (see p. 68) and up to the right where the great Monastery of Strahov (see p. 64) stands on its own.
To the left is a scaled-down replica of the Eiffel Tower and farther up the hill is the small church of St Lawrence.
Built among the woods are some attractive private houses and a 19C hospital beneath which is the elegant mass of the Lobkovic Palace, now the German Embassy.
It has a fine roof with a viewing platform.
Directly beneath the castle walls are the low, picturesque red roofs of the Italian quarter, where the masons and architects, artists and sculptors lodged when they first arrived from Italy to work for the kings of Bohemia.
Beyond this and seemingly in open countryside, is the American Pavilion housed in what was formerly a 16C wine press belonging to the Schönborn Palace.
The surrounding terracing is all that remains of Prague's vineyards.
Turning back towards Hradčany Square once more, note in passing the statue of St Wenceslas by Č.
Vosmík, 1906.
Its base dates from the 18C and came originally from Charles Bridge.
Standing with your back to the castle, Hradčany Square stretching ahead is surrounded with grand palaces and houses.
Beginning on your right (16/56) is the magnificent Archbishop's Palace, still in use.
You can only see the splendid tapestries inside by appointment.
Eight houses were demolished before building on the palace began by Aostalli in 1562–4.
Additions were made in 1600 including a new chapel.
Its present appearance is due to the work of Jean-Baptiste Mathey from Dijon.
He arrived with Archbishop Wallenstein, after having been trained in Rome and worked on the palace in   1676.
Between 1764 and 1765 two outer wings were added and the façade was given its Rococo scrolls by Jan Josef Wirch.
This is a rare example of Rococo in Prague.
Opposite stands the sombre Salm Palace (1/186), dating from 1810.
The Sternbergs had a project to build their castle here using the architect Carlo Fontana, but this came to nothing.
In the end, their palace (1697–1708) was built slightly behind that of the archbishop and is now the magnificent National Gallery of Czechoslovakia (15/57).
The origins of the foundation of this great national collection lie in a body of private individuals — the Society of the Patriotic Friends of the Arts — founded in 1779, under the protection of Count Caspar Sternberg, who also founded the National Museum (see p. 149).
The collection was first housed in the Černín Palace at Hradčany, and later in the Clam-Martinic and Sternberg Palaces.
At the end of the 19C it moved into the Rudolfinum.
The paintings were returned here in 1950 purely by chance.
The Sternberg Palace was probably designed by Domenico Martinelli and Giovanni Battista Alliprandi, pupil of the great Fischer von Erlach of Vienna.
It was built for Václav Vojtěch Sternberg, who also commissioned the great Troja Palace as his country house (see p. 194).
The palace was only made into an art gallery in 1950 and some of the original plasterwork and frescos remain in the interior, the frescos by August Aldorandini and Jan Rudolf Bys.
Inside there is also a China Pavilion by Pisani with stucco by Frisoni.
The doors throughout the palace are splendid.
In the main part of the building the paintings are hung on the first and second floors.
They are divided by country, and the schools are hung chronologically.
They include the most important European schools from a fine small collection of icons and early Italian painting, to the 18C in Holland and Italy.
Downstairs, across the courtyard are the Impressionists and post-Impressionists bought en masse in 1906 by the director after an exhibition from France.
The origins of the early Italian collection are interesting.
It  was formed as early as 1805 by the Marchese Tommaso degli Obizzi whose taste in ‘primitives’ was ahead of his time.
The collection was inherited via the Duke of Modena by the Austrian line of the Este family, ending up with Archduke Franz Ferdinand who transferred the collection to his castle at Konopiště.
The collection is rich, including works by Pietro Lorenzetti, Daddi, Monaco, Nardo di Cione and Vivarini.
Do not miss the fine but small collection of icons in this gallery too.
The collection of the later Italian school includes work by Lorenzo Lotto Sebastiano del Piombo, Tintoretto, Sebastiano Ricci, Tiepolo and Canaletto.
Netherlandish painters were favoured in Prague too and several of their works are to be found in the collection.
There is Geertgen's Adoration of the Magi (mentioned in the original inventory of Prague Castle), Jan Mabuse's St Luke Painting the Virgin (once the centrepiece of an altar in St Vitus') and Peter Paul Rubens' The Martyrdom of St Thomas and St Augustus, commissioned for St Thomas' Church in Prague (see p. 92) in 1637–8.
There is also a beautiful work by Pieter Bruegel the Elder, The Haymakers, as well as work by Frans Hals, Jan van Goyen, and Rembrandt van Rijn.
The German School is also well represented.
There is a fine grisaille by Hans Holbein the Elder, works by Lucas Cranach the Elder and, most important of all, Albrecht Dürer's The Madonna of the Rose Garlands painted in 1506 for the church of the German colony in Venice.
It is the first group portrait in German art, portraying the Virgin crowning Maximilian I and the Christ Child crowning Pope Julius II.
This picture was once in Rudolf II's collection.
It was sold at auction for a derisory sum by Josef II in 1782 and from 1792 until 1934, when it was bought by the State, it was in the Strahov Monastery.
The Spanish School is represented by a fine El Greco and a portrait by Goya of Don Miguel de Lardizabal.
The collection of 19 and 20C European art includes works by the major Impressionists and post-Impressionists, the  Cubists including Picasso, and the Expressionists with sculpture by Bourdelle, Maillol and Rodin.
Returning to Hradčany Square you can see one of the few original gaslamps depicting a heavily draped Allegory of Prague.
These lamps were manufactured by the Komárov Ironworks in 1867 to a design by A. Linsbauer.
Gas lighting was installed between 1865 and 1868 and electricity arrived in 1890.
However, it was not until the 1960s that most of the gaslamps in Prague were converted to electricity.
The city authorities must be congratulated on re-using all the gaslamps, thus giving the centre of Prague such charm.
On the far side of the square, with distinctive sgraffiato decoration, much romanticized in the 19C, when the walls of the building were crenellated, is the Museum of Arms and Armour (2/135).
Originally started for the Lobkovic family in 1545 by Agostino Galli, it eventually came into the hands of the Schwarzenberg family.
In 1871, Josef Schulz restored it and created the present fantasy.
The Nazis took it over during the Second World War and made it into a museum of the German Army.
It has some fine Renaissance ceilings on the second floor although these are under lock and key and cannot be seen unless the keyholder happens to be in the museum that day.
This interesting museum is only open from May to September, and an alternative site for the collection is being discussed.
Crossing the square once more, the Marian column in the centre of the square is by Brokof, 1724–8.
From the National Gallery to the end of the square, the remaining houses belonged to the ‘close’ of the Archbishop's Palace and they feature a variety of façades.
Number 10/62 is on the site of the home of Peter Parler.
Farther on, the Martinic Palace (8/67) on the corner of the square, with its interesting sgraffiato decoration probably much restored, dates from 1580.
It is now the office of the chief architect of the city of Prague.
Walk through into the courtyard to find remains of the late 16C designs of the Labours of Hercules.
No. 11/68 with its late Baroque façade originally belonged to the bishop of Prague, and No. 6/65 was  the house of Alfons Mucha whose stained-glass window is so prominent in the cathedral.
His designs for Czech stamps may be enjoyed in the Stamp Museum (see p. 157).
Mucha's son is a well-known writer who lives here now, and the house contains a collection of the artist's work but is not open to the public.
At the end of the square (5/182) rises the Toscana Palace, previously the Thun-Hohenstein Palace, built between 1669 and 1691, after Mathey.
The statues on the pediment are by J. Brokof.
St Michael can be seen vigorously dragon-killing on the corner.
He was the patron saint of Michael Thun, who commissioned the building and the St Michael is the work of Ottaviano Mosto, c.1693.
The colours used on the façade of the palace are said to be the same as those originally used.
At No. 4/183 were the cloisters and church of the Czech Barnabite Order, founded in 1626.
More recently, this was made into a luxury hotel for the top brass of the Communist world.
Fidel Castro and Nikita Khrushchev were among its guests.
While Khrushchev was in power the Barnabite Committee debated here in the 50s the so-called ‘crimes’ against the Communist Party.
This committee was finally disbanded in 1969.
Leave the square by the Loretánská.
On your left you will pass the old Town Hall of the Hradčany (1/173) with its remnants of sgraffiato and fresco.
Notice the keystone above the door bearing the symbol of Prague.
Just to the right of the door is the measure (a braccia ) for yarn.
Continue up past a very Roman Baroque palace (4/181) on the other side, the Martinic Palace, attributed to Carlo Fontana, 1702–5.
It now houses the Prague Castle guard.
It is also mentioned as the hospital in the novel The Good Soldier Svejk by Jaroslav Hašek.
Here is yet another robust gaslamp.
At the No Entry sign, turn right into U kasáren and peer through the basement windows into the old stables of the adjoining palace.
At the bottom of the hill, on your left is the beautiful Church of St John Nepomuk by K. I. Dientzenhofer.
The church was built for the adjacent Ursuline convent which has an attractive courtyard to the right of the church.
The ceiling frescos are by  V. V. Reiner.
Opening hours are erratic, but the church is open for Mass on Saturdays at 20.00 or ask at the Archbishop's Palace.
Bearing left off the U kasáren will take you into one of the most enchanting corners of Prague, the Nový Svět or New World.
It is a district of small houses set amidst winding lanes, quite cut off from the world.
It is now most fashionable but once housed the poor.
Tycho de Brahe the astronomer to Rudolf II, lived at No. 1/76.
On your left is a gateway to the gardens of the Capucian Order.
The great wall at the end is all that remains of the Baroque fortifications of Prague.
Turn left when you reach the fortifications and you will find yourself at the back of the Černín Palace (5/101).
To explain the grandeur of this palace it is worth knowing that Count Humprecht Černín was an important ambassador in Rome, Venice and Istanbul.
On his return to Prague, he wanted to build a superb house and went, naturally, to Bernini.
The great Italian architect, however, was too busy on his abortive façade for the Louvre.
The architect chosen in the end was Francesco Caratti and the interior was designed by F. M. Kaňka with paintings by V. V. Reiner on the staircase.
You will now be passing the garden wall on your right.
Inside, the garden was restored in the 1920s as was much of the interior of the palace, but a great deal was left unfinished.
Already at the end of the 18C the palace was in the hands of the military and became the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
It was reconstructed by P. Janák between 1928 and 1932.
During the war it became the seat of the Nazi occupiers, including the infamous Nazis Heydrich and Frank.
It was from a window in this palace that Jan Masaryk, son of the first president of Czechoslovakia and ex-ambassador to London, fell to his death.
There is still much speculation as to what happened but at least nowadays people can speculate out loud.
Facing the Černín Palace, look to your right across to the small buildings (1602) that once belonged to the Capuchins.
This was a favourite Order of Rudolf II and the abbot was his second confessor.
You will see cannonballs embedded like  raisins in the walls: these came from the Prussian bombardment of 1757.
The cloisters were, for a time, the offices of the secret police under the Communists.
In the pavement to the left of the Černín Palace is a circle.
This marks the site of the Chapel of St Matthew built by Kaňka but only in existence until the 1790s.
There must have been an interesting contrast in scale between palace and church.
Behind you is the great Loretto Church of the Nativity (7/100).
The façade, 1720–2, is patently by K. I. Dientzenhofer, with sculpture by J. B. Kohl-Severa.
The bells here are famous; the clarion, ‘We Greet Thee a Thousand Times’ which is rung at midday was created by the clockmaker, P. Naumann in 1694.
Note the figures of 1722 by Quitainer on the terrace in front of the façade.
Entering the monastery, the ticket office is on the left and is one of the few places in Prague where good guide books can be bought.
Go through into the cloisters.
Here there is discomfort in both the scale and style of the architecture.
In the centre of the cloister sits the Santa Casa, the House of Mary, designed before the monastery in 1626–31 by Giovanni Domenico Orsi and A. Allio.
It looks foreign, like some late Roman altar.
Originally covered in fresco, the Scenes from the Life of the Virgin in stucco were added in 1664.
The patroness was a devout Spaniard, Benigna Kateřina of Lobkovic, who also donated the diamonds on a monstrance in the Treasury (see p. 64).
The dark interior of this little shrine is dedicated to the Lobkovic family whose name is emblazoned on the red lacquer screen.
There is a fine early 18C altar frontal and some arm reliquaries on the altar.
The overall feeling is sombre despite the contrast provided by the dancing putti on the cornice.
The statues of saints in their niches show the influence of Michelangelo.
Flanking the House of Mary, on either side, are statues of the Ascension of the Virgin and the Resurrection of Christ of 1739 and 1740.
The cloisters surrounding this were begun in 1661 although not finished until 1740 by K. I. Dientzenhofer.
Continue round the cloister, noting the chapels in the corners, especially the N chapel, with an altar dedicated to St Francis  Seraphin with a painting by Brandl and sculptures by M. V. Jäckel of 1718.
The Church of the Nativity (1734–5) is behind the Santa Casa and is by J. G. Aichbauer, half-brother of K. I. Dientzenhofer.
This has a marvellous rich interior, well-restored.
The ceiling frescos in the chancel are by V. V. Reiner and the carvings of 1636–7 are by M. Schönherr.
Opposite the entrance are the stairs to the magnificent treasury.
I would suggest going just before closing time and with luck you will be by yourself in front of the superb Diamond Monstrance of 1698 designed by Fischer von Erlach.
It was made by two Viennese silversmiths.
The diamonds are said to have come from the court dress that Countess Lobkovic is wearing in her portrait outside in the upper passage of the cloister.
But descriptions do no justice to a design in which the vision of St John on Patmos can rarely have been so imaginatively conceived.
Note also the fine Lobkovic Monstrance decorated with coral, a symbol of the Passion, made in Prague in 1673; the Wallenstein Monstrance (1721), with its chalice; the Ring Monstrance and the Big Pearl Monstrance, dripping with baroque pearls.
On leaving the Loretto, continue up the hill leaving the Černín Palace on your right.
To your left stretches the Pohořelec, an area which was destroyed by fire in the 15C.
The name Pohořelec means ‘burnt wasteland’.
Platzer was the author of the statue of St John Nepomuk in the centre of this impressively wide street.
There is a hospital and church to your left and the Swedish Embassy just to the left of that, with the finest view in Prague.
The house was built in the 1930s by Eliška Junkova, a celebrated female racing driver with a love of Bugatti motorcars.
The neo-Renaissance house directly ahead is currently owned by the army.
During the summer concerts are given in the courtyard.
The most attractive Rococo palace in the Pohořelec area is the Kučera Palace of 1775–80.
On your left are dark, steep steps up through the wall into one of the greatest centres of culture in Bohemia — the Strahov Monastery and library.
Since the monks were thrown out of Prague in 1954, the cloisters of the monastery have been given  over to a display of Czech illuminated manuscripts, printing techniques and modern literature.
It is well worth visiting and contains facsimiles of many fine and interesting manuscripts, but be prepared for the fact that it is geared to schools and is therefore rather didactic.
Now, as a remarkable result of the ‘Velvet Revolution’, the monks are returning to this great Premonstratensian monastery, founded in 1140 by Vladislav II.
Thankfully, they are planning to keep the series of remarkable libraries open to the public.
What you see now has been rebuilt several times, although the medieval foundations still exist.
Above the entrance is a carving of St Norbert with angels.
The buildings in the courtyard are late Baroque, but on your right you will see some remains of the Romanesque building.
The bronze lion in the courtyard is by B. Kafka.
The main entrance hall of the monastery was frescoed by Siard Nosecký, who was a member of the Order.
Upstairs, walk past the monks' cells, until you come to a massive door.
Here is pure delight.
First comes the Theological Library (1671–9), by Orsi and again decorated by Nosecký, the in-house painter, between 1723 and 1727.
The most ancient manuscript in the library dates from the 9C and some of the bookcases are magnificent examples of 18C Bohemian cabinet-making.
It is, however, the whole — the books, their bindings, the shelving, stucco and paint — which together make up one of the most atmospheric interiors in Prague.
This library can still be used by the specialist public.
The bookcases now to the left are magnificent examples of 18C Bohemian cabinet-making.
Next, you come to the Philosophical Library, evidently later in date (1782–4).
The ceiling fresco of 1794 by the Viennese painter Franz Anton Maulpertsch, depicting the History of Mankind, is one of the painter's last works and not one of his best.
The beautiful furnishings are by Jan Lahofer.
This room and its collections have a strange history.
It started life as a monastic barn.
Under Josef II, all the libraries throughout Bohemia, with one or two exceptions, were closed, along with the monasteries, and the books were brought here, where the abbot, Václav Mayer, was a close friend of Josef's.
The  emperor, who loathed Bohemian, by bringing the books here, unwittingly set up a monument to the language.
One is left wondering if he would enjoy seeing his profile by Palliardi on the library façade.
The abbot was a clever man.
Coming out of the libraries and walking through the courtyard towards the gate at the other end, you will see on your left the façade of the Church of St Mary.
It dates from the mid-18C and is decorated with sculpture by J. A. Quitainer.
The interior, in which Mozart once played, is in lavish Baroque of 1601–27, and has been newly restored.
The church however still retains its original Romanesque basilica form.
I. J. Palliardi was the stuccoist, and Ignác Raab the Jesuit painter worked here.
There are also frescos by Josef Kramolín and Neunherze depicting the Life of St Norbert, the founder of the Order who is buried here.
Bohemian late Gothic forms are included in this Baroque fantasy and there are some good 18C confessionals.
On your right as you go towards the gate, is a curiosity.
The Church of St Roch, now an exhibition space, was a votive church founded by Rudolf II in thanks for the ending of the plague.
It was given a central plan by its Italian builders, with side chapels dating from 1603–12 dedicated to SS Salvator, Roch and Anthony.
‘Gothic survival’ may be one way to describe its architecture, an almost unique form of Baroque, found also in England at the end of the 17C.
Go out of the gate, turn left and follow the road up to Petřín Hill, now a public park.
The word ‘petřín’ comes from the medieval Latin for ‘stone’, and it was from this land that much of Prague derived its building materials.
In the 19C under Governor Chotek, several private gardens in the area were bought by the city and merged.
The present gardens were created by J. Braul around 1836.
At the top of the hill (which can also be reached by funicular), are the remains of the Hunger Wall, built by Charles IV to give work to the starving.
From afar, the two most striking buildings in the park are the Observatory and the replica Eiffel Tower.
This latter was built by The Club of Czech Tourists who had seen the Eiffel Tower  at the International Exhibition in Paris in 1889.
They then raised the money to build a replica tower one-third the size in 1891.
Many years ago there was a restaurant here as well as a viewing platform, but nowadays it is a sad skeleton.
There once was a plan to remove it and replace it with a television transmitting tower.
Walk a little farther and you come to the Church of St Lawrence which has Romanesque foundations.
Nearby are two more chapels, one a copy of the Chapel of the Holy Sepulchre (1845) by Johann Ferdinand Schorr and the other, to the left of the church, containing a Calvary.
This chapel marks the ultimate halt in a via sacra of 14 chapels which was to wind its way down the hill to the Malá Strana.
The next building has a funfair quality.
It is a Hall of Mirrors built in 1891, the last room of which contains a panorama of the battle against the Swedish troops in 1648.
Every Saturday in the summer months there is open-air theatre in the gardens.
Walk past the Observatory which is open for public stargazing from 19.00 to 22.00 each evening.
It was adapted from a 19C house in 1927–8.
There is an extensive rose garden, separate from the Observatory, laid out in the 1930s.
To the right, in the distance, rise the student flats of Charles University.
Following the path, continue down to the charming sunken alpinum of 1800 and arrive at a further part of the Hunger Wall.
There are two restaurants on the hill.
One called Nebozízek is for tourists, but fear not, if you arrive after 21.30 you will find a seat and locals eating.
Immediately beneath the restaurant is the funicular railway, built in 1891 and with trains running every 10 minutes, from 06.00 to midnight.
From here is a view of the new, box-like suburbs of N, S and N-W Prague.
THE MALÁ STRANA
The Malá Strana or Lesser Town spreads beneath the castle to the banks of the River Vltava.
The gardens of its palaces abutting the castle hill merge with those of the castle.
Always an area of wealth and style, this is one of the most pleasant areas in Prague in which to live.
There is a great sense of space and elegance amidst the beautiful gardens, churches and palaces.
In the fifties it was very run-down and it was possible to buy the glory of a house with a painted ceiling and good stucco if you were prepared to do without the luxury of heating and hot water.
The so-called Lesser Town was founded in 1257 by King Otakar II on the site of an ancient market and some scattered villages.
For the period, a remarkable sense of town planning is shown here with the main square, the Malostranské náměstí or Lesser Town Square in the centre and, running from it to the castle, the wide Nerudova Street, and Mostecká, leading to Charles Bridge and Letenská.
Under Charles IV, around 1360, the town was enlarged and surrounded by a new wall, known as the Hunger Wall (see p. 66).
In 1419 the town suffered greatly because of the Hussite Wars, with many of the churches being destroyed and their contents damaged or the churches merely being left incomplete.
In 1541 a fire consumed most of the town and much of the castle.
The conflagration began in the lower half of the square at the point where the houses are set back a little from the pavement.
The aftermath of the Battle of the White Mountain in 1620, saw a building boom in Prague and the surrounding country under the Habsburgs and their Catholic allies.
The buildings of  this period — palaces, churches and monasteries — were in the Baroque style akin to that found in Bavaria, Turin and Rome.
The Baroque had already made an appearance in Prague before 1620 and it was used by both protestants and Catholics.
But its lavish, dramatic style proved the perfect vehicle of the Counter-Reformation in the battle against the heresy of Protestantism and the power of the Estates.
This must surely be one of the most beautiful forms of propaganda.
Both Stalin and Hitler should have taken note of the aesthetics.
What was astonishing in Prague at this time was the exceptional quality of all the arts, not merely architecture and painting, but the work of the stuccoists, woodcarvers, furniture-makers and glassworkers.
That such high quality was possible was due in part to experienced craftsmen being imported from other Habsburg lands but even more important was the nucleus of craftsmen already based in the Italian quarter, from the period of Rudolf II.
The Italian quarter is to be found in the Malá Strana, its lovely pantiled roofs spreading under the castle walls.
The Malá Strana
The Italian quarter — the Lobkovic Palace — the Schönborn Palace — the Church of St Nicholas — the Town Hall — the Vrtba Gardens — the Church of Sta Maria della Vittoria — the Michna Palace — the Kinský Summer Palace
If you have taken the previous walk around the Hradčany leave the Strahov Monastery by Úvoz Street, the road originally connecting the Hradčany with the Malá Strana and marking the boundary between the two districts.
If you are starting from Lesser Town Square, follow Nerudova Street uphill until you reach its continuation at Úvoz.
Standing in Úvoz Street, to your right is a fine panorama of Prague and the Petřín Hill (see p. 66).
On either side of the street are attractive houses and among the more important is   the so-called Columna Cellata (24/160), a tiny, early Baroque house with, as house sign, a Marian column with its statue of the Virgin.
It was erected in 1706 by its owner the painter, Kristián Luna.
He was responsible for the pilgrimage church at Bílá Hora (see p. 186).
Number 48/171 has a charming, late Baroque façade.
Called At the Gold Star, it was erected around 1730 probably by Alliprandi.
The façade is not very satisfactory; perhaps the design is a little heavy.
Alongside, the Town Hall staircase rises to the Hradčany Town Hall.
The statues at the roadside were put up in 1714 by a nobleman who, wishing to curry favour with the Habsburgs, chose two favourite Habsburg saints — St Joseph, by Francesco Santini and St John Nepomuk, by M. J. Brokof.
Ahead of you the serpentine walk to the castle was constructed about 1640.
Before Úvoz Street was constructed in the 14C, there had been a rough, steep track or else visitors mounted by the Town Hall staircase.
Úvoz Street becomes Nerudova Street and on the right at 47/233 was the home of the writer and poet Jan Neruda.
This house has early Baroque gables.
Neruda's best known work is the Malá Strana Tales , in which he evokes the atmosphere of this district of his childhood.
Note the attractive fountain on your left, ‘The Toilet’, by Jan Štursa, 1908.
Úvoz Street is of medieval origin and was of importance when the kings of Bohemia processed from the Royal Court in the Old Town (see p. 131) to St Vitus' Cathedral for their coronation.
Note the flagpoles on the houses.
Many of the houses were given new façades in the Renaissance and then again in the late 17 and 18C.
On the right is Bretfeld Palace (33/240), built in 1765 by Wirch, the same architect who rococofied the Archbishop's Palace (see p. 56).
Note the fine iron balcony.
Here, in this house, Mozart and Casanova met in 1787.
Beyond this palace, turn to your right down into the Italian quarter by following the stairs of St John's Hill (Jánský vršek) to the bottom.
Behind the gates on the left was the main cemetery of the Italian quarter, now largely built over and the tombs removed.
Many of the court artists and architects, inhabitants of the Italian quarter, were buried here, including  such luminaries as Spranger and Heintz, both painters for Rudolf II, and the Baroque architect Santini.
Indeed, Spranger's tomb still rests in the cellars in an adjoining house (2/322).
Take the street straight ahead into Šporkova Street.
The Sporck Palace (12/321) formerly belonged to the Piccolomini family.
Jan Testa Piccolomini had the garden façade rebuilt by Santini de Bossi, probably in the 1660s, but the main front is late Baroque, c.1730.
The Emblem of the Holy Trinity (lo/ 320) belonged to the Guild of the Stonecutters and there used to be a statue of a stonecutter above the door.
As each separate town in Prague had its own town hall and guild system, such guild buildings proliferate.
There are good Rococo mouldings on four floors of this five-storey building.
Only the façade is worth looking at: like so many other houses, this one was turned into flats in the 19C.
The 18C owner, one Ondrej Kranner, carved the statue standing beside the pavement.
At 8/319 stands the enchanting former garden pavilion of the house.
Continue down Šporkova Street, into the heart of the old Italian quarter.
On the right (14/335), is the Italian Orphanage.
As you will see from the plaque on the wall, this was founded by the Italians as the Congregation of the Virgin in 1575.
Farther along on your left is the hospital (23/339) built in 1602 by Domenico de Bossi and within it is an early Baroque church, St Carlo Borromeo also by de Bossi.
The interior, now a lecture theatre, has stucco decoration from the mid-17C.
The complex of buildings belongs to the Italian Embassy.
Italian names appear sporadically in the royal accounts from the end of the 15C.
But it was only after the accession of the Habsburgs to the throne of Bohemia in 1526, that the trickle became a flood of immigration.
These Italians came mainly from the north of Italy, the area of the lakes and the valleys along the Swiss border.
They were, in the main, architects and stuccoists, and a flourishing colony was established by the middle of the 16C.
The Italians had a virtual monopoly in the building trade until the 1680s.
Opposite the hospital is the stunning façade of the German Embassy, once the Chinese Embassy and originally the Lobkovic Palace (19/347).
It was built in 1702–8 for František Karel Přehorovský, by Giovanni Battista Alliprandi, a pupil of Fischer von Erlach.
The façade was originally more interesting, with the side bays being one floor lower than the central block.
The side wings were raised to the height of the main block in 1769 by I. J. Palliardi, when the Lobkovic family owned the palace.
Tommaso Soldati was the stuccoist for the beautiful sala terrena — a sort of cross between a porte cochère and atmospheric garden room — and frescos were carried out by J. J. Stevens of Steinfels when, in 1717–24, the palace was in the hands of the Kolowrats of Liebstein.
The sala terrena is visible from the street.
The statues on the pediment and in the gardens are by Lorenzo Mattielli from Vienna.
The terraced gardens, haven of thousands of East German refugees in 1989, were planned in 1703 in the Italian style by J. J. Kapula.
In 1793, following the latest English fashion, a picturesque park was laid out.
Here, the Lobkovic founded one of the earliest botanical gardens in Prague.
You can still see vestiges in the upper terraces of the early Baroque garden.
These comprise a bear pit, hothouse and aviary.
Next to the palace is the famous Lobkovic vinárna or tavern, serving wines from its vineyards at Mělník, north Bohemia.
Leaving the Lobkovic Palace, walk on down the hill to the American Embassy (15/365) formerly the Schönborn Palace (15/365) whose original owners, the Colloredo, were important militarily during the Thirty Years' War.
It was built in 1643–56 by Carlo Lurago, although it was probably Giovanni Battista Alliprandi who enlarged the building in 1715–18.
In 1917 Franz Kafka lived here.
The sala terrena is decorated with giants from the Braun workshop and is visible from the road as part of the reception area of the embassy.
In the garden there is a fine staircase of 1715 just visible through the gate.
In front of the American Embassy is a house of 1704–5 (2/303), At the Figure of Jesus, possibly by Santini, with a wonderful rolling façade, but now alas in a poor state of  repair.
The historian František Palacký lived here.
He was one of the leaders of reform during the nationalist revival.
Turn up the small lane beside it, leaving the Santini house on your left.
In this dark medieval labyrinth is the restaurant Baráčnická Rychta, meeting place of the newly formed Society of the Friends of the Malá Strana.
Tunnel your way out into Nerudova Street again.
Opposite is the Church of Our Lady of Unceasing Succour at the Theatines, 1697–1717, possibly designed by J. B. Mathey, with its façade completed by Santini.
This was a convent owned by the Theatines, the first of the crusading Orders founded before the Jesuits in 1524.
The interior contains fine Baroque sculpture on the High Altar by M. V. Jäckel, and a painting by J. V. Callot.
The sculpture on the side altars is by J. 0.
Mayer, and there are paintings by M. Halwachs, F. X. Balko and others.
Next in Nerudova Street is the great high Baroque palace of the Thun-Hohensteins (20/214), again by Santini but with the collaboration of the great sculptor, M. B. Braun.
His is the magnificent portal with the two eagles — the crest of the Kolowrat family, the original owners of the palace — and the statues of Jupiter and Juno.
This palace is fairly typical of the building development in the Malá Strana.
The plots of land can first be dated to ownership in the 13C, hence the aggrandizing owners of the 17 and 18C had to build on whatever space was available, gradually buying up their next-door neighbours.
The other part of this palace, belonging originally to the Hradec family, faces on to Thunovská Street.
The palace came to the Thuns of Hohenstein in 1768 and it is now the Italian Embassy.
Farther down Nerudova Street, No. 18/213, the House at St John Nepomuk still sports fragments of the original sgraffiato dated 1566 and just visible now under the crumbling Rococo stucco.
Note that the emblems on the houses down this street are most attractive.
The house signs, used for identification before Josef II ordered conventional house numbering around 1784, often referred to the occupation of the inhabitants.
One  house belonged to a goldsmith, Bartolomej Schumann at 16/212; another, at 12/210, to three generations of violin-makers called Edlinger, whose founder family member was Tomáš who lived in 1662–1729.
At No. 5/256 is the Morzin Palace, again by Santini, with the happy collaboration of Brokof who sculpted the fine moors supporting the balcony in 1713–14.
The modelling of these moors — a reference to the family crest — repays study.
Above the two side doors are a beautifully modelled Day and Night.
The Morzin Palace is now the Romanian Embassy.
On the corner, before you enter the Malostranské náměstí, refresh yourself with a Pilsner beer at No. 2, the House of the Black Cat.
Beware, however.
After you have placed your first order, further half-litres come willy-nilly and are put in front of you, until you decline.
You pay your bill on the way out.
Moving into the hub of the Malá Strana, you go from a fascinating labyrinth into the world of town planners — those of the 13C who were extraordinarily farsighted.
The large Lichtenstein Palace (2/258) of 1791 opposite the Church of St Nicholas has seen many a change of political fortune.
In 1848 Prince Windischgrätz turned it into the headquarters of his General Staff; it then became a special school for the Communist Party and is now being restored as the Academy of Music.
Opposite is one of the greatest Baroque churches in Prague, the Church of St Nicholas, and the Jesuit College.
The church and monastery divide the Malostranské náměstí in two.
In front of St Nicholas' is the Column of the Holy Trinity of 1715 by J. 0.
Mayer and the architect Alliprandi.
The angels round the base are an addition of 1772.
The column was erected after a plague epidemic of 1713 and the angels after a famine of 1772.
It should be noted that there is a church of St Nicholas in each of the parishes in Prague as St Nicholas was the patron saint of the law, the poor, and business, all of which flourished.
The Jesuit College of the Malá Strana was founded in 1628, under the patronage of Albrecht Wallenstein.
Prior to this, on this site in the Middle Ages stood twenty burghers' houses, with the Romanesque Church of St Wenceslas at one end, and the Gothic Church of St Nicholas, which had heard the preaching of some of the great 14C reformers, at the other.
The Jesuits, in spite of starting their building from scratch, retained the medieval dedication to St Nicholas.
The Church of St Nicholas was built in two stages as the money came in.
In the first building campaign, Kryštof Dientzenhofer built the W façade and the first few bays of the nave in 1702–11.
His son Kilián Ignác continued the work from 1737 until he died in 1751.
The exterior was completed in 1755.
This building programme from W to E meant that the Gothic E end was retained until the last moment.
St Nicholas' was the first example in Prague of the late Italianate style of Baroque.
The broken pediments and the play of convex and concave mass recall something of Borromini in Rome and Guarini in Turin, both architects seminal for Bohemian Baroque.
The Kolowrat family gave money for the church as one of their family belonged to the Jesuit Order and it was here they chose to be buried.
The voice of the Jesuits is heard on the façade, with the Doctors of the Church at gallery level, and the Jesuit saints, St Ignatius and St Francis Xavier with SS Peter and Paul in between them, higher up.
All were carved by J. B. Kohl — Severa.
The whole glorious façade is topped by St Nicholas with the victorious Habsburg double-headed eagle beneath.
These grand buildings, both seminary and church, set in one of the most important squares in the city, could not have been a clearer statement from the victors of the Battle of the White Mountain.
As you enter the church, note the pure drama — the darkened nave leading you to a burst of light at the E end.
The sense of theatre is heightened by the glorious colour scheme of pale pinks, greens and creams mixed with gilded, gesticulating figures.
The pulpit is sheer fantasy.
Touch the ‘marble’ and discover that it is not what it seems but beautifully painted plaster — scagliola.
Starting on the right of the W door is the Chapel of St Anne.
Beneath the floor is the family vault of the Kolowrats.
The high Baroque altar with its twisted columns in varied marbles is by members of the Platzer family.
On the altar is a Flemish painting of moderate quality of the Virgin, Child and St Anne.
Note that the remainder of the decoration of this peanut-shaped chapel is in scagliola, and warm to the touch.
Joseph Redemayer and Joseph Hager carried out the frescos.
The first three bays leading round from the W door are by Kryštof Dientzenhofer and the remainder of the nave to the crossing is the work of his son, K. I. Dientzenhofer.
The fresco in the nave of the Celebration of the Life of St Nicholas was painted in 1761, by Jan Lukáš Kracker, a Hungarian.
It comes as no surprise to learn that he was trained in Vienna in the Maulbertsch workshop.
It is a tour de force of trompe-l'oeil and a strange mixture of secular and religious themes.
Behind you is a magnificent organ above which is a fresco dedicated to the Life of St Cecilia.
Around the organ pipes putti abound and those playing French horns make playful silhouettes.
In 1787 Mozart played on the organ here.
The altarpiece in the next chapel depicts the Marriage of St Catherine by Ignác Raab, himself a Jesuit.
Platzer again was responsible for the statuary and it was from the Platzer workshop too, in the mid-18C, that the Jesuit saints flanking the nave came.
Next is the chapel of St Francis Xavier, with the painting of the death of the saint in China by Frans Xavier Balko; St John Nepomuk painted by Ignác Raab and a Virgin and Child, possibly German of the 16C.
At the crossing under the dome the walls bulge into the side chapels; look at the saints on the piers of the crossing, including St Gregory and St Basil.
The painting on the altar is the Death of St Joseph by Kracker, with a St John the Baptist and a St John the Evangelist sculpted by Platzer.
The High Altar is topped by a copper St Nicholas surrounded by putti.
The St Ignatius and St Francis Xavier on either side are of wood.
Note the good altar rails.
The N transept is dominated by a Visitation by Kracker.
There is also a copy here of the Black Madonna of St Foy, brought from Belgium during the Thirty Years' War.
St Wenceslas and St Vitus stand up on the cornice with Adalbert, the first bishop of Prague, and St Procopius, the patron saint of the Slavs.
Above the Visitation is the statue of St Sigismund, the patron saint of the Luxemburg dynasty, and St Ludmila, grandmother of St Wenceslas who persuaded the king to become a Christian.
The painting in the dome celebrates the Holy Trinity, the spandrels beneath hold a painting of the Virtues.
The pulpit, one of the highlights of the interior, is by Richard and Petr Prachner of 1765.
Its swirling form makes the early stages of the building look positively staid.
At the top of the pulpit, putti hold back gilded curtains, while the remainder is of scagliola of different colours and textures.
The iconography concerns the life of John the Baptist.
In the upper section he is prepared for his beheading and there is a fine Salome; below, in the vase of the pulpit, the saint preaches and baptizes Christ in the River Jordan.
Faith, Hope and Charity sit precariously on the edge.
Walking westwards to the early chapels by Kryštof Dientzenhofer, the space is much less fluid.
Next comes St Michael's Chapel with a painting of the saint by Solimena and an Ignatius and a St Elijah by Raab.
Then the Chapel of St Barbara, the earliest part of the church.
Its shape is so different from the Chapel of St Anne opposite.
The fresco of the Last Judgement is by Josef Kramolín.
This chapel holds the best painting in the church, The Crucifixion by Karel Škréta of 1646.
The Jesuits commissioned a series of canvases of The Passion from Škréta, the remainder of which has now come to rest in the s gallery at the W end.
You can just see them from where you stand now; they are tantalizingly inaccessible to the public.
The church took 150 years to build, with the decoration completed last in 1775.
One can only feel for the Jesuits: when their Order was dissolved in 1777, they had only enjoyed the finished church for two years.
Leaving the Church of St Nicholas, on your left across the square, you can see a tunnel through a grand palace (12/259);, this was one of the four gates of the Malá Strana.
The others were situated on the Charles Bridge, at what is now the Italian Embassy and at the Wallenstein Palace.
The gate facing you is the one through which the troops from Passau invaded Prague in 1611 on the orders of Matthias.
The owners of the palace were the Hartig family and it was built about 1700 by Alliprandi.
You will note that it is a typical example of Viennese Baroque — so much more severe than Prague Baroque.
Turning your back on the Church of St Nicholas, turn right up Zámecká, the narrow cobbled lane beside the House of the Black Cat.
You are now facing a building (18/183) currently owned by the Red Cross.
This was rebuilt and served as the German Embassy during the Nazi occupation of Prague.
Masaryk, as a professor of Charles University, lived here before becoming president.
Ahead is the New Castle Staircase of 1674: it was planned to decorate this with statues to continue the via sacra from Charles Bridge (see p. 55).
The niches may be seen at the top of the staircase, but the project of 1722 was never realized.
Walk straight on to the Slavata Palace.
This is now part of the Italian Embassy and was designed by Orsi some time after 1678.
It was originally built for a branch of the Rosemberg family in the second half of the 16C.
The house at the bottom of the staircase (19/196) has the remains of some interesting sgraffiato decoration, dated 1577.
This was where the painter Spranger lived.
Returning to the Red Cross building, the house opposite (20/184) by F. M. Kaňka of 1720 belonged to the Hartig family.
On the other side of the street is a house (13/199) with Renaissance gables in poor repair from the end of the 16C.
Notice at 15/198 the 16C doorway.
Facing the Red Cross building to your right, is the vinárna or tavern called U Palcátu, named after a form of blunderbuss used by the Hussites.
Continue down Thunovská Street which inclines steeply to  the right.
Its narrowness and the buttress across the street above your head, give a true sense of the medieval Malá Strana.
On the left is the Thun Palace (14/180), now the British Embassy.
The British bought it from Baron Thun in 1920, lock, stock and barrel.
It was formerly the Leslie Palace, built by a Scottish mercenary who, in the Thirty Years' War, was implicated in the murder of Wallenstein, one of the most powerful men in Bohemia.
So powerful indeed that the emperor had him killed.
The palace was rebuilt c.1716–27 by Giovanni Antonio Lurago.
In about 1850 the neo-Gothic gate was built.
This has a distinctly Venetian air.
During his first visit to Prague in 1787, Mozart lived here with his wife.
Follow the street to the bottom and you turn into Sněmovní Street.
The large building in front of you (4/176) housed the parliament for the Republic of Czechoslovakia up until 1938.
Now it only houses the senate for the Czech State.
The Republic itself has two provincial parliaments, one in Prague for Bohemia and Moravia, and one in Bratislava for Slovakia.
There is a third, federal parliament.
The first Czech constitution was drawn up here in 1920.
All that remains of the 18C building once belonging to the Thun family are the portals by Santini.
After a fire in 1801 it was rebuilt by Palliardi.
In the house opposite, by Giovanni Antonio Lurago, lived the priest of the Church of St Nicholas, after 1777.
Notice the traces of an oriel window.
Next door to this (5/175) is the Lažanský, formerly the Wallenstein Palace, of 1740.
It was built by Kaňka and shows some of the eccentricity of his designs.
The next house (7/174) was owned by the Černín and later the Sterreggov family.
At the end of this street is a small square called Petikostelni which means five churches; notice the 19C name on the wall.
In the Middle Ages there were five churches around the square, but the only one still extant is St Nicholas.
The large house on the corner is the Bylandt-Rheidtovsky Palace (13/171) built in the last quarter of the 17C.
Nearby at 2/165 is a charming Renaissance house with typical Bohemian gables called the House of the Golden Swan.
With your back to this square, turn towards the Church of  St Nicholas.
There is an exciting sculptural doorway on your right, by Braun, which was the entrance to the Jesuit Gymnasium (1/17).
The building is by K. I. Dientzenhofer the Younger of 1726.
After 1777, when the Jesuits had been banned, this became the seat of the governor of Bohemia.
There are now plans for gymnasia to be reinstated as part of Czechoslovakia's educational reforms.
When you are back in the main square of the Malá Strana, imagine it encircled with medieval houses set above arcades.
After the fire in the Malá Strana in 1541, these were replaced by Renaissance buildings which in turn were replaced by the palaces you see today.
But the sheltering arcades stayed in place.
The back of the Jesuit College, at present part of Charles University, is a plain forbidding building by Orsi of 1670.
What a contrast to the earlier Carolinum, where beauty of proportion and decoration were of the essence.
The Jesuit College is  unmistakenly the barracks of God's army.
To the right is the house of the Smiřický family (6/18).
Its façade dates from the second half of the 18C and is by Josef Jägr, an Austrian from the Tyrol.
It was in this house that the conspirators met to plan the Defenestration of 1618.
No. 7/19 by Alliprandi belonged to the Sternberg family.
Note the family crest of a crown and an eight-pointed star, symbolizing their alleged descent from one of the three kings.
This was the home of Count Caspar Sternberg, friend of Goethe and one of the promoters of the National Museum.
It was here that the fledgeling collection of the Society of the Friends of the Arts was first housed between 1875 and 1884, a collection which became the core of the National Gallery (see p. 58).
There is a narrow inset in the façade of the building, marking where the fire which destroyed half of the Malá Strana and the castle started in 1541.
With your back to the Jesuit College, ahead of you is one of the most important buildings in the Malá Strana, the former Town Hall (35/21), rebuilt by Giovanni Maria Filippi, court architect to Rudolf II, in 1617–22.
The building once had gables, destroyed in the 19C.
It stands on a rusticated arcade, the windows with their mullions and transoms still have their broken triangular pediments and the bays are divided with strapwork of Mannerist design.
In 1575 in this Town Hall the text giving freedom of worship to both Protestants and Catholics, the so-called Czech Confession (see p. 9) was drawn up.
At the S end of the square is the Kaiserstejn Palace (37/23), built by Alliprandi about 1700 in Viennese style.
It has statues of the Four Seasons on the roof and some fine vases by Ottaviano Mosto.
This was the home of the celebrated opera singer Destinová who held her salon here.
It is her bust that can be seen on the façade today.
Throughout the Malá Strana notice the original black and white pavements, many now in need of repair.
Cross the road at the Makarská vinárna and turn right into Karmelitská Street.
Before leaving Malostranské náměstí, look up at the tower of the Church of St Nicholas.
This replaced the Gothic spire of the old St Nicholas' in the 18C.
This tower was never the property of the Jesuit Church as the town tenaciously held on to it for fire-watching.
Eventually the Jesuits were able to persuade the townspeople to rebuild the Gothic tower in Baroque style, but the Jesuits were forbidden to decorate it with Jesuit saints and they were forbidden to enter the tower from the church.
But the Jesuits broke the agreement; you can see the consoles on the first and second storeys which once held statues.
These were quickly removed by the townspeople and the door from the tower to the church was closed and made into a street door with a house number (556) and the emblem of the town.
Continue down Karmelitská Street.
At No. 25/373 is the entrance to the exquisite Vrtba Gardens.
Once a Renaissance palace, after 1709 it became the property of Count Vrtba who commissioned Kaňka to rebuild it for him.
This was done with the collaboration of the Braun workshop, and V. V. Reiner who painted the sala terrena in the garden.
Nothing but the best would do for the Count.
Walk through the gateway, surmounted by a statue of Atlas, and up to your right you can  catch a glimpse of the sala terrena which tops the four terraces of the spectacular garden.
The terracing was adapted from the existing vineyards, as is the case in all the palace gardens backing on to Prague Hill.
The statues here are of antique gods.
As a plaque points out, Mikoláš Aleš, the 19C Czech painter, lived in the garden house.
Continue down Karmelitská Street to the Church of Sta Maria della Vittoria on the right at the top of a double flight of steps.
The façade is severe: under the portico is a Madonna and Child in Majesty flanked on either side by obelisks.
The church was built for the German Lutherans in Prague between 1611 and 1613, after the Letter of Majesty (1609) ensured freedom of worship once more to all (see p. 9).
Giovanni Maria Filippi gave this early example of Roman Baroque to a Protestant Order.
The ground plan was taken from Il Gesù and the façade was to mirror Sta Trinità dei Monte, both in Rome.
After the Battle of the White Mountain in 1620, the Carmelites took over the church.
One Carmelite warrior had found, in southern Bohemia, a small icon of a Madonna and had taken it with him into the battle.
After the Catholic victory, the little Madonna was given the credit.
The Carmelites transformed the Protestant church and rebuilt its façade in 1640, to the pattern of Sta Maria della Vittoria, in Rome.
The cross at the base of the obelisks is the insignia of the Knights of Malta of whom the Carmelites' patron, Balthasar Huerta, was a member.
Through the gate to the right of the church you can see the position of the original façade, under the stub of the steeple.
Inside, the austere black and white of the early Baroque makes an immediate impact.
The nave is of the first quarter of the 17C and the altars are of the 1670s.
Through the attractive iron grille on the right is an altar c.1700, with a copy of the Madonna above the entrance on the façade.
The next altar on the right holds Petr Brandl's Annunciation to Joachim and Anna; notice the fine treatment of the still-life on the right of the canvas.
The next altar is dedicated to the Bambino Gesü who has a huge wardrobe of rich and lavish costumes.
This small statue was donated in 1628 by Maria M. de Lara.
The  altar itself was executed by F. M. Lauermann with statues by Petr Prachner of 1776.
Amazingly, this church was left untouched by the Swedish troops in 1648, a miracle ascribed to the Bambino Gesù.
Thereafter the Bambino became an object of pilgrimage and there are thanks offerings all around.
More impressive perhaps than the Bambino's wardrobe is the glorious cabinet he is in.
It was created in 1741 by Jan Pakeniho, one of the most important silversmiths working in Prague.
More of his work can be seen in the Loretto Monastery (see p. 64).
The rich carving of the High Altar is by Johann Ferdinand Schorr and although it is difficult to see without binoculars, above the High Altar is a painting depicting the victory of the Battle of the White Mountain, showing the Carmelites holding aloft the small icon of the Madonna.
High above this is a copy of the original, which ended up in Sta Maria della Vittoria in Rome but was destroyed by fire in the 19C.
The paintings by Petr Brandl in the church are worth looking at.
They include his St Simon Stock on the third altar on the left, and other works by him include SS Joseph, Joachim and Anna.
The next two altars to the N and the pulpit were created by Matthew Zimprecht around 1669.
Note the good carved pews and fine confessionals of 1739 by J. A. Geiger.
After passing the pulpit notice a Madonna of the 16C; she is surrounded by a high-quality silver and gilt frame of the Rococo period.
On leaving the church, look at the carved Crucifixion of 1700.
Cross the road by the traffic lights and the Rohan Palace faces you (98/386).
It is an attractive neo-Classical building of 1839.
Inside is a good ballroom by Louis Montoyer.
The palace is now part of the Ministry of Education and is not open to the public.
Ahead is the Church of St Mary Magdalene of the Domenican nuns.
In the 13C a cloister was founded then, in the 17C, Caratti designed the first octagonal cupola in Prague for the Order.
This became the church of the Michna family whose palace was close by.
Incidentally, both the Dientzenhofers were originally buried in this church.
Under Josef II, in the 1780s, the church was given to the army and the bodies  were removed.
The Dientzenhofers were reinterred in the Malostranský Old Cemetery at Košiře in Prague 5 (see p. 179).
The church is now part of the State Archives.
Continuing along Karmelitská Street, to your left is the late Renaissance Michna Palace (450/40), now the Museum of Sport, with some good plasterwork in the interior.
Ahead is the funicular railway to the Petřín Hill (see p. 66).
Here, if you have time, is the moment to make a detour to the Kinský Summer Palace and Gardens, now the Museum of Costume.
Continue down Újezd Street, past the first Soviet tank to enter Prague in 1945.
Turn into Holečkova and ahead, in the gardens, now part of Petřín Hill, is a small, severely Classical villa begun in 1825 by Koch.
The hothouses on the left now house people not plants.
These gardens were laid out by J. Braul and Josef Thomayer, the most important gardeners in 19C Czechoslovakia.
Beyond the wall behind the house is a huge neo-Baroque school for the deaf.
There are two curiosities in the grounds, both of which were left behind after an important ethnographical exhibition held in 1895.
One is found at the side of the house — a tiny timber campanile.
The other, farther up the hill past the waterfall and surrounded by a protective fence, is a beautiful timber church covered in shingles and with turned balustrading and three onion domes.
It dates to about 1780 and looks as if it has landed by magic carpet.
Instead, it represents a small forgotten corner of Czech territory.
It is from Zakarpatská Ukrajina, the Czech Ukraine or sub-Carpathian Ruthenia, first annexed by Hungary and later taken by the Soviet Union and never given back at the end of the war in 1945.
If you are wearing sensible shoes, it is possible to join the path up through the woods on Petřín Hill, past some of the 16 and 18C walling now made into lookout towers, with lovely views over the city.
Continue to Nebozízek restaurant and the funicular station.
Along the Banks of the Vltava
Maltézské Square — the Nostic Palace — Kampa Island — Na Kampě — the Museum of Musical Instruments — the Church of Our Lady under the Chain — the Church of St Joseph — the Church of St Thomas — the Wallenstein Palace — Vojanovy Sady — Charles Bridge
If you are short of time, continue along Harantova into Maltézské náměstí, or Maltese Square.
In the 17C this area was out of the jurisdiction of the town and was solely in the hands of the Knights of Malta, an honour which dates from the 12C.
The Nostic Palace (1/471), now the Dutch Embassy, must have one of the richest façades in Prague.
It was begun between 1658 and 1660 by Francesco Caratti for the Nostic family.
The palace contained one of Bohemia's finest picture collections and here was not only a picture gallery, but also a collection of graphics, a most important library, and a collection of sculpture put together by Count Jan Hertvík Nostic in the 17C.
In common with some of the other great families of Prague, Nostic bought from the Vienna branch of the Antwerp dealer, Guillermo Forchondt.
The collection also increased when he inherited 90 paintings from Count František Antonín Berka of Dubá.
He mainly collected Italian and Flemish paintings of the 16 and 17C and it appears that some of the paintings were bought from the Kunstkammer of Emperor Rudolf II.
The library can still be seen despite the rebuilding of c.1735.
The interiors were by Ambrozzi, the statues on top of the cornice balustrade are by Brokof the Younger, and 1765 is the date of the main portal and the first floor by A. Haffenecker.
The family were patrons too of the historian Pelcel and Josef Dobrovský, a pioneer in the study of Bohemian history and language and the author of the first dictionary of Czech.
His bust may be seen in the gardens of Kampa Island.
Film buffs may like to know that Forman's Amadeus was filmed here in the Nostic Palace.
From the Nostic Palace continue round the back of the  Buquoy Palace, now the French Embassy, and into the narrow Nostic Street where, at 2/465, Kilián Ignác Dientzenhofer was born.
There are also two attractive houses designed by him at 5/466 and 7/467.
Return to the site of the former Nostic Garden with the Riding School on your right and one of the many 14C mills originally powered by the artificial canal, the Čertovka or Devil's Stream.
Crossing the bridge, look back at the romantic view of the palaces backing on to the canal.
The public park on Kampa Island consisted, until 1940, of private gardens belonging to these palaces.
Surprisingly, it was the Nazis who made a gift of this public park to Prague.
Look out from the embankment along the River Vltava to Charles Bridge and across to the far bank of the Staré Město with its neo-Renaissance water tower, now the Smetana Museum.
Farther right is a house with a tower where Oskar Kokoschka lived and painted.
Walk around Kampa Island to the Sovovy mill, a fine neo-Gothic building destroyed by fire and left a ruin.
There are now plans for a hotel here.
Across the stretch of water are the three other islands, the Střelecký, where archers trained in their craft; the Dětský or Jews' Island, now given over to a children's playground; and the Slovanský which used to have a fine dance hall.
Walk through the early Baroque gate returning to the Čertovka, viewing the back of the Michna Palace.
This was built before 1650 and contains good stucco in the interior by Domenico Galli which seems rather wasted as the palace is now a Museum of Sports.
The palace was never finished and eventually became the property of the powerful Schwarzenberg family who created a beautiful formal garden on the site.
At the end of the 18C it became an arsenal.
In 1922 it was rebuilt and adapted for Sokol.
This was an international body one of whose founders, the Czech art historian Miroslav Tyrš, believed in the classical ideal of the human body being in harmony with the universe.
Sokol was seen by the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and later by the Nazis, as a device to promote national education.
Such was its power that both the Empire and then the Nazis dissolved it.
There follows a white villa which was the Jesuits' summer house.
This area of the canal was used as Prague's first public swimming pool as the water was gin-clear up until 1950.
Notice the bust of Dobrovský standing in front of the charming garden house which the Nostics gave him in the last years of his life.
Round the corner, back in the street, you will see in the garden wall of 7/501, a bust of Zdeněk Wirth, founder of the movement for the preservation of historical monuments in Czechoslovakia.
At different times Jan Werich the actor and Vladimír Holan the poet also lived in the house.
At 4/506 stands the imposing Lichtenstein Palace.
It is so different now from when it was built in 1690 as a charming summer palazzo of only two floors.
The neo-Renaissance height and grandeur were added by a mill owner, Odkolek.
It was the same man who built Sovovy mill in neo-Gothic style.
The Gestapo took over the Lichtenstein Palace during the war and it is now being refurbished for the federal government.
Return via a beautiful oblong square, Na Kampě, full of late 17 and early 18C houses.
This was formerly the ceramic market and there are still a few potters' stalls at the far end near Charles Bridge.
On the right-hand side is No. 512/11 where the composer Martinů lived.
Just before the neo-Gothic staircase to Charles Bridge, on your left is a palace (1/498) designed by Bartolomeo Scotti in 1732 and originally built in 1604 by the pharmacist Jan Jiří Dyrynk of Rottenberg, the mayor of Malá Strana.
Keeping the palace on your right continue round the square and turn right into the narrow Hroznová Street.
Ahead of you is the small house (l/500) from 1761 by Matthias Hummel, adapted in 1896 for Pavel Švanda ze Semčic, the theatre director.
Just across the bridge on the right is the site of the originally Gothic Velkopřevorský mill.
This part of the canal is being restored and the mill-wheel will be replaced.
Gradually this whole area of Prague's Venice is being restored to its former elegance.
Ahead, leading off Hroznová Street and flanked by plane trees, is the charming Velkopřevorské Square.
At No. 1/490 is  the Renaissance Mettychů z Čečova Palace behind its Mannerist gate.
The composer J. B. Foerster was born here in 1859.
On the other side of the street, behind the John Lennon Wall, is the Maltese Garden where, in summer, concerts and plays take place.
The John Lennon Wall was an important scene of student protest in the months running up to the ‘Velvet Revolution’.
The police had a continuous battle to keep the wall clear of anti-Communist posters and graffiti.
The French Embassy is housed in the Buquoy Palace (2/486).
Founded on the site of three houses in 1719, it was totally rebuilt by J. G. Aichbauer (half-brother of K. I. Dientzenhofer).
The interiors were redesigned in the neo-Baroque style in 1896 by the versatile J. Schulz.
On the other side of the road at No. 4/485, behind the Braun workshop portals, is the Grand Prior's Palace of 1725–9 by Bartolomeo Scotti.
Within the emblem of the Knights of Malta are two vine pruners added by the Diettrichstein family who were owners of extensive vineyards.
This lovely interior houses the important Museum of Musical Instruments.
It used to display a fine series of Flemish tapestries but these were ‘gifted’ to von Ribbentrop, Hitler's foreign affairs advisor, never to be seen again.
As you walk round the corner to the museum entrance, notice the fine gateway to the left where Adrian Vredeman de Vries lived.
Next to the museum is the Maltese Church, known as Our Lady Under the Chain.
It is now a shadow of its former self.
The church was founded to guard the Romanesque bridge across the Vltava, chains being placed across the route.
The Romanesque origins are clearly visible in the W towers, the remaining wall of the nave and in the chancel.
What parts of the church that were finished were damaged by the Hussites.
The Renaissance W door sits strangely with the Gothic.
The nave has gone and the tiny church in the former choir was adapted by Carlo Lurago in 1640–50.
On the main altar is a Škréta painting of Our Lady with the old chains of the bridge hanging above Her head.
In front of the church we return to Maltézské náměstí.
A statue of St John the Baptist, patron saint of the Knights of  Malta, stands in the centre.
He once stood proudly in the centre of a fountain of 1715 by F. M. Brokof.
Opposite, the Rococo Turba Palace (6/477), now the Japanese Embassy, was designed by the Austrian Josef Jägr.
So pleased was he with the results, that he built his own house — the so-called Muscon — next door (475/5) around 1765.
The yellow façade at 8/480 was the main post office in Prague.
This lucrative sinecure was owned from 1554 to 1723 by the Thurn-Taxis family.
There were many hotels in the area in the past.
Leading off the corner of the square, in Prokopská Street is a house (3/625) whose strange apsidal shape reveals its origins as a church.
In the other corner of the square is the famous vin´rna U Malířů (At the Painter's) which belonged to a painter in the 16C, hence its name.
It serves s Moravian wines and is closed on Sundays.
Its neo-Renaissance interiors date from 1937.
Walk back through the square and past the Church of Our Lady Under the Chain to Míšeňská Street.
In the corner is the Sternigov Palace (9/289), rebuilt around 1720, with some good interiors of 1740 decorated with frescos by P. Molitor.
At the House of the Golden Unicorn (11/285) is the hotel where Mozart stayed in 1789, followed by Beethoven in 1796.
No. 4/287 was the site of the Convent of the Knights of Malta, built in 1728–31 by Thomas Haffenecker and containing good stucco by Carl Antoni.
It now houses the Institute of Oriental Studies.
No. 6/286 with a classical façade of 1840, was the site of V lázni, one of the most famous of the Prague hotels.
Its guest list included Peter the Great, Suvorov, Chateaubriand and Bismarck.
Now turn left into Mostecká Street.
On the left, the house at No. 3/55 was given to Duke Rudolf I of Saxony by the Emperor Charles IV, and it stayed in his possession until 1409.
There are remains of the medieval building on the first floor, but its present appearance as a Renaissance house is due to late 16C work, probably by Campion de Bossi.
Nearby on the same side of the street is a building with a yellow façade and a fine Rococo balustrade (15/277) which belonged to the Kaunic family.
It is now the Yugoslav Embassy.
Jan Adam Kaunic was  an adviser to Maria Theresa.
The house was built in 1773–5 by Anthony Schmidt and its sculpture is by I. F. Platzer.
Turn right into Josefská Street.
At the end of this street rises the dramatic s façade of the Church of St Thomas.
In narrow spaces like these it is easy to see why Prague Baroque had to be more dramatic with a greater sense of movement, light and shade than its Viennese equivalent.
Now walk through the Post Office on your right and you will come to the cloisters of the Carmelite nuns, beyond which you can see the top of the pediment of the Church of St Joseph.
Return to the street and farther along you come to the W façade of St Joseph's.
The monastery was founded in 1665.
In 1686 Mathey began building unusually far back from the road.
The reason is not hard to find.
On the left is the Lobkovic Palace whose courtyard, if the nave originally planned had been built, would have been deprived of light.
Lobkovic wrote to his emperor protesting, and had the plan of the church changed.
Leopold II, obviously feeling guilty about the inconvenience to the church, gave both money and his own architect, Abraham Parigi to design the interior.
This Flemish Jesuit façade is unique in Prague: with its banded rusticated columns and swags of fruit, it would be more at home in Antwerp.
The famous M. V. Jäckel created the statues of St Joseph accompanied by St Theresa and St John of the Cross in 1691.
The interior is centrally planned and organized on the lines of the Pantheon in Rome.
Rich black and gold altars in the high Baroque tradition abound.
The High Altar and those flanking it date from the 1690s and are decorated in polychrome with good quality sculpted figures, again by Jäckel.
Brandl painted the Holy Family on the main altar and the picture of St Theresa.
The gilding must look particularly fine by candlelight.
Now continue to the remarkable Gothic and Baroque Church of St Thomas, both the s and w façades of which were designed by K. I. Dientzenhofer after 1723 with statues of SS Augustine and Thomas by J. B. Kohl-Severa of 1684.
The church was founded by Wenceslas II in 1285 and finished around 1379 for the Augustinians.
From this time date the  ground plan, the bell tower and the original cloistral buildings.
It was rebuilt during the Renaissance and the main portal dates from 1617.
During the reign of Rudolf II, St Thomas became the court church.
In the 18C many of the greatest craftsmen and artists in Prague worked here; it was in fact, the artists' church and many of them donated paintings and were buried here.
Inside, the nave is full of fine frescos of 1730 by V. V. Reiner of St Thomas Aquinas and St Augustus.
The mass of altars both against the walls and on the piers are of high quality.
In the first chapel on the right is a St Thomas of 1671 by Karel Škréta, with white painted figures on either side and good scagliola.
There are some beautifully carved picture frames to the left.
Indeed, throughout this church the woodwork is marvellous, especially the confessionals, pews and pavement.
Adjacent to the first pier is a Crucifixion by Zimprecht.
Beneath this lies the most splendid embalmed St Justin in his contemporary costume with fine wire work and embroidery.
His opposite number, St Boniface, is equally finely bedecked, but is given the dignity of a plaster mask over his skull.
On the right of the nave is a portrait of a donor with the Madonna and Child of 1619.
On the altar opposite the pulpit is a silver ciborium of 1768 by Jacob Ebner.
Walking towards the High Altar there is a fine Assumption of the Virgin by Karel Škréta and to the right is a St Roch by F. X. Balko from 1767.
Note the fine grilles at gallery level on either side of the chancel which enclose on the right, the private chapel of the Lobkovic family and on the left, that of the Wallensteins.
But the glory of the church is found in the High Altar.
For this, Abbot J. Svitavský commissioned Rubens in 1673 in Antwerp to paint the Death of St Thomas and St Augustus.
The original is now in the National Gallery.
The High Altar itself was carved by K. Kovář, who was also responsible for the pulpit in 1731.
The figures are the work of Quitainer.
Note Brokof's six statues of Bohemian saints on the altar.
These were originally in silver but the silver has now gone.
There is also a beautiful altar rail decorated with ears of corn, grapes, etc. — all references to the Sacrament.
Opposite the St Roch painting is an altar dedicated to St Sebastian by Spranger and another dedicated to the Holy Trinity by Karel Škréta of 1644.
Look back now to the magnificent organ.
To the left of the High Altar is the entrance to the sacristy, through an attractive 16C grille and past delicate frescos of the 14C.
The sacristy, with its noteworthy keystone, has been ascribed to the workshop of Peter Parler.
Here, against the walls, are fine examples of cabinet work of the 1670s.
The cabinets contain an important collection of vestments, but if you wish to study them, it would be wise to write in advance of your visit.
Leave the church and turn right into the simple 17C cloister.
It is now a retirement home.
Note the 17C tombs against the wall.
To the E is the door to St Barbara's Chapel of 1597, originally the chapter house.
There is a painting of SS Catherine and Barbara by J. Heintz (1600) on the altar.
In Tomášská Street continue right past No. 4/26, the House of the Golden Deer of St Hubert of 1726.
The house was designed by K. I. Dientzenhofer and the vision of St Hubert above the main entrance was created by F. M. Brokof.
The original owner of the house was a professor at the University.
There is some fine modelling on the façade although the drainpipes now spoil much of the effect.
Tomášská is a most picturesque street lined with houses of Renaissance origin with Baroque façades.
At its end, the street opens out into Valdštejnské námeští (Wallenstein Square) with the great Valdštejn (Wallenstein) Palace on the right.
Here is the first example in Bohemia of an early Baroque palace.
It is no wonder that the emperor thought Albrecht Wallenstein a threat.
The architect was Andrea Spezza; the two men who carried on the work after his death, Vicenzo Boccaccio and Nicolo Sebregondi, followed his designs.
The main façade was built from 1621 and is a strange concoction of northern Mannerism and Italian Baroque.
Around the three main doors (only that on the left is real) are designs from the pattern book of Vredeman de Vries by Caspar Bendl.
The palace is famous for three things: the great painted hall taking up two storeys, on the left of the façade, the important and beautiful garden, and its builder, Albrecht Wallenstein, who fascinated the German dramatist Schiller.
He was a Protestant mercenary from Moravia who foresaw Habsburg victory and joined up on the side of the emperor.
He was made imperial generalissimo in 1625.
He was a remarkable soldier and for his pains was given a domain at Jičín (where he re-planned the town), the dukedom of Friedland and the duchy of Mecklenburg.
That was not all: he was quartermaster for the army and when Ferdinand II could no longer pay his bills, Wallenstein was given leave to create his own mint, a privilege normally unique to the emperor.
The wealth created during his five years of printing money permitted him to buy and then demolish, 27 houses and three gardens to make a site for his palace.
His power eventually became a threat, so the emperor had him taken prisoner and murdered in 1634 at Cheb (Eger) by two of his own officers, the Scot Leslie and the Italian Piccolomini, both of whom were rewarded with palaces of their own (see pp. 81 and 152).
However, the palace remained in the hands of the family until 1945.
Even if you do not have time to go in, at least note the quality of the window grilles.
The palace is now the Ministry of Culture and it is possible to visit the gardens and Great Hall between 1 May and 30 September.
Inside there are five courtyards, one of which contained the family apartments and was originally connected to the garden and the great sala terrena by a door in the wall facing you.
Above the family apartments was Wallenstein's observatory.
On the top floor ahead of you, you may be able to see some painted ceilings of astrological subjects.
The courtyard to the right was for servants and that ahead for horses.
The household included 700 servants and 1,000 horses.
The main hall is stuccoed by A. Spezza to a design of 1630 by B. Bianco, and shows Albrecht Wallenstein as the god Mars.
The marble wall facings here are of 1853.
To the E is the Hall of Knights with an equestrian portrait of Wallenstein of  1631 by F. Leuxe.
The ceiling paintings here are of the 19C.
The chapel is splendid with an early Baroque altar carved by A. Heidelberger.
The altar bears a painting by J. Schlemüller depicting the murder of St Wenceslas by his brother.
Wallenstein's patronage of the arts extended to gardens, and his is one of the most important Baroque gardens in Prague.
It was restored in 1950 so its formal vistas can again be enjoyed.
The very fact that Adrian Vredeman de Vries's series of bronzes were taken from the garden by the Swedes in 1648 to decorate Drottningholm is some measure of Wallenstein's patronage.
But it was not only the work of Vredeman de Vries that made this garden so remarkable.
The great classical arcades of the sala terrena which date from 1624–7 were designed by Andrea Spezza with Giovanni Pieroni overseeing the work.
The sala terrena is decorated with stucco and frescos of the Trojan Wars by Bianco (1630), continuing the warrior theme already found in the decoration of the palace.
A bronze fountain of 1630 now stands in front of the sala terrena and on it is a copy of a Venus by B. Würzelbauer, cast in 1599.
The original was returned from Sweden and now rests in the Castle Museum.
Even more spectacular is the grotto decorated on a grand scale with tufa stalactites by N. Sebregondi and G. Pieroni.
The interior and garden should be seen as one great theatrical whole.
At the bottom of the garden is the huge Riding School, now an exhibition space for the National Gallery, and entered from Klárov Street.
Opposite in Valdštejnské náměstí is the Ausperg Palace (16/1) of 1670, perhaps rebuilt by Caratti.
There follows the Ledebour Palace (3/162) by Palliardi in 1787.
Behind these palaces rise a series of fine gardens up to the castle itself.
Among the finer are those of the Palffy Palace (14/158), designed in 1723 when the palace became the property of the von Fürstenburgs.
Karl Egon von Fürstenburg, who died in 1757, was a president of the first Academy of Sciences.
The Palffys owned the building in the 19C.
The Ledebour garden has a fine sala terrena by Alliprandi of 1710, with a fresco by V. V. Reiner, now alas covered with sgraffiato about the Red  Army.
Sadly too, in the 1950s, restorers used disastrous materials for restoration — concrete and iron — and the gardens are now closed for the foreseeable future.
The Little Černín Palace (12/155), originally by J. J. Wirch but rebuilt in 1952, has a lovely garden beyond it.
In front is the Kolowrat Palace (10/154) of the 1780s, by Palliardi.
It is now the Ministry of Culture but during the Munich crisis was the seat of Beneš and the government of Prague.
Some of the houses in this neighbourhood belonged to industrial barons, and even a few of the aristocrats played a leading part as entrepreneurs.
The Kinskýs manufactured glass for instance, and one of the Wallensteins was a pioneer in textiles.
Until the Communists took power, Czechoslovakia was one of the most advanced industrial nations in Europe, supplying up to 70 per cent of the needs of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, all from an industrial base started in the 1840s and 1850s.
Note by the way the fruits of all this in the Gothic Revival grille surrounding the early Baroque palace (8/153) and gardens on your left, bought by the industrialist, Karl Egon von Fürstenburg.
It is now the Polish Embassy.
The Embassy of India (8/153) of 1917 is set behind this, and the Belgian Embassy in Valdštejnská Street offers a fine example of Rococo Revival.
Valdštejnská continues round to the National Gallery exhibition gallery in the Valdštejn Riding School.
There are statues from the school of Braun outside.
The garden next door to the metro station is of the early 1970s by Otokar Kuča.
From the junction of Letenská Street and the Mánes Bridge along the U lužického semináře, keeping the river on your left, to Vojanovy Sady, formerly the gardens of a bishop's palace destroyed by the Hussites.
Go through the entrance in its high wall and up a narrow internal staircase to a viewing platform.
Here you will be met with an expanse of orchard and lawn stretching to the rear of the Church of St Joseph (see p. 92).
In a niche in the wall is a statue of St John Nepomuk by I. F. Platzer.
The tiny chapel in the centre of the gardens is by K. I. Dientzenhofer.
But the most intriguing thing is the Beata Electa Chapel which doubles as a mausoleum and grotto.
It is  centrally planned and decorated with frescos and stalactites and, I fear, graffiti.
Along from the garden entrance is a seminary (13/90) by Dientzenhofer the Younger.
Carry on to Mišeňská Street and notice the sign on the wall in Russian, indicating the route their tanks took in 1945.
This enchanting street of small houses brings you out at Charles Bridge by the Hotel of the Three Ostriches (1/76), one of the most famous hotels in Prague.
The fresco on the exterior illustrates the name of the hotel, but it derived its name from the fact that the original owner made trimmings for hats from ostrich feathers.
Sadly, the hotel has become a base for large groups of tourists.
All this area is beginning to show the fruits of assiduous restoration and gradually the whole Čertovka waterway and Kampa Island will be restored.
Ahead note another of the magnificent Prague gaslamps of the 1860s.
Behind that, sitting rather severe, are the offices of the Minister of Finance (7/63), built in the thirties by F. Roith, a pupil of Otto Wagner.
Now look up at the towers guarding the entrance to Charles Bridge.
The smaller of the two is Romanesque and was part of the original bridge of the 1170s.
This was largely restored in the 16C.
The other tower is 15C and apes that at the other end of Charles Bridge.
THE STARE/1 MĚSTO AND JOSEFOV
Because of the wealth of monuments in the Old Town (Staré Město), this walk is divided between the area around the Charles Bridge (Karlův Most) and that close to the Jewish Town (Josefov).
The one naturally dovetails into the other, but the walk starts at the Malá Strana end of Charles Bridge, the beginning of the Staré Město.
Charles Bridge from the Malá Strana
Charles Bridge — the Old Town Gate — the Church of St Francis — the Church of St Salvator — the Church of St Clement — the Clementinum — the Clam-Gallas Palace — the Palace of George Poděbrady — the Church of St Giles — Malé Náměstí (Little Square)— Staroměstské náměstí (Old Town Square)— the Týn Church — the Church of St Nicholas
Charles Bridge is one of the most important and romantic sights in Prague.
Apart from two fords across the Vltava River, Charles Bridge was, until the 19C, the only link between the castle (Hradčany) and the Lesser Town (Malá Strana) on one side, and the commercial area of the ghetto (Josefov) and the Old and New Towns (Staré and Nové Město) on the other.
An earlier bridge on this site, the Judith Bridge, had been built in 1170 by Vladislav II but was destroyed by flood in 1342.
The Praha Bridge, later called Charles Bridge, was begun in 1357 or, to be more exact, on 9 July 1357 at 05.31 a.m.
Not only was this St Vitus' Day, but the ascent of Leo was in the appropriate conjunction with the sun and Saturn, and the date  and time of 1357.9.7.5.31 was deemed numerically prophetic.
The astrologers have been proved right: the bridge was only closed to traffic in 1950.
The only visible damage over the years has been to its statuary.
The present appearance of the bridge owes much to the Counter-Reformation, its famous gallery of sculpture transforming it from an ordinary thoroughfare into a via sacra (see p. 55).
Before the 17C there were two statues on the bridge, one of the Crucifixion, which Elizabeth of Bohemia (the Winter Queen) foolishly insisted should be torn down as she said it looked like a naked bather, and the other of the moderate Hussite king, George Poděbrady.
The Emperor Leopold stayed in Prague in 1680–1 during a plague epidemic in Vienna.
It was probably his wish to turn Charles Bridge into something similar to the Ponte St Angelo in Rome which started its transformation.
The first statue to be put on the bridge was that of St John Nepomuk, by Jan Brokof the Elder in 1683.
It stands alongside the spot (now marked by a bronze cross) where Nepomuk was thrown into the river on the emperor's orders (see p. 215).
His statue was followed in all by 31 more dating from the 17 to the 19C, most of which were paid for by aristocrats, the University and religious orders throughout Bohemia.
In 1848 the bridge was damaged by the artillery of Prince Windischgrätz and many of the original statues were put into the Lapidarium (see p. 193) and were replaced by new statues by the Max brothers.
At the beginning of the 20C the sides were raised and in 1950 the bridge was closed to road traffic.
Walk from the Malá Strana end of the bridge past the first six pairs of statues listed below, then look down over the edge to your right over Kampa Island.
You can see from here the statue of Roland of Bruncvík, a 19C copy by L. Šimek of an earlier statue.
Roland is the emblem of the Old Town: he does appear to be trespassing, but the Old Town originally paid for the upkeep of the bridge, so they are here staking out their territory.
According to tradition, if Prague is threatened, Roland will go and fetch St Wenceslas who will march with his   army and save the town.
Beyond Roland are the earliest of the Malá Strana watermills, dating back to the Middle Ages.
Still on the right and at eye level on Kampa Island are the eaves of the House of the Virgin Mary, where a painting of the Virgin which was said to have come floating downstream has been used as a house sign and a cult object.
On one occasion, the owner of the house got both hands caught in a mangle.
He prayed for help to the Virgin and was released unscathed.
Note the rollers of the mangle carved on either side of the window frame.
Walking from the Malá Strana, the statues on Charles Bridge are as follows:
At the end of Charles Bridge you come to the beautiful gateway into the Old Town built between 1370 and 1410 by the workshops of Peter Parler.
The W façade was destroyed by the Swedes in the fighting in 1648.
Walk through and look up at the Parler net vaulting with the crown of Bohemia on the boss.
The E façade, facing the Old Town, is beautifully decorated with symbols of the Luxemburg monarchy and its links with Bohemia, its patron saints and the wealth of the Holy Roman Empire.
The statues (the originals are in St George's) are of Charles IV and his son, Wenceslas IV with St Vitus.
Above them are SS Adalbert and Sigismund.
Among the shields are those of Bohemia, Moravia, Silesia and Upper and Lower Lusatia, the states that went to make up the lands of Bohemia.
Dotted all over you can see the symbol of Wenceslas IV — a kingfisher and a towel.
There was an attempt on his life while he was bathing, but the would-be assassin was foiled by the shrill, warning cry of a kingfisher and the quick action of the bath girl, Zuzana.
To the right of the gateway stands the monument to Charles IV put up in 1848 to mark the quincentenary of Charles's founding of the Carolinum (see p. 4).
It was cast by E.  Hahnel of Dresden and depicts, under the portrait of Charles IV, the four faculties of the University.
The small garden in which this monument stands and indeed, this entire embankment was laid out in 1848–9.
At the same time the railway came to Prague and there were plans to make the river navigable.
Farther to the right is the Church of the Order of the Knights of the Cross of the Red Star, 1679–89, by J. B. Mathey, dedicated to St Francis.
This was built, as was so common in Prague, on the site of a Gothic church.
Some may find the external colours of the dome surprising, but apparently these reds, blues and creams are faithful to the colours that were there at the end of the 17C.
The angels with the symbols of the Passion on the cornice are by M. V. Jäckel but there are strange symbols in the metopes, presumably relevant to the Order.
On the façade is a statue of St Francis, the patron saint of the Knights of the Cross by Quitainer, with Bohemian saints and St Mary and St John Nepomuk by R. Prachner (1758).
On the corner of the street is a statue of St Wenceslas by J. J. Bendl of c.1678.
The interior of the church is centrally planned and rich with ceiling frescos of the Four Evangelists and the Glory of the Cross by V. V. Reiner.
Quitainer carved some of the statues on the walls but some, more classical-looking, are by the two Süssner brothers from Bavaria.
The High Altar was carved by M. V. Jäckel and J. K. Liška painted the fine Stigmata of St Francis here, and also the Finding of the True Cross on the altar to the N. The Assumption of the Virgin on the right-hand altar is by Willmann, and it is his Expulsion from the Temple over the W door.
The magnificent picture frames over the W door are of 1701 and are from the Jäckel workshop.
Quitainer carved the pulpit and the interior was finished by 1720.
The choir of the church was so famous in the 17 and 18C that its music attracted many great composers.
Glück played the organ here, between 1732 and 1736 and in 1860, so did Dvořák.
Return to the gateway by Charles Bridge.
This was the site  chosen by the Jesuits for their complex of College and churches when they arrived in Prague in 1556.
They took over the Gothic Domenican Church of St Salvator and that of St Clement around the corner, and gradually accumulated a huge parcel of land here.
In fact, 32 houses, 3 churches and 2 gardens were taken over for the building of the Clementinum or Jesuit College.
Between the last years of the 16C and about 1653, they rebuilt the Church of St Salvator making it the first church in Prague of the Counter-Reformation.
Part of the staggered building campaign may be seen in the Mannerist w door set into the very Baroque triumphal arch which comprises the remainder of the W front.
You will note that the triumphal arch meets the traveller straight off the Charles Bridge.
At a time when this was the only bridge in Prague, such a meeting would have made an impression.
The architect was Carlo Lurago with Domenico Galli responsible for the rich stucco decoration.
The statues on the façade are by J. J. Bendl: his St Mary sits above the door, and above her is the Salvator Mundi flanked by Evangelists with SS Francis Xavier and Ignatius Loyola.
Above them are the Doctors of the Church and some wonderful vases.
Entering the church you can see that during the first building period of 1578–81, the E end up to the crossing was constructed; then the nave was continued in 1600–61.
The stucco and the spandrels of the cupola date from 1648–9.
The beautiful grille in front of you is partly of 1620 and partly of 1760.
The main altar is of the 18C but there is also a very beautiful modern altar of 1985 by Karel Stádník made from glass and metal, symbolizing the cosmos.
Note the confessionals with statues by J. J. Bendl of 1675 and the fine altarpieces by J. Heintz and J. J. Haring.
Come out of the church and to the left you can see one façade of the Clementinum.
It is unfortunate that this street Křižovnická is so busy as it is difficult to see.
Its fine architecture decorated with giant banded pilasters have more than a hint of northern Mannerism in spite of the fact that they  were finished as late as 1653.
The public entrance to the Clementinum is now off Karlova Street.
The Jesuits had been thrown out of Prague between the Defenestration of 1618 and the Catholic victory at the Battle of the White Mountain in 1620.
On their return they were given the Charles University which they absorbed into the Clementinum, and the emperor became their protector.
Estimates vary but it is thought that in 1574 the population of Prague was 5 per cent Catholic.
By 1648, at the end of the Thirty Years' War, Catholicism held total sway.
Carrot and stick were used in this transformation.
In 1621 all Protestant ministers were compelled to leave the country, and in 1627 Emperor Ferdinand ordered all his Bohemian subjects to choose between Catholicism or exile.
The carrot took the form of education and the Jesuits saw the potential for music and the theatre to get their message across to the masses.
They set up the first important theatre in Prague in the Clementinum with the Czech language as its medium.
Opposite St Salvator, in Karlova Street, is the Colloredo-Mansfeld Palace (2/189) of c.1730, designed by Francis Ignatius du Prée for Prince Vinzenz Paul Mansfeld-Fondi.
The portal is from the workshop of M. B. Braun.
There is a good ballroom inside, but the building is now used by the Academy of Sciences and is not open to the public.
Next, at 4/188, is The House at the French Crown.
Between 1607 and 1612, the German astronomer Kepler lived here, and there are remains of sgraffiato decoration, a Renaissance portal and arcades in the courtyard.
At No. 8/186, with the Sternberg star over the door, was the palace of the Pötting family during the first quarter of the 18C.
The architect was F. M. Kaňka.
Ahead, where the street forks, is the House at the Golden Well (3/175) with fine stucco relief by J. O. Mayer of 1701 of patron saints who, hopefully, protected the occupants from the plague.
Before you visit the Church of St Clement and the Clementinum, you might like to stop for a cup of coffee at the House of the Golden Snake.
This was the first coffee house in Prague, founded by an Armenian, Deodatus Damajan, in 1714.
The Church of St Clement is one of the three churches within the Jesuit College.
It now belongs to the Greek Orthodox Church and serves many of the Ukrainians who came to Prague after 1918.
It is open to the public at 17.00 on Fridays and on Sunday mornings, or you can apply at the sacristy.
The architect was K. I. Dientzenhofer but his plans may have been executed  between 1711 and 1715 by F. A. Lurago.
The statues inside of 1715–21 are all by M. B. Braun; many from the hand of the master himself are quite magnificent.
These include the work on the side altars, the four Evangelists in niches in the nave and the confessionals.
Some painting is by the Jesuit painter, Raab, but do note that the first altar on the right was painted by Brandl.
The main altar of 1760 is by J. Kramolín and portrays St Clement himself.
Kramolín was a pupil of Andrea del Pozzo, best known for his work in Il Gesù in Rome and his speciality of sotto in sù painting.
The fresco of 1711 — 15 is by Jan Hiebel, another follower of Pozzo.
It depicts the Life of St Clement.
The other objects worthy of note are the lovely modern screen by Karel Stádník, the papier mâché crucifix on the right wall as you leave, and the magnificent organ decorated with vases and putti by Braun.
When you leave this fine church, note its entrance and beautiful grille designed by K. I. Dientzenhofer.
On your immediate right is the tiny, oval Chapel of the Assumption built in 1590–7 as the Chapel of the Brotherhood of Italian Painters, Sculptors and Masons.
It was the first centrally planned church of its kind in Prague.
Its similarity to Vignola's oval-planned Sta Anna dei Palafrenieri in Rome (begun in 1570) has been mentioned in the literature.
This church is still the property of the Italian State.
The entrance to the Clementinum (1/190) is a few steps farther down, on the same side of the street.
If you wish to visit this as an individual, I suggest that you write in advance of your visit.
It is easier to book in as a group of four or more, by telephoning in advance, 26–65041 ext. 212 or 262.
The Clementinum was built by the Jesuits from 1653 to 1748 after a plan by Carlo Lurago and his follower, G. D. Orsi.
The craftsmen used throughout were almost all Italians.
The only way the magnitude of this building may be grasped is by seeing the model of Prague in the Prague City Museum (see p. 158).
Enter by the porter's lodge; if no one is there go to the door in the first courtyard on the left and someone is bound to come to your aid.
From the porter's lodge, a long passage stretches before you, off which is an attractive antechamber with water stoups, busts and something of the atmosphere of a grotto.
This corridor is by Orsi after 1660 and the stucco is by Galli.
The scenes, some damaged after a fire, are of the Coming of the Jesuits to Prague.
The adjacent refectory is a monumental room of c.1660 by Lurago.
This is now the main reading room of the State Library, open every day.
It is difficult to imagine how readers concentrate while putti and the Vices and Virtues gaze down upon them.
Both end walls have paintings of 1710 by the Jesuit, Tausch, a copyist who worked on the cartoons of the Italian fresco painter, Andrea del Pozzo.
Holding its own in the space is a fine stove of 1760.
The neo-Baroque bookcases were given by the opera singer Destinová.
Now go upstairs to the Mathematical Hall by K. I. Dientzenhofer, where there are good Rococo tables and a collection of clocks made in the Clementinum.
Most have astronomical mechanisms in addition, as astronomy was an important part of Jesuit education.
By far the most exciting room in this complex, not surprisingly, is the library.
It has been open to the public since 1787 thanks to the efforts of Count Kinský, although its collections have not been added to since 1721.
This was the second largest library in Prague after that at Charles University.
After the Battle of the White Mountain the Clementinum absorbed the books from the University.
The paintings are by Hiebel, with the subject-matter influenced by Diderot and the Enlightenment.
The bookcases date to 1727.
In 1948, when the Communists took power, there was a directive to remove the theological sections; by some miracle, however, they remained.
The other important feature of the room is the series  of geographical and astrological globes, made here from the 1570s to the 1670s.
There is one exceptionally fine scagliola globe.
Among the books in the library is the Vyšehradský Codex of 1085, decorated in the scriptorium at St George's Monastery.
There is also a collection of Wycliff's writings brought over at the time of England's Queen Anne.
Returning to the ground floor once more, visit the last interior in the Clementinum to be finished.
It is the Hall of Mirrors or the Marian Chapel, the private chapel of the Brotherhood of the Holy Mary, designed by K. I. Dientzenhofer in 1724.
The room gains its secular name from the mirrors in the ceiling — a well-known Rococo device.
Indeed, this room represents the very beginning of the Rococo in Prague.
The ceiling is frescoed by Hiebel, and V. V. Reiner painted four canvases for it.
These have been taken down for conservation and it is hoped to replace them with copies.
There is also a very beautiful floor.
It is rather tempting to think of this room as a boudoir rather than a chapel.
Since 1936 the Hall of Mirrors has been used as a concert hall.
Do not retrace your steps on leaving, but carry on past the observatory tower, completed by Anselmo Lurago and a reminder of the prominence of the Jesuits in the sciences.
In the 18C the astronomer J. Steepling founded the meteorological observatory at the top of the tower.
Records have been kept there for two hundred years.
Under the reforms of Josef II, when the Jesuit Order was abolished, the Clementinum became a seminary under the supervision of the archbishop of Prague, and in 1799 it became the first Academy of Fine Arts.
Between 1928 and 1930, L. Machoň, a pupil of Jan Kotěra, adapted it as a State library.
Sadly, in the past, the authorities did not produce adequate postcards and guide books for the Clementinum, but there is now a video of its history lasting about an hour, which can be viewed in a seminar room by booking in advance.
Leave this seat of learning and you come into the newly renamed Marianské Square.
To your right is the back of the Clam-Gallas Palace (see p. 111), ahead is the New Town Hall  (2/2) by 0.
Polívka, 1908–11, and to your left is the Municipal Library of 1926–30 (98/1) by F. Roith.
For a short time in the 1920s this library housed the collections of the National Gallery.
It still retains exhibition rooms for the Gallery's use.
Turn into Husova Street and find on your right the wonderful façade of the Clam-Gallas Palace.
The street is too narrow to take in the full glory of the design by Fischer von Erlach but the two doorways immediately make an impact, with their wonderful straining Hercules bent under the weight of the door entablature.
Further decoration is of scenes from his Labours.
The sculptures bear all the hallmarks of the Braun workshop and date from 1713–19.
In fact, Braun was responsible for all the sculpture in this sumptuous palace.
The present palace follows the ground plan of an earlier one built for the Margrave of Moravia, Jan Jindřich, brother of Charles IV.
It was originally designed for Johann Wenzel Gallas, a diplomat and viceroy of Naples who bought up neighbouring houses and by 1715 was ready to start building.
The façade is more classical than is usual in Prague, but it is nevertheless true Baroque — a Baroque that is more used to being displayed in the wider streets of Vienna.
Gallas had wished to buy the row of houses opposite, demolish them and create a fine square in front of the house.
But he was told that he would have to pay rent for the land until the end of time, so he gave up the idea.
The palace now houses the Prague City Archives.
If you go in, look at the magnificent staircase and follow it up two floors to enjoy not only the staircase itself, with its figures by Braun, but the frescos by C. Carlone.
The subject of the first-floor frescos is The Triumph of Apollo and the main halls on the second floor were painted with the Gathering of the Gods on Olympia and the Coronation of the Arts and Sciences (1722–3).
There were minor additions made to the decorative scheme in the 19C.
Farther down the street on the left is the Central Bohemian Gallery (21/156).
The gallery, which charges an entrance fee, puts on good quality exhibitions some of which are commercial.
Follow the steps down to the cellar which was the original  first floor of the 12C house.
Continuing down Husova Street, notice the house emblems on the right.
Turn right into Řetězová Street and at the end of the street find the gate to the fascinating Romanesque palace of the Lords of Kunštát and Poděbrady (3/222).
The most remarkable member of this family was George Poděbrady who was first regent, then king of Bohemia (see p. 6).
He set out from here, Poděbrad Palace, for his coronation in St Vitus' Cathedral in March 1458.
The house was built some time in the second half of the 12C or beginning of the 13C.
The ground floor, now the cellar, has retained its original three rooms with vaulted ceilings.
In the centre room there is an impressive sexpartite vault supported by two piers.
Remains of fireplaces and windows may be seen.
Here are held temporary art exhibitions.
The present ground floor (the medieval first floor) must have been similar in construction.
The first rooms here contain very fine collections of stove tiles from the medieval period and the Renaissance.
The quality of craftsmanship and interesting shape of the tiles designed to convect heat shows that even at this early date, the room stove was an important decorative object as well as an efficient source of energy.
In subsequent rooms there is an interesting exhibition about Poděbrady's life.
He tried to set up the League of Princes, an international peace-keeping force aimed primarily against the Turks, and the exhibition shows the route of the journeys he made to other countries to promote the idea.
Return to Husova Street and to the Church of St Giles (St Jiljí), first built in 1339–71 by John of Dražice and Arnošt of Pardubice, who had it built as a hall church.
This became the church of the Domenican Order when the Domenicans had to leave the Clementinum.
Monastic buildings were added to plans by Carlo Lurago and the church was redesigned by F. Špaček from 1733–5.
As an ensemble the effect is rich and exciting, but the paintings are not of top quality.
However, the paintings on the side altars at the E end and the frescos on the vaulting are by V. V. Reiner who is buried in the church.
The  best parts of this interior must be the sculptures.
On the NE altar is a good 14C sculpted crucifix.
There are outstanding furnishings and sculptures by M. Schönherr, J. A. Quitainer and F. I. Weiss, and fine confessionals of 1765 by Prachner.
There is a tomb of 1835 by Schwalnthaler of the lawyer Mráče.
Leaving the Church of St Giles, turn right and continue to the Little Square (Malé náměstí).
In the 12C this belonged to a community of French merchants.
In the centre of this busy square is a beautiful fountain of 1560 with its original wrought-iron canopy.
All around are medieval houses with later façades, some with sgraffiato decoration.
At 2/143 is a Gothic portal; at 12/458 is the House at the Golden Lily of the 15C with a later façade by K. Dientzenhofer before l700.
It still retains a medieval shop window.
(There are many medieval and Renaissance shop windows, complete with shutters, throughout the city.)
No. 3/142 has a façade decorated by Mikoláš Aleš for the ironmonger, Rott, and the chemist at 13/457 has a most interesting 19C interior.
The Rechter House (11/459) dominates this small square with its neo-Classical façade.
This is deceiving however, as it was originally two Romanesque houses, one of which was Prague's first pharmacy owned in 1353 by Augustin of Florence.
Ahead is the Town Hall and past that is the famous Old Town Square (Staroměstské náměstí).
If you can resist the temptation of going straight into this wonderful square, turn right into Melantrichova Street where, at the House at the Green Tree (12/472), behind the neo-Classical façade, is a Gothic house which retains at ground level a vaulted hall of the 14C.
No. 15/463 preserves a large Renaissance courtyard with arcades, as does 1/475, The House at the Two Golden Bears with its good 16C portal.
This house is where the famous journalist, E. E. Kisch was born and is now part of the Museum of the City of Prague.
At 17/971, first right through the archway are the remains of the Monastery and Church of St Michael, an important church for the followers of Jan Hus, where many of his friends preached and where the sacrament was given sub  utraque specie , in both kinds (see p. 6).
The Baroque church is at present used as a warehouse, but note the fine windows.
Now go into the Old Town Square (Staröměstské náměstí).
Commerce was the raison d'être of the Old Town and possibly as early as the 10C it embraced a huge mix of nationalities.
The Romanesque foundations of so many of the houses in this area bear witness to its size and wealth.
The first marketplace was on the site of Široká Street.
Later Old Town Square became important as it was convenient for the customs house at Ungelt near the Judith Bridge — the forerunner of the Charles Bridge — and Vyšehrad.
The walled Havelské Město (the Gall Town) to the E, was founded in 1232–4 and its free citizens granted their privileges to the older settlement as well.
In the 13C, recognizing the importance of the Old Town, the royal family founded two major monasteries here — the Convent of the Blessed Agnes and the Monastery of St James.
In the next century, Charles IV set up his university, the Carolinum, here.
This was the seat of the king's magistrate and its main parish church, St Nicholas', had a second use as an assembly hall for the town representatives.
In 1338 the right was granted to have a town hall, built on its present site.
Work also started on the main church, Our Lady Before the Týn, which was the great Hussite cathedral until the Battle of the White Mountain.
The royal court was in the Old Town in the 15C and the Jesuits recognized its strategic importance by building the Clementinum here.
Looking around Old Town Square, it is a remarkable survival for a capital which was rich in the 19C and which could have been rebuilt then.
But Prague has been lucky with its citizens, and time and again informed voices have been heard above the clamour of the developers.
The square has recently been renovated although people complain that it is like a film set and the houses are still crumbling behind their façades.
It looks timeless but there have been changes.
One of the most notable gaps is the missing part of the Town Hall to your left.
There is still a large space where it received a direct hit at the end of the war, destroying  much of the city archives.
Apart from this, Prague was relatively untouched, visually, by the war.
It is difficult now to imagine this square without the powerful bronze of Jan Hus gazing upon his church with his followers holding the chalice which was so significant in his religious arguments (see p. 6).
This testing commission was designed by Ladislav Šaloun in 1900–15 in conjunction with the architect A. Feiffer.
It was unveiled on the quincentenary of Hus's burning at the stake, amidst much controversy and anti-Habsburg demonstrations.
There used to be a fine Marian statue of 1649 by Bendl to the s of the square.
In fact it was the earliest in Bohemia and was based on the column erected in Munich by Elector Maximilian I to commemorate the victory of the Battle of the White Mountain.
When Czechoslovakia achieved its independence from the Austro-Hungarian Empire in 1918, it was considered too redolent of the Habsburgs and sadly was destroyed.
There are guided tours lasting approximately an hour round the Town Hall.
There are some interesting furnishings and paintings of the Gothic, neo-Gothic and of c.1910 to be seen.
The Town Hall (1378) was created from private houses: that nearest the Clock Tower dates from the middle of the 14C with Renaissance windows of 1520–8.
The next has a pseudo-Renaissance façade by A. Baum, 1879–80, and the third is from the early years of the 19C with arcades beneath.
Today these are exhibition halls.
At the corner the House at the Minute has sgraffiato from the 17C.
The most remarkable feature of these houses is, of course, the mechanical clock, still with its original mechanism created in 1410 by Mikuláš of Kadaň and perfected by Master Hanuš in 1490.
The calendar, painted with roundels of the Labours of the Months, is a copy of 1864 by J. Manés of the original now in the Prague Museum (see p. 158).
It depicts idealized peasants involved in seasonal countryside activities.
Czechs monopolized agriculture as Germans did the towns so this decoration is much concerned with idealizing the Czechs at the expense of the Germans.
Note too the rich decoration round the clock and the portal of the Town  Hall by Matěj Rejsek, c.1475.
Turning the corner, the bay window of the Town Hall chapel is a reconstruction of the one that existed before 1381.
Note the 14C Madonna on the corner.
On the façade facing the Old Town Square is the list of 27 Czech nobles, professors and burghers who were executed in 1621 after the Battle of the White Mountain.
The crosses in the pavement mark their place of execution.
Their heads were impaled on Charles Bridge as a warning to others and their families were sent into exile and their lands given to Ferdinand's Habsburg supporters, mainly Germans.
The other plaques on this wall refer to Dukla which was an important pass eventually taken by the Russians in 1944 during their advance into Czechoslovakia.
Note too, the bronze hand held up in blessing commemorating a place of execution by the Nazis.
Continue round to your right.
At 20/548, the House at the Golden Unicorn, there are some late Gothic details in the entrance hall and a good net vault.
In 1848 the composer Smetana established his first music school here.
At 18/550 is a fresco depicting St John Nepomuk.
This house was the venue for a famous salon held by Mrs Berta Fanta in the early 1900s.
Kafka was a guest, so too was Albert Einstein in 1910 when he spent a year at Charles University.
At 17/551 is The House at the Stone Ram.
Originally Romanesque, like so many houses around this square, but later added to in Gothic and then early Renaissance style at the beginning of the 16C.
The original very Bohemian house sign still exists.
No. 16/552, Štorch's House, has a façade of 1897 with a painting of St Wenceslas by M. Aleš.
It is a fine example of Bohemian Renaissance Revival.
Before entering the Church of Our Lady Before the Týn, look in front of it at the Týn School, which is in Gothic style with 16 gables and a strange bulging turret in the centre of the façade.
Here the architect Matěj Rejsek taught in the late 15C.
Beyond, fortress-like, rises the Church of Our Lady Before the Týn built by the workshop of Peter Parler in the second half of the 14C.
The late Gothic gable of 1463 originally held a gold  chalice, symbol of the Utraquists, and a statue of King George Poděbrady, their supporter.
The Týn was the metropolitan church of the Utraquists from 1348.
After the Battle of the White Mountain and the executions of 1621 opposite in the square, the symbol of the Utraquists — the chalice — was melted down and recast as a Madonna in 1626.
The N tower was completed in 1466 but rebuilt after a fire in 1835; the s tower is of 1511.
The times of opening are Monday to Friday 14.00 — 16.00, Saturday 10.00–14.00, Sunday 10.00–13.00 and 20.30–22.00.
At first when you enter, the church seems forbidding and rather a muddle.
This is perhaps because the later accretions are somewhat dwarfed amid the towering Gothic architecture.
Looking up you will see that the whole of the clerestory of 1457 was replaced after a fire in 1679, although the side aisles still have their original quadripartite vaulting of the 1380s.
It is a church that repays study.
Of the same date as the vaulting in the nave are the organ and many of the side altars decorated in black and gold.
The High Altar, dated 1649, was the first example in Prague of this Baroque style.
It enfolds a 1649 painting of the Ascension of the Virgin and a Holy Trinity by Karel Škréta.
Also at the E end is a fine Calvary of the early 15C and sedilia of the Gothic period.
On the nave piers are statues of the Apostles by F. Preiss of c.1700.
Magnificent is the fine stone canopy which once stood over the tomb of Bishop Lucianus by Matěj Rejsek, 1493.
Now it shelters a neo-Gothic altar.
The pulpit too, is Gothic with Gothic Revival additions by J. V. Hellich of 1847.
Behind it is the marble tomb of the Danish astronomer Tycho de Brahe, of 1601, who worked for Rudolf II.
Ahead is more sculpture — a magnificent altar of St Wenceslas by J. J. Bendl with a painting by A. Stevens of 1664.
Other highlights include the lovely Madonna and Child of c.1400 at the end of the s aisle to your right and the John the Baptist altarpiece by Master I. P. This sculptor is thought to have arrived in Prague around 1520.
Characteristic of his style is his intensely naturalistic carving of man and nature; the carved drapery folds seem to take on a life of their own.
His  work shows the influence of the Danubian School, but little else is known of him.
More of his work is in the St George's Gallery.
Against the walls, the Stations of the Cross were painted by Führich, in a similar style to the Nazarenes.
He was director of the Academy of Art.
At the w end on the N wall is a balcony with a grille which led into the palace next door.
On a pier to the left of the entrance is a painting of St Adalbert of 1648 by Karel Škréta.
On the wall next to the entrance to the sacristy is the Renaissance memorial to Václav Berka of Dubá.
Just before leaving, glance up to the left to see the glazed window through which Franz Kafka gazed upon Catholic services in church from his parents' flat next door.
Leave the church and return once more to the W façade.
To the left is The House at the Stone Bell (15/605) which was originally Romanesque and which, until recently, retained an 18C façade.
This has now been stripped back to its appearance of 1340.
It is fair to speculate from archaeological finds that both John of Luxemburg and his son Charles IV lived here while Prague Castle was being made habitable.
Now concerts are held here, and also exhibitions of contemporary art.
At No. 12/606 is the gloriously rich façade of the Goltz-Kinský Palace.
This was built in 1755–65 by Anselmo Lurago.
The Platzer family was responsible for the sculptures.
By the end of the 18C the Kinský family had left and the palace became a gymnasium which educated Kafka among others.
From its balcony, in 1948, Gottwald declared the introduction of Communist rule.
The palace is now home to the National Gallery's collection of graphic art.
The N side of the square was redeveloped when the Josefov district was demolished, and the only building to escape was the Pauline Monastery (7/930).
This was designed in 1684 by J. D. Canevalle and in 1696 M. V. Jäckel carved the statues.
The monastery was connected with St Saviour in Salvátorská (see p. 126).
By a quirk of fortune, a mint was here in the 18C.
At 6/932, is a neo-Baroque house by O. Polívka, built after 1900.
Note the lively sculpture of the roof line, one figure  looking as if he is smoking a hubble-bubble or earning his living as a snake charmer: in fact he is a fireman!
The building was put up by an insurance company.
Cross Pařížská Street, to the Church of St Nicholas where the Benedictines replaced the Gothic church of the German merchants with K. I. Dientzenhofer's bold design of 1732–5.
The detailing on the Pařížská Street façade is of 1910–14.
The s façade facing the square with its twin towers is decorated with sculptures by A. Braun.
Inside it is evident from its simplicity that this church belonged to the Hussites.
But the walls of the interior still retain their rich stucco by B. Spinetti, Braun's workshop decorated the dome, and there are paintings depicting Old Testament scenes by C. D. Asam in the octagonal cupola.
There is a fine crystal chandelier of the 19C and do note too, the metalwork on the doors.
The buildings of the monastery were demolished in 1897 and only the porch remains of Dientzenhofer's work.
Behind is the flat where Kafka was born in 1883.
The second half of this walk starts on the embankment and the area around the late 19C institutions that played such an important role in Czechoslovakia's eventual independence.
We carry on to the old Jewish quarter (Josefov) and continue around to the E through the former Jewish ghetto, skirting the Old Town Square.
The Jewish Quarter (Josefov)
The Rudolfinum — the Museum of Decorative Arts — the Old-New Synagogue — the Old Jewish Cemetery — the Maisl Synagogue — the Church and Hospital of St Simon and St Jude — the Convent of St Agnes (Gallery of 19C Art)— the Church of St James — the Ungelt — the House of the Black Madonna — the Powder Tower — the Carolinum — the Nostic Theatre — the St Gall area — the Bethlehem Chapel — the Náprstek Museum — the Divadlo Na zábradlí — the Smetana Museum
From Old Town Square, turn left into Kaprova Street and continue to Palach Square.
The embankment and many of the  buildings and gardens along its length were begun by the farsighted Count Chotek, governor of Prague in 1826–43.
By the 1870s, ideals of nationalism, public education and culture were translated, with the aid of industrial wealth, into a grand series of public buildings in every possible historical style.
Although most of the architecture you see before you would be more at home in Vienna, the impetus for development came from committed Czechs like Count Sternberg and the architect of the Ring in Vienna, Josef Hlávka, who used his vast wealth to become patron of Bohemian everything.
To make matters tidy, Prince Rudolf of Habsburg was placed at the head of the committees to promote Bohemian culture.
As the Renaissance was seen as the most enlightened period in European history this was the style chosen for the following colourful buildings.
On your left at 3/80 is the Academy of Applied Arts of 1884, which was organized by Gustave Schmoranz, and where Kotěra was professor until 1910.
Then comes the Faculty of Philosophy (2/55) of 1928–9.
The Rudolfinum (1/79) by J. Zítek and J. Schulz is on the far side of the square.
It was set up between 1876 and 1884 as a combined concert hall, gallery and art school, and until the war, it also served to house the parliament.
It is now the home of the Czech Philharmonic Orchestra and the Prague Spring Music Festival takes place here.
It is roughly on the site of the main ford across the River Vltava.
On the other side of the street, dressed in French Renaissance Revival style, is the Museum of Decorative Arts (4/73), founded in 1897 by V. Lanna the industrialist as an inspiration for new design.
The museum was built after a plan by Josef Schulz and with an interior richly decorated with stucco and paintings by B. Schnirch and A. Popp.
The collections were founded in 1885 and were housed first in the Rudolfinum.
Many of the objects were donated by businessmen and craftsmen.
The museum suffers from shortage of space and there is talk of its contents being moved to another site.
However, in spite of that, the range of decorative arts on display gives an insight into the intense creativity of Bohemian craftsmen and  the workshops of Prague.
The exhibits are on the first floor.
As you go up the stairs, note the fine terracotta vases from the Trója Palace (see p. 194).
The first room contains the late medieval and early Renaissance collection.
Notice the fine commessi in pietra dura (hardstone plaques) inset into furniture.
This technique was brought from Italy by Giovanni and Cosimo Castrucci for the delight of Rudolf II, and serves as a reminder of the mineral wealth of Bohemia.
You will also see the products of the Miseroni workshop.
The Italian Ottavio Miseroni was in Prague from 1588 to 1624, where he specialized in cutting gemstones.
Cutting gemstones developed into the cutting of Bohemian glass, now celebrated throughout the world.
The Miseroni family worked in Prague for three generations.
Worthy of note too, are the cabinets made at Cheb and the fine examples of Baroque furniture, much of which was designed by architects like K. 1.
Dientzenhofer and the craftsmen working with him.
There were no clear distinctions between the fine and the decorative arts in Mannerist or Baroque Prague.
The collections here include metalwork, goldsmiths' work, ceramics and textiles from the Middle Ages to the middle of the 19C.
The galleries are arranged in chronological order.
As in so many museums, the stored collections — including photographs and costume — are more extensive than those on display.
Specialists are advised to get in touch with the museum to arrange to see items held in store.
Leave the Museum of Decorative Arts and walk along to the Svatopluka Čech Bridge of 1906, by J. Soukup and J. Koula.
Look over to the platform high on the opposite bank of the river where once loomed a huge statue of Stalin, which the Communist Party ordered to be destroyed in 1962.
This proved difficult and Josef Vissarionovich had to be blown up little by little over a period of two weeks.
The sculptor Švec committed suicide.
To the left of the bridge, on this side of the river, is the Faculty of Law.
This building (7/901) was planned as early as 1914 by Kotěra, but was not finished until 1929, by his pupil, Machoň.
It is worth paying a visit to the interior  courtyard to see the impressive design and use of materials.
A similar building, housing the faculty of Theology, was proposed for the other side of the road, but instead we have the not very edifying Intercontinental Hotel of 1974 by K. Filsak.
On the other side of the square is a fine Art Deco block, built in 1921 as homes for schoolteachers by O. Novotný.
We are now in the middle of the Josefov, the former Jewish quarter or ghetto.
The ghetto, founded in the 13C, grew up in the area between the Old Town Square and the River Vltava near the ford.
It was ideally placed for commerce.
Alas, little now remains of this once-thriving community, which made such an important cultural contribution to Prague, and indeed to Judaism.
(The first Hebrew was printed in Prague in 1512.)
Louis Léger, writing in 1907 of the clearance of the ghetto, pointed out that ‘Les amateurs du pittoresque sordide peuvent le regretter; les amis de l'hygiène, du confort et de la lumière ne peuvent que s'en réjouir.’
There is a school of thought that claims that the ghetto was cleared for commercial rather than health reasons.
This is the only area of central Prague that has so suffered.
Jews settled in Czechoslovakia as early as the 10C, but it was not until the 13 and 14C that a small Jewish community became a feature of every large town.
By the mid-15C as a result of epidemics, pogroms and wars, urban Jewish settlement virtually disappeared, but by the middle of the 16C there were about 1,000 Jews living in Prague.
As money lenders, they enjoyed comparative political freedom and were directly subject to the Royal Chamber without any restriction imposed on them by the guilds.
They were however compelled to wear the yellow Star of David.
Ferdinand I threatened them with expulsion, but the Dutch humanist Erasmus successfully intervened.
Finally, in 1571, the Emperor Maximilian II and his wife paid a visit on foot to the Jewish quarter, and were welcomed under a traditional canopy by the Rabbi and the mayor, Mordechai Maizl.
When in 1574, Rudolf II made Prague the capital of the Holy Roman Empire, he gave the Jews yet greater security.
In  1580, he allowed them to trade freely and repealed a restriction applying to furriers, but he still insisted that Jews wear the yellow star.
The last years of the 16C saw a blossoming of Jewish intellectual life, the central figure of which was Judah Loew ben Bezalel (see below).
In 1689 there was a fire which destroyed much of the ghetto and in 1848, when the Jews were given civil rights, the ghetto walls were removed.
The 20C has not been kind to the Jews and the community in Prague has never recovered from its suffering at the hands of the Nazis.
In the Pinkas Synagogue you will find the names of 36,000 of their victims from Prague alone.
Those who were children during the war recall with horror how, one by one, their Jewish classmates disappeared.
Under Communist rule, as with other religions, services were permitted but no cultural or educational activities.
Since President Havel's visit to Israel in 1990, ‘The Friends of Jewish Culture’ has been founded.
Its aim is to promote a reunion of Czech Jews for the first time since the war.
At the turn of the century Paris caught people's imagination.
Pařižská Street with its buildings dating from 1900–10 cuts a swathe through the picturesque Jewish ghetto.
In this area you can see the fruits of the 19C art schools — jewels of mosaic, stained glass and tiling, Art Nouveau figures.
Make your way along Pařižská Street from the river and you will pass on your right a fine statue of Moses by Bílek (1906) in the gardens beside the Old-New Synagogue.
Behind the statue at 18/250 Maislova Street is the Jewish Town Hall, built in the late 16C by the ever-generous Mayor Maizl, and given a Rococo façade by J. Slesinger in 1765.
There were once 9 synagogues in the ghetto; now the Old-New Synagogue is one of only two in Prague still serving the tiny Jewish community.
It is one of the capital's earliest Gothic buildings, dating from the second half of the 13C, and is one of the earliest surviving synagogues in Europe.
(The synagogue in Toledo dates from the 12C.)
Its striking brick gables are of the 14C.
The interior is fascinating, with twin vaulted naves and a women's gallery.
Some of the details are  similar to those found in St Agnes' Convent.
The original seating has been preserved and there is some fine, late Gothic ironwork in the centre around the bimah or reading platform.
Note the banner (much restored) given to the Jews of Prague by Charles IV in 1358.
In the 19C the synagogue was restored by Josef Mocker and its picturesque qualities attracted many architects and painters during the Romantic period.
Opposite its entrance is the High Synagogue, completed in 1568 and paid for by the mayor of the ghetto, Mordechai Maizl.
It was he who extended the graveyard and established the famous Rabbi Loew in the Talmudic school here.
He had received a special trading privilege from Rudolf in 1592 and became the richest man in Prague.
The High Synagogue now houses a textile museum and you may buy tickets here for all the museums in the ghetto.
At the end of this street is the Klausen Synagogue constructed by Rabbi Cohen in 1694.
It has a fine room with a barrel vault.
Most interesting is the three-tiered Ark built in 1696 by Samuel Oppenheim.
The synagogue now exhibits Hebrew manuscripts and prints.
Alongside the synagogue is one of the most remarkable sights in Europe, the Old Jewish Cemetery, where the famous and the infamous are squeezed together, the crowded headstones looking like so many crooked teeth.
The gate lodge, built in 1906 in a neo-Romanesque style, has a moving display of drawings by children from Terezin concentration camp.
There were originally medieval Jewish cemeteries in the Malá Strana and the New Town but these had gone by the 15C.
Some of the headstones were later discovered and moved to this cemetery but the oldest grave here is that of Abigdor Karo,(d. 1439) who was a poet and scholar at the court of Wenceslas IV.
The list of people buried here is long and includes Judah Loew ben Bezalel (Rabbi Loew d.1609), a philosopher who was interested in the supernatural in traditional Jewish teaching, and whose notorious golem or artificially created servant, was said to lie in pieces in the attic of the Old-New Synagogue; David Gans, the first Jewish historian to write a  history of the gentiles which was published in Prague in 1592; Josef Salomo ben Elias del Medigo de Candia (the Wandering Jew), who was born in Crete, studied at Palermo, was a pupil of Galileo, and finally practised medicine everywhere from Cairo to Prague; Mardochee who founded a most important printing press in Prague and who was one of the founders of the Brotherhood of the Dead who until this century kept vigil at the cemetery.
The headstones here were used as models all over central Bohemia.
You will note that Jewish pilgrims to the graves leave pebbles and messages on paper.
At dusk you will be warned to leave by the ringing of a handbell around the tombstones.
After 1787 the graveyard was no longer used and the Jewish community buried its dead in the cemetery in the Žižkov quarter.
This is where many of the founders of industrial Prague rest.
Franz Kafka, amongst others however, is buried in the New Jewish cemetery in Prague 3, in use from the end of the 19C (see p. 176), where some of the headstones are carved by leading Czech sculptors.
On the edge of the Old Jewish Cemetery is the Pinkas Synagogue, founded by the Horowitz family in 1479.
This was enlarged both in 1535 and in the early 17C.
It is now a memorial to all the Jews in Bohemia and Moravia who were killed by the Nazis — a staggering 77,297.
Turn into Maislova Street from Široká Street and at No. 18/250 is the Town Hall which was once accessible from the High Synagogue.
Continue up Maislova to the Maisl Synagogue at 10/36.
It was once the most lavish Baroque building in the ghetto but was burnt down and rebuilt in the neo-Gothic style between 1883 and 1913.
It is now the Museum of Jewish Silver.
Near the Town Hall there is a good, cheap kosher restaurant and there are several others in the area, notably U Golema and U Matyáše.
Turn left into Jáchymova Street, across Pařižská Street and into Kostečná Street to visit the Church of St Saviour in Salvátorská of 1611–14, by J. Christoph of Graubünden.
In 1910 it was modified and given a  sparse interior for the Czech Brothers who today, are the inheritors of the ideals of Jan Hus.
Turn right into Dušní Street and then into Salvátorská where 0.
Novotný, later professor of the School of Applied Art, designed No. 8–10/931 for the Štenc Publishing House, a publisher specializing in art history books and magazines.
The building is an exciting example of 1909 — lo Art Deco, using a wide range of materials including brick, and it has a long glass gallery at roof level.
It is now in a poor state of repair, but note many of the original fittings still in situ .
Nearby is the Church of the Holy Ghost, evidently of the 14C.
Opposite is the Spanish Synagogue, 1868, the last synagogue to be built in this area, on the site of the earliest known synagogue or Old Shul.
The exterior was designed by Josef Niklas and the remarkable Moorish interior was designed by Josef Niklas with decoration by A. Baum and B. Münzberger.
At the moment it is closed but normally it displays a rich collection of textiles.
Follow Dušní Street to your left towards the river, turning right into U milosrdných and passing the Church of SS Simon and Jude of 1615–20 on your left.
The whole complex of church buildings which includes a hospital, founded by the Milosrod ní Bratři (the Merciful Brethren), and a famous pharmacy, was transformed into the Baroque style by J. Hrdlička in the mid-18C.
The High Altar was painted by J. Hager in 1773 and the patron saints are by V. V. Reiner.
There is also a fine St John of God by J. R. Bys of 1691.
Both Haydn and Mozart played the organ here.
There is a proposal to turn part of the building into a museum of pharmacy; at the moment it still functions partially as a hospital.
Continue to the end of U milosrdných and turn right into Haštalská Square where the Church of St Gastulus sits in the middle.
It dates from the second half of the 14C.
Inside there is a fine double nave, the first example in Prague.
In the northern nave is a Calvary of 1716, by the followers of F. M. Brokof.
The church is open on Sundays at 17.00 during Mass.
Adjacent to this in the area known as Na Františku (Franciscan district) is the entrance to the Convent of St Agnes, now the  National Gallery of Nineteenth-Century Art.
St Agnes was founded in 1233 by King Wenceslas I for the mendicant orders at the instigation of his sister Agnes of Bohemia (St Agnes).
There are two monasteries on the site comprising two cloisters and three churches dedicated to St Francis, St Saviour and St Barbara.
The Franciscan monastery of St Francis (the first north of the Alps) was almost totally destroyed by the Hussites, and only the choir, the Salvator Chapel remains.
St Agnes introduced the Poor Clares into the Convent of St Saviour and became their first abbess in 1235.
It is the Convent of St Saviour that forms the present complex.
The Church of St Francis was probably finished by 1249 and was built by craftsmen trained under the Cistercians.
The Salvator Chapel was incorporated in 1285 and is considered one of the most perfect examples of its type in Central Europe.
After a period under the Domenicans, the Poor Clares returned once more to their convent but the buildings then suffered from the fire in the Old Town in 1689.
The convent, as with most of those in Prague that were not considered useful, was closed by Josef II in 1782.
During the 19C this and the surrounding area fell into decay and the cloisters were actually divided horizontally to provide two sets of slums.
In the 19C the entire area of the Na Františku became an idyllic subject for Romantic painters and writers of the day.
In the redevelopments of the 1880s Na Františku came under the same threat of destruction as the ghetto but was saved by the efforts of the Association for the Rehabilitation of the Convent of the Blessed Agnes.
It was finally rebuilt between 1964 and 1982 as the present-day art gallery.
The development of 19C painting in Czechoslovakia follows that elsewhere in Europe, but here it is imbued with the same emergence of a national consciousness which can also be seen in literature and architecture.
Among the painters of this time to note are Antonín Manés, whose fine Romantic landscapes are signed ‘Bohemus’, and the landscapes and still-lifes of Josef Navrátil who also painted house interiors.
A fine example of his interior decoration may be seen in the rooms he  decorated for Václav Michalovic in his house, now the Postal Museum (see p. 157).
The central hall in the gallery is dedicated to the work of Josef Manés who produced a wide range of subject-matter including fine portraits of the rising bourgeoisie.
There are also some decorative arts scattered around the museum, and one wishes there were more.
Of note is the fine quality of porcelain and, of course, Bohemian cut glass.
There are concerts held in the museum every month.
The magnificent sculpture collections of the 19C are all held in the Castle of Zbraslav (see p.181).
Leave Haštalská Square by Rybná Street and take the third right into Jakubská Street to visit the beautiful Church of St James.
This was founded by Wenceslas I for the Order of Friars Minor and was considered so important that it was rebuilt by John of Luxemburg and Charles IV.
During the Hussite period the church was used as a meat store and so suffered relatively little damage.
Jan Pánek transformed the original Gothic into Baroque but then, after a fire in 1695, the craftsmen returned between 1736 and 1739 to redecorate the interior.
However, much remains of the earlier Baroque building.
The W façade is remarkable for its monumental stucco reliefs over each of the three W doors.
These include the Apotheosis of St Francis, St Anthony of Padua and St James.
They are all by the Paduan Ottaviano Mosto.
Inside, the plan and much of the elevation of this vast Gothic basilica remains.
The pace of the building quickens towards the E end, where at gallery and later at clerestory level, gesticulating putti balance on Rococo vases, turning towards the High Altar.
The overall impression is one of great wealth and the craftsmanship is superb.
The scagliola work is by K. Schartzmann; Abondio Bolla carried out the stucco decoration and Ferdinand Drack, the wood carving.
The frescos on the vaulting are by F. Voget.
The altars are all of c.1680, with frontals painted to look like brocade.
The altar paintings vary and many seem in need of restoration.
There is an Assumption of the Virgin in the first chapel on the right, and a St Joseph nearby, both by Petr  Brandl.
The other paintings are by Peter Keck of 1705, and offer nothing very exciting.
There is however, a fine canvas on the High Altar, the Apotheosis of St James by V. V. Reiner with a tabernacle by Platzer.
There are two other objects of note; one is a Pietà of c.1380 from the Peter Parler workshops and the other is the magnificent monument to the Lord Chancellor Count Mitrowitz, made in 1714–16.
The designer was Fischer von Erlach and the sculptor was F. M. Brokof.
The church had important links with the butchers of Prague and they were given the first chapel on the left at the W end in honour of their defence of Prague, once in 1611 against the troops from Passau, and again in 1648, against the Swedes.
Across the nave from this chapel, hanging up on the w wall, is something looking very like an old chicken-bone.
Thereby hangs a tale.
One night a thief broke into the church to steal jewels from the Madonna on the High Altar.
As he grabbed, his hand stuck to the statue and he remained imprisoned there until found the following morning.
The angry congregation cut off the offending hand, and that is what dangles up there today, 400 years on.
If you go out of the W door and immediately right you come to the fine cloister of St James.
Many nationalities traded from the Jewish quarter and an area called the Ungelt or Customs House developed in front of the Church of St James.
Built around a courtyard, it originally housed craftsmen, but later became the main market and customs house for Bohemia.
There are plans to turn it into a hotel, leaving visible the original Romanesque and Gothic buildings, including the Týn Court.
Notice here the Granovsky House (12/639) of 1560 with remains of Renaissance sgraffiato decoration; this is one of the finest houses of its type in Prague.
The land was given by Ferdinand I to the chief of customs in 1558.
The maze of small streets behind the Týn Church is still a bustle of small picturesque houses.
From Jakubská Street follow the Malá Štupartská to Týnská Street on the left.
Walk around the outside of the N transept of the church whose fine tympanum relief is now in St George's  Gallery.
Opposite is the site of the house belonging to the painter Karel Škréta.
Ahead is the Old Town Square, but we turn left into the important royal route of Celetná.
Celetná Street is one of the most attractive in Prague and is flanked by important buildings.
Follow it to the Powder Tower at the far end.
At No. 2/553, the first floor of the Romanesque house is preserved in the basement.
From 1567 this house belonged to Sixt of Ottersdorf who, as Chancellor of the Old Town, played a part in the anti-Habsburg uprising of 1547.
Its present Baroque appearance dates from the early 18C with the statues on the attic attributed to the workshop of Braun.
The Prague coffee house, At the Three Magi (3/602), is an unusually complete example of a late 14C house.
Franz Kafka lived here for a time.
Next door (5/601) is the Týn Presbytery.
In the 15 and 16C this was the seat of the Consistory of the Utraquist Church which administered the Týn.
Until 1820 the house was surrounded by a graveyard.
Continuing to the right at 12/558 is the Hrzán Palace, built in 1702 by Zikmund Valentin Hrzán of Harasov, perhaps by G. B. Alliprandi.
The sculptural decoration on the façade is from the workshop of F. M. Brokof.
Across the road at 13/597, again with Romanesque foundations, is a Baroque palace built in 1756 by Count Jan Caretto Millesimovský and designed by Anselmo Lurago.
It was used as the Library of Culture for the Communist Party and is now the teachers, training faculty of the University.
Across at 20/562 is the Buquoy Palace, once lived in by the widow of Count Karel Buquoy, a general of the Imperial troops at the Battle of the White Mountain in 1620.
It was bought by Charles University in 1762 and they had it rebuilt by A. Prachner.
Next door No. 22/563 again belongs to the University.
Its neo-Classical façade dates from 1804 although the foundations of the houses are Gothic.
Opposite, the shop at 15/596 is a fine example of Constructivism designed by J. Gočár and built in 1933–4 for the Baťa Company.
At No. 17/595 the Schützen Palace was rebuilt c.1700 and completed after 1706 to a design by V. Kaňka.
The sculpture of St John Nepomuk on the façade is of this date.
The decoration of the  interior is by P. Molitor of 1736.
In the courtyard is a wooden statue of Hercules from the second quarter of the 18C, attributed to L. Widmann.
At No. 30/567 is a house of 1897 designed by Friedrich Ohmann, professor of Applied Arts within Prague.
Across at Solomon's, 23/592, the design of c.1730 has been attributed to Kaňka and the Madonna is from the workshop of M. B. Braun.
Opposite at 34/569 is the House of the Black Madonna, a superb example of uniquely Praguian Cubist architecture by J. Gočár, built in 1911–12.
On the corner across Ovocný trh is No. 36/587.
In 1420 during the Hussite Wars the Old Town acquired the building and installed a mint there.
Apart from a short period, the mint was in operation until 1784.
The present house was built in 1755 to a design by J. J. Wirch.
The balcony above the main door has figures of miners on either side.
These are by Platzer of 1759 and serve as a reminder of the wealth of the silver mines in Bohemia and Silesia.
In 1784 the house was remodelled and was finally given its neo-Baroque features in 1860.
The first tussles of the 1848 revolution took place here when it was the military headquarters.
It was here that the wife of Prince Windischgrätz was killed by a stray bullet and this caused the prince to react with unnecessary violence against the protesters.
Opposite was the site of the Royal Palace lived in by the kings of Bohemia from the Hussite Wars in 1419, until King Vladislav reasserting the rights of kingship in 1484, returned to the castle.
The corner house on the other side of the street (31/585), the Pachta Palace, was rebuilt in the 1730s probably to a design by K. I. Dientzenhofer.
During the ownership of the Pachta family of Rajov, the stucco busts of Maria Theresa and Franz of Lorraine in medallions over the first-floor windows were added.
Take a detour to the left from Celetná Street into Králodvorská to the wonderfully grim Communist Party hotel.
Opposite is the Paris Hotel.
This was designed by J. Vejrych in c.1901.
Although not in the top league of hotels, it is one of the most pleasant hotels in Prague and retains many of the original fixtures and fittings.
Ahead is the late Gothic Powder Tower, built for Vladislav Jagiello, the Polish king, as a wedding gift from the city of Prague.
It was originally the main town gate, built by Matěj Rejsek in 1475-:83, and decorated in a marvellously intricate style.
This virtuoso decorative carving is a typical feature of late Gothic architecture in Bohemia.
When Vladislav moved to the castle, the tower was left incomplete and was subsequently used for the storage of gunpowder.
In the 19C Mocker finished the tower and added the statues of Vladislav and his son.
Facing the Powder Tower, turn right into Ovocný trh to visit the Carolinum or Charles University, founded by Charles IV in 1348 and therefore one of the earliest universities in Europe.
The founding of the university was important in Charles's attempts to make Prague a cultural centre and to foster an interest in Slav history.
He commissioned from Beneš of Weitmil the Cronica Ecclesiae Pragensis , and the History of Bohemia from the Italian Giovanni di Marignola.
Writing in the vernacular, both in Czech and German, was encouraged; the chronicles and lives of saints, as well as the Bible, were translated into Czech, and a Czech encyclopaedia and Czech-Latin dictionary were compiled.
The use of the vernacular encouraged much freedom of thought.
In 1390 one of the major figures of the Reformation, Jan Hus, studied at the Carolinum and became rector in 1409, although he was later ordered to cease preaching and was excommunicated (see p.218).
The Carolinum is a muddle of buildings from the Gothic period onwards.
Much still remains of the earlier medieval university and downstairs you can wander through a maze of beautiful simple passages and rooms with quadripartite vaulting.
By far the most interesting room in the complex is the Great Hall on the first floor, where degrees are conferred.
It is basically 14C but was modified in the late 1940s by J. Fragner.
The tapestry on the main wall depicts Charles IV in front of St Wenceslas.
This, as well as the paintings on the organ loft are by V. Sychra.
The statue of Charles IV is by K. Pokorný of the  1950s.
The room has a comfortable 1940s feel about it apart from the oriel window of the chapel c.1385 which is a beautiful and important example of high Gothic.
A passion for the revival of the Czech language was behind the founding of the Nostic Theatre, on the corner of Železná and Rytířská Streets.
Reach it by turning left from the Carolinum.
It was built from 1781–3 by Anthonín Haffenecker and was redesigned in 1881 by A. Wolf.
Its sponsor was Count Nostic who leased it to various theatrical societies from the end of the 18C for the performance of Bohemian drama.
It was under the protection of the Estates and was also known as the Estates Theatre.
In 1787 it saw the première of Mozart's Don Giovanni , with Mozart conducting, and in 1791 his La Clemenza di Tito , commissioned for the coronation of Leopold II as king of Bohemia.
Carl Maria von Weber held the post of opera director here in 1813–16.
Farther down Rytířská Street is the Kolowrat Palace (4/579) by G. D. Orsi of 1674, Still in Rytířská Street, on the right at No. 20/536 is the Klement Gottwald Museum.
Its collection of Communist propaganda is now being dismantled.
The one good thing about the display is that it did not damage any of the glorious neo-Renaissance interiors, originally designed as a bank by A. Weihl in 1892–4.
On the other side of the road at 18/402 is a house of 1770 by Palliardi and next door was the site of a famous bookshop and printer's, Kramerius.
Farther along on the same side is the tower house of the 13C and still farther along there is a good market hall of 1895–8 by J. Fialka, the original iron struts of which may be seen through the modern ceiling.
Turning right into Havelská Street you will find yourself in the middle of the St Gall area of the Old Town, part of the ancient marketplace founded in 1232 by Wenceslas I. In the 15C the marketplace was split in two by the building of stalls between today's Rytířská and Havelská, hence the grand houses set on arcades in Rytířská and Havelská and the street of low houses between.
These old shops are still in business today, selling second-hand clothes and materials.
There is a  flower market here every morning and it is one of the most atmospheric areas of Prague.
The Church of St Havel with its Romanesque foundations was surrounded by the houses of wealthy merchants.
The reformer, Konrad Waldhauser preached here, packing out the church so often that he was sometimes forced to preach in the square.
Jan Hus followed his example in 1404.
The church then came to the Order of the Shod Carmelites who built a monastery and rebuilt the church from 1723–38.
The architect was P. I. Bayer, with interior decoration by V. V. Reiner.
There is a remarkable Calvary Chapel here by Ferdinand Brokof of 1719–20 and the church is also notable for being the burial place of Karel Škréta.
It is open on Sundays at 17.00.
Leaving the church behind you, walk round either side of the square to Uhelný trh, the site of the old coal market.
In the centre a fountain was set up in 1797, with a statue by F. X. Lederer, an allegory of fruit-growing and viticulture.
On the left is the first tenement block to be built in Prague in 1813–47 and designed by J. Hausknecht.
The flats are set around a spacious courtyard with shops at ground level.
It is also known as Plateys House.
To the right of the tenement is the Church of St Martin's in the Wall.
In the 13C this was the line of the Old Town wall.
The church is basically of the 12C with 14C additions.
As you will see from the detailing, it was restored from 1905–7 by K. Hilbert for the Czech Brothers.
There is a plaque on the wall to recall that all the Brokof family of sculptors are buried here.
From Martinská Street turn right into Na Perštýně and at 7/345 is the Perštýn house or the old beer hall The Two Bears, where V. V. Reiner lived after marrying the innkeeper's daughter.
At the beginning of Bartolomějská Street, on the left, is the forbidding door of the main police station in Prague.
At first glance, Bartolomějská looks like a street full of picturesque houses.
So it is, but each house is part of the police station.
Continue down Na Perštýně Street, turning left into Bethlehem  Square.
The Bethlehem Chapel stands on the site of the original donated by Hans von Mühlheim, a follower of one of the reformers, and consecrated in 1394.
The vaulting, influenced by the s porch of St Vitus', was in its turn the prototype for hall churches with net vaults of the late 14 and early 15C.
Jan Hus preached here between 1402 and 1413 and later the Bethlehem Chapel became one of the centres of the Reformation.
In 1609–20 it belonged to the Czech Brothers and the father-in-law of Comenius preached here.
Later in the 17 and 18C the Jesuits took it over, but after their dissolution the chapel was demolished.
Basing his work on archaeological finds, the chapel was rebuilt by J. Fragner from 1950–2.
On the N side the square at No. 1/269 is a low attractive building, originally a brewery, U Halánků and now the entrance to the Náprstek Museum or Museum of Australasian, African and American Cultures.
The museum was named after its founder, Vojta Náprstek who, on being exiled after the revolution of 1848 went to America.
Here he was impressed by America's industrial progress and in 1862 he visited London for its World Exhibition and to see the museums of South Kensington.
When he returned from exile, he was fired with the wish to help his country catch up with the advanced industrial countries of the west, so he set up the Czech Industrial Museum in his family brewery.
The collections grew too large and in the 1880s he added the tall building next door.
His other interest, ethnographical collections, grew through his support of Czech travellers all over the world.
They returned with artefacts which gradually superseded his industrial collections.
At present the Náprstek Museum is closed, but when it reopens, the American, Australian and African collections will be shown here.
The Oriental collections are in southern Bohemia at Libéchov and the costume collection can be seen at the Kinský Summer House (see p. 86).
Most of the industrial machinery is now housed in the National Technical Museum in Letná while all that remains in the private family apartments of the brewery is a sewing machine of 1862 by Wheeler and  Wilson from Bridgeport, Connecticut, and a large part of the library and fine photographic collection.
Náprstek was also an enthusiastic supporter of the emancipation of women, and there were rooms set aside in the apartments for the American Club of Czech Women.
The meeting rooms were next to his own and there is what looks like a peephole through the door.
His mother was tight-fisted with the money from the brewery and he did not marry until after her death.
He was a prominent member of the Prague city council and the placing of railings around the trees in the city was one of his ideas.
Continue down Náprstkova Street turning right before the end into a narrow lane, Anenská Stříbrná, leading into Anenské náměstí.
On the right at 2/211,213 is a former Domenican convent with a façade of 1676, built on the site of the 12C rotunda of St Lawrence and a church of the Templars.
It is now part of the National Theatre.
Opposite, at 5/209, is the Divadlo Na Zábradlí (The Theatre on the Balustrade), a theatre  renowned for performing the work of dissidents, including that of Havel in 1968.
At 4/208 is a small palace, now part of the theatre, with an enchanting courtyard of 1760 by Wirch and a staircase by Platzer.
Go back onto Náprstkova Street and right along Karoliny Světlé to the 12C rotunda of the Holy Cross.
This stood by the important road between Vyšehrad and the Vltava fords.
It was restored both inside and out in the 1860s by V. I. Ullmann and B. Wachsmann, although there are some remains of 14C frescos.
It is one of three such Romanesque churches left in Prague.
Leaving the rotunda, turn right on to the embankment, Smetanovo nábřeží where there is a fine memorial to Francis II, Emperor of Austria, by J. Kranner, built 1844–6.
This is a fine example of neo-Gothic taste with sculpture, ‘The Homage of the Czech Estates’, by the Max brothers.
The Smetana Museum (1/201) is in what was originally the municipal water tower.
This was built in 1885 in the Czech Renaissance style after a plan by A. Wiehl, and is decorated with marvellous sgraffiato depicting the battle with the Swedes on Charles  Bridge in 1648.
The museum, containing material concerning the life of the composer, was founded in 1928.
In front of the building there is a statue of 1984 of Smetana by J. Malejovský.
This part of the embankment was the first to be built to the designs of B. Grueber between 1841 and 1845.
There is a fine view of the castle from here.