

PROLOGUE
MEN WERE SURE that they knew why women adored Prince Richard.
He possessed a dominating grace which could make any adversary subject to his will.
He had a soft manner, a hard mind and a lean body; his extraordinary combination of merits and ambition would have ensured that, had Richard been born into any other family in Britain, he would have risen to an equally exalted position in the world.
His Royal Highness, The Prince Richard Alexander William Nicholas, was one of nature's princes, as well as a prince of the most successful royal house in the modern world.
The tops of the tall trees in the garden of Buckingham Palace thrashed as the heavy Wessex helicopter passed over them to set down.
Prince Richard's Private Secretary, Clive Fairbrother, watched his master sprint away from the aircraft towards him, resenting the way his glossy brown hair fell back smoothly after the wind ruffled it.
The man had every possible unfair advantage.
Prince Richard was not a big man but his physical presence was overwhelming.
From his own height of well above six feet, Clive Fairbrother was always surprised to find himself looking down on Richard's imperiously poised head.
It fell to the Prince, as it always did, to give his Secretary's most urgent preoccupation pause.
‘Busy morning?’ he threw back over his shoulder, a tightening of his full lower lip indicating irony.
‘Pandemonium.
Every newspaper in the world seems to think you're getting married now.
The Press Office is really under pressure.’
The bigger man lengthened his stride to keep up with Richard's dynamic pace down the red-carpeted palace corridor.
The Prince either stormed through life like a tornado or idled with a lack of haste that was almost feline.
‘They'll cope.
They've always coped before.
Amanda never loses her cool.
After all, the press have been trying to marry me off for years.’
‘It seems different this time, they're very positive.’
His Royal Highness raised an eyebrow and puckered one side of his mouth in a very characteristic grimace of amusement.
‘Positive?
They're taking bets, aren't they?’
His private sitting room on the second floor, a substantial, high-ceilinged chamber immediately shrank to the proportions of a toy theatre when he entered it.
As he approached his thirtieth birthday Richard reminded people more and more of his great-grandmother Queen Mary.
His shoulders were carried with her regal bearing and his mouth, otherwise loose and sensual, had her decisively chiselled upper lip.
‘I'm sure that's just a rumour, Sir, the bookies wouldn't…’
Why am I lying, Fairbrother asked himself angrily.
He was new to this game.
He saw himself as a courtier only by profession and hated to find himself succumbing already to the sycophantic atmosphere of the Palace offices.
The Prince took his customary place before the plain white marble fireplace.
The logs in the basket were rarely burned; he was suspicious of comfort, and was never in the Palace long enough to make lighting a fire worthwhile.
‘Oh yes, they would.
I called Ladbrokes myself.
They're giving two to one on Tory Hamilton and six to four on my darling Harley.
Princess Stephanie of Monaco, Princess Louise of Meinenbourg, Jo Forbes and that go-go dancer they snapped me with in São Paulo are all at 100–7, which will no doubt annoy them all severely.’
His loud, clear laugh resounded to the corniced height of the room.
‘Can you beat it, Clive?
They're actually running a book on who I'm going to marry.
Isn't life rich?’
The room was considerably less cluttered than the apartments of other members of the Royal Family.
Richard did not accumulate objects for sentimental reasons.
His cousin David Hicks had decorated the room in dove grey and gold.
His cousin David Linley had designed the only modern piece in the room, a small marquetry desk of English fruit woods which held Richard's private correspondence.
All the surfaces were bare apart from a seventeenth-century bronze statue of Theseus abducting Antiope, the queen of the Amazons.
The walls were similarly unadorned, apart from a large looking glass above the mantelpiece and, on the opposite wall, a double portrait by Van Dyck of two melancholy black-clad gentlemen of King Charles II's court.
Men were wrong about Prince Richard; women loved him not for his strength, but for his weakness, which was well hidden.
Women's eyes detected only the signs.
His deep-set eyes were normally narrowed against intrusion.
There was frustration in the tightness of his jaw, anger in his energy.
Everything about him betrayed a man of enormous emotional strength who had never been able to commit himself.
There were many women who thought they knew him intimately, and each believed that she alone could unravel the knot of his heart.
As they went through the business of the week together, Fairbrother noted a new lightness in the Prince's manner.
Vulgar speculation about his love life usually enraged Richard; there was still a mark on the pearl damask wall where he had hurled a glass of whisky on receiving the news that People magazine had voted him the World's Sexiest Man of 1984.
Fairbrother knew, but was far too discreet ever to say, that the Prince was oversensitive on the subject of his empty heart.
Now he was joking about the rumours of his marriage.
If he could find this sordid media circus amusing, he was a changed man.
‘You're obviously thriving on the excitement,’ he ventured.
The Prince caught his meaning instantly, and chose to ignore it.
‘Well, you have to laugh about things like this, don't you, otherwise you'd go out of your mind.
There's only one woman in my life, and that is Sister Bernadette of the Nansen Trust, and when we're through I'd like you to ask the office to get her on the phone for me.
Fairbrother knew his man and kept silent a few seconds longer than was polite.
Then he said, ‘Seriously, Sir…’
‘Seriously, Clive,’ the Prince mimicked his secretary's persistent Australian vowels.
‘Seriously you know I can't say anything until I've spoken to my mother.’
He had a casual way of saying ‘my mother’ which somehow emphasised invincibly the fact that his mother was the Queen.
The Queen was not due to return from a tour of the Far East until two days later.
Fairbrother refused to be intimidated.
‘Will you be speaking to her, Sir?’ he inquired, stone faced.
Speaking in this sense did not mean a pleasant filial initiative on the telephone.
If Prince Richard were to marry, he would need his mother's formal consent, and the tradition in the family was that matters of gravity were always discussed face-to-face and in private.
The Prince paused, shook his head like an animal bothered by gnats then turned with a resolute air.
‘Finita la commedia , then.
Yes, you can tell them I'll be speaking to my mother as soon as she gets back, tonight.
They can have a statement in the morning.
Although by then,’ he moved towards the door, his step noticeably more buoyant than of late, ‘our friends in the media may have something else to think about.’
‘Thank you, Sir.’
Fairbrother had not picked up the emphasis in that suggestion, and Richard decided to let it go.
There was a luxurious pleasure in being able to share a secret with one of the very few people he could call a friend, but this time he could resist.
Nevertheless he needed to test the bond now, to reassure himself that it was there.
As he walked to the door he demanded, ‘What's your fancy, Clive?
After all, you know the form better than anyone.
Who's your hot tip for the Royal Wedding Stakes?’
The reluctant courtier gave his master a look which would have extinguished any man with a less armour-plated ego.
‘Fuck off, Richie,’ he growled.
The Prince's laugh echoed from the corridor after the door closed behind him.
A two-mile tail-back of stretch limos crawled towards the Shrine Auditorium.
The temperature in Los Angeles was 90 degrees.
The air on the street was so thick and enervating that the gawpers who tried to glimpse the famous faces behind the tinted windows and security grilles moved in slow motion.
In the great Scandinavian tradition of Greta Garbo and Ingrid Bergman, Lorna Lewis and her daughter Jo Forbes were actresses who could never give of their best when their shoes pinched.
Even now, with a Best Actress nomination each and three more for The Dawn of Dreams , their first picture together, they saw no need to torture their toes until it was absolutely necessary.
On the floor of their limousine two pairs of handmade sandals lay abandoned; two pairs of practical but impeccably pedicured feet wriggled in the cool pile of the carpet.
‘Who paid for our page in Variety ?’ inquired Jo.
‘Our producer, of course.’
The Dawn of Dreams had been a family affair; the producer's credit was for Robert Forbes, Jo's father and Lorna's husband, who sat beside his wife, his long, elegant legs half-hidden in the ultramarine satin folds of her skirt.
Even in his eighties he was  a fine-looking man, the more so in any kind of formal dress.
The truth was that the two women between them had raised the nine million dollars needed to make The Dawn of Dreams , and they had done it with such consummate feminine grace that the handsome, silver-haired head of the family did not quite understand that his title of producer was merely honorary.
‘That stingy bastard — what did you have to do, sleep with him?’
Affection gleamed in Jo's large sea-green eyes.
‘I just told him I hadn't won an Oscar for almost forty years and it was about time, that's all.
He was quite reasonable about it.’
Lorna patted her husband's hand.
‘But I thought we didn't have a lot of cash left over for publicity?’
‘We didn't, but when I heard the whisper about the picture I decided to beef up the budget,’ her father explained.
‘Didn't make any sense to hold back.
I've lived in this town long enough to know that when people are talking about a picture in a certain way you don't need to spend a lot of money on hype, just a little in the right media and the nominations start piling up.
Then your picture's just about made.’
He enjoyed his new role of producer.
Producers, successful ones at least, were the lords of Los Angeles.
Jo caught her mother's eye and saw that she, too, was amused by her father's instant expertise in their business.
A few years ago Jo would have been unable to resist a put-down, but the Hollywood brat had grown up and knew how and when to be gracious.
‘People will want see this picture because it's damn good,’ she said, checking her make-up in the vanity mirror.
‘Five nominations won't do any harm,’ her mother added reasonably.
‘And it wouldn't surprise me if you won Best Actress, Jo.
You know you more than deserve it.’
Jo refused to discuss the Oscars; the whole idea was too exciting to bear serious thought, and besides she knew something about the events of the next three and a half hours that her mother did not, and would not until her name was called.
‘And people will come just to see Lorna Lewis at the top again,’ she said.
‘People will come to this picture to see you , sweetheart.
Especially, let's face it, when your wedding is announced.’
‘And boy are they going to be disappointed!’
She threw back her head and laughed, dislodging a portion of her dark brown hair.
The Dawn of Dreams had not been her most glamorous role — to play the central role of a disturbed adolescent Jo had gained 20lb and spent hours creating the greyish, pasty complexion of a kid raised in institutions.
It was dedication of that order which had won her the reputation of one of the finest young actresses around.
Expertly, her mother reached forward and repinned the falling curl.
‘They won't be disappointed,’ she reassured Jo.
‘Hold still now, let me just fix this…there now.’
She settled back in her seat.
‘I'm so happy for you, darling.
I know you both are going to have a wonderful life together.’
‘Do you?
I wish I did.
I love him, but he's so difficult sometimes…’
‘All men are difficult sometimes, even our wonderful producer.
And you're not always a dream to live with, you know.
Besides, he's not difficult, it's just his position.’
Her mother was the original cockeyed optimist, Jo thought fondly, as her eyes strayed to the window.
‘Oh my God, look where we are now.’
The cortège had been routed through one of Los Angeles' poorest neighbourhoods.
A group of derelicts seated in the trash-strewn gutter amiably waved their bottles at the passing parade.
‘This town is just incredible.
Sometimes I think the people should get out and leave the place to the automobiles.’
Even after a lifetime in Hollywood, Lorna could not look comfortably on squalor.
‘You look absolutely fabulous,’ she told Jo to distract her.
‘Uh-huh.’
Jo pulled nervously at the top of her dress; it was also of satin, a pink so pale that it appeared white at first glance, swathed tightly around her long-waisted body and embroidered all over with pearls, brilliants and crumbs of coral.
Jo thought the dress was gorgeous, and cunningly kind to her voluptuous shape, but she was always uncomfortable in formal clothes.
Leggings and sweatshirts were more her style.
And all that was going to have to change.
‘Who do you think I should ask to make my wedding dress?
Let's face it, no one can make me look like Princess Diana.’
Lorna shook her head, her famous blonde hair stirring like a cornfield in the wind.
‘I think the British people would appreciate it if you chose one of their designers.’
‘But they all make those frou-frou little-girl party frocks…’
‘Not all of them.
What about…’ she reeled off half a dozen names.
Of course.
Trust her mother to know everything.
Jo momentarily relaxed.
She felt tired and detached.
So much had happened so fast, and the man she loved was so far away.
She had the echo of his morning telephone call in her memory, and even that seemed faint and distant.
The limousine was finally slowing to a halt and they scrambled for their shoes.
There was a pause while they waited for Michael Douglas to go in ahead of them, and then the door opened wide; beyond was an incessant glare of flashlights, the roar of the crowd.
They were screaming for Lorna, and Robert handed her out first, then steadied Jo on her unaccustomed high heels.
The three of them walked slowly forward in the dense heat, deafened by the crowd and blinded by the lights.
A man struggled towards her, calling her name and waving a piece of paper.
She thought she knew his narrow, deranged face.
From the corner of her eye she saw the security guards wrestle him to the ground.
Jo raised her hand to wave, feeling the unaccustomed heaviness of the pearl and diamond bracelet which her mother had lent her.
The weight of the matching necklace was already giving her a headache.
She hated being on display like this, hated crowds and hated people snatching photographs, and trying to touch her.
Her mother had a genuine affection for humanity in the mass, which she knew she lacked.
She liked people one at a time.
Feeling severe misgiving, she gave the crowd her best smile.
‘You can just leave the bags here,’ Harley waved the porter with his load to the centre of her apartment's immaculate sitting room, then pressed a few pounds into the man's furtively extended hand and hustled him out.
Impatiently she struggled out of her blue gaberdine suit and began to rip open the thick, shiny bags and the gleaming boxes.
She tore away the tissue paper and threw the dresses over the sofa.
Oh, it was great to have clothes to wear again,real clothes, beautiful clothes, clothes that had been created with genius and handled with adoration, shy, deceiving little artefacts that seemed just lengths of cloth but once you possessed them would flow over your body like enchanted water and transform you into something magical.
She crushed the last dress to her face and inhaled the scent, the faint, delicious musk of fashion lingering in the fibres, the incense of the temples of elegance mingled with the stink of sweat, debts and cruelty.
The smell excited her like a pheromone, even now, three years after she had walked out on all that madness.
as if remembering the steps of a dance she walked to the long cheval mirror in the bedroom and tried on the dress, a dark grey beaded silk gown by Bruce Oldfield.
It was magnificent; the neutral tone accentuated the rich tints of her skin, which, after three years under the Jamaican sun, was the colour of medium roast Blue Mountain coffee.
But tonight's objective was to please Richard and be photographed by every goddam paparazzo in London, and that meant colour, the brighter the better.
She tried a red-and-pink Chanel shift, a Lacroix confection splattered with turquoise roses and a long green tube by Azzedine Alaia which made her six foot, 128 lb body look like some exotic serpent.
It was stunning.
She turned sideways and admired the long sweep of her neck, mentally accessorising the garment.
Long hair would be good, but hers was cropped short now, too short even to pin on a fall.
Life as a lawyer in Kingston did not allow much leisure for hairdressing.
And she needed ear-rings, big ear-rings…
The telephone rang, and as soon as she picked it up and heard the echo on the line from the Prince's lofty Palace rooms, she knew who was calling.
‘All set for tonight?’ he asked her.
‘I can't find a thing to wear, you know,’ she complained.
‘You've got to help me choose now, darling — would you like me in red, green or blue and white flowers?’
‘Anything — you always look fabulous.
Why are you asking my advice, you know you never take it.
You're the top model.
What do I know about frocks, for heaven's sake?’
‘What do I know about frocks, I'm asking myself.
I used always to look fabulous, but that was then and this is now.
I've had other things to think about just recently.
Now I'm standing here in this thing and I don't even know if I've got it on back to front or not.’
‘Well, what does it look like?’
‘Like I fell out of a tree in the Garden of Eden.’
Harley's laugh bubbled down the line.
Hearing it made him feel human again.
‘Just shut up and pass me that apple.’
‘Not bad, not bad — who's writing your material nowadays?’
His voice suddenly dropped to a more intimate key.
‘God, I've missed you.
We had such fun, didn't we?’
‘Just because I'm the only woman in the world who shares your crazy sense of humour…’
‘No, don't put it down, I won't let you do that.
I love you, Harley, I'll always love you, and you'll always love me, and that's settled, we both know that.’
‘Tonight will be just fine, you know,’ she reassured him, sensing the anxiety that consumed him.
‘You can always tell, can't you?
Thirty years they've trained me to give nothing away and you can still read me like a book.’
‘Can you get hold of some ear-rings for me?’
‘Don't change the subject.’
‘Rich, the dress needs ear-rings, long long long ear-rings, maybe diamonds or diamonds and emeralds…’
She was nervous, too, he realised.
It was always Harley's way to get more frivolous the more serious things were.
‘I'll find you some ear-rings,’ he promised, ‘and the car will come for you at six, ready or not.’
‘I'll be ready,’ she told him.
In silence, Victoria Hamilton gazed across her children's heads, thinking about their future.
The early summer sun streamed through the yellow Provençal-print curtains of the kitchen and illuminated a room in which the only sound was the faint crunch of toast in their mouths.
Unformed as their faces were, Sarah and Alex had the look of all her family, generous and strong-boned, with thick, fair hair above a wide forehead.
Agincourt faces, Jo had called them; the bony, resolute features of a dynasty which led the people of England for centuries.
‘Look, Mummy, I've got another wobbly tooth,’ Sarah pulled her rosy lower lip down and demonstrated the tooth's instability with her finger.
Victoria switched her attention to the present, flinching at the sight.
‘Don't do that, darling, it makes you look ugly.’
The child's face, shiny with butter and dotted with toastcrumbs, folded up in a huge smile.
She was delighted at having achieved her aim and made her mother notice her.
‘Were you being sad again, Mummy?’
Animation returned to Victoria's features; it was so touching when your children tried to make you cheerful with no conception of what was on your mind.
‘No, darling, I was just thinking.’
Perhaps this was a good time to prepare the ground.
If they were all to get on as a family, she would have to be careful about introducing Richard to the children.
‘I was thinking,’ she began with caution, clearing her throat, ‘that in time you might like to have a new daddy.’
The suggestion was received with complete lack of interest.
Alex had spilled some juice on the table top and was drawing his finger through the orange puddle with enjoyment; Sarah seemed completely preoccupied by the last mouthful of toast.
Their father, Patrick Hamilton, had died dramatically a year ago, blown up by an IRA car-bomb a few yards from what was then their home in Dublin.
Patrick had not been a demonstrative man.
His nature had been over-mature and he had been focused so much on his career that he had never had a great deal of time for his family.
Having herself lost her mother when she was three years old, the same age as Alex now, Victoria had watched the children carefully to see how they reacted to their loss.
She had concluded, with relief, that apart from a few episodes of moodiness from Sarah, they had taken it very well.
In many ways, the tragedy had brought the three of them closer together.
Victoria had discovered that the traditional upper-class way of raising children took all the fun out of it.
On her own as a mother, she had relaxed all the rules and found all the unexpected joys of being a parent.
She loved sitting up with the children until long past bedtime, playing silly games or just holding them in her arms and carrying on a conversation at their absurd level.
‘What sort of new daddy would you like, do you think?’ she persisted.
‘One who is fun,’ Sarah said with decision.
‘With a big car.
Daddy had a big car.’
Her brother also saw some advantage in the proposal.
‘Only sometimes, darling.
It was the embassy's car really.
And do you think he should have dark hair or blond hair?’
‘Doesn't matter but he must be nice,’ Sarah pulled thoughtfully at her pink hair ribbon.
She had been seriously into pink for a year; Victoria indulged her with delight and stifled the protests of her own aesthetic sense.
‘And what sort of job do you think he should have?’
She smiled to herself, reflecting that this was the question that had been torturing Richard all his life.
Perhaps the answer out of the mouths of her babes…he had this mad idea of working with refugees; politically, of course, it would be an absolute nightmare, but she was sure she had talked him out of it.
‘Blond hair and a farmer,’ Alex said slowly, his grey eyes wide with thought.
‘With a lot of pigs.’
Victoria laughed.
‘Oh dear, are you sure, Alex?
Pigs are awfully smelly.
Couldn't he just have a tractor?’
‘Oh yes, a tractor.’
‘Well, that's settled then.
I'll go out today and see if I can find a new daddy then, shall I?
A nice farmer with blond hair and a tractor.
But suppose they haven't got one at the shop?’
Sarah gave her mother a look of absolute disdain.
‘Don't be stupid, Mummy.
You don't get families at the shops.’
‘Oh dear, where shall I find him then?’
‘In the dustbin,’ growled her son with a naughty chuckle.
The new nanny, a reassuring figure in her brown Norland uniform, came in with the children's coats and Victoria automatically dropped the conversation.
She was longing to tell them everything, but even five-year-olds gossip and it was vital, at this stage, that no one should know.
‘Do you like my new dress?’
Sarah asked the nanny, standing on tip-toe to see herself in the gilt-framed mirror in the hall.
‘I like it because I look pretty like Princess Di.
Mummy knows Princess Di, don't you, Mummy?’
‘Only a little.
Off you go to school, darlings, and have a wonderful morning.’
The nanny hustled the infants emphatically towards the door.
She had already gathered that her new employer was extremely well connected and, as might be expected from a woman of her standing, required absolute discretion of her staff and the encouragement of her children in a properly modest attitude to the family's privileged position.
‘Here she is!’
‘Can we have a photograph, Mrs Hamilton?’
‘Vicky!
Come on out!’
As she opened the door Victoria saw the small group of photographers outside, waiting patiently under the small horse-chestnut tree opposite her house.
Heads turned all along the quiet Kensington street.
She quickly smoothed her hair, then kissed the children and said goodbye to them.
They looked at her in surprise as the lenses clicked.
‘Why are they taking our photographs now?’
Sarah asked with anxiety.
‘Has somebody else died?’
Four grey eyes were demanding an explanation.
‘No, nothing like that.
It's a nice reason but I can't tell you now.
It'll be a surprise.’
‘Can you just come forward a few steps?
You're in the shadow of the porch.’
Obligingly, Victoria took her children's hands in hers and posed on the steps while the nanny stood aside and looked on with pride.
Standing between the two stone urns which Victoria had thoughtfully filled with pink geraniums and ivy the previous day, they made a pretty picture.
‘Off you go now, darlings.
Mustn't be late for school.’
Looking anxiously behind them, the children set off down the street with the nanny.
The reporters were fumbling for notebooks.
‘I'm sorry, you know I can't possibly say anything.’
With a polite smile, Victoria went back into the house and shut the door.
It all seemed so much easier this time round.
She was more mature, more experienced.
There had always been a feeling of pre-destination with Richard and now that they had both suffered so much it seemed stronger than ever.
She hoped the photographers had not upset the children.
Of course, they associated being photographed with their father's death, she ought to have foreseen that.
Victoria's whole life had been lived within the aura of the Royal Family, and she reacted by instinct to nurture that relationship.
It did not occur to her that she valued her relationship with Prince Richard more than the love of her children, and had anyone suggested this to her, she would have been mystified; such a comparison was impossible.
Loyalty and morality were the same thing to her.
She had about her the rich glow of a woman who excelled at everything which constituted a woman's work.
She was a good mother.
She had been a good wife, too.
The perfect ambassador's wife, according to one of the senior diplomats who had been delighted to promote her husband.
Now she was a young widow, dignified but vulnerable, busy but not tastelessly careerist; she believed that she always put her family first.
She was also beautiful, in a very English way, uncontrived and romantic, her large and imperfect features artlessly combined in her own unique grace.
Her hair fell thick and straight to her square shoulders; it was a shade too dark to be fairly termed blonde, but Victoria's canon of style rejected tinting — or at least, tinting which could be recognised as such.
A few highlights were enough.
She was tall and generously made, and her clothes were self-effacing — this morning a faintly nautical look, a square-necked navy cotton sweater and a white skirt.
The skirt did not reach her calves at the ideal point for flattery.
Victoria had very long legs and skirts seldom finished where they should on her.
She considered her reflection between the gilded curlicues of the eighteenth-century looking glass in the hallway and decided to begin a diet.
And perhaps she should take up jogging or something.
White always made her look heavier, and she wanted to look perfect on her wedding day.
‘Lovely.’
A wooden coat-of-arms dangled from the heating duct above Sean Murray's head.
At 10:30 am, first thing in the Fleet Street morning, his desk at the Daily Post was still stacked with the detritus of the night before.
On top of the pile were the pictures of Victoria and her children, which he leafed through with satisfaction.
‘Old Keithie would have made more of it, but this'll do.
Excellent.’
‘But what's he playing at, Sean?
We've got these as well from last night.
The old dusky beauty.
Pretty hot stuff.’
The picture editor spread out a selection of shots of Richard and Harley entwined on the dance floor at various nightclubs.
‘They started at L'Escargot, went on to Annabel's, then Crazy Larry's, then L'Equipe Anglaise and finished up at the Chelsea Arts Club.
I mean, that was a heavy night out.’
‘It's the heavy nights in that count, old boy.
He's just a randy little shit, up to his old tricks, putting it about all over town, Victoria Hamilton's the one, mark my words.
We'll keep the mystery going today and then I'll splash it tomorrow.’
The picture editor was relieved.
Murray was becoming increasingly flamboyant in style, which meant that his rages were fearful when the rest of the team did not get him what he wanted.
His attitude was that he was the greatest gossip writer on Fleet Street and only the best was good enough for his column.
It was not a position which enhanced his personal popularity, but while he was still coming up with the stories Murray's position was unassailable.
‘Are you putting your money on her, then?’
Sandy, his assistant, returned from the library with a pile of cuttings.
‘Absolutely.
The horse's mouth, old girl.
Jane Brompton called me from the Betty Ford clinic last night and it's absolutely 100% sure.
Pop down and put a bet on for me while I'm in conference, there's a love.’
He handed the prints back to the picture editor and looked at his reflection in the dirty window to check the alignment of his snaffle-printed Hermes tie.
‘But how can you trust anything Jane Brompton says?
She's been on the sauce for years.
I saw Colin Lambert last night,’ her New Zealand accent sounded excessively plaintive when she argued.
‘And he said it was all over Los Angeles that it was Jo Forbes.’
‘Colin Lambert hasn't got two grey cells to rub together and will say anything to get his name in this column.
For Christ's sake wise up, Sandy.
The first rule in this business is never believe anything any actor tells you, especially about another actor,especially if he's fucking you at the time.’
When she blushed Sandy's normally lacklustre face looked almost pretty.
‘Use your head, girl — the throne of England's been rocked by an American once, they won't let it happen again.’
With a sulky expression, Sandy watched the two men prepare to leave.
‘You can start getting the page drawn,’ Murray ordered her, handing over a sketch.
‘There's the headline — At Last!
Rich The Bitch Gets Hitched!
As big as it'll go.
We've got the bastard this time — that'll wipe the smile off his face.’
THE GARDENS OF Balmoral in the middle of August displayed as much glory as the devoted skill of the gardeners could achieve in the short-lived Scottish summer.
On the west lawn a large motor mower progressed slowly across the sward shaving off the last half-millimetre of grass before perfection.
The turf, dense and springy after the summer's rain, was rolled into even stripes which led the eye away to the pine woods in the middle distance; the forest obscured what had once been an inspiring view of the valley of the Dee, but shielded the castle from curious passers-by on the road that followed the river banks.
In the sunken garden, orange snapdragons and pink asters, raised in the sheltered nursery beds, had been set out in lurid masses.
The borders blazed with purple loosestrife, golden rod and ox-eye daisies.
A waterfall of begonias, of every colour known to the plant breeders of the 1960s, filled the conservatory.
The men who tended the garden were well aware that to modern eyes this planting scheme was gaudy and banal.
It followed the taste of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert, for whom highly coloured bedding plants had been newly fashionable; successive generations at Balmoral, monarchs and men alike, had valued continuity above innovation.
In the vegetable garden rows of watery English lettuces had been sown in succession to provide sufficient salad for the Royal Family and their guests throughout their summer holiday.
The gladioli were staked in gaudy ranks and the sweet peas had been assiduously kept in bloom for a month to provide the maximum quantity of flowers for the house.
By the bed of alpine strawberries at the bottom of the slope two small children stood hand in hand watching one of the young gardeners at work covering the plants with black netting.
‘Why are you doing that?’ the boy inquired, his curly dark head on one side like a curious robin.
‘To stop the birds eating your father's pudding, Richard.’
‘Do birds like those strawberries very much?’
‘They're nae fools, they always know the best.’
‘Do you like them?’
By the age of six, Richard was well aware of the beguiling property of personal concern.
‘I do not.
They may be all right to eat but they're the devil to pick because they're so small you can hardly see them.’
‘They are very delicious, these little strawberries, aren't they?’
‘Aye, if that's your fancy.
I dinnae care for them myself.’
Expertly, the gardener pinned down the last of the net with a wire stake.
‘I've never eaten them,’ Richard gazed up at the man, his clear chestnut eyes, starry with their thick lashes, open wide as he judged the amount of pathos necessary to achieve his aim.
‘Have ye not,’ the young man's voice was noncommittal as he straightened his back and wound up the spare netting on a wooden stake.
‘Nor has Tory, have you Tory?’ he presented the girl, a golden-haired child with the high colouring of a Joshua Reynolds portrait.
Overcome with shyness, she looked down at her feet, twisted the hem of her much-washed pale blue smock and said nothing.
The two children were of equal height and made a pair pretty enough for a Victorian painting, the boy dark and vivid, the girl fair and withdrawn.
The sight alone would have won a more sentimental soul, but the Balmoral workers shared their countrymen's pride in hard headedness.
Besides, the Queen did not like her children to be indulged.
‘And who is Tory, now?
I've nae met her before.
Is she another of your cousins?’
With practised twists of his fork the gardener spread a small pile of stable manure around the strawberry plants.
‘Well, sort of.’
Richard knew he was related to Tory somehow, but was not sure if cousin was quite the right word.
‘We were cousins in olden times, I think.’
Suddenly the girl raised her immense grey eyes to look at the gardener.
‘My mummy's in hospital,’ she whispered, twisting a lock of hair around her finger.
‘She isn't very well.’
‘I'm sorry to hear that,’ the young man could not be sure, but it seemed that the child's eyes were glittering with unshed tears.
‘But she'll be home soon, eh?’
‘Yes,’ broke in Richard eagerly.
‘And when she does come back we're going to ask her if we can get married.’
A smile at once curled the girl's red lips.
The two tiny hands clasped together swung back and forth with excitement.
‘Well, now…’
Charmed in spite of his suspicion that all this was nothing more than an elaborate strategy to get the best strawberries, the young man leaned on his fork.
‘Do you not think you're a little young for all this?
You're nobbut six years old, if I'm right.
When you grow up you could change your mind, you know.’
At once the tiny girl was crushed in a one-armed embrace from Richard that almost unbalanced them both.
His small face crinkled in resolution.
‘I couldn't change my mind.
I love Tory.’
‘I can see that.’
The gardener's heart was melted.
‘I suppose you're after picking your girlfriend some strawberries now?’
‘Oh yes,please !’
Squeaking with excitement, the two children jumped up and down.
The young man bent down once more and carefully undid half his morning's work, lifting the netting off one row of plants.
Very soon every ripe strawberry on the row had been picked and tipped carefully into Tory's cupped hands.
The gardener, an honest youth of little imagination who was by now enchanted by the whole affair, remembered that the taste of strawberries was improved by setting them on a cabbage leaf, and strode down to the brassica beds to cut a broad green plate for the feast.
The two children retired to a nearby bench where Richard ceremoniously selected the largest and reddest strawberries for his companion.
When the illicit treat was over Richard insisted that they find their benefactor, now at work in the hot, wasp-infested interior of the raspberry cage, and thank him.
‘I don't know what I've to tell the chief when they want strawberries for the house,’ he protested in embarrassment.
‘Get away with you now, and mind you tell no one.’
Their strawberry-stained hands still clasped together, the two children strayed in search of further excitement.
Tory adored Richard.
For the past few days he had brought security into her child's world of distorted perspectives and half comprehended fears.
Until she saw him each day her small face was blank with anxiety.
Although everyone had tried to persuade Victoria that spending the summer with her cousins in their untidy house at the edge of the moor, would be a wonderful adventure, she was not convinced.
She was not yet fully converted to the philosophy held by her family and their circle that fresh air and the country were the ultimate enjoyment.
With her infant's intuition, Victoria knew that major shifts were taking place in the adult world above her head.
She was accustomed to her parents' absences and proud to endure them as a member of a sailor's family should, without complaint, but now the absence of her mother and father disturbed her.
Lately there had been too many hushed conversations and long telephone calls behind the doors of their London apartment.
Her brother Alex, two years older and much more robust in temperament, was her bulwark against the world.
Marie, their high-spirited young nanny, had endless patience with the timid child who was always the first to dissolve into tears.
Although both these comforters were with her, Victoria could not settle in the strange environment.
Aberknowe was one of several substantial granite houses on the Balmoral land which were occupied by the estate managers.
Victoria knew her Uncle Donald was something to do with the Queen's castle, and that Aunt Rose was her father's sister.
Her four cousins were all older than her and their dogs were boisterous enough to knock her over.
The house was always cold, full of stale animal smells and decorated with grotesque knick-knacks made from deer hooves or ram's horns which gave her nightmares.
All the adults pronounced the name of Balmoral with a unique excitement; the cousins were soberly proud of their duty to play with the royal children.
Alex, who in London shared lessons in the Buckingham Palace schoolroom with the little Prince and two others, was regarded almost with awe by the other children, but to Victoria these privileges seemed merely frightening.
She had drifted unhappily around the estate, dragging her feet and shrinking back from the noisy pack of children which romped around the gardens.
Alex, her brother, was big enough to be included in the older children's activities and without him she had felt unprotected.
Several times Marie had found her alone and in tears.
One afternoon a nurserymaid from the castle had appeared with Richard, and her distress had melted as quickly as it had grown.
The girls in charge of the flock of children assembled from this extension of the royal Household watched in giggling amazement as the two children fell in love.
At first they stood like statues, face to face, bewitched by the strange power of their own emotions.
Richard had already been remarked as the kind of small boy enchanted by small girls and deaf to the ridicule of his peers on the matter; on this occasion he watched Victoria twist her curls around her fingers in motionless fascination for ten minutes, then followed her for the rest of the afternoon, fetching drinks and finding seats, carrying her favourite blue rabbit when she dropped it and picking out the choicest pieces of bread and butter for her at tea.
To the relief of the nursemaids, Victoria's mood of weepy apathy subsided.
She knew that Richard came from the castle and understood that his family was the family to which all the others deferred, but now instead of intimidating her Richard's status seemed to impart a sense of protection.
He more than filled the gap left by Alex; his presence animated her with a mysterious excitement.
The sweet precocity of this infant romance delighted every adult who observed it, which in turn encouraged Richard in his chivalry and Victoria in coy connivance.
‘I should like to marry Tory when I grow up,’ he told Marie decisively during a rainy afternoon which drove the children in to the chilly shelter of the Aberknowe kitchen.
‘Will you mind very much?
You can come and live with us afterwards if you like.’
‘I shall know what to do because I'm going to be a bridesmaid next year,’ Tory confided in a diminishing whisper.’
Do you think Mummy will say I have to wear the same dress?
I know she doesn't like me having too many dresses because we can't afford it, and I don't mind — only it might be the wrong colour.’
Suddenly anxious to direct the conversation away from Mummy and her preferences, Marie proposed a formal engagement and began a hunt through the button boxes and trinket chests of the house for a ring.
A tiny circle of bright brass was found at last in the fishing tackle cupboard, slipped over Victoria's finger and proudly displayed to the rest of the party.
The next day they wandered out of the kitchen garden.
When Victoria found the grit from the paths got into her sandals, Richard removed her shoes and socks and shook all the gravel out of them, folding her socks for her to put them on again in the special way that her nanny did.
When she worried that they might not know when it was lunch time, he explained that when they saw his sister come back from her ride, then they would know.
‘We can find a bird's nest in the woods, I bet.
Would you like to go and look?’
Anything Richard could suggest was irresistible and Tory nodded.
They ran across the lawn and found a rabbit path through the light undergrowth between the red-barked pines.
It was quiet and warm under the trees.
Forgetting their purpose they collected last year's cones and made a pile of them.
They saw a squirrel and ran onwards, hoping to find more, but the path petered into nothing and Victoria tore her hem on a bramble.
When she suggested that they might be lost he was comfortingly scornful.
‘I know all the trees in the wood,’ he told her.
‘My father knows all their names.
This one is a Chinese Pruce.’
He patted the trunk with a hesitant gesture.
‘Or maybe it's a fir, a Noble Fir, I think.’
Victoria, who was by now very tired, looked up at the tree with a doubtful pout.
‘When is it lunch time?’ she asked.
Richard now admitted to himself that they might be lost after all but knew instinctively that saying so to Victoria would destroy the flattering confidence she placed in him.
He wandered crossly around the tree, kicking up dead needles.
‘Maybe Alex will come and find us,’ Victoria suggested.
‘Alex doesn't know where the path is,’ Richard was annoyed to find his beloved's allegiance wavering.
‘He'd have got lost ages before we did.
He's really stupid.’
The grey eyes instantly overflowed with tears and the girl's features, unformed miniature suggestions of the wide-browed Fairley face, distorted in misery.
Dismayed at the pain he had inflicted and at the pain he himself felt in consequence, Richard rushed forward, then stopped a few feet from Victoria twisting from side to side in frustration, wondering how he could stop her crying.
A jay flew out of a nearby tree, startling them with its clattering wings, and then they heard the unmistakable sound of distant adult voices calling.
Hesitantly, Victoria stood up, wiping the tears off her cheeks with the back of her hands.
A few moments later Marie and Richard's nursemaid appeared, panting as much with distress as exertion, with Aunt Rose, her old-fashioned roll of black hair half unpinned, behind them.
A few yards behind them came two of the gardeners and the young detective on duty at the nursery that morning.
‘Richard!
You little monkey!’
Relief and anger were mingled in the nursemaid's voice.
‘You know you're not to go wandering off like that!
We've been so worried about you — whatever possessed you?’
Marie knelt down beside Victoria.
‘Are you all right, Tory?’
Victoria nodded, her lower lip quivering, puzzled by the sudden drama around them.
‘I was frightened.
But I'm always all right with Richard, aren't I, Marie?’
‘Yes, love, of course you are.’
She stroked the child's hair and Tory, suddenly babyish, held up her arms to be carried.
‘Least said, soonest mended,’ Aunt Rose said, gazing meaningfully at the nursemaid.
‘There's no harm done and they didn't get far.
No need to make too much of it now.’
The girl nodded and took Richard's hand in silence.
They walked back towards the lawn in a procession at the pace of Richard's small strides until he stumbled over a tussock of grass, admitted that he was tired and accepted a ride on the detective's shoulders.
‘Have the children not been told?’ the nursemaid enquired of Aunt Rose once Victoria and Richard were ahead and out of ear-shot.
‘Not yet.
My brother is coming up at the end of the week to take them back with him, and he'll tell them something then.’
‘Poor wee mite.
It's a terrible thing to happen.’
Victoria's head lolled on Marie's shoulder; she was almost asleep.
‘She's a very sensitive child, though she's had to put up with a lot already, her mother being ill so much.’
Aunt Rose pinched her thin lips together, uncertain how much to confide.
She regarded gossip as a mortal sin, and encouraging it almost as bad.
The estate girls, for all their loyalty, could be as foolish as any other group of young women with dull lives and minimal education, and on this occasion most of Britain was also speculating about the death of her brother's wife.
Caroline Fairley, wife of Lt-Commander The Honourable Charles Fairley, RN, had apparently lost control of a car that was not hers on a small country road in Oxfordshire and crashed into a tree.
The car had burned out and the body had been difficult to identify.
There had been an inquest and the coroner had dwelt with what the family considered unnecessary emphasis on the theft of the car and the woman's motives for driving recklessly about the countryside at the dead of night.
With all this in the headlines daily there was no hope of preventing gossip; Aunt Rose would not normally have considered imparting any personal information to a servant, but she was concerned to protect the children from the truth until they were judged ready.
Furthermore, the Fairley family considered themselves to be people of consequence and were careful of how the world perceived them.
They had three centuries of expertise in oral disinformation on which to draw in these situations.
‘My poor brother,’ Aunt Rose said softly as they trailed across the drive to the side door of the castle.
Victoria was asleep and the detective paused a few yards away to swing Richard down to the ground.
‘He's being very brave but he did adore her, you know.’
The servants said nothing.
Richard's mother appeared in the door-way holding out her arms.
‘They hadn't gone far — where did you find them?’
She ruffled his hair, pulling out a leaf that was still caught in his curls.
‘Just away beyond the gardens, Ma'am.’
‘I was looking for a bird's nest to show Tory, Mummy.’
‘You mustn't run off like that, Richard.
Look at all the trouble you've caused.
Poor Tory must have been terrified.
Weren't you frightened?’
‘What's ‘frightened’?’
His attention skipped the strange word.
‘Can we find a bird's nest for Tory after lunch, Mummy?’
His energy revived, Richard was now intent on keeping Victoria's company as much to himself as he could for the rest of the day.
His mother shook her head, smiling.
‘Tory looks as if she's had enough of birds' nests for one day.
Besides, it's too late in the year, all the chicks will have grown up and flown away by now.’
‘But the nests will still be there — can we?
Oh,please …’
‘Wouldn't you rather go for a ride this afternoon?’
‘No!
I want to play with Tory.’
‘Oh dear, you and your girlfriends…well, perhaps Tory could come too?’ she looked enquiringly at Marie, who admitted that Victoria had been considered too young to ride by her parents.
‘I won't go if Tory can't come.
Can't we just stay in and play?
I could read her a story.’
There were uneasy smiles.
Richard's enchantment with girls sometimes raised echoes of anxiety in his parents.
He was also showing a distaste for outdoor pursuits that ran against the grain of their family life.
His mother and father told themselves that he was only six and was bound to change, but the incident that had made his grandfather King already coloured his life.
After lunch, it was decided to harness two Shetland ponies to a dog cart and give all the children who were too small to manage their own mounts a ride around the park.
They proceeded slowly in the afternoon sun, Victoria content to gaze up at the massed conifers as they passed and listen to the rhythmic grating of the eight small horse-shoes on the roadway.
She had Richard beside her and Alex, her brother, who was a much larger boy, sprawled on the opposite seat.
A groom led the ponies and the two nursemaids formed a chattering rearguard.
The road Richard chose sloped gently down towards the river, levelling out where the Balmoral bank sloped steeply down to the waterside.
‘Why are the flowers in the water?’
Tory asked suddenly, pointing down to a strand of granite pebbles by which a group of bright blooms apparently sprouted out of the shallow water.
‘Flowers in the water — oh, I see.
How funny!
How did they get there?
No one planted them, surely?’
Marie turned enquiringly to the groom who gently halted the ponies.
‘The lupins, you mean?
They used to be in the garden here, but Her Majesty doesnae care for them so they were thrown out on the rubbish heap, but the rubbish heap was by the river so the seeds were carried down by the water and sprouted by themselves on the bank.
You can see them away down the river for miles now.
And the water's high at the moment because we've had so much rain, so it's come up around their roots.’
‘But why doesn't the Queen care for them?’
Tory asked at once.
‘She just doesnae,’ the youth replied, loquacity exhausted.
‘I think they're pretty.’
Tory turned back for a last look at the rejected blooms as the ponies moved off.
‘That's just because you're stupid,’ Alex, her brother, announced, immediately receiving a punch in the ribs from Richard.
When they returned to the turreted stable block, Victoria was taught how to lead a pony in hand and walked it around the stable proudly.
The pony, irritated by her slow pace, tossed its head, tore the reins from her grasp, knocked her over and trotted away with a malicious whinny and a triumphant shake of its mane.
To everyone's surprise Victoria did not cry, but shook the mud off her skirts with such a defeated air that Richard in fury declared that ponies were stupid and he would never ride one again.
Afterwards this incident and the flowers growing in the river were all that Victoria remembered of that summer.
The Fairley family considered that they dealt with their tragedy very well, because both children afterwards showed no signs of trauma.
They were told a carefully graduated series of lies: first that their mother was staying in hospital for a while, then that she might not come home for a long time, and finally that she might never come back.
As their mother seemed already to have been in hospital for most of their lives, Alexander and Victoria saw no change and since the family followed the form of their class and delegated the day-to-day care of their children entirely to the nanny, the absence of their mother hardly affected their lives.
When they returned to London, Victoria settled peacefully to her routine of walks and naps, nursery lessons each morning and Madame Vacani's dancing class on Tuesdays.
Their father, occasionally grand in his uniform with gold stripes on his sleeve, went out in the morning and seldom returned before the children's bedtime.
One day Victoria and Alexander were called to the drawing room after tea and saw a strange woman in a dress printed with yellow lemons sitting on the fender beside their father.
‘Pamela is going to be your new Mummy,’ he told them.
‘But I don't know her,’ Alex protested.
‘You will grow to know her and love her as I do,’ their father took the woman's hand and she smiled up at him.
Alex threw himself on to the floor and rolled over and over shouting, ‘I don't want her!
I want my Mummy!’
‘Get up and behave yourself or Marie will have to take you back to the nursery,’ their father ordered.
He was not a harsh man by nature, only by training.
He himself had been brought up first to obey orders and then to give them in the expectation of instant compliance, and was unacquainted with more complex patterns of relationship.
Alex worked himself into a crimson-faced rage and bit the curled corner of the carpet, whereupon Marie picked him up bodily and carried him out of the room.
His angry yells sounded from the corridor as their father closed the door.
Then he took Victoria's hand and led her towards the strange woman.
‘Tory's a sensible girl, aren't you, Tory?
Would you like to give your new Mummy a kiss?’
Obediently Victoria stepped into the warmth of the fire and delicious aura of scent which the woman emanated.
She bent down her face, which was covered in pink make-up, and Victoria pressed her small wet lips to it.
‘Well done, Tory, that's my girl,’ her father approved at once.
‘We're going to get along famously, aren't we?’
The new Mummy patted her shoulder.
‘Would you like to show me your dolls before bath time?
I expect you've got lots of dolls, haven't you?
I had when I was a little girl.’
Alexander, who resolutely persisted in being rude to his new parent, was judged old enough for boarding school six months later.
There was a quiet wedding, which the children did not attend, and Pamela became part of their household.
She seemed over-conscious of her position as a step-mother and pitifully anxious to integrate well into her husband's family.
Victoria, always pretty and amenable, was taken on a round of the treats considered traditional for an upper-class London child: the zoo, the Changing of the Guard at Buckingham Palace, ice-cream at Fortnum & Mason's soda fountain, a visit to the enclosure reserved for some overweight rabbits near the statue of Peter Pan in Kensington Gardens and a Christmas pantomime called Where the Rainbow Ends in which four intrepid children fed their pet British lion a medicine called the Commonwealth mixture.
Marie sulked and complained that Victoria was always worn-out and was being spoiled.
What she really meant was that the child's affections were being alienated; this was not wholly a fair charge.
Victoria seemed to be growing shyer than ever, now less prone to tears but also less ready to smile.
The nursemaid felt a withdrawal of affection and was hurt, not noticing that the child was shrinking back from all emotional expression; the hugs and kisses once lavished on Marie had not been transferred to Pamela.
A crescendo of resentment built up between the two women, which reached its finale when Pamela lost Victoria's precious blue rabbit, whereupon Marie gave notice.
‘Daddy has been posted to Hong Kong, darling; it's a very, very long way away.
We shall have to go in an aeroplane for a whole day, can you imagine?
And it's very hot and not nice for children, so you can stay in England and go to a boarding school like Alex — won't that be fun?’
With a new rabbit and a short-haired piebald guinea pig in a box, Victoria arrived at a once-grand Queen Anne house in Wiltshire that was now a school devoted to raising the daughters of the gentry.
Most of the new girls cried a great deal; Victoria did not and the teachers were pleased.
Thirty girls between the ages of six and ten slept, ate and did their lessons in rooms with noble proportions, blistered stucco and peeling paint; they were each permitted the character-building company of one small pet and one pony, and slept on iron beds left behind from the mansion's use as a hospital for the wounded of World War I.
The school belonged, her father explained in reassurance, to some cousins.
Great Stourford had been built as the ostentatiously fashionable home of a sugar millionaire whose wealth was so substantial and political skill so keen that his grandson was elevated to the title of Lord Chamfer by Queen Victoria.
One daughter was triumphantly married into the Scottish aristocracy and the family thus connected through succeeding generations to the net of blood ties which included both the Fairleys and the house of Mountbatten-Windsor.
Three generations later, fortunes founded on sugar alone were lost and the current Lord Chamfer retired with his wife to the dower house.
The family home, dilapidated as it had become, was the last tangible talisman of their pride and, rather than relinquish it, the Chamfers leased the building and what remained of its land to an educational trust formed by an academically inclined cousin, retaining shooting rights, fishing rights and the right to have their female descendants educated gratis.
Suzie Chamfer, a sturdy, high-spirited child with thick brown hair which no ribbon could effectively restrain, became Victoria's best friend.
The school was but one institution in a network created to educate, employ and entertain those members of the British nobility who had the inclination to live as courtiers.
Birth was the least of the requirements for co-option to this introverted community.
Many hundreds of cousins, the majority of the proliferation that linked the Fairleys to the other great families of England, the Pagets, the Cavendishes, the Churchills, the Devonshires, and the Spencers, did not choose lives predicated totally on loyalty to the ruling house; those who did entered a circle in which birth and wealth were of some consequence but far less important than the taste for maintaining the moral code of the élite in all its ramifications.
Loyalty was the supreme virtue — to family, to the extended clan of the courtier caste, to the Royal Family and to the British ideal which they embodied.
Victoria and Alex learned first never to call this loyalty by its name, never to identify or analyse it, but to live it.
The morality they absorbed, the way of life which they assumed, were beyond question.
It became clear to them that their trust was to maintain the essence of their country in themselves.
Their class were the guardians for the mysterious quality of Britishness; it was their duty to be fair, honest, and clean in a partial, deceptive and dirty world.
For the next ten years their father was posted from one naval establishment to another, around most of the strategically retained vestiges of the British Empire, from Hong Kong to Aden, to Gibraltar, to Singapore and finally to Malta, and Alex and Victoria, rejoining the family during holidays, became seasoned travellers.
They learned also that they had privilege to complement their responsibilities, and they learned to deny that privilege absolutely.
Wealth was not to be flaunted, although as the children grew older they became aware that their father's circumstances were not the same as those of brother officers who lived only on their Navy pay.
Victoria continued to wear handed-down Liberty dresses from Aunt Rose's daughters, and wasting money by the excessive use of electric light, hot water or heating appliances was a vice which Pamela rigorously discouraged in children and servants.
Possessions were to be valued for their family associations, rather than their artistic or commercial value; the Fairley household gods — three glorious red Beloush rugs, another huge Persian carpet woven with a deer-hunting scene, two handsome gilt-framed mirrors, portraits both human and animal, and an assortment of silver — were carried from one featureless Navy married quarters to the next, becoming chipped, torn and battered in the process, but no mention was ever made of their material worth or aesthetic quality.
Like most officers' children, Alex and Victoria were educated in Britain and had very little contact with children of any other class but their own.
They were nevertheless encouraged to play with the children of other service families, instructed to be polite to these less fortunate beings and discouraged from arrogance.
Snobbery might be innate in their parents' way of life, but it could never be admitted.
‘Do we have to fly tourist class with all the ordinary people?
Can't we go first-class?’
Alex asked when he discovered that first-class passengers got ice-cream.
‘We are ordinary people,’ his father replied.
‘There's nothing special about us.’
He did not consider that he was misrepresenting his descent, since to acknowledge the family's status would display vulgar class consciousness.
‘But we are upper class, aren't we?’
Alex insisted, an intense frown knitting his thick dark eyebrows.
He showed every sign of inheriting and perhaps exceeding, his father's acute intelligence, which made him an exhaustingly curious and argumentative child.
‘There's no such thing as upper class,’ his father answered firmly.
‘Pamela's father's a shop-keeper, how can we be upper class?’
Pamela's father was the chairman of a large retailing group which included one of the most exclusive stores in Mayfair.
‘But our uncle is a Lord, isn't he?’
Victoria's open face, freckled from a few weeks in the Mediterranean sun, was clouded with bewilderment.
‘That doesn't mean that we're any different from other people.
You must never think you're better than somebody else just because of that.
Remember your father is just a sailor, that's all.
First-class is far too grand for us.
Anyway, we can't afford it.’
Their father called himself ‘just a sailor’ in the same deprecating way as King George V, King George VI, Lord Mountbatten and many other naval officers of royal or noble lineage had done.
It was their claim to simple humanity.
Aboard a ship naval ranking was the status system which over-rode all others.
The Royal Navy relieved these men of the burden of privileged birth, gave them a peer-group of brother officers and an isolated, artificial microcosm of society in which they were free to be themselves.
In return, the Royal Navy gloried in the title of the Senior Service and looked down on the Army and the Royal Air Force.
Outside the immaculately maintained and smartly guarded naval enclaves, where minds were drilled as thoroughly as bodies in uniformity and obedience, the privilege of royal society was granted on condition that it would be denied to all outsiders.
The children learned from the example of adults that it was their supreme duty to protect the Royal Family from the degradation of other people's curiosity.
Victoria and Alex occasionally returned to Aunt Rose at Aberknowe for summer holidays.
Pamela presented their father with three more children, two boys and a girl; this second family were collectively called the ‘littles’.
She preferred the hazards of local naval hospitals to leaving her husband and returning to England for each birth, but the strain of pregnancy in hot climates and the diversion of her own children made her willing to billet the older two on their aunt whenever it was convenient.
At Balmoral they internalised the lesson of loyalty completely.
At fourteen and sixteen years old, tall, well-built and strikingly similar in their strong bones and tawny colouring, Victoria and Alex naturally became temporary additions to the royal circle.
Since the brother and sister were always invited together, they were dubbed ‘V and A', and the appellation headed many a hostess's guest list for the boisterous informal balls organised during the summer.
Victoria was a graceful partner for Prince Richard, now a small, slender and self-conscious boy, but he forgot the sequence of steps to the eightsome reel and did not impress her.
Very few boys impressed Victoria; they all seemed inadequate beside her brother.
While a fervid interest in sex overpowered other girls, she listened to their confidences unmoved.
The perverse laws of sexual attraction ensured that this lack of interest only added to the appeal of her generously-made, rosy beauty.
Victoria seemed to bypass teenage awkwardness, and had already an instinctive ease of manner which reassured the boys.
Her most beguiling quality was her air of dreamy detachment; she liked being kissed, and kissed them back with mobile lips and a tantalisingly timid tongue, but at the end of a hectic hour of necking, when her partner would be scarlet-faced, sore-lipped and aching with frustrated desire, she was maddeningly serene.
These scrambling sexual forays amused her, but she was too polite to giggle.
Victoria was also popular with adults.
She was said to mix well, a social attribute particularly esteemed in one of such high birth and breeding since it implied the correct unconsciousness of her status.
‘You mean you really danced with Richard?’
Suzie Chamfer demanded during the animated dormitory chatter that characterised the first night of the new term at the larger boarding school to which at least half their class at Great Stourford had progressed en bloc .
‘Yes.
Everybody did.’
‘Wow!
Gosh!
You lucky, lucky pug!
What was he like?
I bet he was really dreamy!
Come on — tell us all!’
‘He was rather shy, I think.’
‘But he's gorgeous!
You mean you let him get away?’
‘Mmmn…there were loads of boys there.’
‘Didn't you even go outside?
Did he kiss you?’
‘It wasn't that sort of ball.
You know what those Scottish things are like.’
‘Yeah, draggy.’
Suzie sensed that Victoria was withholding information and knew why.
‘Well, I got kissed lots these hols, how about that?
Do you want to hear about it?’
‘Oh, yes, of course.’
‘Good, 'cause I'm going to tell you anyway.’
She chattered on, unaware that in the next bed Victoria silently registered her curiosity about a member of the Royal Family as a threat.
Suzie's interest was not easily quenched.
‘Is he taller than you?’ she demanded the next morning as they awkwardly shared the small mirror intended to discourage the girls from vanity.
‘Who do you mean?’
Victoria brushed back her thick, honey-brown hair.
The question seemed to her to be doubly hostile, implying both that the Prince was too short and that she was too tall.
‘Richard, of course.’
Victoria settled a broad black velvet band on her hair with a single efficient movement.
School rules required all girls to tie back their hair, and Victoria seemed to have a knack of observing the most oppressive and trivial regulations with grace.
‘I really didn't notice.’
She turned away from the mirror.
‘Well, when you looked into his eyes were you looking up or down?’
Suzie persisted.
‘I can't possibly remember,’ Victoria gave a patient smile.
‘You danced with the original Prince Charming and you can't remember ?’
Victoria remembered perfectly well that Richard's eyes were brown, a rich, glowing brown rayed from the pupils in shades of chestnut, bay and bronze.
She was rather surprised that she remembered them so clearly.
She did not intend to disclose such information to Suzie; defence by denial was a strategy she already operated well.
‘I can't remember the colour of the eyes of every boy I've ever danced with, for heaven's sake.
It was only a few minutes.
Alex talked to him more than I did.
Come on, Suzie, we're going to be late for breakfast and the tea will be cold.’
Suzie dragged her unruly locks to the nape of her neck and snapped a clip across the tangles, scowling at the dishevelled effect her best efforts always created.
Everything that was easy for Victoria seemed hard for her and she never understood why.
As the two girls whirled downstairs towards the clattering dining room, Victoria realised that a wedge had been tapped into their ten-year friendship.
Sometimes Suzie and Victoria had added Prince Charles or Prince Richard to their oft-revised list of the men they would most like to marry when grown up, along with Robert Redford, Steve McQueen and Mick Taylor of the Rolling Stones.
That had been harmless fun.
Now Prince Richard was no longer an imaginary distant idol and Victoria felt offended by Suzie's sudden fawning fascination.
At that instant she chose the path of her own life, and understood that in time she would have to part company with her friend.
Victoria was happy at school.
Alex attended a similar establishment for boys ten miles away and visited her at every weekend exeat .
The rules and routines of the institution made her feel secure and offered her plentiful opportunities to do what gave her the most satisfaction, to comply.
She was asked to study, so she did, and seemed surprised when her application produced good marks.
She obediently played sports in all weathers without complaint.
She helped the teachers, was kind to the younger girls, respectful to the older ones and friendly to the two daughters of a Rajput textile millionaire who, as the school's sole representatives of a race other than Anglo-Saxon, were not sought-after companions.
All these things Victoria did with a sense of duty so deeply buried in her psyche that no trace of condescension or obsequiousness marred the performance.
‘Victoria, you're a sensible girl, you go first,’ was an order she heard often and with pleasure, for whatever ordeal into which she had to lead the rest, from construing straight-faced a suggestive passage of Ovid to pushing her pony through a muddy ford, was always rewarded by authority's approval.
She accepted responsibilities gladly and discharged them well.
When the headmistress, with some guilt, asked her to take over the school's unpopular Commonwealth Society she rolled up her sleeves and cleaned out the dusty room that had been hung with torn posters depicting ‘Tea-picking in Ceylon, ‘Coffee Growing in Kenya,’ and ‘Sheep Farming in Australia.’
In their place she pinned up a poster of a starving black child and a chart which eventually recorded a handsome donation to the Biafran famine relief fund, amassed by the girls from a summer fair, Christmas carol-singing and a sponsored fast during which Suzie Chamfer histrionically fainted in the lavatories.
The next year, to the dismay of all who knew her, Victoria altered.
Alex decided to follow his father as a naval lawyer, and was accepted at Trinity College, Cambridge, to read law as a student sponsored by the service.
Expressing a desire to see the world first, he set off to spend a year teaching elementary mathematics in Kenya.
Victoria pined and cherished his infrequent postcards.
Severed from the only person with whom she had ever shared a meaningful degree of closeness, she lapsed into a state of almost trance-like disconnection, all energy gone.
Distress replaced serenity in her wide grey eyes and every task suddenly seemed impossibly difficult.
A test paper which she should have found easy was turned in uncompleted, with ‘I can't do this, sorry,’ scrawled at the foot of the page.
Her English teacher found her crying by herself over the job of rearranging the drama cupboard.
‘I'll never see my brother again,’ she moaned, hating herself for sounding so foolish when her grief was so vast.
‘Don't be silly, of course you will.
He's coming back next year, isn't he?’
‘Yes but he's g-g-going to C-c-cambridge and he's the only person who really c-c-c-ares about me.’
‘Now come along, Victoria.
You know that isn't true.
We all care about you.
I shouldn't be surprised if you're head girl next year.’
‘Oh no, I couldn't possibly…’
‘And anyway, Cambridge isn't the end of the world.
Why don't you apply to go there, too?’
The bubble of agony quietly burst.
Victoria sniffed and pulled a tissue from the pocket of her dress to wipe her nose.
‘I couldn't possibly, they'd never take me — would they?’
The teacher considered.
The school was an amiable establishment in Somerset which existed largely for the daughters of service and diplomatic families, whose fees were subsidised by the services to ensure that the scions of the officer class need not be tainted by cheek-by-jowl association with the children of other ranks.
In this milieu, academic achievement by girls was considered much less important than the development of the quality called ‘character', which meant the potential to become decent, responsible officers' wives, pillars of whatever community into which their marriages would take them, pleasant to look at but not disruptively decorative.
Victoria was more intelligent than most of them but typical in that she had conscientiously allowed herself to be educated without imagining any particular use for her good and well-trained mind.
A dozen girls from the school went to universities each year, very few of them to Oxford or Cambridge.
Those who did achieve such distinction, however, reflected glory on both school and teachers, and the English mistress at once saw how to gain advantages all round from Victoria's unhappiness.
‘You've most certainly got the ability,’ she told her earnestly, ‘and you're a good worker if you like, I'll write to your father.
I'm absolutely sure you could make it if you put your best foot forward next year.
Why not talk it over with your family and think about it for a week or two?’
Victoria made up her mind at once.
For two years she applied herself to her studies with an energy no one had suspected she possessed.
Commander Fairley saw at once the wisdom of keeping the two children of his first marriage together for the last years of their progress to maturity.
He was promoted to the rank of Captain and a desk at the Admiralty offices in Whitehall, which meant an end to the family's wanderings and a large apartment in a turreted neo-gothic building overlooking the Thames in London's legal district.
It had a circular room with a compass inlaid in mahogany in the parquet floor, and here father and daughter sat side-by-side on the window seat while he coached her each evening in the school holidays.
He also wrote letters to bring the full weight of the family's influence to bear on Cambridge University.
The examination papers written in Victoria's large, even script were considered adequate; her interview was unexceptional, although the examiners at Girton College recognised her at once as she had been universally described by all who knew her: an extremely pleasant girl of excellent character.
When the letter arrived telling her that she had been accepted to read History of Art, she shouted ‘Hooray!’ and flung her arms around her brother, then burst into uncontrollable tears of relief.
‘Don't cry, Tory, you'll look like a boiled owl,’ he advised, mopping her eyes with his handkerchief.
‘You big silly, you should be happy.
You've done it.
We're going to be together for three whole years.’
‘I know,’ she sniffed, taking the wet square of frayed cotton from him and blowing her nose.
‘That's what I'm crying for.
Why shouldn't I have a good old weep?
I've worked for it, I deserve it and I'm jolly well going to do it.’
Her long, strong legs folded under her and she sat down on the rug in the hallway and sobbed to her heart's content, while Alex patted her shoulder and wondered if he really understood his sister at all.
MARTHA HARLEY SAT down on the mossy stone parapet of the old bridge to put on her shoes.
She paused and peered down the rocky road to make sure that none of the children who lived in the lower houses had followed her.
They tormented her enough on the grounds of her pale skin, her thin body and her grandmother's pretensions to gentility and the shoes only gave them another cause to tease.
She buttoned the tight bars over her insteps, feeling the patent leather cool against her skin; lying close to the cold water all day had chilled the shoes.
The river was called Rush River, because of the speed with which it roared down from the Blue Mountains, scoring a twisted gorge through the forest.
The water came down so fast from the cold heights that it remained icy even in the thick heat of the valley.
The children played a game, jumping into the deep green pools in the torrent from the big rocks under the star apple tree; the cold of the water was so intense that Martha felt her body flush to its core with a spasm of heat; even after she had scrambled out of the water her flesh still tingled from the shock.
As she trudged awkwardly up the valley road her feet began to sweat and the toes rubbed painfully against each other.
The leather chafed her heels and the straps felt as if they were going to crush her bones.
Martha hated her shoes.
They were ugly, they hurt her, they drew attention to the ever-increasing size of her feet.
None of the other children had to wear shoes, and to Martha's contrary seven-year-old mind the reasons Nana advanced for insisting on shoes were not satisfactory.
The journey home each afternoon seemed endless.
The children emerged from the elaborate wrought-iron school gates, which were red with rust-preventer but had never got around to being painted.
They scattered across the dirt plaza that gave the low-lying village its air of consequence; those whose homes lay uphill began their journey with scuffling games of last-lick which ceased as the road became steep and the heat too strong.
A few at a time Martha's companions would turn into their own yards, until at last she continued alone to the highest village in the valley, her uniform a civilised patch of blue and white against the wild green tracery of the jungle.
Martha was not the only child who lived in the highest settlement, but she was the only one who was ordered to school each day.
She was usually alone, which she preferred to be; the roar of the river water seemed louder when she climbed the road by herself.
Martha thought that the river was angry.
Its depths were treacherous and swift.
The shallows lashed themselves to white foam over the limestone boulders of the valley floor.
In spate it was a terrifying torrent which uprooted whole trees and smashed them to driftwood; in drought it was an evil-tempered stream which grudged them water and tugged the pots from her hands if she did not hold them with all her strength.
The stones at its margins were bleached like bones and nothing grew at the water's edge except rank thickets of bamboo.
At last the track grew level and the valley floor widened into a clearing lined with small board houses.
Martha could feel now that her toes were not only wet with sweat but also sticky with blood.
She greeted their neighbours absentmindedly as she passed them in their yards, her mind occupied with the new argument against the shoes.
Nana's house was the only painted dwelling in the row.
Its yellow distemper had faded to the palest sulphur over the years.
At the rear, Nana's yard was grassy like a sparse lawn, not worn to dirt by chickens and children as most of the others were.
A high hedge of hibiscus screened all of the front from passers-by, except the window at the end which Nana used as a shop counter, letting down the shutter when she was open for business.
This was another futile pretension of formality, since anyone wanting to buy from Nana's small, dusty stock of essentials when the window was shuttered simply wandered into the yard and called for attention.
Having her argument prepared, Martha took a deep breath and opened negotiations.
‘Nana, you know, I can't cross the fording in my shoes any more,’ she began as she came through the gap in the severely-clipped hedge.
‘The water wet them up, I got to put them off.’
‘Say take them off, child,’ her grandmother corrected from the dim interior.
She tried to make Martha speak high English at home as if she were still in school, but the old woman often lapsed into patois herself.
‘And you can't go without shoes, I've told you before.
You got to wear your shoes all the time and thank God Almighty you got shoes to put on your feet at all.
You can step across the fording on the rocks.’
‘But I can't Nana, the river too high just now.’
‘What for the Lord give you fine long legs, child?
Don't tell me you can't jump above the water.’
The old woman glared down her straight black nose.
‘I can't Nana.
Don't make me wear them, Nana, the other…’
‘What the other children do is nothing to do with you, Martha.
Don't judge by other children, they got no ambition.’
‘Anyway, the shoes pinch me, see they mash up my toes, Nana.
Look, my toes are ready to bleed right now.’
Martha sat down on a rough wood bench in the yard and pulled off one shoe to show her grandmother her sore toes.
‘You always argue, Martha, you make me tired.’
Reluctantly the old woman prodded the unyielding toecaps of the other shoe, feeling Martha's long bones crammed painfully together beneath the worn leather.
She screwed up her face as if Martha were growing on purpose to prove her wrong.
The child was soon going to be taller than she was.
Nana was small and scrawny, and the sinews in her neck stood out like guy-ropes above the demure white collar of her dark blue dress.
‘What a way you growing now.
‘So can I take the shoes off, Nana?’
‘No, you may not.
We got to buy you new shoes again and God Almighty knows where we can find the money.’
‘But why, Nana, why must I have shoes?’
Martha felt ready to weep at the unfairness of it.
‘Child, I tell you a hundred times and you don't hear me yet.
You never learn.
You got your mother's hard ears, and hard ears people never learn.
You're fair like your mother and you can't run around without shoes like them ignorant dark pickney.
Now go on and coop up the fowls and don't bother me any more with your obstinacy.’
Angrily, Martha flounced into the yard and flushed the chickens out of the bushes and into the pen where they passed the night, fiercely calling ‘shi-shi!’ to the birds with the resentment she felt towards her unreasonable grandmother.
Once the birds were enclosed she leaned against the low coconut tree behind the house and examined her arms in the gentle afternoon light, wondering what colour they were.
Her grandmother never used the words white and black to describe skin colour.
She termed people fair or dark, and there was scarcely one of the valley's many-hued inhabitants whom she did not classify by colour.
Fair did not seem to Martha to be a colour at all, merely an excuse for a hard old woman to persecute a child.
The children at school, with whom Martha's struggle to be accepted was lost before it began because of her colour, called her Red Ibo.
Certainly she had the lightest skin among them, but she was not red-coloured, like the red of an egg.
Nana could make a chocolate drink with cocoa beans and goat's milk, and that was the only thing Martha could think of that was coloured like her.
Not that her grandmother wasted much time preparing treats for her troublesome charge.
Martha Harley never felt she belonged in the valley.
It was just a place where she had been left, and as she grew out of infancy she knew that it was her mother who had left her there.
The horizons of her life seemed unnaturally close; she could see no further uphill than the lofty breadfruit tree that overhung the road at the edge of the clearing.
It was their tree; although distant from Nana's house, it was one of several passed down as part of the family's inheritance.
It leaned over the track which disappeared in the deep shade below its deeply cut dark green leaves.
At the front of the house the space cleared by the road and the river enlarged her perspective.
She could see rising tiers of treetops, the endless green punctuated in its season by the brilliant orange flowers of the tree called the flame-of-the-forest.
Often there was a lonely John Crow wheeling over the hilltops in an unhurried search for carrion, and Martha thought that the big black bird must enjoy a superior view on the world.
There were mountains beyond the hills.
Most days they were invisible behind low cloud, but if Martha could not see them she could always feel them in the cold fury of the river and the eddying downdraughts of chill air which occasionally penetrated the valley.
The sudden cool of evening made it advisable to keep the cooking fire alive and in the morning a cold, heavy dew dripped from the leaves.
Knowing the mountains were there, Martha passed hours gazing upwards, waiting for a break in the curtain of vapour that would give her a view to the summit, her attention fixed at that mysterious level where the mist descended on the tree-tops and blotted out the perspective entirely.
She was full of a formless curiosity about the distance, but had no mental vision of the world outside the valley.
Her mother visited rarely, and Martha had no clear picture of her either.
All she had was a yearning for everything that was out there beyond her knowledge.
The track disappeared into the forest a few hundred yards past their house.
From the shade beneath the trees emerged each day some of the considerable number of people who lived in the mysterious heights.
They came down to buy sugar, flour, saltfish or candy from Nana, to collect letters and exchange gossip.
From the downhill direction came infrequent vehicles with business in their tiny settlement.
Nana's neighbours risked their rusted axles to carry up heavy goods for the store, and on the last Tuesday of each month the soda company sent a small pickup to collect its empty bottles.
Martha soon heard a new opinion on her colour.
Beyond the hedge of red-leaved crotons that marked the uphill boundary of Nana's yard stood a dilapidated shack that was unoccupied, the property of a woman in one of the lower villages who owned several plots in the valley.
One day on the weary way up from school a truck stacked with furniture ground past Martha; when she reached Nana's house she found the truck stopped in the overgrown yard next door, and a fat woman in a pink dress buying soda pop for a brood of children who stood around her looking fearfully at their new home.
‘Mrs Joyce has come to live here,’ Nana presented her customer with formality.
‘Is this your gran-pickney now?’ the woman demanded cordially, skinning a gold tooth as she smiled at Martha.
‘She so white!
I like that, pretty and white.
And she got good hair.
But she thin!’
The woman's square-palmed hand almost encircled Martha's upper arm.
‘You don't eat enough, me love, you got to put more flesh on you.
How old she?’
Nana remained seated on her stool in the dark front room, below the curling photograph of Queen Elizabeth that was pinned to the shelf that carried packets of Albion sugar, brown on one side, white on the other.
Martha could see from the humourless stretch of her grandmother's mouth that she judged Mrs Joyce and her offspring an unwelcome addition to the neighbourhood.
‘Martha is seven years old,’ the old woman announced in an aloof tone, anticipating the vulgar interest this information would arouse.
‘Seven?
Just seven?’
Mrs Joyce whistled in amazement and stepped back to look at Martha, her fists now buried in her wobbling hips.
‘She already tall like my Hyacinth and she twelve, jus' left.
Hyacinth!
You see this gal!
Come stand together so we can see you both.’
The biggest of the children, a girl with a sweet, oval face and a stout stomach that strained the buttons of her green print dress, handed the baby she was carrying to a smaller sister and stepped eagerly forward to stand beside Martha.
Mrs Joyce turned them back-to-back and the smaller children chuckled and somersaulted in their amusement to see the two girls were the same height.
Embarrassed, Martha stepped aside.
The moral gulf between the households was soon judged by Nana to be impassable.
Mada Joyce did some higglering in the neighbourhood, taking produce from the smallholdings down to the market in the coastal town of Annotto to sell and buying any goods the villagers might require while she was there.
In Nana's opinion this was not only a common occupation which gave a woman vulgar, loud manners but it was also bad for trade.
Mada Joyce expected Nana to trust her for goods from the store, but never expected to pay.
Mada Joyce had, it seemed, no husband but seven children from three different fathers, each apparently blacker than the one before and the latest, who occasionally visited and made half-hearted repairs to the shack, Nana dismissed as ‘nothing but pure Negro.’
Martha, however, was ready to question her grandmother's notions of colour since, whatever colour she was considered to be, it only seemed to bring her trouble.
She found Hyacinth, placid and biddable, an agreeable playmate and Mada Joyce a fine source of entertainment.
She knew stories about Anancy the spider and the Maroon people who fought the British in the mountains.
She scolded incessantly but never beat her children.
Mada Joyce also told the truth, which Martha considered the best virtue an adult could possess.
While Nana denied that there were such things as duppies and forbade Martha to look under her old iron cot for them before she went to bed, Mada Joyce was expert on ghouls, ghosts, spirits and apparitions of all kinds, and had known a woman in another village who had actually seen the skinless old hag who sucked babies' blood reach into the cradle of her new-born child and disappear with a shriek when she touched the Bible on the infant's pillow.
Mada Joyce also told stories of Jamaican people coming to the island as slaves from Africa.
Martha pondered this thrilling information for a day.
After school she went to do her chores, but soon fell into her customary trance of curiosity.
Eventually her grandmother came to rouse her, infuriated as always to see the lanky child leaning against the cornerpost of the verandah, craning her long neck to look between the palms at nothing.
‘You tidy the house yet?’ she demanded.
‘Yes, Nana,’ Martha assured her in a distracted tone.
‘You sweep up the yard?’
‘Yes, Nana.’
Martha turned and shook off her idleness, realising that the old woman would continue enumerating chores if she were not distracted.
‘Nana — how we come in this valley here?’
‘All the people in this valley is descended from four brothers from Scotland called Leekie,’ Nana sat heavily down on the upright rush-seated chair which was the most she would permit herself in the way of comfort, and began the tale as Martha had always heard her tell it.
‘My husband's name was Leekie, so my name is Leekie and so was your mother's before she marry.
And at the bottom end there was also a family of Portuguese Jews named Da Silva.
Everybody living in this valley descend from those two families and their people.’
Although everyone in Rush River told the story the same way, most of them said ‘and their slaves' instead of‘and their people,’ but Martha knew that Nana did not like the word ‘slave.’
She had never mentioned the people Mada Joyce had called Maroons, either.
Nana's form was to skip the next two hundred years of Jamaican history and tell Martha how her husband had gone away to work in Panama and never come back, and how Martha's own father was in America now.
Knowing the route Nana's history took, Martha tried to subvert it.
‘Are we Scots then, Nana?’
The old woman laughed, baring all her yellow teeth.
‘No, child, we not Scots.
What a question you ask me now.’
‘Well then are we African, Nana?’
Perceiving the child's intentions, Nana got up and walked stiffly to the front room, returning in an instant with the curling photograph of Queen Elizabeth from the sugar shelf.
‘We are citizens of the British Empire and subjects of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Second,’ she announced, as if to pre-empt any further questions, pushing the photograph into her grandchild's hand.
Obediently, Martha studied the image of a glassy-eyed young white woman in a long white dress and tiara.
The picture had been before her eyes every day of her life, and consequently had no meaning.
‘But your grandfather , Nana,’ she persisted, ‘what was he, was he an African?’
‘What kind of a question is that?’
‘Well, was he a slave?’
‘Slave days were long ago.’
Nana's small, knobbled hands were picking at her skirt, a sure sign of agitation.
‘But was your grandfather a slave?’
Martha continued, her head on one side in an attitude of persuasion.
‘No, he was not.’
Nana's evasions infuriated Martha.
The old woman was always threatening her with a stick-licking if she told lies, but told them herself.
She was a hypocrite.
‘This family has always been poor, but they were not slaves,’ the old woman almost shouted, snatching back the photograph as if Martha's impious fingers would stain it.
‘You too idle and too curious, child.
God Almighty must look out for you now — Satan putting ideas in your head.’
‘But the children of Israel were slaves in the land of Egypt, Nana…’
‘You dare to argue the Holy Bible with me?
You think you're too big to get a beating?
Where is my stick?’
The old woman hobbled around the verandah, consumed with fury and frustration.
In fact Martha was now too big to get a beating.
She had grown so tall and disrespectful that the old woman was afraid to hit her.
Instead she rushed angrily about the house, screeching threats and peering uselessly into dark corners in the pretence of looking for a switch.
Martha stepped back off the verandah, feeling a surge of fear conditioned by the beatings of earlier years.
The next day, a Sunday, Martha dawdled silently to church behind her grandmother, watching without sympathy her painful, crablike progress on bowed legs and misshapen feet.
Hyacinth came with them, more for company and the irrefutable excuse to avoid work than from any religious inclination.
The two girls lolled in their chairs, their dresses sticking to their sides in the heat, examining the cobwebbed underside of the church's tin roof.
Nana always chose the same place to sit in the congregation.
The front row on the left was taken by the two light-skinned women who ran the Primary School.
The front three rows on the right were occupied by the wealthiest black families in the valley.
Nana sat on the left side, four rows from the front.
On their slow progress back up the road Hyacinth lagged behind them, pausing more and more often and holding her belly.
‘I can't breathe,’ she complained, gasping like a fish.
‘Me breast tough up.’
Martha paused with her, noticing that Hyacinth was sweating heavily and her skin, normally plump and smooth, looked oddly withered and sunken around her eyes.
Hyacinth shook her head, her heavy braid swinging between her shoulder blades.
‘I can't go on, I got to sit down,’ she gasped, collapsing heavily on the grass.
‘Oh God!
Lord Jesus!
Oh God!
It hot!
Me belly hot!’
She clutched again and again at her stomach with her crossed arms, then rolled on to her side and lay moaning, her face contorted with pain.
‘Nana!’
Disturbed, Martha called after her grandmother, but the old woman kept walking uphill with stiff, arthritic strides.
‘Nana — we got to help Hyacinth!’
Martha ran after the old woman, but she did not look round.
‘Hyacinth can get up and walk,’ she said, her nose in the air in a familiar pose of disdain.
Fury filled the child and picked up her feet.
She leaped up the track and ran until she felt as if her lungs would burst.
The forest became a blur of green around her until at last she tore into Mada Joyce's yard, her long limbs flailing, sending the fowls squawking under the house in panic.
‘Hyacinth can't walk, she fall down on the road, Mada Joyce, come quick!’
Mada Joyce's round face appeared in the doorway, frowning in anxiety.
‘She just fall down in the road screaming.
She say her belly hot.’
Mada Joyce suddenly nodded and gave a smile of understanding.
‘I expect I know what happen.’
Hyacinth was lying where Martha had left her, curled in a foetal ball at the roadside, her eyes shut.
She was moaning and dribbling and her Sunday dress of aquamarine nylon which Martha admired greatly was streaked with mud, a sure sign of extreme distress.
‘Now, me love, what the matter with you?’
Mada Joyce bent ponderously to feel Hyacinth's brow and the child's eyes fluttered open.
The curious children stood around like statues, stilled by the drama.
‘It hot so much,’ Hyacinth whispered.
‘Yes, child, I know.
Hot all the time or it come and it go?’
Mada Joyce picked a wisp of grass from her daughter's hair and stroked her round cheek.
‘It come and it go.’
‘Try if you can get up now.’
Her eyes wide with apprehension, Hyacinth rested her arm on her mother's well-padded shoulder and stood up.
She paused, frightened but feeling no pain, then gasped and looked down with embarrassment.
Silent drops of scarlet were falling on the grass around her feet.
Mada Joyce nodded again, a mixture of satisfaction and irritation in her manner.
‘See there now.
I think so, I think it your period.
You know I ask you, Hyacinth, if you see your period yet?’
The child nodded, glancing fearfully around the small circle of onlookers.
‘So long you been growing out of childhood, now you step into womanhood.
You turn big woman, now.
This is your period,’ Mada Joyce's concern began to turn to sternness.
‘Now you got to take care, child, stay away from the boys.
If you have anything for do with a boy now, you will get pregnant.’
Hyacinth shook with a new thrill of fear, and her mother's tone softened.
‘Don't mind the pain, child.
Woman's life full of pain always.
Come up now, I make you some bush tea and you will feel better.’
Martha was burning with curiosity but the solemnity of the affair checked her questions.
They proceeded slowly back uphill, with Hyacinth walking taller at each step as she appreciated the glamour of her new condition.
Two of her brothers, boys of Martha's age but half her height, fell into an exchange of sniggers and whispers, and Mada Joyce paused to smack them around the ears.
‘You Granny keep Safex in her little store?’
Mada Joyce enquired of Martha, who had no idea what Safex might be.
‘Ask her,’ she was commanded.
‘Ask if she got Safex and maybe some gin.’
Eager to take a role in Hyacinth's drama, Martha sped ahead and found Nana resting on her porch, her church books still in her hands.
‘Hyacinth is turn big woman now,’ she announced, radiant with sympathetic pride.
‘Mada Joyce ask if we got some Safex and some gin.’
A flash of black fury shone in the old woman's eyes.
‘On Sunday ?
That woman have the impertinence to send you to ask for unmentionable things on Sunday?’
Nana's rage struck like lightning; now she shot from her chair and grabbed Martha by the arm, dragging her into the stuffy gloom of the bedroom.
‘Stay out of that house!
I told you to have nothing to do with that woman!
Why you always want to go with those ignorant worthless people!’
‘They not ignorant nor worthless either!’
Martha felt her stomach churn with emotion and her tongue loosened with anger.
‘You're the one who's ignorant!
You tell me lies all the time!
You go to church so fine and holy and when your neighbour fall down sick you pass by on the other side!
You are like the Pharisees and the hypocrites!’
The old woman gave a scream of outrage and began raining slaps on Martha's head.
Feeling her strength almost equal to Nana's, Martha thrashed her arm to break her grasp.
She lost her balance and fell back on the old iron bedstead, pulling the old woman off her feet.
For a few seconds she felt the bony weight of her grandmother on top of her and smelt the sickly powder she used; then Nana struggled upright, her breath rasping painfully in her throat, and pulled a thick length of bamboo from its hiding place behind her dressing table.
‘Those who cannot hear must feel the rod of correction,’ she declaimed, raising the stick as she advanced, Martha let out a shriek, leaped to her feet and, barely aware of her action, hit the old woman as hard as she could on the side of the head, knocking her against the wall.
Her spectacles clattered on the board floor.
Martha bolted out of the door and crashed through the hedge into Mada Joyce's yard, expecting to hear her grandmother's shout of rage behind her and all the more fearful when only silence pursued her.
At once her own drama was engulfed in the tumult of Hyacinth's entry into a woman's estate.
The boys were screaming around the yard outside with companions attracted by the commotion.
Mada Joyce and a neighbour bent over the cooking fire arguing over the best decoction of herbs for the girl's condition.
In the bedroom the females of the clan gathered in awed silence.
Hyacinth, now well advanced in hysteria, lay in state on the old striped pallet on which she slept, moaning through clenched teeth and clutching her belly.
Around her hovered two younger sisters with a washing towel and an enamel basin.
Martha watched in silence, unconsciously rubbing her palm on her dress because she could still feel the crisp impact of Nana's hair against her hand.
Mada Joyce at last brought in the bush tea, hauled her daughter into a sitting position and persuaded her to drink.
‘This will ease the pain, my love,’ she promised.
‘Drink it all up.’
Unconvinced, Hyacinth sipped cautiously, then gagged, seized the enamel bowl from her sister and spat into it.
Mada Joyce retrieved the mug and clicked her tongue in annoyance.
‘It can't do you no good if you spit it out.
Drink it all up and all this painful agony finish.’
‘It too nasty — me can't drink that stuff,’ Hyacinth implored, close to tears, but her mother resolutely grabbed her head, held her nose with one hand and poured the potion down her throat with the other.
Retching and weeping, Hyacinth subsided on the mattress and the bitter herbal odour of the brew filled the stifling interior of the hut.
Having anticipated that Nana would be unable to supply gin and Safex, even in an emergency, Mada Joyce had sent her oldest boy loping down to the Chinese store in the lowest village for these essentials.
When he returned more water was boiled with leaves brought by a second neighbour summoned from her home in the upper forest.
Martha, mesmerised by her friend's ordeal and grateful to feel the guilt of her attack on Nana ebb away in this greater crisis, watched silently from the corner of the tiny room.
In the distance she heard a car engine, normally a sound which compelled curiosity but now of no interest.
After more anxious discussion, the woman who had come down with the leaves, bony and greyish of skin with her hair wrapped in a yellow turban, poured half, then all the small bottle of gin into the steaming mixture and ceremoniously put it in the centre of the floor.
‘She must sit on the pot until it cool so the vapour can come up her inside,’ the thin woman commanded.
Hyacinth, quieter now, glanced around the room in embarrassment and her mother at once shooed out the smaller children.
With an expression of furtive apprehension, Hyacinth allowed herself to be helped to her feet and settled, squatting, on the pot.
‘Too hot!
It burn me up!’ she squeaked, leaping away at once.
‘It must be hot as you can bear or it can't do no good,’ the thin woman insisted, motioning Hyacinth back with her knobby hand.
Voices called outside in the yard, and the girl glanced nervously towards the doorway; with difficulty Mada Joyce pulled the door approximately shut on its rusted hinges.
Hyacinth nervously straddled the pot again and, supported by her mother, was lowering herself over the steaming brew when the door crashed open.
‘Martha!
Ain't no use to hide yourself in here!
You got to come out directly.
Here's your mother come to see you now.’
Nana's voice, distorted with tension, sounded so unnatural that at first no one recognised it.
Hyacinth leaped to her feet with a yell and knocked over the pot, screaming again as its scalding contents splashed her legs.
Into the intense atmosphere of the hut, now additionally aromatic with herbs, juniper and alcohol, walked the most beautifully dressed woman Martha had ever seen.
Her tall, slender form was tightly swathed in a pink dress and she stepped warily across the uneven boards on white sandals with heels so high and narrow it seemed barely possible that they could support a human being.
Behind this graceful form Martha could see her grandmother in a state of strange tension, arms folded and brows contracted in the effort of masking her feelings.
The elegant one turned the neatly-coiffed head on her long neck and looked apprehensively around the room, careful to suppress her alarm at the primitive scene into which she had intruded.
With almond-shaped eyes thickly outlined in black she looked from one face to another, Mada Joyce, appreciating the situation immediately, pulled Martha forward.
‘Martha she here,’ she smiled hopefully.
‘Martha, my daughter, my darling child.’
Two slender arms extended towards her and Martha realised that this must be her mother.
‘My what a big girl you are.
When I last saw you you were just a tiny little pickney.’
Martha scented a fresh aroma of cleanliness and toiletries as her mother kissed her.
‘But you're so thin!
Just skin and bone!’
Her mother held her at arm's length and examined her like a piece of merchandise, turning her this way and that, searching for concealed flaws.
Then the almond eyes gazed fiercely over the child's head towards Nana.
‘Let's go back to Nana's house, shall we?’
In a silence vibrating with silent accusation the three of them filed through the gap in the croton hedge.
An enormous powder blue car, gleaming and new, its plentiful chromium winking in the sunlight, was drawn up in front of the house and against it leaned a man in a white suit.
‘This is my husband, Martha, his name is Denzil.’
The man shook her hand and smiled.
He was slight and a light yellow colour, with round shoulders, and Martha felt he was friendly.
‘We came here today to see how you were doing, up here in the bushes with Nana,’ her mother explained, leaning against the hot side of the car and avoiding the child's eyes.
‘I thought to myself, Martha must be growing up now, it's time she left the country and came to live with me and go to a good school.’
‘Leave Nana's house?’
Martha was not sure she understood the suggestion.
Much as she disliked living with her grandmother, she had never thought of any other arrangement in concrete terms.
‘Yes, and come to live with us in Kingston.
In our house.
We have a lovely house up on a little hill.’
Martha was speechless.
The simplicity of the rescue her mother proposed astonished her.
She was dazzled by the vista of liberty conjured up before her.
She gave Nana a quick, guilty glance and saw the old woman, arms still folded, standing a few paces apart, maintaining her vacant expression.
‘Can we go now?’
Martha asked at last, testing her good fortune.
The man and her mother laughed.
‘As soon as we can gather up your things, darling,’ her mother promised.
‘Go on and find your clothes, I have something to clear with Nana first.’
Martha's school dress and books, her one skirt, two blouses and handful of frayed underwear were swiftly parcelled up in the coarse paper Nana used in the shop.
The old woman scarcely said a word and betrayed no emotion, although Martha felt an obscure sense of triumph and her mother was plainly anxious to leave as fast as possible.
A parcel of mangoes was also assembled and loaded into the car.
Martha and her grandmother said goodbye without looking at each other and then the newly constituted family climbed into the shining blue vehicle and bumped slowly down the track.
‘She is so thin,’ the man observed in a soft, concerned voice.
He leaned forward over the steering wheel to see his way through a deep pot-hole in the road.
‘What kind of food were you getting, child?
Nothing but callaloo and green banana porridge, I'm certain.
Did you get hungry, Martha?’
‘Nana said I was always hungry.’
‘Maybe she's been ill — have you darling?’
On the wide bench seat her mother held her close.
Martha shook her head, feeling tiredness descend on her like the low cloud on the mountains, muffling all her emotions.
‘I never sick,’ she whispered with pride.
‘I should have come before, I meant to come before,’ her mother's smooth voice was tight with anger.
‘Nana is too strict and too hard for a little child all alone like you.
It was different for me, I had my brothers, she was so busy beating them she never noticed me.’
The car wallowed around the last bend in the descent and cruised across in front of the school gates leaving two trails of dust behind.
Martha wanted to look back but was too tired to turn her head.
By the time the car reached the coast road she was asleep.
The house was pink like her mother's dress, and sat high on Beverly Hills with a view out over the whole sprawl of Kingston to the hazy bay beyond.
It was made of concrete and had a beautiful garden with a white hibiscus bush and one small, resinously scented tree.
Inside everything was modern.
Martha delighted in turning on the taps in the bathroom and watching water pour out at her command, and when that attraction palled she took to rushing into the kitchen to watch the maid turn on the fire.
Her mother proudly showed her a room which was all for herself, with a pretty bed made up with white sheets and two pillows.
For the first two nights Martha peered under the bed for duppies and enjoyed having no one to forbid her; by the third evening she forgot.
After Denzil had gone to work his driver returned with the car and took them shopping.
Martha stood patiently for a long time while her mother tried one dress after another on her, hoping to find a colour that made her skin seem paler and a cut that disguised her skeletal proportions.
She decided that ruffles were the most effective camouflage and to her delight Martha was attired in a selection of white frilled dresses with petticoats.
They were hot and prickly to wear, and impossible to keep clean, but they charmed the child so thoroughly that she was content to sit as still and silent as a doll eyeing the dazzling frills and listening to the faint crackle of the underskirts.
All this, and the sudden materialisation of a mother who fulfilled all her formless dreams, seemed to Martha confirmation that her discontent with life in the valley with Nana had been justified.
Now, she felt, she was cherished and valued, the centre of attention, and her real life could begin.
as if to confirm these notions of her importance, an enormous party was held in the villa a few weeks after her arrival.
From the balcony, she was pushed forwards to see an immense display of fireworks above the town below.
‘What's it for, Mama?’ she asked, watching open-mouthed a huge waterfall of silver sparks hanging in the smoky night sky.
‘This is the Independence celebration,’ her stepfather told her solemnly, handing her a pair of heavy ex-Army field glasses so she could see better.
‘The Queen has given Jamaica independence from Great Britain now, so we can be our own country by ourselves.’
‘Is the Queen down there?’
Through the glasses it seemed as if the whole sky was showering brilliance on the town below.
One of their guests gave a sarcastic laugh.
‘The Queen's thousands of miles away and she's not stirring herself on account of Jamaica, of that you can be sure.’
‘Norman Campbell, why must you always be so cynical and spoil things for the child?’
Her mother put her arm around Martha's shoulders, enveloping her in a cloud of scent.
‘The Queen sent her own sister, a real princess, instead.’
‘Is it the princess who's down there then?
Can we go and see her?’
‘Well, darling…’ her mother was never anxious to mingle on the streets.
‘Why not?’
Denzil broke across her refusal.
‘You can come to my office with me in the morning and we can see her as she leaves King's House.’
And so in the blazing heat of the next day Martha was supplied with a small replica of the new green, black and gold Jamaican flag and hoisted on to her stepfather's shoulders at the gates of what had just ceased to be the colonial governor's mansion, to see a small erect figure in the back of a Rolls-Royce drive slowly away.
‘Independence,’ Martha repeated the word solemnly to herself.
In her child's understanding it seemed that it was her own liberation that was the cause of the celebration, and the arrival of the princess, the flags which appeared on all the buildings and the succession of functions for which her mother and Denzil put on their beautiful evening clothes and left her with the maid.
‘You're going to have a little baby brother, Martha,’ her mother told her one day.
‘Or maybe it will be a little sister.’
‘Can I have a sister, please, Mama?’
Martha assumed with delight that this was another special recognition of her preciousness.
Nana and her earlier life faded from her consciousness, the emotional charge of her parting not neutralised but stored deep within her.
The next few weeks were the happiest of her life, but then she sensed that her mother was losing interest in her.
At each meal she willingly cleaned her plate, eating ice cream and fried chicken until she felt bloated.
Steak, french fries and chocolate, delicious new delicacies, were all put before her and she gorged enthusiastically.
She made rivers of melted butter in mountains of sweet potato, snacked on corn boiled in broth or greasy fish and bammy and discovered the thrilling sophistication of Coca-Cola.
She knew that her mother wanted her to be fatter; she willed herself to grow solid flesh like Hyacinth, but nothing changed.
Every rib and every vertebra could be counted.
‘I don't know why you should be so thin,’ her mother complained in disappointment.
‘You're eating like a horse.
I was never thin like that and your father was a great big man, his legs were like the trunk of a tree.’
She was better satisfied with their trip to a beauty parlour, where Martha's hair was released from its braids, anointed with a number of glutinous white creams, cut to the level of her shoulders and wound upon enormous wire rollers.
When her coiffure was dry, Martha saw her small oval face framed by curtains of hair that was stiff and immobile but appeared at least to be straight.
The face was another disappointment.
‘I don't know why you should be so dark,’ her mother said with irritation, accidentally scraping Martha's cheek with her long, scarlet thumbnail.
‘Your father was lighter than I am.’
‘Nana's very dark,’ Martha suggested helpfully.
‘Yes, well…’ her mother's pencilled arcs of eyebrows contracted in anxiety.
‘You know, the only ambition she ever had for me was to marry well and bring up the colour of the family.’
Unconsciously she patted the slight swelling of her stomach under her smart new navy-blue smock.
‘Never mind, darling, just remember that the colour of your skin is not the colour of your mind.’
This maxim Martha repeated fervently to herself during her first week at school.
Her mother and the driver escorted her to a complex of low concrete buildings in a parched garden high on a nearby hill.
Martha thought it was a beautiful school; all the pupils were girls, most of them were white, and some of them arrived in cars even larger than her own.
Her teacher was white — indeed, all the teachers were white — and told them with great pride that she came from England.
Martha longed to show off her advancement in reading and writing, for which she had been noted in the valley, and was bewildered and humiliated when she could make no sense of the books she was given.
She ended the first day with a headache so severe she could hardly see.
She could not find any satisfactory playmates.
From being the palest child in her school, Martha found that she had become one of the darkest.
She was unwilling to ally herself entirely with the three truly black girls in her class, who were scholarship students from poor families.
Martha saved herself from relegation to a junior class by reciting the whole of Psalm 103, one of Nana's favourites, in morning assembly; after this feat her teacher had a long conversation above her head with her mother, and began to come to their house on Saturdays to give her extra lessons.
Martha found these even more difficult; she screwed up her entire face in the effort of deciphering print.
‘What are we going to do with you, Martha?’ the exhausted woman exclaimed, attempting jollity because she saw that the child was distressed by her failure.
‘You've got the memory of an elephant, you're probably the cleverest girl in class and you can't read.’
‘This book's so difficult,’ Martha rubbed her eyes.
‘The pages just mist up.’
‘Is it easier if you hold the book closer to you?’
The teacher had noticed that Martha held her books almost at arm's length.
The child shook her head.
‘It's easier if it's further away.’
‘Can you read the names on those packets over there?’
They were seated at the breakfast bar in the kitchen, and she pointed to a row of cereal boxes at the far side of the room.
Martha instantly rattled off the names and descriptions, hardly stumbling over strange words like niacin and riboflavin.
‘Can you tell me what's on the table in the living room?’
It was a copy of The Daily Gleaner ; from a distance of twenty feet Martha could read all the headlines and some of the smaller print.
‘You know, I believe the problem is with your eyes not with your brain at all.’
She took Martha's hand and together they went to the terrace where her mother was resting on a new cushioned lounger.
‘I wonder if you would consider having Martha's eyes tested,’ the teacher suggested, her commanding tone precluding any disagreement.
Shortly afterwards Martha's world came sharply into focus.
She was supplied with a hideous pair of spectacles with yellow frames and thick lenses.
‘You'll only need them for your school work,’ her mother reassured her, also trying to talk herself out of her own dismay.
‘You can take them off the instant you don't need them for reading.’
Martha, eager to reassume the status of the cleverest child in class, could not appreciate her mother's concern.
‘Don't you see,’ her mother explained, drawing her close with an arm around her bony shoulders, ‘you'll be looking after boys soon and things are just like they say, boys don't make passes at girls who wear glasses.’
Martha sniffed, unimpressed equally by her mother, by boys, and by any benefit likely to be acquired through beauty.
JOCASTA FORBES WATCHED the headlights of her mother's car as it drove carefully up the twisting canyon drive, and began to die inside.
It was gross to be collected from a party at midnight by your mother when you were fourteen years old.
When your mother was Lorna Lewis, and still got called the last great blonde in Hollywood even if she hadn't made a picture for ages, it was, worse than gross, it was a total bummer.
At least, she could have sent the driver, instead of always bringing her daughter home herself.
Someone passed her a fresh joint and she took a deep drag, feeling the smoke burn her throat.
Her mother drove like a cripple.
She had a few more minutes.
‘Is that your fairy coachman?’
Ryan was pretty sensitive, he could always tell when she was upset.
‘Yeah, watch me turn into a pumpkin any minute now.’
Forcefully, she blew two thick streams of smoke down her nose and passed on the joint.
They were lying contentedly together against a stack of white floor cushions, the whole of Beverly Hills twinkling in the distance outside the semi-circular window.
Ryan's father's house was small, really not much bigger than Lorna Lewis's guest cottage, but it was in a great situation right at the top of the canyon.
In the daytime the view from the huge windows on the south side was smog, but when darkness hid the mass misdemeanours of the city, Los Angeles glittered like a fairy kingdom.
‘It's ridiculous; she treats you like a child.
Me too, you know — I could drive you home, couldn't I?’
Ryan had just turned sixteen and the object which he counted his proudest possession after Jo was his new red Porsche.
‘Oh God, that's just what she's afraid of — she's afraid if I got in your car we might go somewhere and park , for God's sake.’
They giggled heartily.
Jo and Ryan had been dating for six months and had progressed some way beyond parking now.
Because of Jo's curfew their first priority at every party was to find somewhere quiet and get the screwing accomplished in comfort.
She tossed her hair and preened, imitating her mother.
‘Trust me, Jocasta, I know what's best for you.
You can't stay out all hours at your age.
There'll be plenty of time for all night parties when you're grown up.
You'll thank me then, sweetheart.
You're just like me, you need your sleep.
I have to have the full eight hours or I can't do a thing the next morning, not a single thing.
And I look like death warmed over.’
Ryan rolled over on the floor, shaking with laughter.
Jo could imitate anybody and always made him crease up, even without the dope.
The way she did her mother was the best, though, catching that tiny lisp she had and the way her English was just a little bit awkward.
According to the publicity department of the studio which had trained her, Lorna Lewis was a luscious Swedish beauty whose parents were leading actors at the famous Stockholm National Theatre.
In fact she was born Gunilla Horrigan, the illegitimate daughter of a waitress in Cottonwood, Minnesota, and raised on her grandparents' farm, speaking Swedish at home until the day she ran away.
Either way, the soft Scandinavian sibilants lingered.
‘as if I've got such important things to do tomorrow morning,’ Jo grumbled through her giggles in her own voice.
‘as if I needed to look my best to watch the Archies, for Heaven's sake.’
Affectionately, Ryan twisted the drawstring of her new embroidered blouse around his fingers.
It was a Thirties classic, made of fine white crinkled cotton with multicoloured smocking and red poppies worked around the puff sleeves and low neckline, the perfect complement to her Minnehaha skirt of pale chamois leather.
Jo had bought it that very morning at Aardvarks on Melrose.
The fabric was so delicate that if she wore it without a brassiere you could just see the outline of her nipples.
Jo loathed her blobby nose, her receding chin, her long body, her short legs, her droopy ass, her fat thighs, her white skin that absolutely refused to tan and her brown hair which frizzed and which her mother wouldn't even let her frost; she accepted that she would never look like Faye Dunaway, never be a Prom Queen and that most of her body was a total disaster area, but she knew with absolute certainty that she had great tits.
The upper slopes rose softly almost from her collar bone, the lower curves were rich and full and the nipples pointed invitingly upwards.
Most days Jo left the house with her breasts strapped into a brassiere that had been tailored for her by her mother's corsetière, two thick white cotton cones attached to a four-inch band, meagrely edged with broderie anglaise.
Ryan called it the Iron Maiden.
Her mother insisted the device was essential to stop her skin from stretching, but Jo merely saw it as another strategy to make her ugly.
She played those games — anything to keep the girls children as long as possible and not face up to the fact that she was over the hill.
Most days Jo headed straight for the nearest john and took the hideous contraption off as soon as she was alone, muttering, ‘If you got it, flaunt it!’ as she threw back her shoulders and felt the liberated flesh bounce free.
Now, however, it was time to tie the tits down again before her mother threw a blue fit.
‘Oh shit — my brassiere!
Did we leave it in the bedroom?’
They scrambled to their feet, feeling distinctly stoned, and picked their way over the outstretched legs of their friends to the door.
In the next room half of Beverly Hills High was freaking out to The Doors.
On the stairs some man with a twelve-string guitar was improvising for the benefit of three skinny girls with long blonde hair.
They got to Ryan's bedroom just in time to stop a bunch of kids they didn't even know putting his treasured copy of the Beatles White LP on the turntable.
Ryan's father was in the music business and he could get all the hot albums before they were released.
They found the brassiere under the bed and Jo let him hook it up at the back for her.
There was no way to put that garment on alluringly — she knew that with certainty, having spent hours struggling in front of her bedroom mirror.
Thanks to the operation of Murphy's Law relating to parents, they were coming downstairs hand-in-hand just as Jo's mother walked in the door; nobody in the whole room could have missed the flash of alarm in Lorna Lewis's huge, upswept, blue eyes when she saw her elder daughter coming downstairs with a boy.
She's so fucking naïve , Jo told herself angrily.
If only she knew .
Then it began, the stuff she hated, the stuff she had been forced to stand by and watch all her life.
Lorna Lewis might not have made a picture since a flopperoo called It Happened in Monte Carlo three years ago, but she was still Hollywood royalty.
As she advanced into this room full of teenagers, pretending not to smell the rich aroma of Acapulco Gold, gracefully rippling the caftan of pink flowered silk which she considered appropriately hip casual wear, the kids all stopped what they were doing and collected admiringly around her.
Somebody put on Herb Alpert instead of The Doors.
The guitar player strummed along respectfully.
Ryan's father appeared from the den, seated the star in the centre of the white sofa and ordered Ryan's sister to fetch orange juice from the fridge.
He always had their maid squeeze some fresh juice when Lorna Lewis was scheduled to put in an appearance.
Everyone in her orbit knew she never touched alcohol.
Then her mother would graciously conduct half an hour of polite conversation with all these people, who Jo knew were otherwise pretty cool and mostly also pretty sane, and they would all pretend to be interested in whatever dumb thing she said, and laugh if she made any of her awful little jokes and store away any personal information she disclosed so that they could tell it to their friends the next day and make it absolutely clear that they were on intimate terms with a really big star.
By the time her mother rose in an elegant flourish of Pucci and swept her towards the door in that ostentatiously motherly way she had, Jo was in a sulk as deep as the Pacific Trench.
She slumped in the far corner of the white Corniche and watched her mother nervously hugging the steering wheel and peering at the road ahead.
The throb of Marvin Gaye's Grapevine followed them down the twisting road.
Her mother had a cute, sharp, upturned, little nose.
Her sister Tina had the same nose.
Why, Jo wondered, did she have to have a nose like a cross between a doughnut and a ski-jump?
She felt her brassiere tighten uncomfortably as she heaved a vicious sigh.
‘Do you want some air, honey?’
An uncertain but immaculately manicured forefinger hovered over the dashboard.
The car lurched towards the far side of the road and her mother anxiously wrenched it back on course, then turned her attention back to the dash and at last flipped the switch which folded the roof down.
Suffocating warmth enveloped them.
‘This car is air-conditioned, Mom.
You don't put the roof down for air, you turn the air-conditioning on.’
‘Sorry, sweetheart, you know I don't understand mechanical things…’ the car swung wide around a bend as her mother searched again for the switch.
‘It's fine, Mom, just leave it.’
Jo's voice was sarcastic with patience.
‘I thought you wanted some air, sweetheart, that's all…’
‘No Mom, wrong again.
I wanted to stay at the party, have a good time, be with my friends, dance with Ryan…’
‘You need your sleep, sweetheart, or you'll be no good in the morning.’
‘What do I need to be good in the morning for, Mom?
It's only Sunday.’
‘Yes, and you haven't done your school work.
You went shopping this morning when you should have done it, so now you have to do it tomorrow.’
‘It's not important, Mom.’
‘Of course it's important — you want to get good grades, and you won't get them if you don't study.’
They turned left on to Sunset and her mother put the roof of the car up again without any argument.
Neither of them wanted every driver on the street gawking at Lorna Lewis having a fight with her daughter in her white Rolls-Royce.
Jo sighed again.
Her grades were always the best in her class; she didn't need to study.
There was no point telling Mom that, because whenever she did so her mother just told her that everyone needed to study and her grades would drop if she stopped.
‘Some of the other kids were going down to the Ash Grove later,’ she complained.
‘For Heaven's sake, what kind of a name is that?’
‘I said the Ash Grove, Mom, not the Hash Grove, for God's sake.
It's just a place people go to listen to a little music, you know?
No big deal, nothing heavy, nothing depraved…’
‘Don't talk to me like that, Jocasta.
There were people taking drugs at that party, I could smell it.’
‘That was patchouli oil, Mom, can't you tell the difference?
God, you're so naïve , I can't believe it.
Anyway, so what if there were people smoking a little— everybody does it, the teachers in school do it…’
‘I don't believe it, not at your school.’
Jo and Tina were chauffeured every day to a small exclusive private school for the cosseted daughters of those Bel Air families who valued high moral standards and hard work more than the pretence of being regular folks.
‘There are plenty of other schools in town.
Ryan says a teacher tried to score off him.
And the soldiers in Vietnam do it…’
‘I suppose Ryan does it?’
Jo paused.
If she admitted that Ryan smoked her parents would probably break them up and she didn't want that.
She wasn't in love with Ryan, but he was cute and they had a good relationship.
They didn't expect it to last forever especially since he was planning to go to college back East.
Ryan had come along just a few weeks after they took the braces off her teeth and the tits started to look like something; in those few weeks Jo had had more attention from boys than she could handle.
It scared and disgusted her the way every male she met suddenly started ogling the blancmange under her blouse.
She tried going around in dungarees to disguise things, but Mom didn't think they were ladylike.
Once she was dating Ryan things were easier.
He was muscular, athletic, good-looking and his folks were rich enough; he scared off the other guys.
With Ryan's ring, made of a silver spoon bent into a spiral, on her finger, Jo felt safe.
‘Ryan's dad smokes, Mom,’ Jo answered at length.
‘Everybody does it.’
‘Your father and I don't do it, Jocasta, and neither do you.’
‘Only because you're always fussing around me like a fucking jailer …’
‘Don't say that word, Jocasta!
Just don't say it, that's all!’
Her hands flew up in horror then slammed down on the steering wheel.
The Corniche shot across two lanes of Sunset with a squeal of tyres.
‘Why the fucking hell shouldn't I say it, I fucking mean it!,
They yelled at each other until the car passed erratically between the electric gates of the elegant, much photographed Lewis home and came to a halt on the gravel before the porch.
It was beyond her mother's skill to put the car in the garage while distressed.
Jo ran straight up to her room and fell on the bed.
She pulled off her clothes and left them in a heap, then lay on top of the covers looking up at the ceiling.
She was too wound up to sleep.
She didn't want to fight with her mother all the time, but there didn't seem to be any alternative.
After a while she soothed herself with her favourite fantasy; by a succession of miracles she grew divinely tall, with long, sinewy, racehorse kind of legs and a small straight nose of classic proportions.
Her breasts deflated to a simple 34B — no, 34A, even better.
Her freckles joined up into an even tan — nothing excessive, the colour of lightly browned toast would do.
Then one day, when she came out of school there was a car waiting to take her for a screen test, and something magical happened as soon as she stood in front of a camera, and she became an actress, a real actress not a washed-up joke like her mother, and everyone admired her.
She imagined her face in close-up on the screen of their cinema downstairs, looming radiantly over the small audience of her family, and fell asleep.
She sulked through the morning reading Anna Karenina .
She had chosen the book because it was the kind of volume she liked being seen around with, thick, classic and Russian.
Because the story took her into an exotic, adult world, she enjoyed it.
The mood of heavy tragedy seemed congenial; it was good to know that other people, far away and long ago, had felt as miserable as she did.
Maybe they would remake Anna Karenina when she was an actress, and everyone would be amazed that such a young girl could project such depths of emotion and hail her as the new Garbo.
Ryan came over late in the morning and stood uncertainly on the terrace jangling his car keys, intimidated by the thunderous look in her eyes.
‘I — uh — thought we could go to the beach or something,’ he offered.
‘You mean you thought you'd like to drive around in your car all afternoon just in case there's anyone in the entire state who hasn't drooled all over it yet — that's O K, Ryan, that's cool, I can handle that, I'm sure you and your Porsche will be very happy and I wouldn't dream of fucking up your beautiful relationship.’
‘OK, no beach,’ he said lightly, ‘I'll call you tomorrow.’
She did not want to go to the beach because the beach meant the bikini, and spending all afternoon sucking in her gut and wondering why her skin went straight from fishbelly white to lobster red while all the other kids had golden tans.
She did not want to be evil with Ryan either, but fortunately, Ryan understood all that.
‘C'mon, Jo, play me at tennis,’ her sister Tina cajoled.
‘Why?
Can't you find anyone else to play with?’
Tina never normally wanted to play with Jo because her sister always won.
Her favourite partner was her father; neither of them could serve to save their lives and most of the balls ended up scattered on the lawn, but they made a handsome couple on the court.
Tina, at twelve, was already taller than Jo, and slender, and a natural blonde like her mother, with that cute nose and deep blue eyes edged with dark lashes; Tina looked fantastic in whatever she wore, particularly jeans or a tennis skirt.
Jo looked like a Munchkin in anything that showed her legs.
‘Dad's asleep and Mom's getting a manicure.
C'mon, Jo.’
‘I'm busy.’
‘No you aren't, you're only reading.’
‘Call up a friend or something.
If you've got any friends.
Just fuck off and leave me alone.’
Tina immediately burst into noisy tears and ran off wailing ‘Mom — she said that word to me again!’
Their mother appeared in a blue face pack, waving her spread fingers, and another row started.
Sundays were the worst.
Sunday was always the same in the Lewis home — now that it really was the Lewis home; for the first ten years of Jo's life her mother had been away making films and her father had been away on business so much that the main house had been a ghost dwelling; the Chippendale and Sheraton furniture was draped in dust sheets.
The children had lived with the house keeper in the guest cottage and learned early that it was futile to ask when Mummy would be home.
Because Jo's father was English and Lorna Lewis gave many interviews explaining that the secret of keeping a marriage together in Hollywood was to make sure your husband was the king of his own home, they had chosen a house built in English baronial style, with walls mantled with ivy, black exposed timbers, fireplaces big enough to hold a conference in and small diamond-paned windows through which the sun streamed defiantly in brilliant narrow shafts.
First-time guests peered up the dark oak staircase to the gallery murmuring, ‘Mrs Danvers,’ under their breath.
While most of the neighbours favoured Spanish-style architecture, and their gardens rioted with purple bougainvillaea and pink oleanders, the sombre, towering hedges of yew around the Lewis house looked distinctly foreign.
The sweeping lawns were sprinkled daily at dusk when the shadows cast by the magnificent specimens of chestnut, oak, pine and sycamore stretched out to touch the house itself.
The manorial style was what Robert Forbes had been accustomed to portray in his early days in Hollywood, when Paramount had tagged him ‘the young Ronald Colman’ and cast him in half a dozen minor heroic roles with reasonable success.
It bore no relation to his origins.
Robert Forbes was born Terence Lewthwaite in Salford, part of the industrial heartland of England, a sprawl of sour streets of back-to-back houses, cross-hatched with scummy canals and punctuated by decaying factories which fouled the atmosphere with their effluents.
At fifteen he ran away to sea, pursuing the myth of his absent father.
At eighteen he was tending bar in San Francisco when an actress, taken with his clean-cut good looks, said she thought she could get him a scene shifter's job at the theatre.
The director, even more impressed with the tall, meaty young man with a flashing smile and an indefinable and absolutely spurious air of distinction, gave him walk-on parts.
‘That was when the acting bug really bit me,’ he habitually recounted.
‘After that, all roads led to Hollywood.’
He was the kind of man who looked magnificent in any uniform; Hollywood's British Colony gave him the airs to match his looks.
In a clipped, reconstituted Oxford accent he called his colleagues ‘old chap,’ and ‘my dear fellow.’
C. Aubrey Smith, the imposing king of the dress extras, liked him and he became a regular guest at his croquet tournaments.
He also taught Forbes to play cricket.
As a screen Englishman, he felt it his duty to volunteer for the Royal Navy when war broke out and was amused to find that his newly-developed persona automatically promoted him to officer class.
When he returned in 1945 with a wide-eyed English wife, something in his spirit had matured.
Acting was unsatisfying; he was clear-headed enough to recognise that he was not particularly talented, and he was permanently detached from the narcissism of the self-styled Glamour Capital of the World.
‘I didn't feel like spending the rest of my life waiting around for the parts David Niven turned down,’ was how he expressed it.
Then Selwyn, Lorna's agent, always added, ‘Since when did Niv turn anything down, huh?’
Whereupon Robert Forbes would shoot an immaculate cuff, finger the crested gold links, crinkle his eyes and rejoin, ‘Precisely, old boy.’
His honest, square-jawed and faintly familiar face served him well in the real estate business.
His wife, severely disappointed to find that her husband was happy to sink to the status of a businessman with only a distant connection with the movies, ran off with a more committed actor.
By the time Robert Forbes was introduced to Lorna Lewis he was free, rich and forty-one; his hair had turned almost completely white and he was the perfect partner for a beautiful actress, eighteen years old, who was so full of ambition she almost trembled with it.
Their courtship, marriage and family life became useful promotional tools.
At MGM Lorna Lewis had been given the keyword ‘kittenish’ to help focus her identity — cute, blonde and comic, more down-to-earth than Grace Kelly, less neurotic than Monroe but sexier than Doris Day.
Louis B. Mayer announced that she was America's new sweetheart, exactly the kind of actress to make the kind of pictures decent, wholesome citizens needed.
For a while he appeared to be correct.
She made a brilliant debut in This Girl's Army and followed up with two light romances; the publicity department declared that she was grown up when she charmed Alfred Hitchcock and won an Oscar nomination for Reasonable Doubt , a sophisticated courtroom melodrama.
Pictures of Lorna Lewis picnicking in pedal pushers, marrying in white and christening her baby daughters counterpointed these triumphs, and the couple, who lived their lives from the outside in, saw themselves looking happy in magazines and believed they were happy, although the combination of Hitchcock and post-natal depression persuaded Lorna to announce that she would take a year off to devote herself to her family.
It was the year in which Mayer died.
When she returned, decent, wholesome Americans were inclined to prefer television.
Film scripts specified free-spirited nymphets in mini-skirts, and there were younger actresses with more malleable identities queuing up for the parts.
Lorna made a comedy western, a beach musical and a spy spoof in slow succession.
Hitchcock wanted her for The Birds but she turned him down.
Then came It Happened in Capri , and after that, nothing.
The adorable kitten had grown into an uninteresting cat; Lorna Lewis found herself approaching forty, battling against spreading hips, deepening wrinkles, an unlovable daughter and changing times.
Her film titles were recited like a catechism over Sunday lunch.
The routine was always the same.
Selwyn, Lorna's agent, would arrive early, with his wife and sometimes with a new script.
Jo's godfather, Harry, the director of This Girl's Army , would come late, sometimes drunk and alone, sometimes a little less drunk and with a girl.
Usually one of Robert's business prospects would be invited for a lethal dose of glamour.
Lorna's publicist, physician, astrologer or other senior members of her entourage might also be present.
On this occasion Andy, the landscape architect, whom her father nicknamed Adam the gardener, was invited.
In the beginning Lorna's illustrious co-stars frequently appeared; Paul Newman came once, Jo remembered, but three years is a long time in Hollywood and now lunches were becoming more intimate.
The event commenced with Lorna entertaining the ladies on the terrace, currently with her plans for a flower border around the pool, while the men retired to the library with Robert for Scotch and business talk.
Jo heard Selwyn enunciating the words ‘deep, deep shit,’ from behind the double doors as she came downstairs and hurried towards the dining room to avoid her father, who was bound to complain about the embroidered blouse and her old white overalls.
‘Before I forget,’ Selwyn announced as a plate of the roast beef of Old Idaho was placed in front of him.
‘Somebody called from the London office to know if you'd be interested in a revival of South Pacific they're planning over there.’
‘I've done Nellie Forbush in summer stock.’
Lorna never said no outright, Jo noticed.
She would twitter on for a few sentences to get everyone else to give their opinions, then make a decision.
‘Who called, do we know them?’
‘No, nobody knows 'em from Adam,’ he nodded jovially at the gardener who flashed back with a wall of white teeth.
‘London would be nice…’
Another cornerstone of the externally absorbed philosophy of the Lewis home was that anything British was good and Britain itself the most alluring destination.
Neither of Jo's parents had been to Europe since her father returned from the war.
‘Not in November,’ Robert growled from the side table where he liked to carve the meat himself.
‘What are they offering?’
‘Peanuts.
I'd have turned it down without asking except I thought you might be interested — ah — because…’ he shrugged, unable to find a tactful way of saying that this was the best offer she would get all year.
‘Well, I'll think about it.’
‘Didya read the script I brought last week?’
‘Oh, well…’
Lorna daintily unfolded her damask napkin.
‘It was interesting, I suppose, but I didn't really feel it was right…’
‘It stank.’
Her husband sat down.
‘What's the matter with you, Sel — you know Lorna can't play that kind of part.
A nympho barfly shacked up with a prizefighter — that's not her scene.’
‘Jewison wants to direct it.’
Selwyn mopped gravy from his chin.
He ate fast and heartily, but his skinny frame never gained a pound.
‘I heard he was making some kind of detective story with McQueen.’
To mitigate this shrewdness, Lorna lowered her eyes and chased a fragment of meat around her plate with her fork.
‘Well, the next picture after that…’
Selwyn shrugged, ‘I thought it could be another Doubt , maybe I'm wrong.’
‘Steve McQueen's really groovy, Mom — can't you make a picture with him?’
Tina put down her fork with prim care and reached for her Irish crystal water glass.
Jo flinched at the insensitivity of her sister's request.
Mom would probably give her back teeth to make a picture with McQueen but nobody would cast her if they could get Faye Dunaway.
She caught Adam's eye and saw that he too was embarrassed.
‘Your mother doesn't operate her career for your amusement, Princess,’ her father admonished, pinching Tina's cheek.
There was a commotion from the distant hallway and the rangy silhouette of Harry Foster appeared against the afternoon sun.
‘Apologies, apologies.’
He scooped back a lank blond forelock as he sat down.
‘New York called just as I was leaving.
Ah hair of the dog!’
He seized the Scotch that was set before him and drained it.
‘Thank you thank you — a little more water next time.
Ah!
What news, eh?’
He bared well-shaped lips over handsome teeth and smiled around the table.
‘What's your news, Harry?
You're in fine shape this morning.’
Lorna gave him the intense, twinkling smile that had once agitated the hormones of millions in This Girl's Army .
‘Fine shape!
Yes, ma'am!’
Harry had not been in good shape in Jo's memory.
Once a good director, now a cheerful but notorious lush, he seldom worked nowadays and when he did it was only television.
However, this morning he was certainly smiling, and much less liquored-up than usual.
‘What's the scam, Harry?’
Selwyn folded his bony fingers.
‘The scam!
Ah yes!
Is that horseradish?’
He gestured down the table with his knife and Jo, smiling broadly, passed the relish.
She liked her godfather.
He was a man who was quite unable to relate to children and therefore always treated them as adults, an approach which she appreciated.
‘Come on, Uncle Harry, spit it out.
What's happening?’
‘Happening?
Happening?
Johnson's going to stop bombing Vietnam.
The polls say the people don't trust Nixon.
We won another gold in Mexico City…’
‘You gotta picture,’ Selwyn announced.
‘I got a picture,’ Harry confirmed, reaching for the potatoes.
‘This is good meat, Lorna.
You do the best roasts, you know that.’
‘What kinda picture?’
Selwyn demanded.
‘Ah — the producer's calling it Mondo Desire .’
Harry's voice evaporated to a whisper and he glanced nervously at Lorna.
‘Mondo Desire !’
Selwyn repeated with satisfaction.
‘You're gonna gang bang them in the drive-ins, Harry.
Mondo Desire !’
‘But you won't go with that, will you, Harry?’
Lorna smiled encouragingly.
‘Oh no, no, no, no way.
Like I say, it's just a working title.
It's kind of an emotional drama, two middle-aged guys driving through Texas, reliving their lives on the way to a college reunion…’
‘No women in it?’
It was many years since Selwyn's wife had persuaded him that it was not good manners to pick his teeth in company, but his lips still made the motions of mouthing a toothpick.
‘A girl, a hitchhiker, kind of a hippy…’
He glanced uncomfortably at Andy, who had blond ringlets down to the shoulders of his fringed buckskin jacket.
‘So they pick her up and rape her…’
‘You read it.’
The agent was doing an efficient demolition job on Harry's ebullience.
‘Nah.
I get a dozen scripts a week like that.
Seems like the only parts they got for a young actress nowadays she gets six lines, they cut three and she gets raped in the first ten minutes.
No wonder kids don't go to the movies any more.
You — Adam, Andy, that's your name isn't it?
Does Mondo Desire sound like the kinda movie you'd want to see with your Saturday night date?’
‘I guess not,’ the gardener answered, awkward at suddenly being made a spokesman for his generation.
‘You see?
They're killing the business.
Jeez!
This town.’
There was a chorus of agreement as the maid cleared the table.
Hollywood's death wish was the traditional subject for this stage of the meal.
Then they would move on to acquaintances who were ruining their careers doing television.
Jo tuned out.
She had an idea, a hot one.
Uncle Harry was going to cast her as the hitchhiker in Mondo Desire .
She could make him.
She knew how.
He may have known her all her life, but when the tits appeared he'd had his tongue hanging out just like all the rest.
When the meal was finished Harry excused himself, as he always did, and went to take a nap down by the pool.
It was the perfect place for what she had in mind, several hundred yards downhill from the house and screened by tall shrubs.
She saw Harry stretch out on a lounger in the fragrant shade at the far end of the terrace and toss the last four inches of his Romeo y Julieta into the hedge.
Out of sight behind the orange trees she loosened the string at the neck of her blouse and readjusted the straps of the overalls.
A quick dab of Youth Dew and then she sauntered over to join him.
‘Hiya, kid,’ he greeted her sleepily.
‘How's tricks?’
She didn't want to get into that kind of conversation, the kind of conversation adults had with schoolkids.
Somehow she had to get into grown-up territory.
She considered taking off all her clothes and diving into the pool, but rejected the option instantly; he'd never want to fuck her once he'd seen her naked in full sunlight.
‘What happened to your girlfriend?’ she asked, perching on the edge of the white wrought-iron table beside him.
‘Uh?
You mean the one with the headband and the brown-cow eyes?’
‘Yeah, who came with you last Sunday.’
‘Oh well — she's not around any more, I guess.
Got too possessive, kept wanting to play house.
Broads are all the same.’
He unbuttoned his shirt and the sun gleamed on the astrological medallion around his neck.
An Aries, she noticed, hot blooded and impulsive — great.
‘You mean they put out they're into free fucking but really they just want to get hitched?’
‘Does your mother know you use that word?’
Jo giggled, seductively, she hoped.
‘My mother thinks I'm still a virgin.’
‘Oh, I see…’
One of his rawboned hands descended on her shoulder and she felt a flash of excitement.
It was going to work.
‘My little girl's growing up, eh?
That — er — what's his name, red-haired kid…’
‘Ryan.
Uh-huh.’
‘Well, good.’
He swallowed, scanning her face with tawny eyes whose whites were becoming dull with excess alcohol.
How old was she?
Sixteen?
Seventeen?
Things like this made him feel his age.
‘He seems like a nice kid.
You've been going together quite a while.
That's the best way, in a good steady relationship.’
‘Oh, we're not in love or anything.’
She shifted her free shoulder and let the blouse slip off it, then squeezed in her elbows to make the cleavage look really inviting.
This was a great pose, she'd practised it a lot with the mirror.
‘Ryan's cute but he's kinda young.’
‘So are you, don't forget.’
‘Yeah, but like you said — fourteen going on thirty-five.’
Shit, she shouldn't have mentioned her age.
‘I said that?’
‘On my fourteenth birthday — you've always been around at the most important moments in my life, Harry.’
Complete lie but what the hell, he was usually too juiced to know where he was.
He was looking at her affectionately and he hadn't taken his hand off her shoulder.
‘Well — hey — what's a godfather for?’
‘And now I'm older, you know, you're very special to me.’
She spoke slowly, partly so she could drop her voice to the right sort of sexy drawl and partly because she was desperately wondering what to say next.
‘I can't get interested in kids like Ryan, Harry — not with you in my life.
You're my ideal of how a man should be…’
He was looking confused.
Jo leaned towards him and began to slide her hand up his long, lean thigh.
‘Holy shit!
You're coming on to me!
I don't believe it!’
He jumped off the lounger roaring with laughter.
‘Lorna's little girl's trying to vamp her old Uncle Harry!’
He cackled on, nervous with shock, glancing guiltily around the pool terrace to make sure no one was watching.
‘And there I was wondering why you were smelling like a — like a…’
‘Oh shut up!’ yelled Jo.
Getting angry was better than dying of embarrassment.
‘All you so-called adults ever think about is sex.
You make me want to throw up!
You don't understand anything…’
Harry rubbed his eyes.
‘Don't yell like that, your mother will hear.
Now listen, Jo.
Don't get mad.
We both know what went on just now — don't we?’
He tipped up her chin so she had to look him in the eyes but she pulled her face away.
‘It was just foolishness, the kind of thing people do at your age.
You made a mistake and you won't do it again.
You're a nice kid, nice looking kid — you could lose a little weight maybe — but you're no great beauty, are you?’
Mutinously she stared at the ground.
‘Look, kid, I've been around, I know what happens with kids like you.
You want some attention from the boys, but they don't want to know.
They're all chasing the good looking girls.
So you figure if you come across with what the good looking girls are holding out on…’
‘It isn't like that.
You don't understand…’
‘What I'm saying is don't make yourself easy, Jo…’
God, what a moron.
Her chest was tight and her throat hurt.
She refused to cry.
‘How dare you talk to me like that!
How dare you!
You come around here every week with whatever chick you fell into the sack with the night before and you're giving me a morality lecture!
You don't know anything about my life.
You don't know anything!
All you know is shit…’
‘I'm just trying to stop you breaking your poor mother's heart, Jocasta…’
‘Her heart!
What heart!
What about my fucking heart!’
It was no good, she was going to cry.
She ran off up to the house, and managed to get to her room before anyone saw her.
Damn motherfuckin' Uncle Harry.
He was just scared, scared of her mother.
Still, he'd be sorry one day that he'd turned her down.
A blend of emotions fermented inside her.
She was angry, humiliated, ashamed and most of all frustrated.
Uncle Harry did not understand, but there was a trace of truth in what he had said.
And why couldn't she make things come out the way she wanted?
When the driver brought her back from school the next day she was still agitated.
Andy the gardener was standing around on the lower terrace looking at some white geraniums he had set out in an urn by the pool house, and although she shrank from returning to the scene of yesterday's shame, she decided to go and rap with him.
Andy was cool.
He understood things.
‘I feel like I'm in prison and I don't understand the crime,’ she told him once the preliminaries were over.
‘Wow!
That sounds really heavy.’
‘Yeah.
It feels really heavy as a matter of fact.
Do you think I'm beautiful, Andy?’
‘Ah — yeah, sure…you've got beautiful eyes and nice hair and…’
She knew what that meant — that meant no, not really beautiful.
Well, that was nothing she hadn't already handled.
‘What would you do if you were going with someone and you liked them but you didn't love them or anything but you were only really going with them because if you didn't you'd get so much heat…’
‘I guess it must be tough being Lorna Lewis's daughter.’
‘Every girl in Bel Air is somebody's daughter.’
Jo looked at Andy carefully.
Deep tan, good body, jeans that were tight and bleached over the thighs but not looking like they were sprayed on.
Yeah, she could go for Andy.
‘Like Somebody with a big S, huh?’
‘Yeah.
It's normal around here to have famous parents.’
‘But your mother's really special, isn't she?
I mean she doesn't act the big star and all, she's really warm and caring and — ah — a special kind of a person…’
Jo felt a little flash of old familiar rage.
Another starfucker.
‘Do you know what the problem is really, Andy?’ she asked, making her voice as sweet and low as she could.
‘Let me show you, OK?’
‘OK, but…’
‘Just turn around and don't turn back until I tell you.’
She was wearing the dumb preppie blouse her mother liked her to put on for school and, of course, the Iron Maiden.
Impatiently she pulled off the blouse and unhooked the brassiere, throwing them out of sight into the pool house.
Then she cradled the tits the way she'd seen the girls do in Ryan's father's porno movies.
‘OK, Andy, you can turn around now…’
‘Jocasta !’
Jo nearly fainted with shock as her mother stepped out of the pool house, her face pale under its tan and her freshly painted mouth twisted with fury.
‘Go inside and get dressed this minute!
What in the world possessed you to act like that?’
In all the yelling and argument that followed Jo concluded that Andy the gardener was a starfucker in the literal sense of the term, for what else could her mother have been doing in the pool house at that time of day and why else would she have over-reacted the way she did?
Jo figured that her mother was probably a nympho — after all, it took one to know one and Jo thought she was probably a nympho herself.
Hadn't she just come on to two guys in two days?
And she and Ryan screwed all the time and she didn't even love him.
She advanced this theory to the child psychoanalyst to whom she was delivered the next day.
He was a practitioner of the old school who was intrigued to be asked to treat a child named after the mother of Oedipus, but unimpressed with anything she had to say.
Jocasta struck him as a typical Hollywood brat, neglected, indulged, selfish and forced to grow up too fast.
He discovered that she had an IQ of genius level and announced that she needed firm discipline and intellectual stimulation.
The Lewis home became the scene of several anguished conferences, not all of them, as Jo imagined, about her.
The deep, deep shit to which Selwyn had referred concerned the collapse of a marina development in which her father had invested heavily.
Robert Forbes pulled out before his partners were indicted, a manoeuvre which cost him all the accumulated wealth of Lorna Lewis's golden days.
Lorna and Robert did not tell the children.
Lorna decided to do the tour of South Pacific .
The Lewis home was rented for enough to cover its mortgage, and Jocasta and Tina were enrolled in an English boarding school famous for its high fees, flexible academic requirements and tolerant attitude towards the screwed-up children of wealthy foreigners.
‘It's cool here,’ Jo wrote to Ryan after a month.
‘Cool like refrigeration, the climate sucks.
I can do the work OK, they're giving me really good grades, which is more than my dear dumb sister.
They do Shakespeare every year.
Everybody laughs at my accent.
The boys are nurds.
I'm not saving myself for you, or anything, but there's nothing fuckable for miles.
Mom's talking about staying a few years because someone's offered her another show.
They keep saying how cheap everything is.
None of the kids know who the hell she is, which pisses her off no end, but she doesn't visit much.’
That year rolled into the next, and then the next.
Lorna did another show in London, then went to Broadway with a revival of Kiss Me Kate.
Jo acquired a British accent that was almost flawless, and considerably more genuine than her father's; she dated the son of a famous playwright, and discovered that the dramatic societies of the great British universities were an excellent entré into the acting profession.
When she disingenuously called her mother and asked if she might stay in England to take a degree, her parents congratulated themselves on having saved their daughter.
THE ICY WATER streamed down Richard's face.
From where he lay on his side inside the laundry basket, he could hear the noise of the showers echoing around the stone walls of the House.
Big drops hammered the side of his head and his face ached from being clenched to keep the water out of his eyes.
The tender rim of his exposed ear burned with cold.
There was a filthy taste in his mouth and his lips felt as if they had been stung.
Across his scalp and down to his brows spread a searing pain.
He could not feel his fingers; whatever his hands were bound with was stopping the circulation.
This immense physical distress was nothing to his internal agony.
‘You're an arrogant little shit, and this is the way we treat arrogant little shits round here, and we don't give a flying fuck who your fucking parents are!’
He could hear the words as if they were still resonating in the dank air of the shower room.
It was all his own fault.
Four boys had beaten him up, forced him into a laundry basket and left him helpless under a cold shower, and all for a few ill-judged words and a bar of soap.
He had got into an argument in the wash room with Clive Fairbrother, an Australian exchange student a year older than him whose sense of humour was only a few degrees away from sheer malice.
‘The divine right of kings doesn't mean you can pinch my soap,’ Fairbrother had snarled, and the three other boys in the wash room had been electrified by such dazzling insolence.
He was not using Fairbrother's soap, Richard was sure of that, even though his mother had made sure that he had been supplied with the exact brand most popular at the school.
To argue would be prissy, he decided.
Better to make a joke of it.
‘I thought you colonials didn't know what soap was for…’
He regretted the words as soon as he spoke.
Clive's fist hit the side of his head before he could blink, and in an instant he was crushed under all four boys and someone rammed the soap into his mouth.
Why is it always like this, he cried silently to himself in the darkness.
Nothing I say ever comes out like I want it to.
Nobody likes me.
Most of the people I like actually hate me.
Why can't I ever behave like the person I want to be?
He kicked out as if kicking himself and yelped as his bare feet hit the end of the basket and a sharp end of wicker stabbed into his sole.
The self-inflicted pain goaded him into a furious spasm, but as he strained and thrashed against the wicker walls in the darkness all he achieved was the sense that the basket had not yielded a millimetre.
He had been at school almost six months, the most miserable time of his entire life.
He had a picture of himself being friendly and relaxed — normal, like the others; he wanted to be popular, or at least to have one friend, but the ideal withered as soon as he tried to achieve it.
If he behaved normally the other boys stepped back and did not respond.
He would try harder, hobbled by self-consciousness, and then he would say something precious, or stupid, or insulting.
No wonder they all hated him.
His father had warned him of what might happen, but not about how he would feel.
‘Some of them will probably think you need cutting down to size; they might be quite right, of course.
You'll find there's a certain kind of boy will have a go at you now because he knows he won't be able to touch you once you've left school.
You'll have to stand up for yourself.’
Quite how he was supposed to stand up for himself when he was tied up in a wicker laundry basket which had been left under a running shower was another matter.
Anger at last took hold of him.
The sods — Fairbrother and the rest, filthy, stinking, little creeps.
He'd kill them for this.
His jaw ached and he realised that he was grinding his teeth, so he released the muscles and tried to relax.
Instantly an uncontrollable tremor shook his mouth and his legs began to shiver in sympathy.
The part of his mind that remained a detached observer wondered if his teeth were actually going to chatter.
The same faculty considered his options.
His hands were tightly bound together with what felt like bootlaces.
His tormentors had snapped off the lights as they wished him goodnight, and it was completely dark.
It was probably about ten o'clock at night, and if he yelled it was unlikely that anyone would hear him.
His detective was in all probability preparing for bed in the sanatorium, a quarter of a mile distant at the extremity of the estate.
If he lay there until the morning, assuming he did not pass out, or drown, or spew up and choke to death in the meantime, he would be found when the boys came in to wash; the humiliation would be unbearable and the whole story would be all over the school by breakfast.
Then Amanda Pennington might hear about it; her cousin was in another House and they wrote to each other.
The thought made him flush hot with embarrassment even though chilled to the marrow.
Amanda Pennington, with her long, black maenad's hair and round blue eyes, was the girl he adored.
She was two years older than him, and a thousand miles away at a girls' school in Gloucestershire, and on the rare occasions when they met he hardly dared even speak to her; but Richard was always in love with someone and his passions were all the more intense for being largely fantasy.
If Amanda Pennington ever heard about this he would die of shame.
Like a caged rat, his mind ran around all the possibilities of his situation.
Although still some months short of his fifteenth birthday, Richard had already discovered from experience that there is a critical relationship between the piquancy of a secret and the number of people who can keep it.
Even in the largely loyal community of the school a hot little item like this one could probably only be shared by about five people before the newspapers got hold of the story.
Shame on shame, and the sight of the awful mixture of distress and reproof in his parents' faces.
Killing Fairbrother was out, too, for the same reason.
Also drowning himself or any other method of snuffing it.
Why, if he died the embarrassment would kill him!
In the darkness the Prince gave a short, barking laugh, ingested a large mouthful of water, choked and expelled it in panic through nose and mouth at once.
Don't panic, think, he ordered himself.
How strong was the basket?
He wriggled and heard its creaks amid the incessant pounding and splashing of the shower.
The thin cotton of his pyjamas did nothing to cushion the discomfort of the wicker scraping his bony body.
Richard was small and skinny for his age, part of the reason he was in this mess.
Clive Fairbrother was six feet tall and heavy.
With his bare feet he strained against the side of the container, and heard a few cracks.
It was an old basket, maybe he could make a hole in it.
Although slight, he was well made and capable of explosive strength when he had to be.
He rocked to and fro, feeling the basket creak and trying to get a sense of its condition.
There seemed to be a weakness in the wicker wall at his feet.
Perhaps not, perhaps he was wishfully imagining it — but what else did he have to go on?
He kicked repeatedly with all his strength and heard splintering.
Encouraged now he kicked again with greater force and application, ignoring the cuts from the sharp ends of broken wicker which clawed at his feet and legs.
Soon the whole side of the basket was smashed and he was able to wriggle out and away to the side of the shower room, out of the icy water, gasping with relief through streams of mucus.
By the faint, clouded moonlight from the small window in the adjoining washroom he was able to orient himself; he struggled upright, leaning awkwardly against the wall, hampered by his bound hands and lacerated feet, and began to walk.
A yellow line of electric light shone below the door just as he reached it, and his heart jumped; he stepped back quickly as the handle turned.
‘Oops — sorry!’
The silhouette, instantly recognisable by its wide hips and shaggy curls, was David Murray, an older boy in the House who had so far taken little notice of the latest royal presence in the school.
His rounded hand reached for the light switch.
‘Oh Christ!
It's you.
Are you OK?’
Blinking in the glare, Richard followed the other boy's gaze and looked down.
He was standing in a pool of blood and water and behind him a line of bloody footprints marked his painful progress from the showers.
Below his knees, his blue pyjama trousers were blotched with crimson.
‘Yes, I'm — er — no, I'm not, I'm…’
Murray's face wore an expression of dismay and Richard realised that an explanation was needed immediately.
‘They trussed me up in a skip and left me under the showers.
Had to break out so I kicked a hole in it, you see, but I've cut my feet…’
The older boy's face relaxed.
‘I — my God, I don't know what to say.
That's awful, awful…’
He shook his head as if trying to deny what he had heard.
‘Bloody hell, I can't believe it.
What a filthy thing to do.
Are you sure you're O K?
I'm busting for a pee, back in a sec…’
Richard leaned against the wall while Murray lumbered past to the lavatory.
Flashes of warmth darted uncomfortably through his chilled limbs and he felt nauseous.
He closed his eyes.
‘Who was it?
Don't tell me, I bet I know…
Fairbrother was one of them, wasn't he?’
His voice, hushed but full of nervous urgency, echoed over the metal partition.
‘He's been on your case all this term.
Primitive little git.
Australopithecus is alive and well and hanging round Pete's Cafe.’
Murray emerged from the toilet and gestured towards Richard's hands.
‘Let's look.’
He picked at the assembly of hitches uselessly with fingers on which the nails were bitten, then pulled the last knot loose with his teeth.
‘Ah!
That's got it!
No prize for seamanship, whoever tied that.’
He patiently unravelled the bootlaces and Richard winced with pain as the circulation returned to his fingers.
His hands were marked in red and white stripes where the laces had cut into his flesh.
‘Thanks,’ he muttered, still wary of his rescuer's reaction.
Murray looked into the shower room.
‘God, you must be strong — have you seen this?
Or what's left of it?’
Gathering strength, Richard retraced his bloody steps and together they inspected the basket, now sagging under the running water.
Fragments of wicker were scattered all around the room; a small pile of them marked the drain.
Murray splashed round the perimeter of the enclosure and turned off the shower.
‘Christ, I'm sorry.
Here, take my jacket, get yours off, you're soaking.
They shouldn't have done it to you — to you or to anyone.
Anything could have happened.’
‘Well, they did.’
Richard accepted sympathy badly.
‘Look, let's leave the basket, we can't do anything with it.
Can you go up and get me a vest or a towel or something from my locker?
I don't want to bleed all over the stairs.’
‘Yes, yes, of course— you're sure you're OK?’
‘You thought I was in here slitting my wrists, didn't you?’
Even in the yellow glare of the lights Murray's blush was unmistakable.
Richard's round brown eyes, normally bright and birdlike, drilled into him without a trace of humour.
‘Well, not exactly, I mean, I didn't think that carefully…but you have had a rough time, you must admit.’
‘Yes, well, I suppose I have.
Some people might say I asked for it.’
This, Murray acknowledged to himself, was also true.
Those of the school staff who remembered Prince Charles had immediately noticed that Richard was a much more outgoing and confident boy than his brother had been.
They predicted that he would make friends more easily, reckoning without natural adolescent malice and the excessive value their pupils had been taught to place on modesty, however false.
In his first term, Richard's bounce had hardened to defensive, brittle pride.
There was no pity for his evident loneliness and many stories circulating about his arrogance and the superior manner in which he parked the cheaply-framed photograph of his parents on his night table.
Richard found the cleaner's mop and bucket and was amateurishly wiping the floor when Murray returned with a dressing gown and some towels.
He wanted very much to deliver some insouciant quip about royal blood — his sense of humour was seldom disabled for long— but since wit of this stamp had been the cause of his persecution he kept silent.
‘Don't bother with that.’
Murray reached for the mop but Richard pulled it away and squeezed it out in the bucket as he had seen the maids do.
‘No, let me — if I don't clean the place up there'll be a hue and cry.’
‘Look — what are you going to do?
You're going to report it, aren't you?’
‘Absolutely not.’
The floor was clean.
He sat down in the doorway and inspected his lacerated feet.
‘But you must.
The headmaster has to know what's going on…’
‘There'll be the most almighty fuss and I'll look like a prize prick.
Look, David, thank you for helping me.
I've got to trust you, since you came down and found me, but please just keep this quiet, O K?’
‘But you must do something, you can't just take it.’
‘I've got to take it, don't you see?
It'll be ten times worse if I don't.’
He wiped his nose on the sleeve of his dressing gown and sniffed.
He was on the edge of weeping, but did not want Murray to realise it.
‘You're not going to do anything — er — silly, are you?’
Richard was so exhausted with cold and emotion that his laugh came out as a foolish titter.
‘Duff them in, you mean?
Clive's twice my size, for a start.
Even if I could make an impression it'd be the worst thing I could do.
Think about it.
They'll just kick up a stink and then it'll all come out anyway.
The head will chew them over, their parents will go mad, then when it's all finished we'll be back here next term and they'll hate me worse than ever.’
‘If they really want your guts they won't let up, you know.’
Richard wrapped one vest around each foot and tied the corners tightly.
‘Well, I'll get Mum to send them to the Tower then, how about that?
Look, it's my barney, O K?’
‘Stout fella,’ Murray approved, helping him stand again.
‘Plucky little tyke,’ Richard took his arm and limped into the corridor.
‘Good man, Carruthers.’
‘Salt of the earth.’
He began to shake with suppressed laughter.
It was almost worth all that agony to have these few moments of companionship.
‘Heart of oak.’
‘Damn good soldier.’
Murray grabbed him under the ribs and they reached the bottom of the stairs.
They were both snorting back their giggles.
‘Sssh — for Chrissake, someone'll hear us.’
Making as little noise as possible, Richard struggled up the stairs.
‘Don't worry, God's on our side.
At least no one came and found us half naked in the showers with our arms around each other.
That would have been a tough one to keep quiet.’
Richard gave his rescuer an amiable punch on the arm and hopped into his dormitory.
Five minutes later a plastic bag containing his wet, bloodstained pyjamas and a bottle of antiseptic fell on his bed and he heard Murray's heavy footsteps retreat down the bare boards of the corridor.
With his cuts bandaged tightly with handkerchiefs and two pairs of socks inside his running shoes he managed the morning dash around the garden, but realised as each step became stickier and more painful that there was no real hope of the gashes healing while he continued to fulfil the personal fitness goals in his Training Plan.
He was considered a promising runner and there was a cross-country race at the end of the week.
Fairbrother was shuffling reluctantly out of the stone doorway as he returned, and Richard greeted him with sarcastic cheerfulness.
He managed to avoid the morning shower by lingering over the cleaning of his shoes, and decided on a strategy to get him to the matron without attracting comment.
Fortunately a younger boy had a dramatic nosebleed which distracted his house-mates' attention and covered any remaining smears of blood.
Mid-morning, he had a training break on the school's assault course.
He unwrapped the handkerchiefs, contrived to get a good amount of mud down his boots and pretended to make a bad landing from the monkey rope and was dispatched to the sanatorium with a suspected sprain.
‘Whatever have you been doing?’ the matron demanded as she examined his feet.
‘Larking about,’ he mumbled.
‘But your feet are cut to ribbons — and look at your leg!’
She pushed up the caked edge of his fatigues, revealing a long, shallow scrape on his shin.
‘Oh, that — I, er — got cut up on the rocks canoeing, Matron.
Shoes came off in the water.
Broken bottle or something, I didn't see it.’
‘Hmn.
Well, it doesn't look too bad, but I'll have to ground you till you heal up a bit.
We'll have to take care they don't get infected.
Come and see me tomorrow and I'll change these dressings.’
The matron was a sceptical young woman who had seen many different injuries in her short time at the school and heard many bizarre explanations for them.
Intuitively, she knew that the little Prince was lying and the dejected lag in his steps as he left her room told her that there was a weight on his spirit.
That afternoon she sought out his housemaster, a fresh-faced biology PhD who habitually passed his free-time assembling, examining and cataloguing slides of plankton species from the Moray Firth.
‘I can't imagine what he could have been doing to get cut about like that, but it wasn't falling out of a canoe, that I am sure of,’ she finished, leaning against the low white-painted bookcase in his study.
‘I've got a good idea what's been going on.’
All day the riddle of the wrecked laundry basket in the showers had been exercising the teacher's faculty of deduction.
It was a torture which was part of the school's underground mythology, but something he assumed had died out at the same time as the belief that bullying was inevitable, harmless and good for the victim's character.
‘I've seen it coming — or something like it.
He's run into a spot of trouble with a couple of the older boys, if you ask me.’
‘No!
You don't mean it!
They wouldn't dare…the poor lad, he can't help being who he is.’
‘He can help the way he behaves; he's too cocky.
Don't feel too sorry for him.
He's not asked for our sympathy, has he?
He's got to work this one out for himself sooner or later, and it looks like it's going to be sooner.’
As he spoke, the teacher saw Prince Richard in his mind's eye and recalled the authority in the imperious carriage of the boy's small head on his narrow but habitually braced shoulders.
‘I think he's decided to handle things his own way.
Good for him, if you ask me.
We shouldn't intervene.’
‘We should tell the Palace, surely?’
At the back of her mind, the matron envisaged gangrene, amputation of the royal limb, a national scandal, a public inquiry and the ignominious end of her own career.
‘I'll mention it to Detective Furness.
I don't think it should go any further.
We can't stand up and lecture them on self-reliance and personal responsibility and then wade in and take over as soon as they show signs of doing what we want.
His parents didn't send him here to have the teachers live his life for him.’
‘All the same, I do feel sorry for him.
He's a nice, ordinary lad…’
‘He's got charm, Matron, but he is not and never will be ordinary.
That's what he's got to live with.
I'd save your sympathy — he's lucky, in a way.
They never did anything like this to his brother, you know, because they didn't dare.’
Three days later the matron had to take care of Clive Fairbrother, who lost half of one of his front teeth in what he claimed was a game of dormitory rugby after lights-out with Murray.
No one believed this explanation.
Murray's manner was habitually dignified to the verge of pomposity; nocturnal rugby was a juvenile predilection for which both protagonists were too old.
Murray, a boy who was well-liked but who shone at nothing, was also proud of his status as a Colour Bearer and a member of the school council, and took seriously his obligations of exemplary citizenship.
Obviously it had been a fight, but since Fairbrother was a newcomer to the school, aggressive and ever ready to defend himself with insults, no particular motive was assigned to either party.
As he watched his enemy climb into a teacher's car to be driven to the dentist, Richard felt agitated by a mixture of anger, fear and pleasure.
Murray did not make himself available for conversation through the rest of the week.
On Saturday the pupils could enjoy the austere pleasures of going into the small granite town of Elgin, something Richard did not enjoy but decided to do because his injured feet ruled out most alternatives.
In silence, with Detective Furness at his side, he dawdled aimlessly around the streets looking in shop windows.
There was a particular café which the others frequented, but he knew if he went in he would be greeted dutifully, the buzz of talk would die down and one by one his schoolmates would leave.
He bought a pen, which he did not need, in a small general store, and as he was leaving stepped aside to let Murray pass.
‘Oh!‘
‘It's me again.’
‘Yes.
Ah — do they have geometry kits here?
I've broken my compass.’
Murray's awkwardness was again betrayed by a blush that spread upwards from his weather-reddened neck.
‘You didn't stick it into somebody, by any chance?’
That sounded O K, Richard noted, hoping with passion that the older boy would take the bait.
Murray laughed and he felt triumphant.
‘Can't think what you mean.
Violence?
Fisticuffs?
Horseplay?
Why would I indulge?’
‘Just an idea I had.’
Now they were once more a conspiracy of two.
Murray bought his compass and they walked on together, beginning the skein of meaningless jokes and catchwords which was to bind them together in the next few weeks.
By tacit, mutual understanding they returned to the school separately.
In the same way, they took care to spend no more time together than the daily round of school life made appropriate, but the simple knowledge that there was now one person in the small, enclosed community who cared for him healed Richard's wounded spirit.
It seemed to him that he at last had a friend.
They laughed at the same things.
His transactions with his fellows began to lose their artificiality and it was generally admitted that the Prince was losing his rough edges.
Murray was flattered to the depths of his heart by the affection of this special creature; he was an uncomplicated youth of shallow emotions who did not appreciate that Richard was investing their relationship with far more significance than he was.
The season mellowed.
The last of the daffodils along the walk to the chapel died back and were hidden in new grass.
The larches drooped gracefully, dappled with their fresh green growth; the hedges grew shaggy and a deep fringe of rushes, sprinkled with a few yellow flags, bordered the lake.
An osprey's nest was discovered above an inlet to which the junior yachtsmen sometimes sailed.
A project to photograph the birds as they raised their young was launched, and at once became a passion with the younger boys.
Richard had joined the birdwatching society hoping to make friends and been disappointed when the membership dwindled in consequence; now he found himself surrounded by eager acolytes.
More field trips were demanded; in the new climate in which life was at last prepared to be amenable to Richard's desires, it seemed natural that Murray should supervise these expeditions.
For two perfect Sundays they scrambled side-by-side over the lichen-dappled rocks of the valley wall, the aquamarine sky above reflected in the ribbon of sea below them.
In such a small group the special sympathy between the two boys was obvious to all their companions.
It was all the incitement which some of them required.
‘Wake up, Toady!’ yelled Fairbrother, matched against Murray in the summer tennis tournament.
His confident, curving serve whistled over the net into the far corner of the court, leaving Murray to lunge futilely in its direction.
‘Get off your knees, Toady!
What are you waiting for, your knighthood?’
The name stuck and by the end of the day it seemed to Murray that every child in the school covertly sniggered ‘Toady’ as he passed.
His own closest friends looked embarrassed and avoided him.
No trouble was taken to keep the name from Richard's ears, but in his new flush of confidence he paid no attention.
Murray turned back his bedcover one evening to find a dead toad spatchcocked across his pillow.
The sight and smell revolted him; the creature had been a female bloated with spawn.
In fury he scooped up the gelatinous mess and hurled it at Fairbrother, who kicked him in the balls.
The fight was broken up by the housemaster, whose ears had been open in anticipation for some days.
Murray was removed from the school council, demoted and warned sternly by the headmaster that such a betrayal of the community's trust was also a betrayal of one's best self, a suggestion whose subtlety he could not penetrate.
‘It's so unfair,’ Richard complained miserably, having sought Murray out in his study to offer his guilty sympathy.
‘I can't understand how people can behave like that.’
The older boy was finishing a letter to his father in which the news of his downfall was carefully translated into a voluntary withdrawal from activities which were interfering with his studies.
He looked at Richard with discomfort.
‘Fairbrother's just a slimeball.
Forget it.
That's what I intend to do.’
He stuffed the scrawled pages into an envelope and sealed it.
‘I've got to get this stamped.’
He stood up, feeling bad about his dismissive manner.
‘Have you got anything to post?’
Instantly Richard brightened.
‘Yes, I've just finished a letter.
I'll get it.’
He ran down the corridor to fetch his own letter home and gave it to Murray, taking this small offer of service as a token that their friendship would continue.
Murray bought stamps at the school shop and fixed the two portraits of Richard's mother to the letters, curiously reading the address on the envelope inscribed Buckingham Palace, London S W 1, with the special code for personal letters to the Royal Family almost unreadable in Richard's energetic script.
Two younger boys came in and, after an awkward silence, one of them ventured to mumble, ‘I'm awfully sorry about what happened and everything, David.’
‘I just want to forget it all,’ Murray reiterated, and in his agitation stuffed both letters together into his trouser pocket, where they remained, forgotten, until a month later when he returned to the London apartment, cramped but in a smart street in Chelsea, which his mother's divorce settlement had provided.
He at once set off to stay with his father in Spain, abandoning his school clothes to his mother.
She thoughtfully left the two letters on his desk, where his older brother discovered them.
Guessing that they had been overlooked, Murray senior tore up the one addressed to his father; Richard's he opened and read.
It was insignificant prattle about birds, sailing and school gossip, but the last paragraph mentioned plans for a demonstration against the Education Secretary's newly-announced plans to end the distribution of free milk to schoolchildren.
‘It seems like a good idea to me, but then I hate drinking milk anyway.
I think they really want to have a demonstration because it's a trendy thing to do.’
Richard had concluded with a large exclamation mark.
Murray's brother sold the letter to the ambitious editor of his university newspaper for £20.
By the end of September it had reached a news agency reporter in Manchester, who offered it to the Daily Post, an ailing middle-market Fleet Street tabloid, for £15,000.
The editor, a nervous man always conscious that none of his immediate predecessors had lasted more than two years in the job, held his readers' adoration of royalty as an article of faith.
He decided to use the letter; the editor of his gossip column astutely elected to buy himself into the good graces of Buckingham Palace by informing their Press Secretary.
The police retrieved the letter in a dawn raid on the Manchester reporter's hotel room and traced its progress back to Murray.
By the end of the month a summary of their findings had reached Richard's parents at Balmoral.
‘Is that the boy he wanted to bring home in the holidays?’ his father demanded.
Behind him the tartan curtains of the drawing room framed a view of ten yards of sodden lawn and a curtain of heavy rain.
‘Well, it's the same name.
Oh dear.
I think it'll be a blow for him; he does get so attached to people.’
His mother passed the two sheets of paper, typed in the smudged style characteristic of the Metropolitan Police, to her husband with a frown.
‘But what kind of people?
He'll have to learn to judge better than that in life.’
Restless with irritation, he crossed the room to stand in front of the white marble fireplace.
‘He's desperately lonely, Philip.
Can't you see how miserable he is, how difficult all this is for him?
Only the wrong kind of boy comes forward to be his friend; the right kind are just the ones who hang back.’
‘That's the natural consequence of his position.’
Prince Philip crossed the room and paused in front of the white marble fireplace.
‘It'll be the same for the rest of his life, he's got to learn to get on with it.’
‘I can't understand what's happened to him.
He was such an easy child, everyone adored him.
Now he's gone wrong, somehow.
He's not stupid…‘
‘No point in having brains if you can't use them.’
He folded his arms and leaned against the mantelpiece.
‘The trouble is, the boy's not interested in anything.
If he could find one thing to put his heart into, it would solve everything.’
His wife nodded, smoothing the collar of her pink tweed dress with an abstracted gesture.
‘I think everything has been too easy for him up to now, that's Richard's trouble.
As soon as he's more or less mastered something, he's bored with it.’
It was a course of discussion they had followed several times before, each time with greater perplexity as their bright, affectionate little boy metamorphosed into a silent, awkward adolescent.
‘Is the headmaster talking about expulsion?’
‘He hasn't seen the boys yet.’
‘However you look at it, it's a despicable thing to have done.’
‘Well, we mustn't judge too soon.
It may not have been this boy's fault.’
She pursed her lips and reached for the next letter on the pile of personal correspondence brought in by her secretary.
There was a silence broken only by the faint snuffles of the dogs at her feet.
Queen Elizabeth considered her son's maturing character.
There had been no doubt of Charles's sensitivity or Andrew's boisterous good nature; Edward was still too young to be a cause of anxiety.
Richard was more complex.
He was clever, but disinclined to distinguish himself in study, athletic but lazy, honest but argumentative.
His bubbling forwardness could collapse in an excess of emotionality.
He showed passionate intensity without any focus.
His mother was puzzled but disinclined to judge him; Prince Philip interpreted these contradictions as wanton perversity.
‘Of course it was his fault.
He couldn't possibly have come by the letter honestly or even accidentally.’
‘Well, at least the newspapers can't get it now.’
She spoke too soon.
The German magazine Die Stern had also bought rights to the letter, and published it the next day, with a lengthy translation and a headline proclaiming, ‘Drink, Birds and Politics — Prince Confesses.’
Under the guise of outrage, the Daily Post self-righteously took up the story, forcing the other Fleet Street newspapers to follow suit.
By the time Richard and Murray were called to the headmaster's study a sheaf of publications headlining the incident were laid out on the large drum table.
‘Sir, I swear I don't know how it happened.’
Murray's round blue eyes glistened with the effort of projecting honesty.
Richard wondered what to say.
He remembered clearly that Murray had asked if he had any mail, and his instinct was to tell the truth.
If he did so, Murray's guilt would be confirmed.
If he claimed to remember nothing, Murray might be suspected of stealing the letter — unless he also claimed that it was a forgery; there had, indeed, been several of those.
While he deliberated, Murray continued: ‘I had the letter because Richard gave it me to post, sir.
It was when I was voted off the school council and I was really broken up about that and I suppose I forgot to post it…
I don't even get on with my brother, we've always been at different schools and I've hardly spoken to him since he went to university.’
‘Does that agree with your recollection, Richard?’
Richard muttered an affirmation, his gaze firmly fixed on the spotless grey carpet, and then, feeling obliged to speak up in Murray's cause, added, ‘I'm sure it's all a dreadful chapter of accidents, sir.
David's been a really good friend to me, and he's had a tough time because of it.
I trust him absolutely.’
‘And you haven't had too many friends, is that right?’
‘Yes, I suppose it is, sir.’
The headmaster paused, reminding himself of his conclusion that the privilege of educating the sons of the royal house had been conferred on this school because it was uniquely endowed with a philosophy which informed all its actions and made it equal to the task.
He wondered how Plato would have advised him.
Murray seemed to him to have a laziness of spirit and a lack of character; Richard, on the other hand, gave the impression of a great potential traduced by charm.
‘The education you receive here,’ he said at length, ‘should equip you to realise your own powers and thus to serve your community to your utmost.
This experience should be something from which you will both learn.
I am sure you are as appalled as I am at the use that has been made of the private letter of a schoolboy to his parents, but it is certainly a lesson for you in the ways of the world.’
Outside the study door Murray strode forward without a word and Richard, bewildered, had to trot to keep up with him.
‘Thanks for sticking up for me,’ he snapped at last, an unmistakable sneer in his tone.
‘I thought it would help.
I only meant…you are my friend, David.’
‘If I'm a friend, I'd hate to see how you treat your enemies.
God, I wish I'd never come to this bloody school.
Why don't you just piss off and leave me alone.
Go on, get lost!’
They were following the perimeter of the cricket ground in full view of at least twenty-two other boys, and Richard was damned if he was going to trail in Murray's wake before this audience.
In furious silence he matched the older boy's stride until the trees of the Home Wood shielded them.
A few minutes later Murray turned into the Sports Centre and Richard continued towards the House in merciful solitude.
The headmaster issued a brief and dignified press statement which avoided confirming that the letter was genuine and regretted the entire incident.
The Queen's Press Secretary called a meeting of Fleet Street editors and implored them to let Richard grow up in reasonable privacy.
Murray's father, feeling that neither communiqué sufficiently absolved his son, left tax exile in Marbella bellowing recriminations and removed the boy from the school.
A few months later Murray began a miserable round of university interviews at which he felt his prospects had been unjustly and completely blighted.
All this Richard observed with dismay which deepened to despair.
His mother permitted herself to use one weekend visit from the strictly observed quota to see him.
The relief of an interlude with one of the handful of people who could understand his feelings made him weep, which embarrassed them both.
He went about his work mechanically, withdrawing from contact with other children as much as he could but aware of a subtle shift in the groundswell of opinion around him.
Out of his hearing there was much discussion of the rights and wrongs of the affair; the general conclusion, held in typically absolute adolescent terms was that Murray and Richard were innocent victims, while Murray's father and brother were villains.
Fairbrother yelled, ‘Goodbye, Toady!’ after the Murrays' car, and crowed loudly with his diminishing circle of admirers over his enemies' downfall, thereby reducing his popularity still further.
A brief mood of shapeless hysteria took hold of the claustrophobic young community, which ended abruptly with a short holiday.
Richard chose to stay with his grandmother at Birkhall, her house on the Balmoral estate nestling between sloping woods of birch and pine and its own concave garden hedged with yew.
He was not an easy guest; he arrived in an obvious abstraction of wretchedness and his grandmother, being aware of his growing tendency to argue with the family's general insistence that out-door exercise was good for whatever ailed one, at first decided to leave him alone to recover.
He moped from one room to another to everyone's frustration, declining amusements and leaving a half-read book open beside every chair in which he sat.
‘Come down to the river and do some fishing with me,’ she suggested after his third afternoon of idle silence.
‘No thanks, I don't want to go out.’
‘Darling, you can't help these awful things.
I know you're unhappy, but you can't sit indoors and brood about it all day.’
She tucked her dark blue silk scarf more securely into the neck of the beige jumper she wore under her thick tweed jacket.
Her hand trembled slightly, a measure of her anxiety for this unpleasable child.
‘I don't want to do anything,’ he mumbled.
‘Stop worrying about me.
I hate you all fussing over me all the time.’
‘And I hate to see you unhappy, and you won't feel better if you stay in and frowst by the fire all day.
Promise me you'll do something tomorrow?
You've got to take your mind off this horrible business somehow and it's a sin to waste this glorious weather.’
Deeside was enjoying an Indian summer of mild, windless days and skies piled with white cumulus.
Behind the trees the late afternoon sky was growing pale towards the horizon and taking on a pellucid apricot tint.
‘There's nothing I feel like doing,’ he persisted.
She sighed.
When Richard's top lip set in an obstinate bow and his lower lip protruded in a sullen pout he had the unmistakable look of his aunt Margaret.
Any minute now his eyes would darken until they seemed almost black with the sheer emanation of his will.
It exasperated his grandmother to see this forceful spirit drifting like a rudderless boat, directed neither to work nor to leisure.
Richard was already a good shot, a patient fisherman and a brave, if occasionally reckless, rider, but competence in all these sports had come to him so easily that he had no interest in practising them.
‘Then do something whether you feel like it or not,’ she advised crisply.
‘I'll go for a walk, then,’ he conceded in a sulky voice.
‘Can I go up Lochnagar?
Old Fiery can come with me.’
Detective Furness had earned this nickname for his hair which, cropped unfashionably short, still glowed a vibrant rusty red.
‘I don't see why not,’ she replied, in a bright tone which belied the words.
This was an obvious choice made to evade her concern.
It was a hard walk to the mountain top, and she was relieved he had selected a pastime which did not require her participation.
‘Which way do you want to go — from our side or Loch Muick?’
‘Can't I go along the burn?’
‘It's a very long way, dear, and bound to be boggy at this time of year.
If you want a nice long walk you can go by the iron bridge and through Ballochbuie forest…‘
‘I don't like that way,’ he announced, decisive at last.
‘I'll go up Glen Gelder.
Now that's settled can I carry on moping for a few hours more?’
The next morning, he laced up his walking boots while Detective Furness, squinting doubtfully up at the cloudy sky, telephoned the mountain rescue post on the other side of the peak to advise the guide of their intentions.
The Loch Muick approach to Lochnagar, generally held to be both the easiest and prettiest, was the one favoured by most climbers.
There were no regulations to prevent people from walking up the Balmoral side of the mountain when the Queen was not staying at the castle, and Richard had chosen a long ascent from the Balmoral side for the sake of privacy.
The mysterious mass of Lochnagar dominated the landscape.
The mountain, eleven granite peaks rising between the gentle flow of the Dee in the north and the foaming River Muick in the south, was a presence which pulled everlastingly at the primitive senses of the people below it.
Lochnagar seemed to hold the ancient spirit of the land.
Young couples took their children to it as soon as their legs were long enough; old people accepted it as the first of their last climbs and many beery pledges were made to the mountain in the Deeside pubs.
The lower slopes, smoky purple with heather, incised by green-banked burns, and in this season splashed with the intense russet of dead bracken, rose from the woods surrounding Balmoral.
On clear days grazing deer or wheeling birds added life to the stillness of the mountain.
Most days were not clear, and the higher rocks were invisible behind curtains of mist and rain.
The summit reached almost 4000 feet, above a mass of crags which were blotched with snow even in the height of summer.
The hold which the mountain had on Richard's imagination, and indeed on the attention of all who lived in its shadow, was not related to its height or its beauty, but to the succession of mysteries which Lochnagar revealed only to those who climbed it.
Lord Byron had imagined the souls of dead Highland heroes riding the gales around the mountain's rocky heights.
Local folk tales made it the home of mythical monsters.
Richard's brother Charles told stories about the creatures that lived around the black loch which lay hidden at the mountain's crest.
When Charles had first taken his brother to the summit Richard had been so young he still half-believed that a haggis was a little animal with one leg longer than the other, the better to run around mountainsides.
He remembered a long climb between grey-white boulders to gain a flat ground scattered with lumps of quartz, which glittered like giant uncut gems in the sunlight.
He had filled his pockets with stones, but the drama of the landscape had been beyond his understanding.
What he had retained was the sense of an elusive mystery waiting in the heights for his return.
He declined the offer of a Land-Rover ride for the dullest part of the journey.
After an hour of easy walking through heather and scrub they reached the lower slopes, and Richard strode rapidly upwards with no compassion for ‘Fiery’ Furness's middle-age.
Their route became a steep scramble between white boulders speckled with green and grey lichen.
When Richard at last paused at a twist in the track he looked back to see the detective, red-faced and sweating, a hundred yards below him.
At once, he turned and sprang up the rocky path even faster, suddenly excited by the idea of being alone.
The air was thin and pure, and the sun shone on his back without warming it.
To his right was the undulating panorama of the Cairngorm foothills, already capped with snow.
Closer, on the other side, he could see the Grampians, a tapestry of a thousand shades of green.
Thick white clouds raced across the blue sky, casting a perpetual kaleidoscope of light and shade over the earth.
At last the steep slope flattened and he reached the saddle scattered with quartz.
A darker cloud bowled over the sun, bringing a sudden icy wind, and he paused to untie his Fair Isle sweater from his waist and put it on.
The detective was nowhere to be seen.
Richard felt a pang of guilt, knowing that he was selfishly, and perhaps dangerously, preventing the man from doing his job; he liked old Fiery, but at that moment the only company he wanted was his own.
His life so far had been crowded with people, familiar but not friends, guardians like Fiery or the nurserymaids, boys at school or companions chosen for him.
He had never questioned their presence, but now he realised that it had oppressed him.
Those whose company he would have liked, his mother, father, sister or brothers, the friends from his old school, the girl he adored, were all distanced from him.
There was, he calculated, seldom less than a hundred miles between himself and the people he loved.
Loneliness was his inevitable condition, and now at the mountain top the intoxication of solitude took hold of him.
He began to run and jump across the white rocks, exhilarated by the emptiness all round.
A huge curtain of grey cliff rose up in front of him, the lie of the ground making its appearance seem instant and magical, like scenery in a theatre.
As he rushed onwards it lengthened and curved, until he stood at the edge of a cold volcanic cauldron, looking down at the mountain's secret, a still, dark lake which gleamed green at the foot of the crags.
Three small pools below the lip of the crater shone turquoise in the sunlight.
There was snow in the folds of the rock face, and a new sprinkling of white along the ridge.
The highest point on the mountain was, he remembered, to be gained that way, but he would need to go back along the path and so would meet Detective Furness and prick the bubble of aloneness in which he was so happy.
Almost as if he had willed himself there, he found himself standing on the scree at the foot of the rock wall, staring upwards, searching with the little experience he had gained on school climbing expeditions for footholds.
There seemed to be enough of them.
He was good at climbing; it was a sport in which his small, sinewy build was on his side.
The vast mountaintop panorama was forgotten as the focus of the world shrank to six inches away from his nose.
The dark rock comforted him with its hardness.
Boldly he kicked loose stones off the ledges and heard them clatter into the silence below.
The footholds grew narrower as he climbed higher, but a deep groove in the rock face opened out into a chimney in which he could brace his boots against the sides.
The effort began to sap his strength and his muscles quivered as at last he pulled himself over the icy edge.
From the clifftop he watched the small figure of Detective Furness in his red anorak on the saddle below, twisting from one side to another as he strained his eyes against the bright sunlight to search for his charge.
Exultantly Richard stood above the rocks and looked down once more on the lower mountains around.
A large bird was riding the air currents below him, and he decided it must be an eagle.
He felt triumphant and at peace, standing alone with the world spread out at his feet, hearing only the faint howl of the wind and the thunder of his own blood.
People were insignificant.
He looked at his hands, white with cold, the fingertips rasped to bleeding, and felt that he could hold his destiny securely in them.
Another dark cloud covered the sun, and he saw another, much lower with rain like a grey curtain below it, approaching rapidly from the north.
There was suddenly an intense chill in the air.
It was time to go back.
‘Fiery’ Furness was very angry.
He was also tired and cold, and in between worrying that Prince Richard was lying at the bottom of the lake with a broken neck had been forced to entertain the idea that he himself might be less fit than he should be.
All these emotions vanished when Richard came bounding towards him with scarlet cheeks and shining eyes, looking happier than the detective had ever seen him.
‘There you are, Fiery!
I thought I'd lost you!
Isn't it a wonderful climb?
Did you see me on the rocks?
I got to the top — it was easy!’
‘All the same, anything could have happened…’
‘Nobody is going to kidnap me up here,’ Richard told him, jumping off a boulder for joy.
‘And if I broke a leg I'd have done it whether you were with me or not.
Ow!’
He landed awkwardly and twisted his ankle.
‘Take it easy, there's still time for that.’
Furness extended a hand to help him up and they walked down the track together.
‘That's better,’ his grandmother approved when Richard returned, still pink-cheeked and with the afterglow of joy in his eyes.
He realised that for the first time in weeks he had not thought of school, Murray, Fairbrother or the wretched affair of the letter.
Climbing became his passion when he returned to school.
His self-conscious gaucheness vanished as if it had evaporated in the thin cold air of the mountains and he found friends.
The small groups who tramped across the Cairngorms with him enjoyed his wit, admired his ability and trusted his leadership.
To his childish charm was added experience of people under pressure and his intuitive sensitivity developed into adept diplomacy.
His peers liked him, even, in the end, Fairbrother, who enjoyed climbing himself and appreciated Richard's gifts.
His teachers were suspicious of his popularity, annoyed by his lack of interest in academic work and infuriated that he could still achieve high marks in examinations.
In his final year he took the part of Hotspur in the school production of Henry IV Part 1 and had the audience cheering at his rabble-rousing speeches.
‘It is fortunate,’ wrote the critic in the school's magazine, ‘that Richard was born into our Royal Family, because if he led a revolution it would probably be very successful.’