

Terracotta Plain Tiles from Redland The Right Pitch on Roofing Baronial Burn's Poetic Vision Fitch Finds A New Mooring
CONTENTS
Frontis
Left, the main entrance to Marketplace's new offices with its rich mix of contrasting materials.
Right, the rear of the building is rendered and painted white.
With a few minor improvements, Weston Williamson has turned a standard fire escape into an exciting addition to the building.
Right below, the oak-floored corridor to the top-floor conference rooms
London's Victorian railway stations have been at the centre of the, now declining, spate of property development in the capital, as conveniently located derelict land and industrial/warehouse buildings have been exploited for new office accommodation.
The area around London Bridge station has been no exception, most notably with the completion of the first phase of London Bridge City and its spectacular Galleria containing shops and restaurants overlooking the river Thames.
Marketplace, an advertising agency with blue-chip clients such as Sainsburys, took the brave decision to move south of the river and bought an Edwardian warehouse in Holyrood Street, hard up against the high-level railway lines leading into the station.
After a limited competition, Weston Williamson was commissioned to refurbish the building with the aim of providing the agency with an up-market image for the nineties.
Although the client suggested a Victorian-style treatment, similar to a recent conversion a few doors away, the architects were determined to convert the building in a sympathetic but thoroughly modern way, on the limited budget which was available.
The existing building has been carefully restored externally: the brickwork on the Holyrood Street elevation was cleaned and repaired and the render on the rear elevation was largely replaced and painted white.
Windows were replaced with more sympathetically proportioned ones in softwood, painted blue.
On a small triangular piece of land which runs behind the adjoining site, Weston Williamson designed a new four-storey extension which provides a reception area on each floor.
It is a lightweight steel structure on piled foundations and, elevationally, is treated differently to the existing block, in a consciously modern style.
White Eternit panels are defined by black joints on a module relating to the window transoms.
Above, view into one of the conference rooms.
Weston Williamson also designed the conference table and built-in furniture
A limited range of high-quality, contrasting materials has been used, with expensive finishes reserved for places where they will make the most impact.
At the entrance, doors are of solid oak, side panels are stainless steel, the canopy is glass and painted steelwork and the steps are galvanised steel.
Inside, the warehouse feel has been retained.
Studded rubber has been used on the stairs where the handrails are oak.
The male and female lavatories on each floor are lavishly treated, with stainless steel basins, marble floors and dramatic lighting.
Open office floors are relatively untouched.
Ceilings and walls are painted white and artificial lighting is provided by suspended fluorescent lights from Spectrum.
But, the crowning glory of the building is the new conference suite which the architects created on the existing flat roof.
A modernist, fully-glazed pavilion sits on top of the building.
The high loading capacity of the existing warehouse floors meant that little structural alteration was required, and the new steel-framed structure, which is simply and elegantly expressed, was designed to rest on the party walls.
Large sliding doors open from the oak-floored corridor in the pavilion into the conference rooms.
When these are open, views are obtained in two directions.
To the south is the endlessly fascinating sight of trains pulling in and out of the platforms of London Bridge station.
To the north is the Tower of London, on the far side of the Thames.
Although this may be obscured by the second phase of London Bridge City, if the Simpson scheme is constructed the directors of Marketplace could find themselves with the unlikely view of a replica of the Piazza San Marco in Venice.
Richard Wilcock 
News Review
Architects Increasingly Pessimistic
Value of new commissions awarded to architects for the second quarter of 1990, showing the previous quarter (left) and the current quarter (right), and the percentage difference between the two.
The workload continues to fall sharply with only Scotland showing a rise for the quarter
The latest RIBA workload statistics for the second quarter of 1990, published in RIBA Leads , show the decline in the value of new commissions continuing.
London is faring particularly badly: this quarter new commissions were valued at £3,143 million, 23 per cent down on the previous quarter and dramatically down on the £7,247 million value for the same quarter last year.
Other areas showing significant falls are Wales, 46 per cent down on the previous quarter, Midlands/East Anglia (30 per cent), North (21 per cent ), South West (20 per cent ), and Ulster (15 per cent ).
Scotland bucked the trend with a rise of 22 per cent.
Overall, the value of new commissions in the private sector fell by 23 per cent.
This gives an annual fall of 37 per cent for non-housing work and 38 per cent for housing in this sector.
In the public sector, the dramatic decline in the value of new, non-housing commissions continues with a fall this quarter of nine per cent.
However, housing work in the public sector rose by 12 per cent compared with last quarter, a rise of 20 per cent over the year.
Fifty per cent of this work is refurbishment, compared with 43 per cent last quarter.
Looking to the future, architects are increasingly pessimistic about levels of work with 41 per cent now expecting a fall.
Fourteen per cent expect an increase and 46 per cent expect no change.
Medium-sized practices of six to 10 staff are the least optimistic with only six per cent expecting a rise.
This quarter the RIBA asked over 300 practices what marketing activities they had undertaken in the last 12 months.
Seven per cent have a full-time person responsible for marketing and 36 per cent someone part-time.
But only 11–12 per cent had prepared a formal marketing strategy or employed a marketing consultant in the past year.
RIBA Leads is available from The Coach House, 32 Evesham Road, Cheltenham, GL52 2AG, annual subscription £115 (£90 to RIBA members).
Has the Leisure Bubble Finally Burst?
The leisure sector has experienced phenomenal growth over the last few years.
Fuelled by an explosion in consumer spending, the leisure industry has expanded to satisfy  consumers' insatiable appetites for leisure goods and services.
This year we expect consumers to spend some £80 billion on leisure — almost one quarter of consumer spending.
All this has provided an extremely favourable operating environment for companies involved in leisure.
Commentators are suggesting, however, that the leisure industry has come too far too fast and that the leisure bubble has burst.
Certainly, the combined effects of continued high interest rates and the poll tax is already being felt by leisure markets, with overall leisure spending growing more modestly than in the past.
Despite this cloud that appears to be looming over the industry, it is worthwhile bearing in mind that the impact of interest rates and the poll tax is not felt uniformly across the country or among different groups.
Certain groups are actually beneficiaries from high interest rates.
Those in the higher socio-economic groups and consumers over 45 years old tend to have higher net savings relative to their outstanding debt.
Since higher interest rates boost the return on savings, these consumers benefit.
Similarly, people living in Scotland, Wales, the South West and the North are adversely affected by the high current borrowing rates.
In general, those leisure activities that are more popular among middle-aged and older groups as well as those aimed at the higher socio-economic groups are likely to hold up better than those aimed at the more financially stretched groups.
Likewise, those leisure companies with operations outside the South East may experience less of a slow down.
Despite this short-term hiccup, it is the Henley Centre's view that prospects for the leisure sector will remain buoyant overall.
In the 1990s Britain will be somewhat more family-oriented, due to the increase in the number of families with small children.
This is caused by the ‘baby boom’ generation of the 1960s settling down and having families of their own.
Thus demand will be strong for more family-oriented facilities.
The importance of catering to the tastes of more affluent middle-aged people is underpinned by  the increase in  their numbers and high spending power.
The well documented decline in the number of young people means that, while they will remain important consumers of many leisure products and services, they will no longer be so dominant in the leisure market.
Overall, we forecast an increase in leisure spending of almost 15 per cent between now and 1995.
While this growth is less spectacular than that of the past few years, the cumulative impact is significant.
Within this, however, it will be those leisure facilities that appeal to the growth groups identified that will be the main beneficiaries from a strong leisure pound.
The Henley Centre
Dulwich Picture Gallery Winners
Christopher Grasby, Brendon O'Neill and Tom Zetek's winning scheme for the new pavilion
Christopher Grasby, Brendon O'Neill and Tom Zetek, all architects working at Rock Townsend, have won the competition for a new pavilion at Soane's Dulwich Picture Gallery.
They receive the first prize of £4,000.
Allies and Morrison won the second prize of £1,500 and Peter Clash was awarded the third prize of £1,000.
Five other schemes were highly commended: Chris Dyson, Simon Fraser, Charles Sutherland with Ben Fereday; Gerard MacCreanor and Richard Lavington; Henry McKeown with Andy Bow, Jonathan Neill and Tom Ringhoff; and Brendon Phelan and Ann Markey.
The judges were Gordon Bowyer, Brian Carter of Arup Associates, Leonard Manasseh, Clive Aslet, Margaret Richardson and Giles Waterfield.
An exhibition of the short-listed 40 designs runs until 14 October at the gallery and the remaining entries are also on show in the grounds until 7 October.
Clive Aslet will chair a presentation to the winners at the RIBA on 16 October.
Nominations for Honorary Fellows
Members are invited to submit nominations for Honorary Fellowships to be awarded in 1991.
Anyone except persons of British nationality eligible for corporate membership of the Institute may be elected as an Honorary Fellow because of his or her ‘eminence and interest in architecture and the arts and sciences connected therewith’.
Nominations should be sent to the Director-General to arrive not later than 30 November.
Letters of nomination should include the name and address of the nominee, together with a brief statement proposing why the award should be given.
References to sources of information would be helpful.
News Summary
Sir Andrew Derbyshire has been appointed Professor Rhetoric at Gresham College in London and will deliver his inaugural lecture, ‘Function, fashion and finance: A new sense of architectural purpose in the City?’ on 27 November at the City of London School.
Entries are invited for the Fifth Annual PA Awards for Innovation in Building Design and Construction.
The innovation may be for a building or construction project which was completed between 1 January 1987 and 12 October 1990.
Entry forms are available from PA Consulting Group, Bowater House East, 68 Knightsbridge, London SW1X 7LJ, tel. 071–589 7050, to be returned by 12 October.
Troughton McAslan Architects has won a limited LDDC competition for an office and retail development on the ‘Lipstick site’ at the western gateway to the Isle of Dogs.
Terry Farrell's scheme for the £220 million Financial and Conference Centre in Edinburgh Development Group has applied for outline planning permission.
In the Birthday Honours made to members of the RIBA (RIBA Journal August) John Peter Foster received an OBE.
In Kenneth Powell's article on the Royal Society of Arts (RIBA Journal August), the rear elevation of the Society's building was not ‘mutilated’ by Lasdun's New South Wales House.
The profile of the 1957 Lasdun development was established by previous buildings on the Tivoli Cinema site which predated the 1926 Aston Webb elevation.
Quinlan Terry's scheme for the Fulham Football Club site at Craven cottage (RIBA Journal August) is still the subject of a public inquiry.
Awards for the Regions
Thirty-three buildings have received RIBA regional Awards for Architecture.
These will now go forward to be judged for the National Awards which will be announced in the January 1991 RIBA Journal .
Buildings were completed between 1 January 1986 and 31 December 1989.
Tuesday Lectures for the Autumn
Colin St John Wilson opens the Tuesday night lectures at 66 Portland Place in November with a talk on ‘Building the British Library’(6th).
On 13 November, Ken Miyazaki, Design Co-ordinator of Green Expo 90, will give the 1990 Landscape Institute/RIBA Lecture titled ‘City Policy Greenery: the case of Osaka and Expo 90’.
Coinciding with an exhibition at the RIBA, ‘Design Classics: Charles and Ray Eames’, Christopher Wilk, Curator of the Furniture and Woodwork Collection at the Victoria and Albert Museum will lecture on the Eames' furniture designs on 20 November.
On 27 November Professor Peter Sulzer of Stuttgart analyses the work of French architect Jean Prouvé and on 4 December Swiss architects Jacques Herzog and Pierre de Meuron talk about their recent work.
Closing their lecture programme for 1991, Edward Cullinan will give the RIBA Christmas Lecture For Young People.
Subtitled ‘What's all this architecture business?
Why don't we first build buildings in the most economical and obvious way like people did in simpler times?’, the talk is aimed at 15–18 year olds.
All tickets for this lecture cost £2.00.
Other exhibitions at 66 Portland Place this autumn include ‘Architecture in Detail’, a selection of recent photographs by Richard Bryant on show 2–12 October.
Buildings featured include the Vitra Museum by Frank Gehry and the Financial Times Printing Works by Nicholas Grimshaw.
The work of Leslie Martin and Associated Architects is the subject of ‘Three Recent Buildings and a Background’ which runs from 22 October until 2 November.
The three buildings are the Gallery of Modern Art, Lisbon; the New Concert Hall, Glasgow; and the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama, Glasgow.
Organised and sponsored by the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation, Lisbon, the exhibition also includes other works from the period 1933–87.
Banister Fletcher Award Winner
David Ottewill's The Edwardian Garden (Yale University Press, 1989) has won the Sir Banister Fletcher Award for the best book of the year on architecture or the fine arts.
The award is given annually by the Author's Club on the recommendation of the RIBA's Professional Literature Committee.
The author, David Ottewill, qualified as an architect in the 1950s and went on to work for John Brandon-Jones.
In the 1960s he gave up practice to pursue an academic career as an architectural historian.
This book is the first comprehensive study of these gardens, and was reviewed in the RIBA Journal last month.
Director-General's Column
Pier Head
William Rodgers on the waterfront at Liverpool, the perils of work overseas, a retailing analogy for practices and the new RIBA practice survey
As a small boy, growing up in Liverpool, I stood at the Pier Head and marvelled at the huge Atlantic liners berthed at the world's largest floating landing-stage.
I travelled five miles of busy docks on the Overhead Railway, passed flour mills and sugar refineries and massive bonded warehouses.
Liverpool was the sea, the docks and the waterfront.
All this has long since gone, and the problem of rehabilitation is immense.
There is James Stirling's Tate of the North at Albert Dock and the excellent Maritime Museum by Brock Carmichael.
But the Pier Head has remained windswept and deserted.
Only an occasional ferry boat makes a last, bleak journey across the river to Birkenhead and the Wirral.
The Pier Head is, in fact, a substantial stretch of landfill between the waterfront and three majestic Edwardian buildings — the Royal Liver Building, the Cunard building and the Dock Board offices — that have been known to generations of seafarers.
It was tempting to see its potential as another fun palace or shopping centre or — this being Liverpool — housing estate.
It is too soon to be sure that any such desecration has been avoided, but the excellent scheme by Allies and Morrison which has now been adopted is already on course for completion by the arrival of the Tall Ships in 1992.
With Paul Appleton as the project architect, Allies and Morrison is promising a park and tree-lined square, which will leave an uninterrupted view of the existing buildings from the river.
There are times when understated architectural solutions like this are the right ones.
The Pier Head was a place of departures and homecomings.
It deserves to retain its dignity and to escape trivialisation.
Visiting a large London practice shortly after the end of the 1980–88 Gulf War, I was surprised to find the Middle East rather than Europe the focus of attention.
Was there confidence, I asked, about stability?
Would the prospects turn out to be as good as in the 1970s?
But architects were not alone in hoping that the years ahead would bring peace and reconstruction to Iran and Iraq.
As a result of Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait, the Export Credits Guarantee Department must have difficulties.
I do not suggest that practising in Continental Europe is either easy or necessarily profitable.
But the creation of the European Community over 30 years ago was inspired by the idea of no more war in Europe.
Now, as the barriers come down between East and West, that prospect will become a reality.
I am glad to learn of an initiative recently taken by the North West Region of the RIBA, which invited officers of the Nord-Pas-de-Calais Order of Architects to visit it in Knutsford.
Now there is to be twinning between the two regions, to be followed by exchanges of students and younger architects.
Other regions have similar plans.
In Guildford I saw for the second time the travelling exhibition ‘Architecture in Context’, staged by the RIBA's South East Region.
Earlier it had been on view at 66 Portland Place, and it will shortly complete its run in Folkestone.
Judging by the visitors' book, it has already been seen by several thousand members of the public and potential clients — including visitors from most European Countries and from as far away as Brazil, Alaska and South Korea.
An impressive variety of practices is featured in the exhibition, from the one-man band to the big, quoted companies.
But, if I were to identify a trend, I would do so on a retailing analogy.
The large practices will increasingly become supermarkets, highly competitive on fees, offering a one-stop service to clients, with engineers, surveyors, designers and town planners as part of the in-house team.
A number of smaller practices, with an international reputation for quality, will be architectural boutiques, offering their clients award-winning designs and virtually naming their own price.
Then there will remain the architectural corner shop, busy and respected in its own community, doing house extensions, small commercial developments and a wide range of local jobs.
We shall know a great deal more about such matters in two or three years' time, if money can be raised to commission an end-of-the-century version of The Architect and his Office .
This RIBA survey (supported by Leverhulme Trust), published in 1962, had an immense influence in determining the future direction of the profession.
Sir Andrew Derbyshire, who as a young architect with Sheffield City Council was part of the steering committee 30 years ago, has agreed to serve again, and the chairman will be Frank Duffy of DEGW, who is now the RIBA's Vice-President for Marketing.
Council has been insistent that as this strategic study of the profession moves to the advanced planning stage, it should take into account the public as well as the private sector, the small practitioner as well as the large.
Allies and Morrison's initial project for Pier Head Liverpool
Practice
Ray Cecil praises the integrity of a member, looks at the increase in latent defects insurance, and sets the record straight on four-year funding
The RIBA has many awards for architects mostly, if not all, in the field of design.
Well, I think it is high time that we gave an award for valour in professional conduct, and I nominate as the first recipient, Keith Holdsworth of Bournemouth, Employed by the New Forest District Council, Keith Holdsworth risked his career, his livelihood and his life savings in the defence of his professional integrity, when it would have been so easy to take an easier route.
The affair was reported at length by A. Hollington in the local newspaper,the Advertiser and Times , earlier this year, but the essence of it was as follows.
Firstly, Mr Holdsworth refused to certify to a builder monies that had been valued by the in-house quantity surveyors, for the simple reason that he knew the work to which it related had not been executed.
This precipitated a memorandum from the Chief Technical Officer to the effect that architects were not to question quantity surveyors' valuations!
Still later, a project went out to tender.
A tender list of six firms was prepared in accordance with Standing Orders, but on the day they were due to be sent out, Mr Holdsworth was instructed to add a seventh.
Surprise!
Surprise! the seventh firm won the tender by a narrow margin.
Mr Holdsworth expressed reservations about the seventh firm and sought a meeting with the Chief Technical Officer.
When he arrived at the meeting it was to be told that he was suspended and barred from his office.
He refused to leave until the Council obtained an injunction banning him from Council premises.
Eventually Mr Holdsworth was summoned to attend a Council committee at which he was presented with a list of 26 disciplinary offences, none of which had been raised with him before his suspension.
He was not permitted to call other officers of the Council in his defence and he was found guilty of 12 offences and dismissed.
On appealing to yet another committee, the 14 cases on which he had not been found guilty were resurrected and his dismissal confirmed.
ON taking his case to an Industrial Tribunal, Mr Holdsworth was awarded the maximum compensation of £14,000 and had the satisfaction of hearing the Council's case called ‘laughable’.
Mr Holdsworth was then sued in the High Court for the reinstitution of his pension rights.
No mean combatant, Mr Holdsworth dismissed two solicitors for not pursuing his case with sufficient vigour.
That case has now been settled with all allegations of misconduct being withdrawn and Mr Holdsworth has been compensated for the loss of his pension rights.
As is usual in these cases, both parties agreed to make no further statements on the matter.
It has taken all of six years and in the end this chartered architect has been entirely vindicated, but the case does highlight the vulnerability of architects in employment.
And the pressures are probably much greater within the public sector, if only because of the difficulty of obtaining further employment in the public sector if one has been dismissed for disciplinary reasons.
As I constantly urge members — your signature is your most precious possession.
Never apply it to a document that you know to be false or incorrect.
I only hope that by following this advice other members do not face the ordeal to which Mr Holdsworth was subjected.
Advice to the retired
If you have retired — then stay retired.
The decision to retire is never an easy one for architects.
They may want to leave the hassle of day-to-day practice, but even so, retain their skills and find it difficult to close the book on a lifetime in the profession they love.
They have friends in their local community and often a wide reputation.
So the temptation is always there to take on some small job ‘to keep one's hand in’ or to help a friend.
Well, if you are going to do that, then you haven't retired.
So make sure that you maintain a professional indemnity insurance policy for any work that you may intend to do!
The reason I make this point is that while a retired architect may be covered by the PI policy of the firm he has left, that cover will only extend to the work he was involved with while a member of that practice.
And for a retired lone practitioner, a run-off insurance policy will only cover past work.
Current work needs current cover!
I am moved to remind readers of these points by the case of a retired practitioner who was approached to do a small domestic extension.
It seemed innocuous enough and the client only wanted some basic drawings for approvals.
The architect charged a very low fee, but the client disputed it and the architect was to ill-advised (or not advised at all- as to decide to sue.
Unfortunately there was a small error on one of the drawings and a great meal was made of this in the Small Claims Court where he lost his fee claim.
Now the architect is faced with a five-figure claim which will cost several thousand pounds to defend with no insurance company behind him.
the moral is clear.
You cannot ‘semi-retire’ from architecture.
Latent defects insurance
There are signs that latent defects insurance, such as that recommended in the BUILD report, is beginning to take off in the insurance market.
The Wren insurance mutual of some 40 major firms is offering a package tied up with an optional extension to cover consequential losses at the owner/occupier/tenant's expense.
This is an interesting development and if the trend continues, we may see the demise of collateral warranties in the not too distant future.
I was particularly interested in the fact that a firm of architects, one of the public companies, is offering this insurance as part of a total professional services package.
I don't have any details except that the insurance is fairly basic with a number of optional extras and is dependent upon the client employing the firm for their full range of services at full scale fees.
I don't know what happens about any other consultants who may be engaged but I suspect there will be no waiver of subrogation against those firms.
In one sense, offering insurance in this way may be no more than a marketing device and the whole deal is a matter for the commercial judgement of the firm involved — and their clients.
As they say in Yorkshire, ‘Tha gets  owt fer nowt’ and many clients will still prefer to negotiate on fees.
It will also be interesting to see how the ‘scale fee’ condition will operate if the Institute ceases to publish scale fees, as is quite likely to happen within the foreseeable future.
Nevertheless, the fact that leading insurance companies are grasping the nettle of BUILD type insurance is good news indeed.
It will make the five years that I served on the BUILD committee seem worthwhile.
Contributory negligence
The law on contributory negligence has never been clear and I for one do not profess to know it.
But most architects involved in liability cases feel that there has been at least some contribution to his own losses by the claimant.
The law treats contractual and tortious claims differently in these cases, hence the confusion.
Now the Law Commission has issued a working paper entitled ‘Contributory Negligence as a Defence in Contract’ in which it recommends that contributory negligence should be available as a defence to all breaches of contractual obligations.
However, this is only a recommendation and it remains to be seen just how much notice the courts will take or whether legislation will follow.
Nevertheless, it is good news because the deep involvement of many clients in the building procurement process means that they are seldom entirely blameless when things go wrong.
Particularly s this so when they ignore the warnings of their advisors on matters like budget and timescale.
Another aspect which should be considered is the input of clients' in-house departments in the design process.
Usually, the contract places all the responsibility upon the consultant but it is sometimes difficult to resist accepting the work of expert clients.
Now, if that input contributes to the loss or damage it may be possible to have the damages reduced.
This is just one more sign that the courts may be balancing the scales of justice a little more fairly than has been the case over the past decade or so.
Four-year funding
Lest anybody should have got the idea from my August column that I was in some way in favour of four-year funding of students of architecture, let me set the record straight.
These articles are addressed to practitioners and for a long while I have been urging practitioners towards a greater involvement in the education of the profession's next generation.
That needs to happen whether five-year funding continues, or not.
Five-year, full-time education is the norm almost world-wide, however it is organised, and the present levels of funding have already seen a drastic reduction of staffing levels in the schools.
To reduce it by a further 20 per cent would seem to be the height of idiocy.
The trouble is that when our present Government sees an opportunity to reduce its spending, logic, good sense, the public weal and even moral commitment seem to have no place in its thinking.
Hence, we do need to think about how we will deal with the situation if the Government rides roughshod over all informed opinion and ceases to fund the fifth year of full-time education.
The author writes these articles as an architect in practice.
He does not hold himself to be an expert in law or insurance.
For advice on detailed or specific matters readers are advised to consult their own lawyers.
Letters
The cost of the architecture centre proposals questioned, John Harris replies to Bob Giles, and is architect's academic education too long?
A Centre for Architects
With reference to Bob Giles' gallery-targeted speech (RIBA Journal September), it is my impression that the absence of a ‘grand swell of opposition’ to the Drawings Collection/Library proposals is largely due to the despair of the ‘average member’in the Council taking their view seriously on anything of consequence.
As I recall, the grand swell of opposition which occurred with regard to abandoning the classes of corporate membership and allowing self-advertisement by members of a professional body was not heeded.
The members simply have not the time at their disposal to take on the continuous pressure needed to effectively construct a platform for alternative or opposing views.
We are not all made of the stuff of John Weller, nor should it be necessary for us to be so.
A referendum would give the membership views but Council, whilst spending madly on the Hay Report, would no doubt object to spending money on a democratic exercise which might upset cherished opinion.
Chucking other people's money about in courageous fashion is just what architects are always being accused of doing and it is the average member who bears the brunt of such criticism.
However, if the Institute is going to plan for the needs of 2001 AD, the whole idea of space occupied by books may need to be revised.
There are some people who believe that the future of books and magazines for recording information is bleak and suggest that he computer will make the book obsolete as a way of preserving intelligence for succeeding generations.
It may be that ‘no action’ would turn out to be a very wise option based on the experiences of miniaturisation over the last 30 years or so.
Speeches like Bob Giles' are all very well but they tend to obliterate the cool thinking so necessary by those who hold positions of trust.
It is interesting to note the oblique thrust of the Director-General's comments in the same issue of the Journal regarding ‘eloquent’ speeches.
Passion must be tempered with reason.
Frankly speaking, I don't want an architecture centre in our Institute headquarters in London.
Remember the design Centre?
What I want is an institute which is a centre for architects: a very different concept and one which puts the emphasis on the human capacity for individual creativity rather than the resulting artefact.
The Design centre finally failed because it became too elitist and alienated the general public.
An architecture centre is in danger of doing the same thing and, to that extent, is distinctly against the interests of the membership as a whole.
Derek S Bottomley, Sherburn-in-  Elment , Nr Leeds
A Resigning Issue
So the ‘house of hype’ has convinced itself that it's full steam ahead with the architecture centre and hand the cost (RIBA Journal September) conservatively £40,000,000 (count those noughts) over 30 years.
And what have the Portland Place plenipotentiaries to say about it?
To Giles I'm a ‘Jeremiah’ who should be capable of ‘an act of faith’— act of lunacy, more like; to Hans Haenlein and others I've got incredibly deep pockets; to Peter Davey, for whom I voted and who is now so far removed from ‘the cultural gangsters’as to be a cultural kamikaze pilot, I need ‘a heroic proposal’; to Mervyn Miller I shouldn't ‘surrender my birthright’— but I may have to sell it.
Ray Cecil's understatement is about right — I'm in a ‘state of shock’.
Yes indeed, Bob Giles, the membership has been quiet on this issue.
Perhaps, like me, they were waiting to see how crazy it would get.
Just because Council is delegated in the matter of routine gives it no right to assume such a role when it proposes such a mammoth commitment.
It is inconceivable that we could advise our clients in the manner in which Council has advised this institute, A ‘brown-field’ site out of London, in say Leeds or Sheffield or York, could attract development grants, rates deferrals and provide jobs and would be better placed for the majority of the membership.
London may be the centre of England to Bob Giles, it ain't for me.
Let me advise Council now, that if they proceed down this primrose path any further then it becomes a resignation issue for me and, I suspect, many others who cannot believe this farrago.
Roger Emmerson, ARCHImedia, Edinburgh
Who are the Suckers?
Following our report of the July Council meeting (RIBA Journal, September), including the Honorary Librarian's speech in support of the architecture centre proposals, we received the following open letter to Bob Giles.
Yes, of course I am disgruntled, but not for the reasons you may adduce.
Your memory is short.
I was the first to state that reunification was the best option (and I quote from an Institute minute)‘provided the RIBA can show that Portland Place can be adapted for the successful functioning of all departments.’
It has not.
During what I call the period of uneasy peace, 1983–84, Mr Heinz expected all options to be examined and costed in detail.
They were not.
Jack Heinz and I thought as one: that if the drawings could be housed in a Portman Square modernised for fire and climate control, and have the financial burden lifted from the shoulders of the RIBA, this would allow for spatial manoeuvre in Portland Place.
With rolling stacks in a Jarvis Foyer mezzanine, and t with the space allocated to the drawings, the library would have ample storage well into the next century.
These possibilities were ignored.
No, Mr Giles, what I am disgruntled about is the lousy deal you are getting for £26 million or more.
this apparently buys an exhibition gallery utterly inadequate to host even a moderately-sized show; a restaurant not large enough to serve both staff and members and be an income-generating venue for the public; a bookshop that needs twice as much space if it is to be the premier one in England; library and drawings storage that will mean costly out-housing as soon as the new facility is opened; and finally — my own personal quibble — a drawings collection that will have lost its allure as a magnet for donor support.
Recently, in another context, you described Cedric Price, and others, as ‘suckers’ for listening to the likes of Mr Heinz and me.
As a business man, Jack had all of you licked.
He saw, with that sharp acumen that made the Heinz organisation famous, that Portland Place could not absorb the expanding requirements of a British Architectural Library, an architecture centre, and a professional institution.
I think his genial ghost is already chuckling, that ‘we'll see who are really the suckers’.
John Harris, London SW10
Library Alternatives
In the September RIBA Journal great prominence is given to Bob Giles' contribution to the Council debate on the library/architecture centre.
The opposite view is referred to briefly in passing in the Council report.
It is important that members should be aware of all the issues involved — the matter is too important for the future of the Institute.
All the alternatives have not been properly considered, and must be before the Institute is committed to an enterprise of this magnitude.
We are not now talking of £2 million or £5 million.
The total costs are now estimated at £25 million capital costs, plus either]£10 million or £16 million needed for the endowment necessary to fund the operating costs of the extended library and the permanent outhousing of 50 staff.
That totals £40 million or, if you take the lowest figure — excluding the ‘risk factor’ and taking the lowest endowment figure — £30 million!
An alternative scheme for a ‘brown-field site, costing £16 million — £9 million less than the capital cost for the favoured project — has been lightly dismissed.
Under the approved scheme, with work being carried out in three phases, our headquarters will be a building site for three years.
However skilfully that is organised, the disruption to the vital work of the Institute will be close to unbearable.
With a brown-field solution disruption can be kept to a minimum.
There is another brown-field alternative that has not been investigated: to build a new RIBA administrative building on a new site and sell 66 Portland place to the trust set up to operate the architecture centre and the library.
The space vacated by the RIBA can be used to produce revenue for the trust.
If number 68 which is litter more than offices, is surplus, it can be sold to help finance the new building.l Raising of funds for the trust should also be easier, as again it will be a separate identifiable building.
The issues are not just money but where the RIBA's priorities should be in a rabidly changing situation.
The library study was looking to the future of the library — not the RIBA.
That issue is of concern to all members, not just Council.
The approved scheme will give up control of our only major asset — 66 Portland Place.
Owen Luder, London SW1
An Act of Faith
On the evening of Thursday 13 September, architecture was celebrated at Portland Place: the first annual Trustees' Medal was presented to Norman Foster for the Willis Faber & Dumas building in Ipswich.
Such celebrations of our art should not be limited only to honouring great architects and their buildings, or listening to occasional lectures and debates, but should be a continuous function of our institute.
Sadly, our 60-year-old building no longer allows this to happen.
In July, Council voted unequivocally to proceed with the much praised plans to reinstate Portland Place to its rightful role as an architecture centre based round its internationally-celebrated library and drawings collection.
Let there be no doubt about it — this is the most important and momentous decision for architecture, and hence for architects, since our predecessors voted to build 66 Portland Place.
Council has rightly, and appropriately as the new millennium approaches, committed us, the profession, to an act of faith.
There will always be the doubters and disbelievers, but now the public debate is over, the course has been set, and fund-raising is to commence.
For the sake of architecture, which we all believe in, it is vital that if we cannot accept the decision to proceed with enthusiasm, we at least accept the decision with democratic grace.
Peter Aldington, Haddenham, Buckinghamshire
Value of Paper Qualifications
Your September editorial spoke out strongly against a reduction in the length of full-time architectural courses.
To what extent though do student architects actually benefit from staying at university or polytechnic for so long?
The earnings potential of a first degree student with one year of office experience is the same as that of a second degree student who after six years still only has one year of experience to offer.
Earnings only build as office experience imparts skills that are of value to the employer.
As an employer, I find that paper qualifications are no guide to ability.
In fact, since the RIBA abolished the part-time qualification route in preference of degree status for all architects, the value of paper qualifications as a badge of competence, has correspondingly diminished.
In general, we are asked to pay higher salaries to experienced, but ‘unqualified’, technicians than we are to inexperienced but highly ‘qualified’ architects of the same age.
It is the mainly office-trained technicians who acquire a thorough grasp of construction, office procedures and job running far more quickly than their architect counterparts.
It also has to be recognised that the general educational standard of aspiring architects is much lower than it used to be.
Most young employees are quite unable to write simple letters without spelling and grammatical errors.
Isn't it just possible that students are missing out by being held back on full-time courses for so long?
Graham Price, London WC2
Diary
RIBA Events
•22 October Doric Club Lunch 1990.
All members qualified for 45 years or more are invited to attend.
Details, Betty Nyss at the RIBA, 071–580 5533.
Exhibitions
•Until 12 October Society of Architect Artists Annual Exhibition at 66 Portland Place.
•Until 12 October Architecture in Detail.
Richard Bryant photography, at 66 Portland Place.
•Until 27 October Voysey and Decoration: Drawings from the Collection of the BAL at the Heinz Gallery.
•17–24 October Rhino.
New Contemporary furniture by Angus Addison, Jeremy Edwards, Michael Managh and Melanie Nelson, at 66 Portland Place.
•17–18 October Northern Construction Industry Computer Exhibition and Conference 1990.
Applications of computing technology in the G-Mex Centre, Manchester.
Details, Beverly Nicholls at RIBA, 071–251 5885.
•22 October–2 November Three Recent Buildings and a Background.
The work of Leslie Martin and Associated Architects, at 66 Portland Place.
•29 October–2 November Constellation. experimental textiles: Postgraduate students' work from Winchester Art School, at 66 Portland Place.
•The Heinz Gallery is at 21 Portman Square, London W1 and is open Monday to Friday 11 a.m. to 5 p.m., Saturday 10 a.m. to 1 p.m.
Exhibition opening hours at 66 Portland Place, London W1 are Monday to Friday 10 a.m. to 5.30 p.m.
Lectures
•9 October Wild Colonial Boys?
The City, Abstraction and the Architecture of Denton Corker Marshall.
John Denton presents the work of his practice based in Melbourne, New South Wales.
•16 October The Country Life Competition for the Dulwich Picture Gallery.
Presentation of the winning scheme, chaired by Clive Aslet, with the winning architects.
•23 October Theory and Design in the Second Machine Age.
Martin Pawley talks about his new book.
•30 October The 1990 Redland/RIBA Lecture by Professor Gunter Behnisch.
•6 November Building the British Library by Professor Colin St John Wilson
•13 November The 1990 Landscape Institute/RIBA Lecture: City Policy Greenery: the case of Osaka and Expo '90 by Ken Miyazaki, design co-ordinator of Green Expo '90, Osaka.
Tickets: £3, £3.50, £4.
•20 November The Furniture Design of Charles and Ray Eames by Christopher Wilk, Curator, Furniture and Woodwork Collection at the V&A.
•27 November The Work of Jean Prouvé by Professor Peter Sulzer, Stuttgart.
•Lectures begin at 6.15 p.m. at 66 Portland Place, London W1.
Admission is £2.50 for members, £2 for students, and £3 for visitors.
Conferences
•4–5 October Environmental Quality 90.
Organised by the RIBA and sponsored by British Gas West Midlands, at the British Gas Conference Centre, Solihull.
Details, Clare Bell, 021–356 7869.
•10 October Interior Design Opportunities.
RIBAS seminar at the London Tara Hotel, London W8.
•18 October Design Build — Still a Growth Market organised by RIBAS at 66 Portland Place and at Park Hall Hotel, Chorley, Lancashire (6 Nov).
•23 October Planning Control Update: the new planning acts explained.
Organised by RIBAS, at The Cresta Court Hotel, Altrincham.
•25 October Sports Stadia in the 90's.
Robert Atkins, Minister for Sport, will give the Government's view on sports stadia design and management.
Organised by RIBAS at 66 Portland Place.
•29 October Project Management: the competitive edge.
Organised by RIBAS and ICC/RICS at Cavendish conference Centre, 20 Duchess Mews, London W1.
•1 November CAD — Investing for the Future.
RIBAS seminar at 66 Portland Place
•8 November JCT Contracts Update.
RIBAS seminar at Cavendish Conference Centre, London W1.
•15 November High Rise 90.
Organised by RIBA West Midlands region on the options available for the maintenance and refurbishment of high-rise buildings including private development, at the Motorcycle Museum, NEC.
Details, Clare Bell, 021–356 7869.
21 November Assessment Schemes Present and Future.
RIBA Environmental and Energy Committee half-day seminar with presentations from the promoters of three schemes, at 66 Portland Place.
Details, Barry Lennox,(0962) 8600095.
•Further details of RIBAS seminars are available from Jayne Sheriffs, 071–251 5885.
Regional Events
•8–19 October RIAS.
RIAS/Burrell Award for Architecture exhibition at RIAS Gallery, 15 Rutland Square, Edinburgh.
•8–27 October Architectural Drawings from the Archives: Inverness Architectural Association exhibition, Inverness Art Gallery.
•10 October Eastern Region.
Electricity Economy in Schools seminar at the University Centre, Cambridge.
Details, Rex Bowen (0992) 555120.
•12–13 October RIAS.
Frontiers of Technology Jubilee Conference, Tree Tops Hotel, Aberdeen.
Details, 031–229 7545.
•30 October Norfolk Association of Architects.
Annual Norwich Lecture by Rick Mather on Contemporary Architecture and Design, at the University of East Anglia at 6.30 p.m.
Details, Peter Dean,(0493) 842219.
•1 November Leeds Society of Architects.
Talk by Ray Cecil on his manifesto for the forthcoming RIBA Presidential Election, in Leeds Polytechnic, Brunswick Terrace, Leeds LS2 8BU (0532) 832600 ext. 4082.
Other Events
•6 October–26 November Architectural Tours.
Lutyens in London (6 October), Masters of Engineering (12–14 October), City of London (16 October), London Docklands (20 October), Sir John Soane: Major London Buildings (27 October), India (10–26 November).
Details, Victoria Thornton, 071–267 6497.
•2–3 November 3D — Design, Debate, Demonstration.
Glasgow design event based along the lines of Designers' Saturday organised by a group of Glasgow designers and architects as part of the City's Cultural celebrations.
Details, 041–226 5291.
•4–6 December Housing Centre Trust study tour of Northern Ireland.
Details 071–735 6827.
•3–20 April 1991 Passage to India eighteen-day architectural tour of northern India.
Details, David Snell,(0580) 712291.
Exhibitions
•Until 27 October In Search of Ruskin: Drawings, Paintings and Research by Derek Hyatt at Ruskin Gallery, 101 Norfolk Street, Sheffield.
Details (0742) 735299.
•20 October–2 December Furniture and the Schröder House at Mead Gallery, University of Warwick, Coventry.
Details (0203) 523523.
•22 October–2 November Walking on Glass.
The work of Pawson Williams Architects exploring ideas on composition and the fragility of modernism in the city, at the Blanc de Bierges Gallery, Business Design Centre, Islington, London N1.
Details, 071–288 6217.
•23 October–18 November The Otis Award.
A selection of winning entries from this year's competition at the Design Museum, Butler's Wharf, London SE1.
Details, 071–407 6265.
•23–26 October Building 90 exhibition and seminars at Earls Court, London.
Details, 071–486 1951.
•27 October–4 November The 1989 International Architecture Exhibition in the Grande Halle de la Villette, Paris Details,(33) 46 33 05 62.
Lectures
•10 October Bricks Design and Industries Association talk and presentation by Valerie Thompson of Redland Bricks PLC at the Redland Bricks Ltd Showrooms, 28 Maiden Lane, Covent Garden, London WC2, at 12.15 p.m.
Details, 081–940 4925.
•17 October Urban Design Group World Cities Lecture series.
Prague's Unique Townscape: Urban design in Czechoslovakia by Walter Bor, at DEGW, 8 Crinan Street, York Way, London N1, at 6.0 p.m.
Details, Philip Cave, 071–240 2430.
•31 October Ibstock Building Products lecture series: Communities in the Countryside — What Future? by Professor David Lock, at Ibstock Design Centre, Glasgow, at 12.30 p.m.
Details, 071–835 1222.
Conferences/Courses
•1–19 October Analysing Historic Buildings and Landscapes course at Ironbridge Gorge Museum Trust, Ironbridge, Telford, Shropshire.
Details, 095245 2751.
•10 October The Building Process has Changed — How to Improve the Product.
Conference organised by the Chartered Institute of Building.
Details, Sue Hines,(0344) 23355.
•12 October Construction Law 1990.
School of Business and Industrial Management conference at the Selfridge Hotel, London W1.
Details (0233) 622101.
•19–20 October Docklands, Dereliction and Development.
Conference at Merseyside Maritime Museum, Albert Dock, Liverpool.
Details 051–207 0001 ext 456.
•23, 24, 25 October Construction Industry: Avoiding Disputes and Getting Paid.
Organised by James R. Knowles Construction Contracts Consultants, at Hilton Hotel, Manchester (23rd), Moor Hall, Sutton Coldfield (24th) and Churchill Hotel, London (25th).
Details,(0565) 50090.
•23–24 October Design and Build Contracting.
School of Business and Industrial Management course at the Royal Automobile Club, London SW1.
Details,(0233) 622101.
•23–25 October Business Performance Improvement for Design Consultancies and Studios.
Series of six seminars, at the Chartered Society of Designers, 29 Bedford Square, London WC1.
Details 071–631 1510.
•24 October Planning for Profit: An Update.
Current issues in planning law and practices at the Café Royal, Regent Street, London W1.
Details, 071–499 8995.
•25 October Housing for the Frail Elderly — Practical Issues.
Housing Centre Trust seminar at Inverness Court Hotel, Bayswater, London W2.
Details 071–735 6827.
•29 October–1 November Conservation of Interiors and Decorative Arts.
Institute of Advanced Architectural Studies course, University of York, The King's Manor, York.
Details,(0904) 433978.
•31 October Collateral Warranties seminar organised by the School of Business and Industrial Management at the Selfridge Hotel, London, W1.
Details,(0233) 622101.
•7 November The Paris Conference 19990 Design and Communication.
at the Centre Français au Commerce Exterieur Conference Centre.
Details, 071–354 9094.
•7 November Gold Quality Day.
A Department of Trade and Industry conference on quality management at CBI, Centre Point, London.
Details, NACCB, 071–498 3722.
9–12 November British Council of Shopping Centres annual conference at the National Hall, Dublin.
Details,(0734) 861101.
Books
Transport problems and proposals, the work of SITE, and a new volume in the Buildings of England series
Civilising Transport
Brian Richards: Transport in Cities, ADT Press, 1990. £14.95.
As Brian Richards says, the range of techniques for improving movement in cities has never been so great.
The irony is that, in much of the Western world, urban traffic congestion is getting worse, not better.
A quarter of a century ago, Colin Buchanan told us that road-building, improved public transport and some limitations on the use of vehicles would not aloe solve the problem of traffic in towns.
Richards follows Buchanan in wisely reminding us that there is no simple, sure-all solution.
Implicit is the recognition that the age of conservation creates a new straitjacket for change.
Richards is inclined to follow fashion in identifying ‘the road lobby’ as a prime cause of our troubles when the great majority of people have access to a car and want to use it.
But he is right in saying that existing road space must be rationed — electronic devices are the obvious method — and public transport radically enhanced.
Transport in Cities is a good, clear illustrated guide to the ways in which we could greatly improved urban living by civilising our means of transport.
William Rodgers
Surrealist America
SITE, foreword by James Wines, interview by Herbert Muschamp, Rizzoli International, 1989. £35 cloth, £25 paper
Like Robert Venturi before them, James Wines and Alison Sky of SITE apply the values of a clever urban sophistication to the phenomenon of the American strip.
Compared to Venturi, SITE has had rather more ambitious and frequently surrealist purposes.
The supermarket, the fast-food joint, the parking lot have all been projects of the practice: but a Macdonalds which floats, a parking lot with 20 cars deeply buried under asphalt, and its most celebrated work, the series of catalogue stores for the Best company where boxes are smashed into and eroded, with trees growing through them, façades peel or tilt, distorting the relationships between the predictable elements of the landscape.
This volume provides an admirably full and even coverage of 13 years of these and many other projects, but it scarcely attempts the more critical profile one might have expected from Rizzoli.
An office which is assiduous about publication and publicity, but which is often seen as outside the dialogues of current architectural concern in the USA, deserves a more judicious appraisal then it has received, here or elsewhere.
Andrew Higgott
Lincolnshire Discovered
Nikolaus Pevsner and John Harris, revised by Nicholas Antram, The Buildings of England, Lincolnshire, Penguin, 1989. £20
The first edition of the Buildings of England, Lincolnshire volume, published in 1964, was the first volume in which Nikolaus Pevsner collaborated with another author, in this case John Harris.
Harris did all the preliminary research and visited the secular buildings, Pevsner confined himself to churches and medieval domestic buildings.
This detailed academic research, combined with Pevsner's Germanic organisation, resulted in one of the largest volumes to date: but nothing like the extensively revised, jumbo-sized second edition with its 879 pages.
One of the delights of the early volumes was their brevity and Pevsner's idiosyncratic style, but many Victorian buildings were omitted and scholarly thoroughness was sacrificed for speed of compilation.
Nicholas Antram has undertaken the revision and records the ongoing demolition of churches, the ‘insidious suburbanisation’ particularly noticeable around commuter towns such as Grantham, and the changes in the landscape due to modern farming methods.
Other changes of emphasis, after a quarter of a century, reflect a more general appreciation of townscape — a larger selection of minor eighteenth- and nineteenth-century structures is included, an increased interest in gardens, and a new introductory chapter by Neil Wright records the growth in the study of industrial archaeology.
More detailed research and length of text could deter the casual reader but one of the improvements in this volume is the increased use of historical and topographical introductions to towns and villages.
These brilliantly set the scene and reintroduce the Pevsner flavour.
Some of the descriptions are devastating: Alford is a ‘small, uneventful market town’; Beelsby, ‘a few old houses and plenty of recent infill for the Grimsby commuter’; Fosdyke, ‘an austere village in remote and forbidding Fen country’; and Mablethorpe, ‘famed for its sand, certainly not for its architecture’.
Richard Wilcock 
Jonathan Glancey's heavily illustrated appraisal of the current architectural scene —New British Architecture — published by Thames and Hudson is now out in paperback, priced at £14.95
A Bridge Between Two Cultures
London based Islamic architect Abdel Wahid El Wakil talks to Peter Rawstorne about his approach to art and architecture.
Abdel Wahid El Wakil has not yet made a building in the UK and works abroad mainly in the Gulf.
This interview came out of several inspirational talks we had in June and was highlighted by his brilliant summer lecture to the Art and Architecture Society.
‘There is no architecture without ornamentation,’ he says.
He does not mean mere decoration.
The very essence of his buildings is expressed through intimately relating ornament to structure so, together, they create astonishing, tautly dynamic, glittering volumes and spaces for people.
His virtuosity and clarity is a welcome oasis in the current clouded debate: whither modern architecture?
He seeks ‘origins’ in tradition but eschews sentimental nostalgic façadism.
Not for him Classical decoration hung on utilitarian steel or concrete frames.
His buildings are as exciting naked as they are sumptuous when adorned.
I honour him as a ‘bridge’ between two ancient cultures — East and West — at a time when such positive influences are much needed.
El Wakil : Culture is the interaction of man's intelligence with his environment.
What has happened in the modern period is a deviation, not a development: a deviation that is failing economically, socially, environmentally.
I do not mean to deny all that has happened — there are some beautiful modern buildings.
I mean the unleashed growth and expansion without regard to natural balance.
Very few people are aware of a limit to growth.
Today, new solutions — nuclear, solar, and so on— are still talked of in an expansive attitude when restraint is needed.
We are in a new age.
To be truly modern today is to be anti-modern!
Tradition and environment
Primitive people had inspired knowledge that came out of the archetypes.
In nature ‘solid’ material does not exist.
Cities are the inverse, containing individual blocks, streets but few voids, lungs: an excessive impression of solid mass and a zero expression of space.
(drawing source: Sir Leslie Martin Urban Space and Structures ).
Intelligent spatial geometry gives a ‘breathing space’ of open volumes.
Commercially lettable space is there but low-rise gives better distribution of air, services — what London used to have — positive spaces (drawing source: James Gleik Chaos )
Today we have two kinds of knowledge: acquired knowledge from without — experience, teaching, research — and inspired knowledge which comes from within.
This is largely absent in today's secular society.
Innovation should be the correct interpretation of the archetype, the prototype.
It will thus follow the path of tradition — and this becomes the vehicle which protects us against deviation.
On the one hand, you have acquired rational knowledge established by analysis, by polarity, and, on the other, the holistic — what the ancient Egyptians called the knowledge of the heart.
Once, the oral tradition ensured that knowledge went not only to the brain but to the heart, to become the synthesis from within.
I do not have a romantic nostalgia for the past but a binding love for the environment, producing an emotive link with the past.
Links with the past establish man's identity.
Architecture was the medium for the understanding of the environment.
Now it is all mechanical: a ‘patient’ in intensive care — artificial heart, air-conditioned lungs, pulleys to carry your legs up and down.
But in all the buildings made today, in the most beautiful locations, there are very few which express their environment.
They express technology of industrial materials, efficient space management.
Once, architecture gained expression by man trying to interpret nature.
there was a holistic world vision which brought about an understanding of the natural order.
But this holistic view was lost, and architecture became a series of isolated statements.
We need to stop talking of single buildings and think of streets, whole environments.
Architecture can no longer be about individual statements, buildings.
It must be looked at as a grand community of integrated environment.
The craftsman has to interact emotionally with the pattern.
Each is different.
If you change the proportion, all changes.
It took months to analyse the geometry.
Below, study for the King Saud Mosque, Jeddah based on the Cairo mosque.
I wanted to sculpt the stalactites but we could not find the sculptors.
They have gone.
We made it in a factory (Hollowcore) using moulded GRG.
Five craftsmen helped me here in England.
We all became friends.
It was a fulfilling experience.
Bottom left, King Saud Mosque, Jeddah — finished stalactite.
Bottom right, King Saud Mosque, Jeddah, oblique view of stalactite
Building on the past
Our age wants to erase the past.
Tradition builds on the past, relates everything to archetypes and prototypes.
Without this dynamic process, tradition stagnates into a fixation of habit, traditionalism, bringing about its death or rejection.
Tradition implies continuity.
Designing with tradition is not a pretence for re-creating the old.
It is no mere act of imitation.
Mimicry destroys the significance of form.
Traditional design is a complex process of adaptation and assimilation in a perpetual act of gestation.
The act of being creative should relate to the Creator — the Architect of the Universe.
Far from inspiring individualism, or egoism, the act should inspire awe, humility.
It is not a linear process with past at the back and future at front — the Whig theory that the latest moment in history is the most progressive.
Tradition, the node, is the centre, and the future is the infinitely variable capacity of elaboration radiating outwards to the periphery of wider and wider circles.
Is this a theory or is it a truth?
It is a truth if you look at nature.
Growth in nature starts from a seed and flowers into a variety of forms.
Between the seed and the flower is time which is not a linear action but an elaboration.
Never forget that the tree was in the seed.
In the seed is the design of the tree.
This is not a romantic vision.
It is an ‘organic’ proposal creating space.
‘Organic’ does not mean copying natural forms but seeing the structure in nature, how natural form works efficiently with minimum energy output.
Making traditional ideas into form
There are two lobbies in today's debate.
One group, like spoiled children, refuses to face reality, and wants more and more.
The other, the revivalist, has a fixation for a dead past.
The real Classic tradition is lost to both parties.
There must be a complete scrutiny on every level to re-create this past knowledge, seek out its truths, bring them into today.
As an example, Medinah is the centre of Muslim history and tradition.
Making the Qiblatain Mosque there was like working in the Vatican or an active Mont St Michael or Chartres.
The old mosque was too small.
Pilgrims come now in their millions — two million by air in a very short space of time.
Change was necessary.
Many said we should express the spirit of our time.
The idea is neither to express the spirit of the times, nor go backwards and create a Disney World of history.
It is: what forms create what moods?
How do the materials function with such forms?
How is the environment affected?
What is the overall impression of the built edifice to the human experience of visitors to that place?
In this process, the use of modern conveniences, techniques, when required, are not denied.
However, they do not establish themselves as an emblem to the overall design.
They serve, but do not become a cultural statement.
Cultural forms are never established by technical conveniences.
A problem to note is that high-tech implies high costs.
It is often more energy-intensive with a more rapid deterioration than low-tech buildings!
At King Saud Mosque, Jeddah, we covered a large courtyard with an opening lightweight metal roof.
It ‘floats’ and the open panels ‘fly’like kites.
We could get the 80 per cent shade using heavy traditional materials but we chose the most appropriate
Craftsmen from Morocco and Pakistan carved these beautiful columns for the mosque at Qiblatain, Medinah, using their traditional plaster techniques.
Three hundred masons learned from us.
They can build their own house without government loans or mortgages.
That is real freedom!
Below, view of the newly-completed mosque.
The purity of natural form is expressed in the brick squinch arches forming the pendentive supporting the dome
Loss of scale
The greatest deviation in modern architecture and planning is the loss of scale; not human scale but the hierarchies of scale in which vital transformations happen.
An old cathedral had a scale when you saw it from the mountain, or the plain, the silhouette.
The, within the city, it would be its campanile, then, closer, the façade, then the door, then you see the small figures on the panels on the door.
Ruskin called this the arborescent quality.
Nowadays, it is one block of glass from the air.
And inside, it is the same block: just one glass surface.
Energy
I use whatever is appropriate.
But, whatever is used, the big question now, is energy: where are the hidden costs, how much energy is used to produce what you want, where has the waste product gone?
It is not the element cost.
It is the global cost, the total energy input.
Any healthy person will think like this.
The answers to such questions make the moral judgement on my work as an architect.
But who is subsidising the market cost?
It is the Third World poor.
Is the Third World expected to imitate the West, and if so what would the consequences be?
I am not merely trying to preserve the tradition of my country.
I am just saying that we have no other alternative.
Architecture for the people
In the beginning, I worked with Hassan Fathy.
He dedicated his life trying to find an appropriate architecture for his country which was realistic and integral to that society.
He touched upon universal values.
This made him a world figure.
Once you have a universal message, a doctrine of appropriate maximum efficiency, everyone listens.
I make mosques.
For the last 10 years I have worked to create environments for the millions of pilgrims who come to Saudi Arabia.
You don't need to have a credit card or a bank account to go into a mosque.
Fifty per cent of the mosques we have built in Saudi Arabia were donated by others to create an environment for everyone.
Rich and poor alike go together into the same mosque and enjoy the same richness — the carpets, the chandeliers, the art, everything.
I have created a rich architecture for the poor.
Art and architecture
Without ornament there is no architecture.
I equate the loss of ornamentation in our times as the loss of architecture.
Ornamentation is the essence of architecture.
But, what ornament?
That is the question.
What is the essence behind the ornamentation?
It is vital to find the essence in the traditional idea by tracing it back to its origin.
True art and architecture collaboration is a process in which everyone has to define his own limits.
Each plays the role they can do best.
Working together is part of a contribution to a whole.
If there is no ego then there is no problem.
Sadly, the lack of a real craft tradition today means the architect may have to design most of it himself.
Personally, I would much rather just give it away to someone who can handle it if I could find them.
The results of Western individualism today are individual buildings with no art or, if there is any art, it pays only lip-service to the idea.
You end up having inappropriate sculptures just put somewhere in front of the building, bearing no relation to it or its function.
This is nonsense, degrading the artist.
The artist must play an integral part in the process from the beginning.
My buildings are collected works of art made by many hands of many artists and true craftsmen, made with love, a true brotherhood; an experience of joy where all parties gain fulfilment.
Living ornament with three-dimensional geometry
If Modernists criticise me for copying the old, I tell them it takes a lifetime to do it well.
The designs are unique, individual, can be infinitely varied each time.
I start with a record of the old — photographs, drawings — and I decipher the geometry.
Discovering it takes many months.
This can best be done if you are an expert in descriptive geometry.
If you can handle this, you can handle anything three-dimensional with facility.
This is not dead ornament.
It is a serious discipline in which you have infinite freedom, within the restrictions of geometry.
True freedom is movement within restriction.
It is sculpture par excellence .
There are an incredible variety of possibilities which would take three or four lifetimes of an artist — even using a computer.
William Burn's Fashionable Functionalism
In the third of our series on major Scottish architects, David Walker describes the career of William Burn (1789–1870) and the important contribution he made to the planning of the Victorian country house
One hundred and twenty years ago, just one month after his death on 15 February 1870, the RIBA accorded William Burn the distinction of a short memorial lecture by his friend and fellow Scot, T.L. Donaldson, and published a list of his works in Transactions .
Although Burn had never been very active in the affairs of the Institute, his career had long been the subject of interest and indeed curiosity.
It had been Burn, even when on his sick bed, who had sent for Sir George Gilbert Scott and given him his support when in professional difficulty.
Charles Barry Junior, who chaired the lecture, spoke warmly of ‘his great, his exceeding kindness to all those younger than himself’, having been the recipient of many instances of it in his own career.
A list of works was not, however, what Donaldson's audience had hoped to see.
Burn's nephew, MacVicar Anderson, ensured that Burn was as secretive about his methods of house planning in death as he had been in life.
Robert Kerr voiced the general disappointment that no selection of plans had been laid before the Fellows for their consideration, for Burn's success had been founded, as they all knew from Kerr's own book,The Gentleman's House , on his absolute mastery of integrating the complex demands of that subject.
In his prime Burn had built, substantially reconstructed or enlarged as many as six country houses a year for clients as diverse as the Marquis of Westminster and I.K. Brunel.
His career had spanned Georgian Gothick, neo-Greek, neo-Perpendicular, neo-Tudor, neo-Jacobean, Scots baronial, Italianate, Graeco-Roman, Tractarian Gothic, French Renaissance and even neo-Baroque and neo-Rococo without ever losing identity.
His designs were always, as Mark Girouard put it, ‘gentlemanly, that is, not too showy’, with the precision of an architect schooled in the Greek revival, whatever style he was working in.
Opinion as to the artistic merits of his buildings has been mixed.
Goodhart-Rendel writing from the viewpoint of having altered his first plate-glass windowed house, Idsworth (1848–52), Hampshire, found his elevations conventional and even perfunctory and in our own time even Howard Colvin found that ‘not a single building stands out as a masterpiece’.
Yet Burn's Revesby shares with Soane's Pelwall the distinction of being one of two houses Save and English Heritage have done most to save from demolition, and rightly so.
Nikolaus Pevsner was nearer the mark when he wrote of him that ‘his forms (may be) individually feeble but he knew how to compose.’
Burn's mastery of planning and composition had not been acquired easily.
Born in Edinburgh on 20 December 1789, he began life with two advantages.
Robert Burn, his father, was not merely an architect, specialising in country houses of the middle size, but a builder in a large way of business with a marble works.
He was also a minor landed gentleman, a circumstance which gave Burn not only an entry to society, but a profound understanding of his clients: as Donaldson recalled, ‘no-one could tell with greater spirit many a good story about the auld Scots lairds and their vagaries.’
In 1808 the elder Burn sent William, at the age of 17, to the office of Sir Robert Smirke, then only three years in the business and already being offered more business than he could safely undertake.
There Burn worked on the drawings of Lowther Castle and was entrusted with the task of supervising the building of Covent Garden Theatre, an arduous nine-month feat of office and site organisation in which he was hard put to maintain a working relationship between his 27-year-old employer and the contractor, Alexander Copeland, one of the giants of the London building world.
It was an experience which steeled him for the future task of having as many as a dozen major country houses under construction in any one year.
And there too, usefully for the future, he extended his experience of Scots clients to the sometimes rather more sophisticated requirements of the greatest of English landowners.
Burn returned to Scotland in 1811.
In his first few years he did more to establish the Hellenism of Smirke and Wilkins as ‘the modern style of architecture’ in Scotland than anyone else.
His public buildings — North Leith Church (1814), the Merchant Maiden Hospital in Edinburgh and the Custom House, Greenock (both 1816), the Edinburgh Academy (1822) and John Watson's Hospital (not the National Gallery of Modern Art) Edinburgh (1828)— may now seem more remarkable for their correctness of proportion and detail than for any great originality, the first having an Ilissus portico adapted from Smirke's Armley Hall, Leeds, and the four last all being variations of the theme of Smirke's Covent Garden.
But in the 1810s their studied simplicity must have made the post-Adam school of design then current in Edinburgh seem fussy and dated to a degree hard to appreciate now.
Moreover, in these works one can see the beginnings of Burn's highly systematised manner of design: the Merchant Maiden and Greenock Custom House had the same strict 1:4 ratio of height to width as Covent Garden while standard scales were, as far as circumstances would allow, adopted for the orders and such things as doorcases.
The 29ft 6in columns of North Leith Church were to reappear at his great Classical mansion of Camperdown seven years later.
Above, Falkland, 1839–41.
Left, Revesby — a house which both Save and English Heritage campaigned to preserve
Although Burn showed both originality and ingenuity in his initial designs for the Edinburgh Academy, giving a two-storey building a single-storey façade and an unfluted portico to save on façading costs, others made the Greek revival their own: Thomas Hamilton who developed the basic arrangement of the final design of Burn's Academy into the Royal High School, and William Henry Playfair, Burn's contemporary at Smirke's, whose work showed awareness of the latest developments in Germany.
In their Doric orders the entasis was the subject of meticulous attention: in Burn's Theseion orders he did not use entasis at all, although its absence is not noticeable.
Above, ground floor plan of Saltoun, East Lothian.
Right, north façacde of Saltoun
But by 1830 Burn had left the Greek revival behind him for the subdued Italianate of his branch banks and the big, simple palazzo from of his New Club on Edinburgh's Princes Street of 1834.
His churches showed an equally acute awareness of changing fashions: the neo-perpendicular of his fan-vaulted church of St John, Edinburgh (1818), which challenged comparison with anything in England at that date, was superseded by the elegant Early English and neo-Norman of the numerous churches he built for the Duke of Buccleuch in the 1830s, and in 1843 by the mid-Decorated of his St Mary's, Dundee, in which he reproduced in a much richer form the arcades and clerestory of the burned-down medieval church instead of building the usual preaching box desired by presbyterian divines at that time.
It says much for his authority and persuasiveness that such a scheme could have been accepted.
Although he had also established a particular reputation as a hospital specialist at his large cross-plan mental institutions at Perth (1822) and the excellent Crichton Royal, Dumfries (1834), Burn, by his own choice, virtually closed his career as an architect of public and business buildings by 1840.
At first he left that aspect of the practice to David Bryce, his partner from the early 1840s, and then, after his move to Stratton Street, London in 1844, finally abandoned it altogether to concentrate exclusively on country houses.
Even when approached to design Wellington College as the National Memorial to the Duke, he preferred to recommend John Shaw who admirably fulfilled the confidence Burn had in him.
It was but one of the kindnesses to younger men to which both Donaldson and Barry referred.
Although Burn began his career as executant architect for Smirke's Kinmount (1811–12), a huge assemblage of Ledoux-like interpenetrating masses, it took him some years to dislodge Gillespie Graham and the London architect William Atkinson from their places as Scotland's leading country house architects.
A large part of his success was personal.
Donaldson described him as having ‘a slight figure, with a strong constitution (only once was he seen to wear an overcoat)…frank and plain spoken, occasionally even to roughness…no flatterer…somewhat impulsive and gifted with great shrewdness and common sense…he was a man of the highest integrity and independence, and so far from leading his clients into needless of extravagant outlay, he would demur at any expense beyond his employer's means…
And it is well known that, being required to prepare designs for a useless and costly object by one of our leading nobility, long since deceased, one of princely fortune, but who had an extravagant passion for building, he purposely appealed to the son to advise his father to give the intention’.
Donaldson may be assumed to be referring to the Duke of Hamilton's mausoleum at Hamilton Palace which Bryce executed after Burn had departed for London.
Donaldson was not, however, quite correct in stating that Burn always followed the Vitruvian principle of waiting to be sought.
If Burn knew that an important building was in contemplation he might write to say that he had particular experience of that type of work but, if not employed, he would not raise the subject again.
If invited to complete, he would decline.
His personal attention —‘rain, snow or frost never kept him in’— and his scrupulousness in the matter of estimates gradually secured country house clients, but his expertise as a house planner took time to develop.
The general concept of Kinmount, with its vast Soanic central saloon rising into a tribune gallery and a lantern tower, was reproduced in neo-Tudor form as his ambitious enlargement of Saltoun, East Lothian (1817); without the lantern tower, at his neo-Classical Adderston, Northumberland (1819) and the much larger Camperdown, Dundee (1821–28); and, at Blairquhan, Ayrshire (1820) where he retained the lantern tower but began to experiment with asymmetrical planning and to adopt more archaeologically correct Tudor forms, following the example of William Wilkins' Tregothnan (1816) and Dalmeny (1814).
Dundas, West Lothian (1818) was more old-fashioned castellated in its elevations but, in its abandonment of the toplit saloon and stair in favour of a single hall staircase lit by a large window, gave a hint of his future planning.
In these houses Burn evolved the elements of the plan types which made his reputation.
All of them feature a private suite with a family bedroom with dressing rooms, WC and usually a bathroom (with a shower!) on the main floor level and, depending on the size of the house, often a private sitting room, a boudoir, and even a breakfast room.
Such a provision was not new.
Robert Adam had incorporated a suite of private apartments into the main floor at Mellerstain in 1770 and Atkinson had built a particularly well-planned example, clearly expressed as a separate private wing, in 1803 at Scone.
Atkinson's planning appears to have influenced Burn considerably, Blairquhan having the same stepped relationship of asymmetrical main block and a private wing ending in a low tower, a formula which was to be repeated in many Burn houses.
But at Camperdown we see, for the first time, the unbroken en suite arrangements of private and principal apartments, from bedroom to dining room, with each room in the sequence which it would be used so that the mistress of the house need never appear in hall or corridor unless going out.
Above, ground floor plan of Saltoun, East Lothian.
Right, north facade of Saltoun
Left, Stoke Rochford Hall 1840.
Below left, Poltalloch House, Argyll 1849, sadly now demolished
After about 1820 Burn rarely sacrificed comfort or convenience to grandiose spaces or symmetry.
Picturesque asymmetry appealed to him because it enabled him to allow the logical sequence of the rooms and considerations of service and privacy to determine the entire plan from of the house without any unnecessary duplication of accommodation.
Over the years Burn's planning became even more sophisticated.
Elongated single-aspect plans with hall-corridors on the entrance front were introduced to ensure even greater privacy from callers and servants, private wings were stepped back to create private sheltered garden areas, and the kitchen and staple offices were skilfully deployed at right angles to the main block to create sheltered L-plan forecourts.
That great convenience of Victorian house planning, the luggage entrance, was introduced for the first time at Dupplin as early as 1829.
Indeed his service wings and courts early became as sophisticated in their planning as the main house, being divided into zones under the butler, the housekeeper and the cook with solidly walled off male and female stairs.
Throughout, as the late Jill Franklin put it, the juxtaposition of the rooms, invariably wimple well-proportioned rectangles, ‘works as neatly as the cells in a beehive both in vertical and horizontal relationships.’
No architect before Burn had thought so profoundly about how buildings should function
But Burn was much more than an uncommonly clever house planner.
Too often his reputation as an architect has been written off on the basis of very late works which were more the work of his nephew, MacVicar Anderson, and his chief clerk, Colling, under his direction.
Until he was 70 he drew in pencil and in pen and wash with great neatness.
He pioneered several revivals.
He followed Blore into Cotswold-type Tudor cottage houses from 1824, and in the same year, concurrently with Smirke, began experimenting with Elizabethan and Jacobean forms, culminating first and Dupplin and St Fort (1828–30), far more suave than any of the parallel English or Irish examples.
Then, after his commission to complete Salvin's Harlaxton in 1834 had introduced him to a far richer vocabulary, came the wonderful sequence of great Jacobean palaces of the 1840s — Falkland (1839–41), Whitehill (1839–43), Muckross and Stoke Rochford (both 1841), Dartrey (1843), Revesby (1844), and Poltalloch (1849).
In varying degrees these had rich Jacobean and baroque interiors in contrast to the simple interiors in contrast to the simple interiors of the 1820s and 1830s which had depended largely on rich marble Louis chimney-pieces and high quality papers.
Parallel with these, and with the encouragement of his friend Sir Walter Scott, whose own house at Abbotsford by Atkinson had pioneered the revival of old Scots forms, he began building hybrid Scots-English, neo-Jacobean houses at Milton Lockhart and Tyninghame in 1829, reaching, with Bryce's help, the full range of Scots detailing in his spectacular reconstruction of Thirlestane in 1840 and the large house he and Bryce built at Inchdairnie, Fife, in 1845.
He invited to Scotland the English architect-author Robert William Billings whose Baronial and Ecclesiastical Antiquities of Scotland provided the source book for the Scottish baronial movement for the next 40 years.
His career should have reached its climax in the great Franco-Scottish chateaux of Fonthill (1849) for the Duke of Westminster and Buchanan (1851–53) for the Duke of Montrose, but the first was built only in a much reduced and quite different form while Buchanan suffered from the late substitution of plate glass for the mullioned windows which were an indispensable element of his style.
Too old to struggle with such incongruities, many of his later designs, however neatly composed, lack the confident style of his work before 1850.
Only at the French chateau of Montagu House in Whitehall (1859), where he owed a particular allegiance to his great patron the Duke of Buccleuch and was ever hard put to please his Duchess, was he again truly still at the height of his powers.
Like Harlaxton, where Bavarians may have been employed, and Stoke Rochford, Montagu had lavish baroque and rococo interiors.
The extent to which Burn, or before him Salvin, was responsible for these remains an unresolved mystery.
Burn is still an underrated architect.
Study of the sheer logic of his planning, with its neat resolutions of all manner of complexities, reveals an intellect as formidable as that of Alexander Thompson.
No architect before him had thought so profoundly about how buildings should function and no other had ever been so nimble in adapting to changes of fashion without loss of integrity.
His architecture may still have lessons for us.
He never lifted whole sections of design from antique buildings as Wilkins did, and as some architects are doing again in our own day, or squeezed his buildings into medieval or Jacobean plan forms: it would never have occurred to him that he should.
He designed from the inside out and, despite the basic similarities of his main plan types, he never had difficulty in giving his major buildings a very individual architectural expression in which every element of the design was exactly what it appeared to be.
Above, Crichton Royal hospital Dumfries, 1834.
Left, Milton Lockhart, 1829, now in ruins.
Below left, Montagu House, Whitehall
Energy-Efficient Hospice Awards
BRITISH GAS/RIBA DESIGN 90 AWARDS
The subject of the British Gas/RIBA Design 90 Awards — open to postgraduate students of architecture — was the design of a low-energy hospice.
Below we publish the winning entries, which were dominated by Scotland, with a summary of the assessors' report
There was a pronounced improvement in the level of energy-efficient building design shown in this year's competition.
A requirement of the brief was that the building should combine architectural quality with low-energy design, demonstrating the application of effective energy management techniques.
The location of the hospice was left to each entrant so there was a rich selection of sites, both urban and rural.
Professor Adrian Gale of Plymouth School of Architecture chaired the competition assessors which comprised Bob Allies, Allies and Morrison; Dr Sheila Cassidy, Medical Director, St Lukes Hospice, Plymouth; Dr Norman Ross, Director, Watson House Research Station, British Gas; and Robert Jones, Co-ordinator Conservation Projects, British Gas.
Most of the submissions, from 35 schools of architecture, had a good grasp of architecture, had a good grasp of hospice philosophy; the three communities in one — the carers, the relatives and the dying patients.
From the medical point of view, there were many good ideas which co-ordinated into a single design, would embody most of the special requirements of this type of building.
The skilful manipulation of space and light is particularly important for patients too ill to enjoy the open air.
The successful schemes were unsentimental and transcended the apparent dilemma posed by the design brief which asked for a building which related to preformed and powerful sensibilities and beliefs about life and death and which is also required to be effectively energy conscious.
The attractiveness of thermally stable structures for buildings that are in a day-long, year-round use seemed to influence most of the submissions.
Thermal mass was discussed and applied and many entrants appreciated that this might not be appropriate for those parts of the building having only occasional use.
There was also an awareness of the need for relatively high levels of external insulation.
Projects were carefully oriented to maximise usable solar-gain, to protect a northerly aspect, and to capitalise on natural lighting and ventilation.
Avoiding artificial lighting and air conditioning was seen to be important in reducing the use of electricity, not only to keep down running costs but also for wider, environmental reasons.
Associated with the different applications of heavy and lightweight structures for energy conservation was the entrants' grasp of a need for zoning and the convenience of localised control.
The use of gas, live-effect fires and the creation of domestic hearths carried this idea forward in a positive and congenial way.
In a hospice, hot water requirements dominate energy-use considerations yet there was no evidence that aspect this was fully understood.
However, on the plus side, many submissions indicated that the designers were aware of the opportunities for heat recovery, possibly using combined heat and power (CHP).
Overall, the energy efficiency aspects of building design were well appreciated.
Even where concepts and practicalities were not handled adequately, it was clear that schools of architecture were making energy efficiency a significant aspect of their curriculum.
The total prize money this year was £4,700 which included £600 to the school of architecture attended by the winning entrant.
The first prize of £2,000 was awarded to William Watt of the Scott Sutherland School of Architecture, Aberdeen.
Two runners-up awards, of £750 each, went to the joint entry by Tim Makower of the University of Cambridge and Stephen Taylor of the Royal College of Art, and to Nicola Walls, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh.
Two commendations of £250 each, were awarded to Peter Collier of Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh and Joyce Michie of the Scott Sutherland School of Architecture, Aberdeen.
David Whitehead of the University of Sheffield received a special mention and a prize of £100.
Next years competition brief is to design an energy-efficient ceramics factory producing heavy-duty decorative tiles for buildings.
It is to include design studios, exhibition facilities, a development and testing laboratory and administrative offices.
First Prize
William Watt, Scott Sutherland School of Architecture, Aberdeen
This winning design has the stamp of personal experience.
The designer's close encounter of severe illness had a profound influence on his scheme.
It is both architecturally creative and practical and his ideas embrace three characteristic spaces — the community, the group and the individual.
His hospice had to be ‘completely approachable’ and this partly led to his choice of site in the centre of Aberdeen where it fits comfortably into a hollow in the hillside.
Here, patients do not feel remote because of the closeness of the town with shops, pubs, galleries and parking just around the corner.
A ‘gurgling burn’ bisects the site, spanned by walkways linking the elements of the three-storey hospice.
The approach to the building is through a thick rubble wall of granite enclosing a hanging garden which embraces patients and visitors alike as they enter.
The reception, in a vast lightwell running north-south, is constantly catching light reflected down on the arcade of shops and a cafe beneath where patients may, in effect, ‘go out’.
These are the community and group spaces.
Above the reception is the professional team's accommodation and administrative facilities.
Wards and individual spaces are also arranged along the lightwell overlooking the arcade so that patients can watch the comings and goings of visitors and staff.
The wards are smaller than the design brief suggested, but family/interview spaces are provided elsewhere in the hospice.
In the centre of the site is the mortuary chapel where there is calmness and tranquillity in an urban setting.
There are several economical and sensible ideas in the design which are carefully related to the urban situation.
The feeling of privacy, yet easy public accessibility of the hospice, is accomplished in such a way that it does not distort the fabric of the city.
The scheme stood out because it is original, inventive, and surpasses the accepted stereotypical image of a hospice.
Runner-up
Section through the ward block of Makower and Taylor's scheme
Tim Makower, Department of Architecture, University of Cambridge, and Stephen Taylor, the Royal College of Art, London
The site near Hammersmith is cupped in a tight bend of the Thames where the hospice faces west over flat beds of water.
As the final building in a line of four-storey semi-detached villas, it compliments its neighbours and at the same time relates approximately in both function and scale to neighbouring buildings in a mews at the rear.
From the reception area, the route into the hospice passes a garden and the principal offices for the care of out-patients, new patients and families.
High windows provide maximum natural light from the east into the wards and single rooms.
Both lighting and natural ventilation can be controlled individually by the patients.
Each room has a timber balcony overlooking the water.
Runner-up
Nicola Walls, Department of Architecture, Heriot-Watt University
Elevational section of ward unit in Walls' design, and sketch perspective of one of the four-bed wards.
On an urban site in Leith, this building also uses an internal ‘street’ to encourage interaction between every member of the hospice community.
To one side of the street — a multi-level space which embraces many different activities — are more open patients' and visitors' rooms and opposite there are the cellular service rooms.
The street offers views to the outside with access to a secluded garden where patients can sit.
There is also access to a south-facing balcony at first floor level.
In the two floors of wards, the single and four-bed wards are coupled around toilet and bathroom facilities.
While the chapel is a recognised central element, the mortuary is a separate building discreetly out of patients' and visitor's view.
Elevational section of ward unit in Walls' design and sketch perspective of one of the four-bed wards
Commendation
Peter Collier, Department of Architecture, Heriot-Watt University
Section through Collier's commended scheme at Torphin Farm, near Edinburgh
Torphin Farm on the edge of the Pentland Hills, just outside Edinburgh, is the site for this ‘settlement’ designed to provide care for up to 20 patients.
Its main entrance is identified by the chapel.
The principle elements of the hospice — single rooms and patient care facilities — project in a wing which extends along the base of the hills, around an internal courtyard over which the nurses' station discreetly presides.
A variety of spaces from open to enclosed, private to public, encourage patients to experience the earth, sky, wind, rain, and sunshine, as well as providing the opportunity for contact with other patients and visitors.
Commendation
Joyce Michie, Scott Sutherland School of Architecture, Aberdeen
Like the winning scheme, Aberdeen was also the site for this proposal, but, in contrast, the building is on the windswept coastline.
Designed as a garden walled by the building from the prevailing weather, each patient has an individual inward-facing view.
a large conservatory also serves as a street from which the comings and goings can be seen by the patients.
This design showed special regard for the needs of the families keeping vigil, by providing relatives' rooms next to the wards with balconies overlooking the sea.
Michie's coastal scheme in Aberdeen
The Impact of Reform
Kenneth Button and Michael Fleming of Loughborough University look at the history of regulatory reform on the practice of architecture in the eighties and assess its impact on fees, profit margins and jobs
The 1980s might usefully be thought of as the ‘decade of regulatory reform’.
Economic policy is subject to frequent minor shifts which represent something rather more fundamental.
The past decade has seen such a change.
Over this period the UK has liberalised economic regulations in many sectors and privatised others.
The professions have not been excluded from this process.
In part, the impetus for reform came from concern over the efficiency of the long-established regulatory regimes and, in particular , a belief that many self-regulatory systems may have evolved into restrictive practices dressed up to be in the public interest.
In addition, there are international forces at work arising especially from membership of the European Community.
Among the objectives of the 1992 Single European Market is the removal of barriers to labour mobility and the easing of the supply of services across national boundaries within the EC.
Conservative policies
Economic growth in the post-war period has been slow compared with the UK's neighbours in Europe and one of the objectives of the Conservative Party while in opposition from 1974 was to develop policies to change this.
A cornerstone of its manifesto in 1979 was to introduce policies which would release the wealth-generating powers of the free-market system.
In this context, regulations were, in the main, perceived not so much as serving the public interest but as representing ‘capture’ of the economic system by specific groups serving their own self-interest, reducing economic welfare and inhibiting economic development.
The professions in the UK, as in other countries, have long retained a privileged position.
They have generally been free to regulate their own affairs, sometimes with statutory backing, and have been specifically exempted from the scope of competition laws.
Competition in the professions was thought not to be in the public interest because of the specialised and personal nature of the services provided, which often affect the health, safety and well-being of the public.
But increasingly, doubts, some of which can be traced back to a general report on the supply of professional services by the Monopolies Commission in 1970, were raised about whether restraints on competition in the professions are necessarily beneficial.
The professions had been brought within the scope of the monopolies legislation — although remaining exempt from restrictive trade practices legislation — in 1965.
A significant number of regulatory reforms were subsequently introduced.
These generally relied on voluntary action by the relevant professional associations, although they have often only come after protracted negotiations following official investigations.
Monopoly rights have been removed from several professions but most notably from opticians and solicitors.
Restrictions on advertising and fees have been relaxed over a wider front.
Advertising restrictions have been relaxed to varying degrees in the cases of architects, surveyors, veterinary surgeons, dentists (to a limited extent), solicitors, stockbrokers and opticians.
The architectural and surveying professions have also amended their rules to allow competition on fees.
Deregulation has also extended to business organisation though, as yet, in only a limited way.
There has been a tendency to move away from prohibitions on corporate practice — removed in the cases of architects, surveyors and accountants.
Similarly, there has been some relaxation of restrictions over the formation of mixed and inter-professional practices.
Types of regulation
Architects have for many years been subjected to both legal and self-regulation.
In particular, legal regulation has traditionally covered the definition of an architect, while self-regulation, through a professional body, has focused on practice — for example , fees, forms of advertising and nature of organisation.
The Architects' (Registration) Act of 1931 and the Architects' Registration Act of 1938 confine the use of the title of ‘architect’ to persons on a register maintained by the ARCUK.
A system of mandatory fees was long justified by the RIBA in terms of both protecting architects from the power of clients and ensuring that design standards were maintained by guaranteeing architects a reasonable return for their work.
However, this system came under attack from the National Board for Prices and Incomes in the late 1960s.
It recommended the establishment of an independent body to review fees and also that theses fees should be seen as guidelines for negotiation rather than mandatory rates.
the RIBA opposed the idea of ending mandatory fees, although it was less resistant to the idea of an independent review body.
The debate over mandatory fees continued throughout the 1970s with a report dealing with architects' services from the Monopolies and Mergers Commission acting as a catalyst for eventual change.
The Commission concluded that ‘the architects' system of mandatory scales, together with rules which prevent competition for business on the basis of fees, operates against the public interest and should be brought to an end.’
The impact of the report was not immediate and there was strong opposition from the profession.
It was not until 1982 that mandatory scales for architects' services were replaced by recommended fees — with the RIBA responsible for establishing the scale.
Advertising by the profession has traditionally been restricted by the ARCUK and the RIBA.
Limitations on advertising were relaxed somewhat in the late 1970s.
Even so, the advertising media that could be used were restricted to printed forms and the advertising of professional fees was still not permitted.
More recently, in 1985, the Office of Fair Trading (OFT) investigated advertising in the professions.
Following its report, there have been further relaxation of advertising restrictions and advertising by architects is now essentially ‘de-regulated’.
The final area of regulation concerns the form of organisation through which architects may offer their services.
Traditionally, there have been two major constraints.
First, architects were prohibited by the ARCUK and the RIBA's code from practising under limited liability.
Second, architects were not permitted to form joint practices with other sectors of the building industry.
The Monopolies Commission took the line that the benefits of a more liberal regime outweighed any drawbacks.
Changes in rules governing forms of organisation, though, took time to be implemented.
In 1981, however, the ARCUK issued a new Standard of Conduct which, with some conditions, permits architects to offer architectural services and to form limited liability companies.
The RIBA amended its professional code of practice along similar lines.
Market liberalisation
It takes time to adjust to reforms, but some general observations are now possible on the impact of market liberalisation on the architectural profession, particularly remuneration, the level of unemployment and the organisational structure of practices.
Information is drawn in part from regularly published data sources, compiled either by the RIBA or by the Government, and in part from specific surveys.
Use is made both of the results from an official survey of 588 architects, conducted by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission as part of its study of architects' services in 1977, and of surveys of 725 architectural practices and 34 clients, conducted in 1985 by the OFT as part of its study of advertising and charging within the construction industry.
The latter survey, while a substantial one, possibly came too soon after the reforms of the early 1980s to detect their full impact.
Consequently, this earlier survey data is supplemented by the results of two new national postal questionnaire surveys conducted by the Applied Microeconomics Research group (AMERG) at Loughborough University.
The first of these was sent to 500 practising architectural practices in May 1989 and 50 large public and private sector clients in July 1989.
Income and profits
While in nominal terms, the earnings of architects have risen since the early 1970s, there is evidence that relative to earnings in general, architects have suffered a decline.
In particular, principals have suffered the largest fall suggesting that fees declined relatively more than salaries.
The downward trend in earnings, however, was apparent before any liberalisation took place.
The interesting question is whether the reform to regulations regarding fee structures in 1982 and, to a lesser extent, the greater freedom architects enjoyed from about this time to practice in a less restrictive manner have influenced the pattern of events.
The OFT client survey in 1985 found that organisations commissioning consulting architects were, in general, paying 10–15 per cent below the RIBA recommended scale, indicating that there may have been some small reduction in the fee income of architects after 1982.
The exact interpretation is not simple, however, since the previous mandatory scale referred to minimum fees and there is only limited evidence relating to the level of mark-up which existed above these.
Indeed, 85 per cent of architects questioned in 1985 felt that rules on competing for fees had no effect.
However, the 1989 AMERG survey asked specifically whether the ending of the mandatory scale had led to reductions of fees charged for individual projects and over 68 per cent of respondents stated that it had.
The majority of architects also stated that it was now competitive forces which determined fees.
Of equal or greater importance than earnings in assessing the impact of increased fee competition is the impact on profit margins.
Profit margins, however, are related to the level of demand for building work as well as fee competition.
Data collected by the RIBA shows that there has been a gradual fall in profit margins dating back to the early 1970s.
In fact, the value (in real terms) of commissions received by architects rose by 20 per cent between 1971 and 1973 but then fell very dramatically by 47 per cent between 1973 and 1980 before and equally dramatic recovery.
As one would expect, there is a clear relationship between commissions and the value (in real terms) of orders received by contractors for building.
A close relationship emerges between the trend of profit margins and workload.
In order to disentangle the effect on profit margins of the introduction of fee competition in 1982 from the influence of variations on the workload, some simple statistical regression analysis was conducted.
The results show that variations in profit margins were directly related to fluctuations in the level of demand for architectural services between 1971 and 1988 but that the liberalisations which occurred after 1982 have also acted to reduce the size of profit margins.
With regard to fees, earnings and profitability, the 1982 reforms do seem to have exerted some, albeit limited, downward pressure.
Employment
Earnings, fee income and profit margins are not the only parameters by which liberalisation can be assessed.
Greater flexibility in charging, coupled with the introduction of new organisational structures, can also affect employment prospects in the profession.
It may also influence the long-term supply of young people willing to embark on the seven-year period of training.
If one simply looks at the level of unemployment amongst architects over time, it is difficult to identify a clear pattern linked to any of the regulatory reforms.
Prior to 1982, unemployment among architects mirrored national trends.
Since then, this relationship has broken down and architects have enjoyed lower rates of unemployment relative to the national situation.
Again, this was confirmed by the application of simple statistical regression analysis.
Incorporation
Relaxation of the rules regarding the form of business organisation through which architects in private practice are able to offer their services may bring about structural change in terms of type of organisation and also size of practice.
Comparable figures are available only for the years 1984 and 1988.
Abolition of the rule preventing practice under limited liability has led to very considerable growth in this form of organisation and, by 1988, the proportion of practices which had formed limited liability companies had grown to 7.5 per cent of the total.
This change took place almost entirely at the expense of ‘sole principal’ practices.
Change has also taken place in the size of practices since the early 1980s.
Between 1968 and 1988 the number of practices grew from just over 3,000 to over 5,000.
There was consistent growth over this period and it is notable that this occurred despite the collapse in demand during the 1970s.
Until the early 1980s, the smallest sizes of practice increased proportionately at the expense of all other size groups.
Since then (and certainly since 1984) this trend has been reversed: the smallest size group has declined proportionally and all other size groups have increased.
Conclusions must be drawn carefully since the timing of the change may be coincidental, but it is tempting to conclude that the increased competitive pressures following liberalisation may have put small practices at a competitive disadvantage.
Advertising
The relaxation of advertising regulations, initially in 1979–80, and more fully in 1987, seems to have had only a limited impact on the profession.
This is despite a perception by some respondents in both the OFT and AMERG surveys that the public needs to be better informed of the services and architect can offer.
The 1985 OFT data indicates that architects predominantly use traditional means of advertising (house magazines, directories and so on); some 98 per cent using announcements and 11 per cent using printed advertisements.
Furthermore, 60 per cent of those surveyed felt that the rules governing advertising had no impact on their behaviour.
The 1989 AMERG survey presents a similar picture with the vast majority of architects using only traditional means and frequently relying on ‘word of mouth’.
Asked whether the new rules have influenced either the amount or type of advertising undertaken, 56 per cent of those responding said that it had not and 11 per cent said that it had exercised only a very marginal effect.
The remainder have in many cases, however, devoted more resources to traditional means of advertising rather than adopted new media.
In particular, the freedom since 1987 to advertise on radio and television does not seem to have exercised any discernible effect.
As confirmation of this, over 85 per cent of clients questioned by AMERG responded that changes in the advertising regulations had had no effect over their method of selecting architects.
Most clients sought their information via directories or personal contacts and a dominant influence in selection was experience of past work.
Overall, the liberalisation which has taken place in the architectural profession since the early 1980s does not seem to have had a revolutionary effect.
But have the limited changes which have occurred been beneficial?
If one takes the views of the architects explicitly asked this question in the AMERG survey then the reforms seem to have been a mixed blessing (42 per cent thinking them to be beneficial and 29 per cent not to be).
For some architects, the removal of regulations which both provided guidelines for behaviour and also limited the areas in which competition existed has provided a stimulus since they now feel able to compete more efficiently in a less restricted arena.
Others, however, feel that reforms have debased the profession and have led to exploitation of their services.
These results may also be seen as offering some tentative support to the contention that the greater flexibility now permitted in fee setting, coupled with the ability of architects to establish themselves in a wider variety of organisational forms and to advertise more freely, has essentially lubricated the market and led to greater efficiency.
The 1989 AMERG survey of architects, however, indicates that a substantial minority (over 28 per cent) felt that the demand for their services at the time was not being adequately met and nearly 40 per cent felt that the intake of students into architectural training was insufficient to meet future demands.
One might conclude that while the removal of mandatory fees has led to some short-term reduction in charges and a decline in unemployment amongst architects, the continuing controls over training places may result in shortages and fees rising again.
Kenneth Button is Professor of Applied Economics and Transport and Director of the Applied Microeconomics Research Group, and Michael Fleming is Professor of Economics, Department of Economics, at Loughborough University.
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support received from Loughborough University's Research Fund, and would also like to thank their research assistant, Theresa Madden, for her invaluable help and the RIBA for the assistance it has rendered.
Interiors
The Rockette display system by Dick Stringer Associates
Flying into the Fifties
Fifties revivalism has spawned yet another range of contract furniture in the shape of Rockette, by Dick Stringer Associates (DSA).
This display or retail system, which could also be adopted for domestic use, consists of shelving, rails, hangers and tables, with white-painted metal tubular elements finished with the almost classic black shiny ball trim.
The range, including the palette-shaped table, is available with the random pattern laminates shown here — other laminates and finishes can be ordered.
New Designers Shine
Last July's New Designers Show, showcasing the best of student work in 1990, attracted over £13,000 in sponsored prizes.
Six thousand visitors made their way to the Business Design Centre in Islington, London to see the exhibits, which ranged from tableware to floorcoverings, fashion to fabrics.
Among the 14 awards presented were the Zoeftig Furniture Award of £1,000 which went to the RCA's Adam Brinkworth and Alison Thomas for their ensemble of stool and armchair.
The Emess Lighting Award went to Gavin Fraser-Williams of Brighton Polytechnic.
how much of this often innovative work will see mass production — and how many of its designers will end up with appropriately creative jobs in today's depressed jobs in today£s depressed job market — remains to be seen.
Designers' Yesterdays
Further indications of the sudden demise of the ‘design’ era — in the wake of redundancies and bankruptcies — are the cancellation of this years' London's Designers' Saturday and the decision to move the Salone del Mobile in Milan to April next year.
However, confidence is still high in the 1990 European City of Culture, Glasgow, where a group of designers and architects has organised the 3D-Design, Debate, Demonstration event.
On Friday 2 November there will be an open debate and on the following Saturday, 10 Glasgow showrooms — including Artemide, Domus Tiles, Marlin Lighting and Vitra (UK)— will open their doors to the design community.
Sponsored initially by BDP, it is planned to become an annual event.
Winning chair by Brinkworth and Thomas of the RCA
Instant Heroes
ADT Press has launched a new series of monographs entitled DesignFiles which will attempt to review the work of some of Britain's most innovative and influential young designers and architects.
First out of the hat comes Plans and Elevations: Ben Kelly Design and Jasper Morrison; plans, projects and drawings, 1981–89 .
The former comprises a straightforward survey of Kelly's projects, from McLaren/Westwood's early 1970s Seditionaries shop to the Dry 201 Bar in Manchester of 1989, intercut with an eclectic series of essays on Kelly's iconoclastic career.
The Jasper Morrison volume is a more prosaic retrospective of Morrison's far-from prosaic furniture design, introduced by Peter Dormer.
The book illustrates how, in nine short years, Morrison has created a handful of modern classics, such as the Wing-nut Chair (1984) and his ply and tubular steel dining chair (1986).
Carl Gardner 
Plywood desk, 1988, by Jasper Morrison from the recent ADT Press monograph
Fitting Out Fitch
Carl Gardner looks at the corporate and creative statement made by Fitch-RS's new King's Cross headquarters, designed by its own architectural division, Fitch Benoy 
Far left, view of the concourse/café area showing the enclosed façade of the original building.
Left, a curving wall contains the stairwell
‘Complex, but not complicated’ is how Fitch Benoy's associate director Phil Wren describes the new offices/studios of Fitch-RS.
Certainly one's initial impression is of a building with a haphazard history, in which functions and spaces have been added and transformed, with little attempt to hide what went before.
Today, helped along by Fitch Benoy's latest radical interventions, the accretion is happily much more than the sum of its parts.
From the outside, however, like many post-industrial conversions, the prospect is unavoidably prosaic.
Porters South is a former three-storey beer-bottling plant, built in brick and dating back to 1904.
It backs on to Battlebridge Basin (reputedly the site of Queen  Boudicca's death in a battle of the Romans in AD61), behind King's Cross station.
A half-derelict industrial next to the Regent's Canal, it is now tipped for recovery and renewal, in the wake of Foster's long awaited regeneration scheme.
Fitch's arrival — and that of next-door neighbours DEGW — is perhaps just a harbinger of what's to come.
After years of living in several buildings scattered around Soho Square and Oxford Street, Fitch was looking for a permanent headquarters to physically unite its ‘multi-disciplinary’ practice.
The right building in the West End would have been expensive, so the company bought Porters South in 1988 for £2.7 million — and set about the £10.3 million conversion.
The first job of the Fitch Benoy team, led by divisional director Charles Dunnett, was to assess the existing fabric.
The original three-storey Edwardian building, with a 1912 south-west extension, was eminently adaptable.
But a tatty, concrete post-war extension located on the south-east corner was demolished.
This permitted the creation of a new five-storey office space, in complementary style — and exposed the attractive ‘interior’ south-facing elevation of the original building.
In fact this flank wall of the north block defines and delineates the reception area and route into the building.
A south entrance on Wharfedale Road was considered, with a main corridor along the longer north-south axis, but this would have sliced the building into two narrow segments, so entrance doors on Crinan Street to the west were finally adopted.
Visitors enter the slate-floored reception area up a slight ramp from the door — the tall, interior brick elevation, with its curiously convoluted buttress, slides away to the left.
The eye is immediately drawn upwards by a short flight of stairs and the brilliant vista of the glazed atrium, crisscrossed by two oak-and-steel walkways, at different angles.
These link the upper floors of the building's two ‘halves’, across what some staff have nicknamed ‘the gorge’.
Raised up to ensure views over the canal basin, the concourse/café area is the most exciting space in Porters South — and forms the heart of the scheme.
Slicing through the building almost from front to rear is the planar glass roof, supported by a simple bowstring steel truss frame.
Linking up with ceiling-to-floor glazing on the elevation overlooking the basin, it floods the space with light.
Down below, a green slate floor butts up to and contrasts with the smooth screed concrete on either side.
‘It was the quality of public space we were seeking — for that you tend to use exterior, rather than interior materials,’ Wren explains.
Blocked in on the west side of the atrium, alongside the stairs from reception, are the building's main vertical circulation routes — lift, stairs and accompanying walkways.
The full-height enclosed stair tower makes a powerful statement, with its curved plaster wall painted in an orange ‘parchment’ effect, and punctured by a row of square windows with steel  riveted frames.
This grid-like effect is echoed elsewhere in the scheme — for example the beech-wood frames surrounded the cellular office spaces.
The stairwell feature is emphasised at night by a series of porthole-like floods recessed in the floor, which wash the walls with light from below.
To the north is the old, rugged brick wall, punctuated by windows, included Rodney Fitch's glazed office, with its private balcony/terrace overlooking the café (an ambiguous architectural gesture — power? accessibility? surveillance?).
On the south side, conference rooms and boardrooms on two storeys are suspended over the kitchen/servery area.
The high-tech equipment for these two rooms includes automatic black-out screens, to cover the huge windows during presentations.
A pleasant feature of the boardroom is the open terrace, overlooking the concourse, with its terracotta tiled floor.
These two executive/client spaces are supported by five white pre-cast columns, tow of which drive up through the room and terrace above.
This south face of the concourse, flanking the rebuilt portion of the building, is almost entirely clad in smooth, light maple panelling, to provide an interesting contrast with the older brick wall opposite.
New brickwork, where visible, is several tones lighter than the original, to distinguish the building's newest section.
Around the stair tower, a curved, fin-like aluminium wall screens the lower conference room and the boardroom terrace above, and adds a further textural element to the low-key material themes of timber and brick.
For Phil Wren, the concourse area was an attempt to embody ‘the community of Fitch ideal’— and certainly provides a well-used social and eating space in restaurant-starved King's Cross.
Its atmosphere has something of a European town square about it, albeit taken inside and miniaturised.
The sense of shared knowledge and teamwork has been further accentuated by the numerous glimpses and views up into the studio spaces, the upstairs offices and surrounding meeting rooms.
The northern half of the building — the original bottling plant, shared by next-door neighbours, DEGW — houses all the studios and offices of the ‘creative’ departments, for retail, graphics, product and leisure design.
Originally three storeys, Fitch Benoy inserted an extra mezzanine at second floor level and introduced and extra studio floor in the former roof-void area.
With three sets of windows serving five levels, the lower mezzanine floor was held back 1.2 metres from the outside walls to avoid the ugly juxtaposition of window and floor edge.
With 29 metres between east and west window elevations, the building was not ideal for open-plan studios.
So a glazed atrium was cut through the five floors to allow in extra light and to open up visual links between different departments.
Again finishes are low-key, to complement the large areas to exposed Edwardian brick.
‘When you buy a warehouse, you also but the idea of studio spaces being as simple as possible.’
Wren explains.
‘You don't want to get too fussy with the finishes.’
Door and window apertures on the south wall flanking the stairs and concourse were left in their original state, unmatched and asymmetric.
Horizontal balustrades in shot-blasted mild steel finished in grey mottled epoxy lacquer, with a slotted kick-board detail, are used throughout the building.
These add an unobtrusively modern industrial signature.
Only the rather crude, top-heavy, diagonal girder-work, supporting the new roof at the upper mezzanine level, spoils the effect — turquoise blue paint only serves to accentuate its impropriety.
The top floor, closest to the glazed roof section, also suffered from heat gain during the July and August heatwave — plans are in hand to install a brise-soleil and possibly a local air-conditioning system.
Elsewhere in the building, most staff benefit only from an under-floor air exchange system — and numerous open windows.
On the ground floor (below the basin water level, incidentally) solid oak tables and benches in the centre of the atrium space offer common working/discussion areas.
Up above, two flying walkways in oak and steel traverse the space at third and fourth levels.
In addition there are circulation routes at both ends of the space — at the north end provided by a fireproof staircase and walled corridor wings.
The stairwell repeats the grid-like windows of the central concourse and is topped by one slight piece of whimsy: a tiny ‘Juliet’ balcony cut into the top-floor end-wall, which offers an excellent vantage point over the studios.
Lighting in the studios was a problem.
‘We needed uplighters, but we didn't have a regular enough ceiling grid for low-voltage halogens, so we had to use high-frequency fluorescents.’
In collaboration with Isometric, Fitch Benoy designed their own trough-like, ceiling-mounted fittings.
‘They're cheaper to run and they gave us more flexibility on positioning,’ Wren adds.
The reconciliation of floor levels throughout was another bugbear — hence the ramp at the door, the sloping walkways and numerous short flights.
‘There are 13 different floor levels in the building,’ Phil Wren claims — the result of creating five floors out of three in the studios, while leaving the south-west administration block, with its library, accounts and research department, at its original three.
The library, somewhat lost in the old set up around Oxford Street, now has a prominent position to the right of the front door — windows in the entrance area provide a semi-public view down into it.
The effect, claims Wren, has been significant: ‘Staff are using it much more than they used to.’
The new south-east block was built with five floors too.
In conjunction with the new mezzanines, this has boosted the total floor area from 45,000 to 65,000 square feet.
Ten thousand square feet in the rebuilt south-east corner will be rented off to a tenant.
Here light transfer has again been employed, by way of an original glazed lightwell which was retained as ‘a memory of the old building’.
This also acts as a natural ‘barrier’ between pure Fitch space and tenant-occupied areas.
The purchase of its own building and provision of rentable space are just two symptoms of Fitch's long-term shrewdness, which could see the company thriving as other design consultancies, such as one-time rivals Michael Peters, fall by the wayside.
Already Fitch's new headquarters is reputedly worth the £13 million it cost to buy and convert.
As real estate asset, working accommodation and corporate statement, Porters South cannot help but boost Fitch-RS's fortunes.
Surprisingly too, for a company associated with some of the more extravagant and transient retail schemes of the 1980s, the overall effect is both understatedly stylish and reassuringly solid.
The shape of retail design to come, perhaps?
Fitch Benoy Design Team : Charles Dunnett, Phil Wren, Syed Arffin, Martyn Clarke, David Cresswell, Jenny Lowe, Sean McLaughlin Structural Engineer : Dewhurst MacFarlane Mechanical Engineer : Mott Laverack Quantity Surveyor : Banks Wood and Partners Lighting : Isometrix Main Contractor : Sir Robert McAlpine Mechanical and Electrical Subcontractor : Lorne Stewart Joinery Subcontractor : Hillsons Contracting Metalwork Subcontractor : Aynsleys Metalwork 
Right, view through atrium in the studio block.
Far right, the balcony on the upper studio floor overlooks the atrium
Right, the concourse ‘gorge’ showing maple cladding.
Below, ground floor plan
Roofing: Flat and Pitched
Tile Council
Robin Mackley of the Clay Roofing Tile Council welcomes the new British standard for plain clay tiles and fittings, BS 402, and reports on recent developments amongst the Council's members
Left, Redland's new £1.4 million wind tunnel in Horsham performs live wind and driving rain tests on roof tiles, fitting and tile accessories
For years articles like this have been heralding the ‘impending’ arrival of a new British Standard for plain clay roofing tiles: good news was just around the corner.
In 1990 that corner was at last turned and the new BS 402 is now fully operational.
Given the implications for all professionals of product liability, quality matters more than ever before — and that is why standards for the industry are important.
The most significant change in the new standard is the inclusion, for the first time ever, of a frost test.
Tiles must pass 100 freeze/thaw cycles, which is twice the French requirement, for example— and a first line of defence (provided you specified BS tiles) when defending a property owner's claim.
Other changes include a revision to the requirement fro longitudinal camber and the introduction of a new requirement for twist, related to camber.
The new standard is the result of much hard work over the last few years by manufacturers, contractors and specifiers.
The head of the Clay Roofing Tile Council's customer advisory service, Bev Stringer, is typical of architects who have welcomed the development.
‘Architects are more and more in need of reassurance where product liability is concerned, and a new BS 402 is a major step forward in this respect,’ he says.
The standard will eventually be superseded by European equivalents, but this will probably be at least three years away.
Common European standards were to be published in 1992 but this is now unlikely.
In any event, when published, the EC standard will apply climatological bandings to clay roofing tiles because performance requirements differ widely throughout the Community.
This emphasises the importance of frost testing for tiles which are to be exposed to often severe British winter conditions.
It might seem a matter of logic that Sicily and Scotland cannot require the same performance features of tiles.
Unfortunately this was not the case.
Such is the Delors-led demand for uniformity that even this was mooted as a possibility.
Again, it was thanks to people in the industry who were prepared to spend hours arguing in the committee rooms of Brussels that common sense prevailed.
As an indication of how far off implementation of a pan-European standard is, it should be noted that there is as yet no agreement on surface characteristics, dimensions, or permeability.
There is also disagreement on the method that should be used for frost testing, with the British representatives pressing hard for the most rigorous system.
The probability is that a compromise will be reached by which any one of the current British, French, Dutch and German methods will be acceptable.
So specifiers will need to know not just that a tile meets EC requirements, but — crucially in northern Europe — in what way it meets those requirements.
When these far from straightforward issues have eventually been resolved, the draft will be subject to public comments (six months), then committee revision (say nine months)— and, finally, it will take about a year before specifiers can see anything in print.
The uprating of the section of BS 402 which relates to fittings will begin shortly.
Yet here again we run into a piece of Euro-nonsense.
Fittings, as you would expect, are phenomenally diverse throughout Europe, comprising several hundred different items.
Roofing, after all, is as much an art as a science and centuries of artistic creativity have left their mark on the tile makers of the continent.
So the creation of a pan-European standard would not be easy — but neither would it be impossible.
Brussels, in its infinite wisdom, has decided (for the moment at least) that the standard for fittings should not include either dimensions or strength; and the supreme importance of the god of uniformity should not be left in operation to cover these aspects.
Cynical readers might be forgiven for thinking that concentrating on the minutiae of standards is a convenient way of avoiding the subject of how the industry is faring in a depressed market — but they would be wrong.
Innovation and expansion have continued apace as manufacturers have no misgivings about the long-term future for clay roofing tiles.
A few examples from within the membership of the clay Roofing Tile Council illustrate this point.
Earlier this year the UK's largest pitched roofing manufacturer, Redland Roof Tiles Ltd, announced its intention to become a major supplier within the clay tile sector.
The company believes the strength of its Rosemary brand, plus the ‘state-of-the-art’ technology installed at its new Bedworth plant, will enable it to achieve this aim.
At £18 million, the Bedworth factory is the largest single green-field plant investment the UK roofing industry has yet seen, and has an annual design capacity of 30 million Rosemary clay plain tiles.
Sales and Marketing Director, Paul Pinsky emphasised the company's commitment to the clay tiles market: ‘Bedworth is one of the most advanced and sophisticated clay tile plants in the world.
Not only does its technology guarantee absolute consistency of product quality; it also enables us to ensure ready availability in the face of a continued growth in demand.
There's been a lot of doom and gloom spoken about ‘the depressed market’, and certainly the fiscal policy of high interest rates has had the short-term effect that was intended.
The long-term shows a continued growth in demand for clay plain tiles, which have doubled their volume in a decade.’
On Humberside, Sandtoft has recently announced that it is to make a machine-pressed plain tile for the first time.
Whilst the company is well known for its handmade clay plain tiles, this will be the first time it has ventured into the expanding machine-made clay plain tile market.
Indeed, it will be a ‘first’ in the history of tile making on Humberside.
The development of the clay tile industry in England has been along peculiarly narrow lines, plain tile makers tending to grow up in isolation in the Midlands, and pantile makers emerging on Humberside.
No other country in Europe possesses this sharp division between two sides of the same industry.
European manufacturers invariably make plain tiles alongside their interlocking tiles, and it makes good sense for a manufacturer to be able to offer both types of product.
The Humber plain tile, as it is appropriately to be known, is an attractive product to handle.
it is well made, on one of Sandtoft's modern multiple presses.
It possesses a cross-cambered upper surface to create a pleasing ripple effect on the roof, and its edges are rounded for ease of handling and to reduce on-site chipping.
Meeting the demands of the refurbishment market.
Steetley Roofing Products has launched the Ashurst tile, an authentic clay roof tile that creates an instant weathered look.
A dark colour on the exposed surface ensures that it blends right away with urban roofscape environments, making it ideal for the maintenance and renovation market.
The tiles are handmade by trained craftsmen which, combined with the use of computer controlled handling, drying and firing technology, ensures the production of traditional tiles of a consistently high quality.
‘Recent months have shown a slowing down in new house starts throughout the country although refurbishment remains relatively stable,’ says Chris Williams, Marketing Manager for Steetley Roofing Products.
‘Thus we have developed a distinctly new product especially to meet the demands of this market.’
Left, two rebuilt Tudor buildings in Coventry have been re-roofed, using handmade clay plain tiles from Steetley Roofing Products' Canterbury Collection, as part of a larger redevelopment project by Coventry City's Architect's Department
Stuart Gee, National Sales Manager of Tarmac Bricks and Tiles is equally buoyant about long-term prospects: ‘Although the market is currently sluggish, the popularity of natural clay products is expected to continue to grow, stimulated by an expansion in pitched roof construction.
Both are proven products which are natural and are subject to imitation — with varying degrees of success in colour, texture, and weathering.
This ‘sincerest form of flattery’ will continue as clay enjoys a rising share of the market’.
Gee goes on to identify other, more powerful, factors which are likely to increase the popularity of clay tiles: ‘The rise in clay tile demand is also undoubtedly linked to the emergence of green thinking.
The newly awakened consciousness of planners and architects to quality in design, the virtue of the natural products and their compatibility with the environment all signal a return to more traditional designs.’
Flat Roofing: a new era
Paul Newman, Director of the British Flat Roofing Council, describes the Council's major research project which will contribute to the development of European Standards
Such has been the success of the British Flat Roofing Council since its formation in February 1982 that today it is universally respected as the advisory body for the industry.
An independent, non-profit-making organisation, BFRC provides a range of services free of charge, aimed at resolving and preventing flat roofing problems: a conference and seminar service: and technical advisory telephone service; and technical information literature packs.
In the last 12 months great strides have successfully been taken in maintaining a high profile and promoting the industry.
A successful conference took place in April; a research project is currently under way; a valuable reference work is under production; and BFRC has also been in the forefront of the important material developments which have taken place in the industry.
The three-day Flat Roofing Conference 90 was hosted by BFRC in London this spring.
Eight major architectural practices presented case studies which illustrated the use and importance of flat roofing as a design solution, in a wide diversity of projects.
The Council is currently collaborating with the Construction Industry Research and Information Association (CIRIA) in the production and publication of The Flat Roofing Guide .
A 450-page, hardback volume, illustrated in colour, the guide is due to be issued in 1991.
Editing and updating will be an on-going process with new editions published every two to three years.
The book is set to provide comprehensive, authoritative and independent guidance on the performance requirements, state-of-the-art practice and economics of the design, construction and maintenance of flat roofs.
It will become an essential reference for specifiers, architects, building surveyors, maintenance engineers, building owners, contractors, building control officers and professionals in training.
A three-year research programme to assess the life-span characteristics and as-built performance of flat roofing systems in underway.
In this project, BFRC is collaborating with Napier Polytechnic of Edinburgh.
The polytechnic which has already been commissioned for significant consultancy work into the performance of roofs, will conduct the statistical analysis assessing life-span criteria across a full spectrum of roof systems.
This analysis will lead to a comparison between design and as-built performance.
The proposal will commence with a reappraisal of existing data of polyester roofing systems from work previously undertaken by BFRC.
This will be extended through a new survey to assess performance changes since the original data was obtained.
Other roof systems will be examined, including APP and SBS polymer-modified, high-performance felts, mastic asphalt and single-ply membranes.
It is proposed to survey a total of 400 roof systems, each with a minimum gross area of 500 sq.m, with Napier Polytechnic covering Scotland and northern England and BFRC surveying the Midlands and the South.
Anderson roofing felts were used on the NatWest Staff College at Heythorp Park
All the roofs will be surveyed using traditional techniques, but detailed investigation, using a range of monitoring equipment including infra-red thermography, ultrasonic pulse-echo testing and strain gauges, will be carried out on a smaller sample.
This will allow comparison to be made between different survey techniques.
Thermal performance will be assessed through the use of thermocouples and heat flux sensors.
In some roofing systems, it is envisaged that the investigation will extend to examining the condition of individual layers within the roof.
Further testing of load/elongation behaviour and stress will take place in laboratory conditions.
The research programme has involved the creation of a full-time postgraduate post at Napier Polytechnic and occupies a substantial part of the studies of BFRC's new technical officer, Jim Hooker.
It also involves BRE, Herriot-Watt University and the flat roofing industry in general.
Funding of £50,000 will come from the Government's DOE LINK programme.
Since the objective for the project is to advance the understanding of flat roofing performance and maintenance, and to develop improved specification and quality assurance criteria for roofing systems, BFRC will disseminate the results of the research to the whole of the construction industry.
The results of the project will provide the objective criteria to enable the British flat roofing industry to compete more effectively within the European Community.
In the past the fall from grace of the flat roof was due to series of problems: inappropriate combinations of waterproofing material, insulation and decking; low durability waterproofing materials; poor design and detailing; and low quality installation.
Thankfully, major advances in the industry have been made, and this has led to placing emphasis on the fundamental elements that are essential for a successful roof, namely: good design, quality materials and regular maintenance.
Prevention is invariably more satisfactory than cure (although flat roof refurbishment rather than replacement is now a totally viable concept) and pioneering this educational crusade has become paramount with BFRC.
The new, improved materials available have gone a long way towards extending the lifespan of today's flat roof.
These flat roofing materials fall into three major categories: built-up felt roofing, mastic asphalt and single-ply membranes.
Built-up felt roofing was one of the materials which suffered most in the early search for cheap solutions.
However, the production of polyester-reinforced materials in the early 1970s had revolutionary performance implications.
Strength, resistance to strain and resistance to damage-in-use were increased by factors of 10 and more.
Further development of polyester-based material has produced even better performance.
The Cambridge University Centre has been refurbished using Trocal PVC roofing
This development has been supported by long-term performance warranties provided by manufacturers and suppliers, covering the liability of both products and application.
A new feature links warranties to planned inspection maintenance, giving the building owner better protection if the roof is properly monitored.
There is little doubt that annual inspection, maintenance and the repairing of damage in use will eliminate a high proportion of the problems arising from neglect.
Mastic asphalt is impervious to water or dampness, vermin-proof, non-toxic and odourless after laying.
It is applied in molten form — making it a voidless, seamless material — only by craftsmen who have served a four-year apprenticeship.
Similarly, repairs and maintenance should only be carried out by a specialist mastic asphalt contractor.
Mastic asphalt can be laid over any deck but, in general, a general, a concrete base is preferred.
Where problems associated with water penetration have occurred on mastic asphalt roofs, it is usually as a result of failure from one or more of the following: incorrectly detailed or ignored movement joints, penetration through parapet walls, wrongly positioned or damaged damp proof courses, blocked rainwater outlets, condensation, failure to provide a suitable finish, or physical damage in use.
There is a wide range of single-ply materials from highly elastic rubbers to thermoplastics such as PVC.
All must provide strength, durability and waterproofing.
Single-ply materials are not sold on the open market and the involvement of manufacturers at the design stage will ensure a correct system choice and detail design.
the use of manufacturer-trained contractor should guarantee good workmanship.
The inherent resistance of single-ply materials to water, oxidation and ultra-violet radiation means that their optimum physical characteristics are maintained for long periods, accommodating both expected and unexpected movement and loads.
Ultimately, the advantages gained with any of the new, improved materials is dependent on the level of collaboration at the design stage and the training of the installer.
Over the years, improved material and application technology and testing has facilitated this process, but in the long term the ability to effect repairs will continue to remain an important requirement.
In any project the importance of good design, coupled with the use of material suitable to that design, cannot be stressed too strongly.
The Council aims to enlighten both the public and the construction industry, highlighting the many benefits of flat and low-pitched roofing, and gradually eradicating the memory of the needless failures of the past.
Both in Europe and the UK, the BFRC is active in the establishment of standards for flat roofing, giving the industry representation on a number of British Standard and CEN European Technical Committees.
The European scene is changing fast.
The CEN Technical Committees 116 and 117 which have been working on the creation of European Standards for bituminous sheeting and single-ply membranes have recently been disbanded to be replaced by a new Technical Committee, CEN TC 254, which will prepare European Standards on waterproofing sheeting used in building and civil engineering works.
This particular Committee's finding will have a profound effect on the construction industry, and this heralds a new era for flat roofing.
Industry News
Below we publish details of new products, interesting applications and company developments
Lightweight Replacement Slate
Anchorlite Slate is the result of 10 years research and development to produce a replacement for natural slate that is virtually indistinguishable both in weight and visual appeal.
The launch of the new product follows extensive in-house and independent trails in both simulated and actual conditions and Anchor Roof Tiles is backing its new slate with a 50-year guarantee.
Anchorlite is available initially in Slate Grey and is suitable for use on all pitched roofs from 25 to 70 degrees.
Fixed in the normal way, the slate features a side lock designed for optimum strength, a thin leading edge for aesthetic appeal and it has a coverage rate of 17.5 slates per square metre.
A full range of matching detailing products for verges, ridges, hips, eaves and valleys is available.
Reader enquiry number 141
Reading Landmark
Twin barrel-vault roofs formed from Broderick Structures' Brodseam were used in the new Imperium building in Reading, by Bennetts Associates (RIBA Journal July).
The longstrip sheets are curved over insulated metal panels on steel ‘Z’ purlins, supported by softwood battens.
Its natural weathered finish contrasts with the white powder-coated aluminium walls.
Reader enquiry number 142
Convent Contract
Alfred McAlpine has supplied roofing slates for the new St Joseph's Convent and Convalescent Home, which has just won a Centenary Bournemouth Civic Design Award.
The multi-level hipped and gabled roof forms one of the project's most striking features.
The architects were Jackson, Greenen, Down and Partners of Winchester.
Reader enquiry number 143
Traditional Tile for Exploration Building
Sandtoft's natural red Old English clay pantiles have been used to roof new offices of BP Exploration near Newark in Nottinghamshire.
Designed by Saunders and Partners of Newark, the complex and extensive roof incorporates split levels, valleys, hips topped with finials and recessed balcony.
Reader enquiry number 144
Ventilated Lean-to Roof Solution
The Marley Roof Tile Company has recently introduced an Abutment Ventilation System.
Designed to allow ventilation at the apex of lean-to roofs the new Abutment Ventilation System utilises the major components of Marley's Ventilated Dry Ridge System with the addition of a lead support strip.
This allows the flashing material to be easily applied without dressing and provides a discreet and weatherproof method of ventilating the apex of a lean-to roof.
Fully in accordance with the requirements of the Building Regulations, Marley Roof Tile's new system is suitable for use with the company's full range of 13 roof tile profiles and on roofs with a pitch of up to 35 degrees for interlocking tiles and 45 degrees for plain tiles.
Reader enquiry number 145
Insurance-backed Roofing Installation
The 1,400 sq.m roof of the recently completed research and development building for Rank Xerox in Welwyn Garden city was covered with Sarnafil.
A single-ply coated roofing membrane, Sarnafil consists of selected polymers applied as liquids to a carrier material (glass fibre or polyester), which are fused together in a gelation process.
The result is a membrane that is resistant to water, weather, ultra-violet degradation, fire and chemical attack.
Installation is carried out by one of a national network of approved contractors trained by Sarna UK.
On completion, Sarna UK Technicians will inspect the final installation before issuing a 10-year guarantee.
Reader enquiry number 146
Olympic-sized Vapour Barrier
The external envelope of the Ponds Forge Swimming Pool in Sheffield, designed by FaulknerBrowns, is almost complete.
Planned to be open to the public by Christmas, the complex will host the World Student Olympics in the summer of 1991.
A main sports hall and the Olympic pool each have a sweeping curved roof and the total roof area is approximately 6,800 sq.m.
A double-skin metal sheeting roof system was specified, including an aluminium deck sheet by Architectural Profiles spanning 4.2 m between steelwork, and a Butler MR24 standing seam outer sheet capable of accommodating the very low apex pitch.
Project architect Jon Ignatovicz specified a high performance vapour barrier from Monarflex capable of overcoming the potential problems of quality control of sheet jointing and general construction damage.
For the Ponds Forge roof, clear, 0.5 mm thick, low-density polyethylene sheeting, reinforced with a polyester mesh, was factory welded to produce single sheets to the required size.
Reader enquiry number 147
Hardrow for Homes
At the Swan Reach development at Harefield, Hertfordshire, GHM Architects Ltd of Wheathampstead have created 27 homes adjacent to the Grand Union Canal for clients Jarvis Homes.
Dark grey Hardrow slates were specified to give the scheme a natural and mature appearance from the outset.
Reader enquiry number 148
Going Green in Greenwich
As part of an extensive refurbishment of its Hughsfield Estate, the London Borough of Greenwich specified a Vulcanite built-up roofing system, incorporating CFC-free Vulcatherm insulation boards.
The Hughsfield Estate is a mixed development of blocks of flats and terraced homes, all flat roofed and formerly finished with asphalt.
A bituminous primer was applied to the existing asphalt covering, which was left in position to form a vapour check layer, before layering the insulation and then the finish was provided by a cap sheet of Vulcanite Tribond 350 elastomeric, white mineral.
Reader enquiry number 149
Sawn-faced Slate
At a cost of 20 per cent less than is popular hand-riven Westmorland green roofing slate, Cumbria-based Burlington Slate now offers the product with a sawn face.
The company introduced the bate sawing of Westmorland green roofing slate 18 months ago to improve the utilisation of non-riven green rock.
In addition to initial cost savings, sawn roofing slate has other advantages over its traditional riven counterpart.
Due to the sawing process, all slates are absolutely flat and of a very even and regular thickness, advantageous factors which mean the fixer does not have to sort the product on-site.
Available in one depth only (16in) and two thicknesses, the slate comes in random widths which provides a variegated natural roofscape.
Reader enquiry number 150
Moorland Roofing
Bradstone Moordale slates, from ECC Building Products have been specifically developed for the north of England.
The slates are dressed with the bevelled tail and edge characteristic of thick, square stone roofing traditionally seen in the counties of Yorkshire, Lancashire, Derbyshire and parts of Cheshire and Durham.
Reader enquiry number 151
New Products
Hardwood Conservatories
Although Atrium Conservatory Systems uses a modular system for its high-quality hardwood structures, it is happy to produce individual modules to the dimensions required by the designer.
Unlike many manufacturers, this company does not use infill spacers.
In , it offers a number of style options, as well as being happy to produce special designs.Each roof structure is test-erected in Atrium's factory.
Reader enquiry number 121
Metal Ceiling System
Armstrong World Industries, so long concentrating on mineral fibre ceiling systems, has now introduced a metal laminate system — the ML ceiling.
This 300 mm wide plank design is 19 mm thick and sports four face designs.
Panels are supplied in 1.2, 1.5, 1.8 and 2m lengths.
They offer good sound attenuation, neat lines, protected edges and good light reflectancy.
Sealed ML ceilings for clean areas are also possible.
Reader enquiry number 122
Brick Pavers
Two new pavers have been introduced by Redland Brick — the Chailey Multicoloured Stock and the improved Wealden Stock Flex paver.
The former has the softness of line and speckled coloration of a genuine clamp-fired brick; whilst the latter has a traditional appearance of a warm red, multicoloured, Wealden stock.
Both have non-slip surfaces; the Chailey has an FL durability rating and the Wealden has a PA classification.
Reader enquiry number 123
Character Stairs
Typical of the unusual and smart staircases marketed by Staircase Solutions of Alexandra Palace is the Niviv — a steel design which gives maximum flexibility, is self-supporting up to 16 risers, adjustable on site, suitable for internal or external use and is supplied in a range of colours, as well as stainless steel.
Other stairs available include British, Danish and French systems.
Reader enquiry number 124
Wood Laminate
Suitable for internal use, Formica's new Lignaform range for decorative laminates incorporates real wood veneers to combine the appearance of a genuine wood surface with the durability of a high pressure decorative laminate.
Six wood veneers in Natural or Surfaced finishes are currently available and it is anticipated that appropriate applications will be for wall panelling and furniture.
Reader enquiry number 125
Restaurant Chair
New from Hostess Furniture is the Club chair — a metal and wood design with classic rounded shapes and an angular steel frame, aimed at the restaurant and leisure market.
The moulded plywood back is available in a range of veneers and laminates and the upholstered seat in a number of vinyls and fabrics.
The steel frame can be supplied in a selection of colours.
Reader enquiry number 126
Clay Ridges
Two new clay ridge tiles have been introduced by Steetley Roofing Products.
One is a roll top ridge, the other a capped angle ridge.
Both are supplied in two lengths — 305 and 450 mm.
They form a follow-up to the recent launch of Steetley's three decorative ridges.
All can be used with tile-covered roofs, or as a contrast, with slate roofs.
Reader enquiry number 127
Composite Beams
Retaining the characteristics of the original composite steel/concrete Thor Beam, launched a few months ago, a new version for use with metal deck flooring has now been introduced by ConstrucThor.
Its characteristics include reduced overall depth, no requirement for added fire protection, and a flat soffit for ease of service design and installation.
The second version has continuous concrete bearing pads on either side to carry the floor.
Reader enquiry number 128
Adaptable Furniture
Designed to overcome the problems of ‘re-configuring’ office furniture.
Abak from Integrated Furniture Systems consists of a series of panels, hung on a tubular metal framework with integral adjustable feet.
The framework contains wireways, giving considerable cable-carrying capacity, both vertically and horizontally.
Panels simply clip on to the framework and can be easily removed, as required.
Reader enquiry number 129
Towel Radiator
Weather the central heating is on or not, dry towels are possible all the year round with Bisque's Arbonia towel radiator, which contains a small electric heating cartridge.
Also available from Bisque is the battery-powered, remote-control Bagno-Stat, which allows you to pre-set the towel radiator heater to come on at specific times and maintain required temperatures.
Reader enquiry number 130
Door Furniture
Designed in Scandinavia and manufactured to exacting UK standards, Randi-Line door furniture is available in this country from Thomas Laidlaw.
The range is based on three lever shapes manufactured in stainless steel and brass.
Each lever can be used with a wide variety of high quality accessories.
Suitable applications range from new build to restoration projects.
Reader enquiry number 1313
Glass Luminaires
Glass fittings, Marlin Lighting believes, add an extra quality to the light they emit; hence its Limburg luminaires, all of which rely on glass craftsmanship.
Now it has added Pyramid to the range, a series of wall lights and ceiling fittings manufactured in two glass finishes — wall lights in white satin matt glass and ceiling fittings in satin matt three-ply opal glass.
Reader enquiry number 132
Fitted Sanitaryware
Stelrad Doulton's popular Vista range of bathroom equipment has been extended by the addition of two fittings designed specifically for the fitted bathroom — the semi-recessed washbasin and the back-to-wall WC.
They are available in all eight standard colours, including the recently introduced tones of soft mint and soft cream.
The use of this type of fitting makes for easy cleaning and less cluttered bathrooms.
Reader enquiry number 133
Ceiling Tiles
Manufactured of water felted mineral fibre, Donn Products' new Auratone Nordic ceiling panel has a smoothly pebbled texture with a random surface perforation and is supplied in three edge profiles.
Square edge panels come in both 1,200 x 600 mm or 600 x 600 mm sizes, whilst shadow line and interline edged panels are available only in the smaller size.
Flame spread is Class 1 and fire propagation Class 0.
Reader enquiry number 134
Downlighters
Designed Architectural Lighting has launched a new range of 14 downlighters.
These range from low-voltage fittings, through HID units to compact fluorescents.
The company offers a choice of fittings which are functional or decorative, as well as including external luminaires.
Low-glare, high-efficiency and good colour rendering are design priorities.
Reader enquiry number 135
Light fittings
Zon International has announced that it has taken over the UK distributorship for Solar lighting products.
Solar hales from Scandinavia and its range includes Pipeline, one of the most successful tube systems on the British market.
New Solar products to be launched include Gina, a range of indirect light fittings using low-voltage halogen lamps and built-in electronic transformers.
Reader enquiry number 136
Security System
Limitless potential is claimed by Advanced Design Electronics for its iD combined security and fire alarm system.
Starting with 30 monitoring points, the system offers massive flexibility due to the fact that it can substitute two wires, punctuated by individually programmed chips, for the massive bunch of wires which would be needed by a conventional system.
It is said iD can become the brain of an intelligent house.
Reader enquiry number 137
Rainwater Gutter
High capacity and good looks are the two qualities aimed for by Caradon Terrain with its new Torrent uPVC gutter system.
A level gutter with a central outlet is said to be capable of draining 210 sq.
m of roof — an impressive rate of 4.37 litres per second.
The gutter has an elliptical shape, is fixed with new pivot style clips and is fitted with a long radius downpipe.
Reader enquiry number 138
Continuing Professional Development
Comparing Notes
In the first of a bi-monthly series on continuing professional development, Norman Roberts puts the RIBA's approach in the context of other professions
Norman Roberts is an architect with experience in continuing professional development at the Institute of Advanced Architectural Studies and the PNL RIBA London Region CPD centre.
He is currently CPD Co-ordinator for the Southern and South East Regions and Director of the CPD Unit at Kingston Polytechnic School of Architecture.
RIBA Members will be required to undertake continuing professional development from 1992.
The implementation of this 1987 decision of Council will be examined in more detail in later articles but meanwhile, how does this place the RIBA in relation to other construction professions?
The CDP in Construction Group, to which the RIBA and most other professional institutions within the construction industry belong, defines CPD as ‘the systematic maintenance, improvement and broadening of knowledge and skill and the development of personal qualities necessary for the execution of professional and technical duties throughout the practitioner's working life’.
This broad approach at least is common; it is certainly more than going on courses.
The various approaches to CPD in the construction industry were reviewed in a report last year for the DOE and the Council for National Academic Awards.
One of the authors, Linda Welsh, an early leader in developing CPD (for the RTPI), presented the results to the first annual RIBA CPD Forum in Birmingham earlier this year.
This report and the other earlier ones demonstrate the interest of central government departments in professional development.
The need for CPD seems common to most professions.
Linda Welsh has previously suggested that the key issue is competence, at a time when the knowledge gained in initial vocational education may have a life span as short as four years.
Consumerism has led to high expectations and increased litigation, which in turn has led to increasingly expensive professional indemnity insurance.
The institutions have an evident interest in maintaining professional standards, possibly backed by quality assurance, while competition also demands continuing development.
Voluntary or compulsory?
How have the professions responded to this need?
An apparently fundamental issue is whether the scheme is voluntary or ‘mandatory’(or compulsory — the terms are numerous).
however, on examination this becomes less clear cut, since there seem to be three categories — the voluntary; the required but not closely monitored; and the fully enforced.
Most institutions, including the RIBA under present proposals, fall into the middle category, although maintaining professional skills is an implicit, or in many cases explicit, requirement.
The CIBSE, the ICE, and the RTPI have schemes that are voluntary, although evidence of participation is required on transfer to higher grades of membership.
CIBSE plans to make CPD mandatory for all except fellows, and ICE has well structured continuing education requirements for its members prior to them becoming chartered engineers.
CPD is obligatory (but not ‘mandatory’— a fine distinction) for members of the Institution of Structural Engineers and although this is self monitored, CPD diaries are examined on transfer to a higher class of membership.
A programme of CPD will be requirement of membership of the RIBA from 1992, and it is argued that this is already covered by the charter and Byelaws which commit members to the ‘acquirement of the arts and sciences’ associated with the advancement of architecture.
In a similar way, although the CIB's rules of professional conduct have previously required members to keep themselves informed of ‘new thought and development’ in building, CPD becomes ‘obligatory’for them this year.
The RICS acted early to make CPD a requirement for new members elected after 1981.
It was voluntary for others at that stage, though from last year those transferring to fellowship had to show their CPD record for the previous three years.
The membership has now confirmed the decision of their Council to make CPD obligatory for all members from January 1991.
CPD activity will be monitored annually.
The RIBA seems to be steering a liberal, middle-of-the-road path with the bias on personal responsibility
The most rigid requirements lie outside the construction industry.
The Law Society requires newly qualified solicitors to undertake approved CPD for a period of three years on pain of withdrawal of their practising certificate.
Midwives have even more demanding requirements!
It seems then that the RIBA is in a middle position in terms of obligation.
Essentially this is a personal, professional obligation, inherent in membership of the Institute, rather than a closely policed one.
However, it could be checked if questions of competence arose.
The requirement is as real as any other in the construction industry, but it is interesting to note that take-up in the RICS, with its earlier commitment to obligatory CPD, has been higher than in other professions where it has so far been voluntary.
Members of the RIBA may be expected to follow the same pattern after 1992.
Modes and categories
CPD may be voluntary or obligatory, but what is it that's required?
The DES Further Education Unit's report notes that events such as workshops, seminars and courses are the most common form of provision, although it may be argued that, overall, more learning takes place in other ways.
Distance or open learning and on the job activities may be some of these, as well as supervised research for further qualifications, teaching (for those in non-teaching posts), practice (for those in teaching posts), structured home reading, preparing articles for the technical and professional press, sabbaticals and paid educational leave, practice review/practitioner research, and self-help groups.
Different professional institutions may define to a greater or lesser extent the modes and their mix.
The CIOB, for example, draws a distinction between direct CPD — those activities which contribute to improved professional performance — and indirect CPD, which contributes to personal development.
The former would be a seminar or course, while the latter could be serving as a local councillor.
A network of 25 authorised CPD centres are being established at appropriate educational institutions, along with voluntary CPD officers in the CIOB's 13 regions.
CPD certificates are issued for attendance at courses run by authorised centres.
More specific guidance on categories is given by the ISE which breaks its CPD into engineering, finance and management, law and economics, new technology, and the engineer in the community.
Individual engineers are encouraged to prepare their own CPD plans, an approach based on the Engineering Council's ‘Career Manager’.
Once again the RICS has a well structured scheme which has three categories of CPD: private study; research; and courses, seminars, technical meetings and so on.
Members are encouraged to balance these and not concentrate only on ‘events’.
The emphasis here is also on the member carefully selecting activities which will meet their individual development needs.
The RIBA's proposed approach, as outlined in Practice July 1989, combines many of these approaches.
The emphasis, like the Engineering council, the ISE and the RICS, is on individual requirements which are assembled into a personalised development plan.
Topics are not specified, but, as with the CIOB, a distinction is drawn between ‘practice-related’ CPD and personal development.
Like most institutions, record keeping, if not certification, is emphasised.
Again then, the RIBA seems to be steering a liberal, middle-of-the-road path, with the bias on personal responsibility.
Having decided the degree of obligation and the categories of CPD, how much of it is required?
In fact many institutions express this as a recommendation, albeit a strong one where the commitment is obligatory, and averaging over two or three years is often permitted to allow for varying circumstances.
CIOB, CIBSE and RICS all look for 20 hours per year, while the RTPI expects 25 hours.
ICE asks for five days, say 35 hours, which is the same number as suggested by the RIBA for structured/practice-related CPD.
The RIBA also suggests that as much again may usefully be spent on incidental/personal development, although this will not be a requirement.
Looking at other professions in general and construction professions in particular, the strong drive to continuing professional in particular , the strong drive to continuing professional development is evident.
The reasons are clear and, it seems, widely accepted.
The alternative to institution-led standards might be either deprofessionalisation or re-registration tests of competence.
The RIBA is in good company as it finalises its plans for obligatory CPD.
Perhaps it will be both rather more demanding and more flexible than some, asking for a few hours a year but with more emphasis on personal planning.
This seems appropriate to our complex profession.
The challenge for the RIBA is now to develop and communicate its CPD requirements and the service which will help members to meet them.
Further articles in this series will report on how this is being tackled.
Members
Obituaries
Robert Purdew died on 11 May at the age of 66.
He was an indefatigable architect, an extremely positive, versatile and congenial man, whose friends and former colleagues will greatly regret his passing.
In the 1950s he joined the Architects Division at the LCC as a trainee, later becoming a member of the Development Group.
In the 1960s he worked for several years in industry, including a period as Chief Architect at Camus, before being appointed Head of the Architectural Division at the National Building Agency.
As part of the Agency's advisory work, Purdew greatly improved the detailed planning of many building schemes, both high and low rise.
He also initiated the development by a number of authorities of ‘rationalised traditional’ designs, and through pilot projects, where the Agency acted as consultants, demonstrated the feasibility of this method.
He showed the savings of one-third of the man hours per house could be achieved by rationalisation in brick, block and timber design.
Working with the BRE and with TRADA, he carried out a number of pilot schemes and produced a manual of timber frame design and construction.
He led a highly successful group of architects and surveyors on the designation of General Improvement Areas by local authorities in association with housing associations and co-operatives under the 1969 Act, and helped design and implement a number of these areas.
In the building industry change to metric, he also played a major role arranging training seminars in collaboration with the RIBA and leading the Agency's role as an advisory body to local authority architects and building contractors.
Cleeve Barr 
Ps
Martin Pawley finds himself in the grip of museum culture
What was the most memorable moment of Modern architecture in the last 20 years?
The rebuilding of the Barcelona Pavilion, or the blowing up of Pruitt Igoe?
Before you answer this question, consider the context.
Modern architecture was not a style.
It was not like any previous architecture because it was supposed to be expendable.
Why then should anyone want to conserve examples of modern architecture?
In view of the fact that Modernists are still being blamed for the destruction of civilisation, this seems like a good question, but according to DOCOMOMO it is not.
DOCOMOMO is the euphoniously named international working party for the DOcumentation and COnservation of buildings, sites and neighbourhoods of the MOdern MOvement, which held its first conference in Eindhoven last month and has attracted an astonishingly strong ground swell of support.
The unfortunate thing is that a good part of it came from an unexpected direction.
While some DOCOMOMO delegates were tough-minded Modern enthusiasts, mindful of Frederick the Great's famous exhortation to his wavering guardsmen: ‘Do you want to live forever?’; others were out and out conservationists, desperate to get their hands on another endangered species to save.
In my opinion, as an invited speaker to the Eindhoven conference, DOCOMOMO should have recognised immediately that the conservation industry has aims and ambitions that run entirely counter those of Modern architecture.
But at Eindhoven the organisation was unable to prevent fraternisation between the two sides leaping from mutual suspicion into whirlwind romance.
The reasons are not hard to find.
Ever since European Architectural Heritage year, the ranks of the Modern Movement diehards have been steadily depleted.
One by one, true believers have either died off or slipped away into the post-Modern or revivalist camp under one pretext or another.
Now the handful of survivors have been made an offer they cannot refuse: a last chance to surrender and march out, still beneath the banner of Modernism, straight into the arms of the museum culture — not as prisoners, but as co-belligerents.
Nowhere is the siren song of conservation more difficult to resist than when it combines a sentimental appeal to make a restoration project out of every down-at-heel relic, with the coded suggestion that it might even be a retail money-spinner in its own right if properly marketed by a curator and a press officer with a gift shop and a T-shirt designer on hand.
It would have taken a miracle, like the reconstitution of the central committee of DOCOMOMO in the shape of real veterans of the Great War, men brutalised by life in the trenches and determined to rebuild society starting at the top, to have recognised this siren song immediately and rejected this siren song immediately and rejected it out of hand, and at Eindhoven such a miracle did not take place.
Notwithstanding the efforts that were made at the conference to din the contradiction between conservation and utilitarianism into the brains behind DOCOMOMO, the lure of the rolling expense accounts of museum culture was too strong.
Now it appears that nothing can prevent the enthusiastic fossilisation of all that remains of the revolutionary structures of 1919–39.
For Modern thought this is a tragedy.
Here was an opportunity to demonstrate the architectural difference between analytical thought in the service of society and the Czech artist Karel Teige as the difference between buildings that are instruments and buildings that were conceived as expendable machines, not eternal monuments or worse, post-Modern fakes.
A proper respect for the Modern thinking that underlay such tools of social and economic experiment as the centre of Zlin, the original Bauhaus buildings, the Weissenhof, the Maison Savoye and many more, demands that their documentation should be preserved, but they themselves should be allowed to die.
How stirring to watch the video of the demolition.
One has only to call to mind the eternal life of the moving pictures of the destruction of the Tacoma Bridge and Pruitt Igoe to see how influential such a fate could be.
If filmed destruction to draw attention to expendability seems to hard to bear, there was one other radical solution canvassed at Eindhoven and that was terminal neglect.
Although bathed in a sentimentality of its own, the concept appeals to me because it reminds me of a trip I made as a student to the Maison Savoye in the summer of 1957, when this great Corbusier villa was a ruin surrounded by waist-high grass and nettles.
At that time, one could enter the building easily, wander up and down the racked and discoloured ramp, contemplate the looting of one of the door handles, even find undrunk wine in a cupboard.
Never was the enormous authority of this machine for living in ever so well expressed as in this scene of picturesque desolation.
It was like stumbling upon a forgotten battlefield, which in a sense was exactly what it was.
The recorded destruction of documented Modern buildings, or their determined neglect seem to me to be the only two ways in which DOCOMOMO can remain true to the spirit of Modern architecture while communicating with representatives of the all-powerful museum culture that has architecture in its grip.