

NUMBER ONE FOR ROAD RUNNING AND ATHLETICS
NIKE AIR 180 — WIN THE YEAR'S HOTTEST SHOE
Run a perfect 10 with our simple — but smart — 10K schedule
Racing shoes — can they really make you run faster?
Calling all clubs
Could you win our National Fun Run Trophy?
See p94
You and cholesterol — is it the killer the experts claim?
Back on track
How Jon Solly plans to take on the world
FOR JOGGERS, RUNNERS AND ATHLETES
FEATURES
The unbeatable lightness of racing!
19 pairs of racing shoes just in time for the season
Track and road — Solly's twin peaks?
Why Jon Solly is convinced that 1991 is his year
Carry on up the jungle
Running, rafting, canoeing, horse-riding, climbing and parachuting?
Could you take on the Raid Gauloises?
Try a little self-control
No coach, no problem — at least it isn't if you follow our training plan!
These shoes have run 25,000 miles!
Is ultra-runner James Zarei the ultimate competitor?
Cholesterol — why the jury is still out
Jane Griffin sorts the good from the bad
DEPARTMENTS
From the Editor/News Special
News
Forum
Vets
Competition
Charity Talk
Next Month
Club News
PRACTICAL RUNNING
Seven-page section starts on page 21, including
Training Tips
Women
Marketplace
Safety Tips
Fitness Clinic
Cross-training
Young Runner
Runners' Rights
Review
RUNNING RACE SERVICE
Racing Ahead
Racing Reports
Events
Travel 
SINK OR SWIM Raid Gauloises endurance race
WIN!
A pair of Nike 180
WHO'S SOLLY NOW?
Jon Solly interview
THE LIGHT FANTASTIC?
Racing shoe guide
Practical Running Marathon training; fitness clinic; shoe and kit news — starts p21
FROM THE EDITOR
Are there any Corinthian ideals left in sport?
It doesn't seem like it if you consider some of the most recent press reports: endless bickering about which London group will bid for the Olympics in the year 2000; the decision for the 1992 Games not to allow the slower marathoners to finish in the stadium because they will interfere with the closing ceremony; Charlie Francis's cynical opinion that most of the world's top athletes are on drugs.
The list goes on and on.
Well, in our own small way we have decided to play our part in making the taking part more important than anything else.
At this year's National Fun Run, which, as we reported last month, is going ahead on October 6, we'll be launching a special RUNNING Magazine trophy for running clubs.
In keeping with what Fun Run founder Norman Harris sees as the original principles of the event, it'll reward overall performances by a team — not necessarily the fastest team, but the one which has the best spread of age-group competitors.
We're not offering cash, training grants, incentives or discount subscriptions — just a plain, old-fashioned trophy.
What's more, there will be three of them, so your club's second and third teams can get in on the act as well.
There's more about the team award on page 94, plus a priority entry form.
Fuller details about exactly what you need to do to enter will appear next month.
Continuing on a club theme, don't forget about our Newsletter of the Year competition which we're running in conjunction with New Balance.
Entries have already started coming in, and we'll be awarding bi-monthly prizes as well as the overall prize of £1000-worth of New Balance kit.
NICK TROOP 
The date of the World Veterans' Championships in Turku, Finland, is July 18–28, and not as reported last month.
Cover Bedford's Paula Radcliffe, winning the Inters race at the 1991 Women's National Cross-Country Championships in Arrowe Park, Birkenhead.
Picture by ALLSPORT
NEWS SPECIAL
EDITED BY CONOR O'HAGAN
The birth of BAF — a happy event?
From October, with the birth of the British Athletics Federation (BAF), British athletics should finally give the sport the constitution it has for so long struggled to devise.
The BAF Council, which will be the new governing assembly of the sport in Britain, will bring together representatives of the three English areas, the three ‘Celtic’ associations, and representatives of the Special Commissions, of which the three most powerful will be track and field, cross-country and road running.
For the first time, road running will enjoy a guaranteed share of voice in the management of athletics in the UK.
But will the arrival of the BAF make a discernible difference to the lot of road runners, many of whom feel that structures and attitudes within athletics have for years worked against the interests of road runners at all levels?
As Honorary Secretary of the AAA Road Running Committee, and successful organiser of some of Britain's best road races, Colin Gostelow has a vested interest in fighting road running's corner.
He has also been instrumental in moulding the constitution of the BAF, from its inauspicious start as the draft document prepared by AAA President Arthur McAllister in 1988, which largely ignored the need to recognise road running as a separate voice, to the 1991 model, which, he believes, has something real to offer.
‘Currently we are represented at the AAA by the road race committee, none of the members of which are selected by direct election.
We have a place on the AAA finance and general purposes committee, but no designated budget.
‘Having said that, we have managed to carve out more and more independence over the past few years.
The responsibilities that we exercise through the general committee are quite well established and under the BAF arrangements they will be enshrined in the constitution as being ours by right.
‘It's the magic words ‘directly elected’ which I think are all-important.
The Road Running Commission will have a chairman and secretary elected at the AGM, and most importantly, only road runners will be able to vote for them.
Clubs will now be registered specifically as road clubs, cross-country clubs, track and field, or as a combination, and they'll pay fees accordingly.
Only if registered and paid up as road running clubs will they be able to elect officials on to the Road Running Commission.
‘The significance of having directly elected officials is largely that now they will go to the BAF armed with a mandate to pursue objectives, policies etc.
I hope that at least some of the national representatives on the Commission (two each from Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, and six from England) will also be directly elected, but that's the decision of the national associations.’
There will also be voting members from the British Association of Road Races, and the Road Runners Club on the Commission: ‘We felt it was important to recognise the work they have done, and will continue to do in the sport,’ says Gostelow.
The chair and secretary of the Commission will sit on the BAF Council, which will in effect be the governing body of the sport overall.
‘We will have no more, and no less representation than the track and field, and cross-country commissions, while between them the commissions will have more votes than an area.
‘The Commission's budget will be agreed at Council, and will come direct from central funds.
It will have complete control over the disposal of that money.
The difference between that and the existing situation is really more one of principle than practical effect.
‘To be honest, no really well-founded scheme has ever been turned down on a financial basis.
You could say, perhaps, that the Star Rank scheme was largely put on ice, but that was for want of a sponsor, which was always vital to the future of the scheme.
Course measuring, which has been one of the most important areas of work in road racing over the past few years, has certainly not suffered for want of funding.’
Gostelow feels that constitutional safeguards are a relatively minor factor in advancing the interests of Britain's road runners: ‘The real issue is attitudes of mind rather than constitution.
Over the past 10 years we have already come from a situation where road runners were getting virtually nothing from the sport, to a far more respected and well-provided role.’
Dissatisfaction with the original McAllister plan ran strongly enough in some road running circles to lead many to advocate secession from the AAA (a view aired, if only speculatively, in RUNNING Magazine!).
But Gostelow denies that this was ever a worthwhile idea.
‘At one point it might have looked attractive to consider breaking away from the AAA altogether and striking out on our own.
That was particularly so when the 50p levy was generating quite a lot of finance at local level.
‘But even then it was obvious that, as the sport became more attractive (and after all, wasn't that what we were all working for?) more and more people would join the clubs, and the amounts raised from levying unattached runners would gradually decrease.
The more attractive the sport became, and the more committed people got, the less wealthy we would grow!
‘We should be honest, and accept that most of the money in the sport comes either from TV directly, or as a result of television interest, which is mostly in track and field.
I can't see the attraction in separating ourselves, anyway.
I want to be a part of the sport, one sport which encompasses everyone from a small kid who wants to have a go at throwing the javelin because he has seen Steve Backley on television, through to the 60-year-old recreational runner.’
One of the more commonly heard complaints against the existing management structure from top athletes is that its detachment from the road race scene leaves management ill-equipped to make selection decisions for road races in major internationals.
According to Gostelow that criticism should be redundant from October.
‘Team selection will categorically be the responsibility of the Commissions; including the selection of teams for international competition.
The only area where we won't be altogether unfettered is in selection for multi-sport events such as the Olympic Games, where there may be policy considerations laid down by overarching bodies such as the IOC or BOA.
I think that will represent a real change.
At the moment it is possible for some people to complain that because the policy is set and also administered centrally, teams for a major championship marathon are picked in the same way as sprint squads.
That will change when the responsibilities are delegated to the relevant commissions.
‘It's vital that the people making those decisions are in touch with the grass roots of the sport — that they are out there on the ground talking to athletes and coaches, attending races and letting it be known what they are doing.
At the moment, for instance, Gordon Surtees selects for small teams above half-marathon distance, while Alan Warner handles distances below that.
Both of them attend races regularly and phone around constantly, both at home and abroad.
The athletes know them, and also know that on certain occasions they are being looked at for selection purposes.
That level of contact must certainly be maintained in future under the Commission, and I would expect the national coaches to be co-opted on to the Commission itself as non-voting members.’
One apparent anomaly in the post-October arrangements that Gostelow is keen to defend is the unchanged status of road running in the AAA of England — the most powerful component of the BAF.
‘Although there is a schedule for an English Cross-Country Association, no such schedule exists for road running.
That's largely historical; and came about because the ECCU has such a long and distinguished tradition.
Road running, on the other hand, will continue to be managed by a committee within the AAA.
But like cross-country, it will have a budget and the officers will be directly elected from the three English regions.
I have personally received an assurance from the AAA General Committee that the management powers granted to road running will be similar to those given to cross-country, including control over championships and team selection etc.
‘The really important change will be that the UK Road Running Commission will be genuinely powerful, and will stand as an equal with the other specialisations — particularly track and field and cross-country.
‘It can't be denied that all this has taken a very long time to come about, but I think that, political wrangling aside, much of the delay has been due to genuine uncertainty about the tax implications of moving money around from one body to another.
These things matter today — after all, there's a lot of money in the sport these days!
NEWS
EDITED BY CONOR O'HAGAN
Marathon man Coe to tackle London
Britain's greatest ever runner will make his debut marathon appearance at the 1991 IAAF ADT London Marathon.
Double Olympic gold medallist Sebastian Coe will lead a team of runners from Greenwich to Westminster on April 21 to publicise the launch of ADT Healthquest, a national health and fitness campaign aiming to raise £1m in 1991 for six health-related charities.
Coe's decision to run his first marathon at London emerged from a wager with ADT President, Michael Ashcroft, who offered to donate a substantial sum of money to charity if Coe entered the event.
The quicker Coe finishes the marathon the larger the donation.
Taking up the wager on behalf of ADT Healthquest, Coe's idea to encourage people to develop more active and healthy lifestyles seemed, he said, an obvious extension.
‘I've wanted to do a marathon for a long time, but it would be silly to run one without putting it to use.
ADT Healthquest is a serious and vital campaign designed to make individuals and industry aware of the benefits of active, healthy living.’
The 800m world record holder, who is currently training between 50 and 60 miles a week, was quick to play down any suggestion that he would finish among the top runners in the 11th London Marathon.
‘I just want to get around in one piece.
I'm not concerned about the time.
I'm doing no more than many other runners who will be running at London and I have no pretensions of being in the top finishers.
If I have to name a time I'm thinking of running around the three hour mark.’
Ron Pickering
Ron Pickering, who dies on February 13, aged 60, was one of the most charismatic and widely respected figures in British sport.
Over several decades he brought a level of energy, commitment and enthusiasm to athletics which helped transform the sport into its modern form.
Born in Hackney, East London, Pickering showed talent as a decathlete during national service in the King's Own Regiment, but on leaving the army he began to concentrate on coaching.
After several years under the wing of top English coach Geoff Dyson, he became Welsh national athletics coach in 1960 at the tender age of 30.
Widely admired for the enthusiasm he brought to the job, his greatest triumph as a coach came with Lynn Davies' Olympic gold in the long jump at Tokyo in 1964.
Pickering had nurtured Davies since his days as a schoolboy triple jumper, and Davies has frequently credited Pickering with giving him the confidence to compete at top level.
As President of Haringey AC, Ron Pickering showed his love of and feel for grass roots athletics by building the club from obscurity to greatness, partly through encouraging young black athletes to realise their potential.
But it was as a broadcaster that Ron Pickering will be best remembered.
A BBC television commentator for 25 years, it was his voice which accompanied some of the greatest moments in televised athletics, and which could add flavour and drama to any athletic competition.
His knowledge of athletics, along with several other sports, was almost encyclopaedic, and together with fellow presenter David Coleman, he set the high standards for television coverage of athletics which have helped bring to the sport the huge audiences it enjoys today.
A man of strong convictions and combative nature, he worked tirelessly against the threats he perceived to sport in the modern age — notably drugs and apartheid.
Both on-screen and at speaking engagements, he was in the fullest sense a commentator on the sport, and was frequently critical of its administrators.
He was awarded the OBE for services to sport.
Married to Jean Desforges, who became European long jump champion, Pickering leaves a son, Shaun, and daughter Kim.
Ingrid back in the USA?
Ingrid Kristiansen appears set to return to the USA to compete in April's Boston Marathon.
It would be her first marathon since winning the New York in November last year.
Kristiansen, the women's world marathon record holder, lived and trained in Boulder, Colorado, until June last year, but was forced to leave America due to a dispute with the US immigration service.
The problem arose when her husband Arve, was refused an extension of his visa to continue studying at an American college.
Following the incident the couple put their Colorado home up for sale and returned to their native Norway, claiming that they no longer felt welcome in the USA.
With Kristiansen eager to renew her marathon career at Boston, they have since reapplied for American visas.
Commenting on the situation Arve Kristiansen said: ‘We have been told that the American Embassy in Oslo will issue new visas for us, as least we hope so.’
Snub for the Cross-Country Commission
The UK Cross-Country Commission has been severely snubbed by the British Amateur Athletic Board, after a decision to overrule the controversial rescheduling of the World Cross-Country Championship Trial Meeting.
Initially scheduled for Basingstoke on February 9, the trial was postponed when heavy snowfalls made travel absolutely impossible for many athletes.
The decision made by the UK Cross-Country Commission to adopt the new date of March 9 sparked controversy among athletes and officials, since it would leave only two weeks for selected athletes to prepare for the World Championships in Antwerp.
The poor showing of Britain's men in last year's World Championships was widely attributed to insufficient recovery time between the trial and the championships.
A telephone poll of athletes by national cross-country coach Bud Baldaro, who was not consulted by the UKCCC, revealed that most athletes likely to figure prominently strongly favoured accepting an offer by the Women's Cross-Country and Road Running Association to incorporate the men's trial into the women's event at Birkenhead on February 16.
At a meeting of the British Amateur Athletic Board's Joint Standing Committee, a unanimous vote overturned the UKCCC's decision, with the result that the trial race was cancelled.
After further consultation with athletes it was decided that a selection panel would pick the team for Antwerp, using the English, Scottish and Welsh championship races as a guide to form.
Cash motive behind élite club
Money is apparently the principal motive behind the newly-formed Chafford Hundred Athletic Club.
Six of Britain's top track and field athletes, including Fatima Whitbread, Linford Christie and Steve Backley, have combined forces to maximise their earnings potential through this élite club.
By launching the commercial scheme in the guise of an athletic club it falls within the rules of the Amateur Athletic Association.
The group, which also includes Colin Jackson, John Regis and Mick Hill, will be available for special promotional, marketing, advertising and endorsement activities.
All the members, however retain their links to current clubs and will compete for them in league and cup matches.
Only at Grand Prix and invitational meetings will they wear the name and colours of the Chafford Hundred Club.
Group spokesperson Fatima Whitbread commented: ‘The commercial activities of the club and its members will provide sufficient monies through the athletes' individual trust funds to cover the period when they are no longer involved as competing athletes and embarked on a new career.’
Olympic hopes still alive
An 11th hour compromise has kept London's hopes of staging the 2000 Olympics alive.
Two rival groups from the capital, London Olympic 2000 and the London Council for Sport and Recreation, finally settled their differences and agreed to unite as the London Olympic 2000 Campaign.
The decision came just eight hours before the deadline imposed by the British Olympic Association (BOA) for cities to be considered as the British nomination.
The BOA had said it would accept only one bid per city.
Many of the differences between the competing groups seemed to evaporate after the resignation of Peter Lawson, General Secretary of the Central Council of Physical Recreation, as a director of the London 2000 group.
Former Olympic champion Sebastian Coe was appointed president of the new committee which is made up of three members from each of the former rival groups.
Its first step is to defeat the challenge of Manchester for the British nomination, which will be decided by the BOA in April.
Don't miss our London seminar
April 21 will be the biggest day in the 1991 road race calendar.
Over 32,000 runners, many of them RUNNING readers, will tackle the 11th London Marathon.
Correct preparation is vitally important, so to help with last minute advice and tips, RUNNING Magazine and Nike are hosting a London Marathon seminar on the afternoon of Saturday April 20 at 1pm.
Experts from RUNNING's advice panel will be there to answer your questions, along with top Nike athletes.
The seminar will take place at the Science Museum, where you can also see Mike's exhibition Running on Air — the Nike Exhibition of Sports Shoe Technology.
Space will be limited.
To claim your ticket to the RUNNING Magazine/Nike seminar, cut out and keep this panel.
A similar panel will be printed in the May issue.
The first 90 readers to present both panels at the RUNNING Magazine stand in the ADT London Marathon Exhibition on each of the four days of registration will receive a ticket.
See you there!
Paris Marathon called off
Two of Europe's biggest road races have fallen prey to security fears over the Gulf War.
The 1991 Paris Marathon, due to have taken place on April 14, has been cancelled, as has the Paris 25K, scheduled for March 17.
According to the organisers, both races rely on military assistance, which could not be guaranteed in the present crisis.
Red tape set to delay SA return
The readmission of South Africa to international sport continues to draw closer as political momentum towards the abolition of apartheid grows.
But bureaucratic and constitutional obstacles may prevent South African athletes from competing at the 1992 Barcelona Olympics, even if political objections are soon lifted.
At the end of March, the International Olympic Committee's anti-apartheid commission will visit South Africa — the first official IOC visit since 1961.
Recent changes in government policy, and the reform of many sporting federations have led some commentators to predict that South Africa will be effectively cleared for readmission to the Olympic movement.
But re-election by the International Amateur Athletic Federation must be carried at the IAAF meeting at Tokyo in August to be effective in time for 1992.
As the application deadline for inclusion on the congress agenda expired in February, hopes for an early return to international track and field competition may be premature.
Zola on track for comeback
The return of Zola Budd (now Pieterse) to international competition could mark one of the most dramatic comebacks in athletics history, if the 24-year-old South African's recent form is any guide to her potential.
In a 3000m race at Stellenbosch in February, the new-look Zola, now markedly more adult in build than in her ill-fated days as a British international, won with a world-class 8:42.26 — a time which would have ranked her third in the the world in 1990.
Now working with coach Nauder van Zyl, Zola is reportedly looking forward to again competing at international level, once the boycott on sporting contact with South Africa is lifted.
According to a recent report in the Observer newspaper, Zola's long-term ambition is to run the London Marathon!
Speed equals cash for Coe
Andrea Whitcombe led almost from start to finish to retain her title at the Women's National Cross-Country Championships at Birkenhead.
Her winning time of 19:55 over the 5600m course, ensured the 19-year-old Parkside runner a place in the six-woman team at the World Cross-Country Championships in Antwerp.
Christie in with the in-crowd
Zola…about to make history or just history?
FORUM
READERS' LETTERS
The Editor reserves the right to alter and shorten published letters
Definitely, not a walk-over!
At 59 I'm the novelty man of big time races, but seven years ago it was a different matter.
I suffered a mild heart attack after 20 years of athletics.
Super fit.
Macho.
Vitamin taker.
Health fiend.
How could it be?
Today, lifestyle remodelled, I'm a ‘race walker’.
‘You're finished’, said the docs.
‘No I'm not,’ I retorted.
Now I stride out in major events: the London Marathon, the Great North Run, and the Malta, Benidorm, Sheffield and Leeds marathons.
It proves there is life after trauma.
No need to decline or fade away.
True, I'm at the rear, but I enjoy the scenery; the chats with spectators and I storm in, without hordes around me, to relish the kind of reception the winners get.
Others, inspired by my example, are following in my wake.
Great.
So if you can't run — walk!
Do it well.
Create a style.
And guess what?
My dear wife has joined me.
Together we'll be walking the New York Marathon in '91.
Leslie Holt Manchester
Putting your foot in it
Could I appeal to running shoe manufacturers to open their eyes and realise that they are missing out on a valuable section of the market?
The market that I'm referring to is in shoes, sizes above UK 11.
I take a size 13 and have to start searching for my next shoes immediately after breaking in a pair of new ones.
It takes me about three to six months to obtain a pair and then I have to have what is on offer.
I never get a choice.
So, come on shoe companies, pull your finger out, deliver the goods you advertise.
Perhaps too much effort is directed towards the leisure/poseur market.
It's a subject that makes my blood boil and disappointments have left me a blister short of swearing.
Steve Sockett Sheffield
A lesson in getting rich
As a lowly, poorly paid teacher and a member of Mensa, I wonder if RUNNING could put me in touch with sponsors and promoters who might make me a few million pounds over the next couple of years, even though I'm not Canadian.
I am willing to fail any dope test be it verbal, non-verbal, as long as it's after this year's London Marathon.
I am willing to travel (expenses paid, of course) anywhere in the world, to race over any distance, against anyone — as long as the millions come pouring in.
Richard Wallen Amersham
Charitable advice
You made a lot of good points in your article ‘Is Charity Losing Its Appeal’(RUNNING February 1990), but, in my view, you missed the most important point of all.
The success of a charity appeal connected with the marathon does lie, to a certain extent, on the appeal of the cause, but it relies even more on the organisation.
The best organisation that we have ever experienced was the Great Ormond Street Hospital Appeal.
They really knew how to raise money and, as a result, the final figure collected was about £1.5 million.
More than half of this came from city organisations, largely due to the good connections which members of the appeal committee had with such institutions.
You quoted David Griffiths saying that he had told the RAF Benevolent Fund that we would be ‘pretty disappointed if they failed to raise one million pounds from the Marathon’.
I have heard several organisations talking about the magic million, but as soon as you probe deeper, you soon discover that they don't have the expertise or the infrastructure to collect anything like this sum.
Raising money takes a lot of organisation and a lot of very hard work.
Finally, the response from unsuccessful applicants to donate their entry fee to our own charitable objectives has been greater this year than in any previous year.
Some £150,000 will be allocated to various recreational schemes in London, most of which will be in boroughs through which the course runs; boroughs which give us so much help.
Christopher Brasher London Marathon Race Director
On the borderline
Would any RUNNING Magazine readers be interested in an exchange scheme with Soviet runners?
Clubs or individuals would only need to pay the cost of travel to the USSR.
Their hosts would be responsible for accommodation (in their homes); for meals, race registration, and local transport etc.
In return, with a letter of invitation guaranteeing board and keep in the UK, Soviet runners could visit this country and participate in races.
The Soviet club, which would like to initiate the exchange, is based in Leningrad.
Races in this area include: 10 to 42K events, as well as 100K and 24-hour events.
The club is of a high standard and was placed first in the 1990 30K Pushkin-Leningrad race.
Anyone interested contact: Gyennadi Shcherbakov, U1.
Mayakovskovo 33/32, Pushkin, Leningrad 189620, USSR (010–7–812) 465–23–11.
Fraser Milne Edinburgh
100 not out
The 100 Club is for people who have achieved or are close to achieving the goal of running 100 marathons.
I realise there may be many runners who I believe have not yet heard of this relatively new organisation.
I would like to ask those interested runners to get in touch with me.
Mark the envelope ‘100 Club’, First Floor, 284 Leagrave Road, Luton, Beds LU3 1RB.
A list of documented evidence as to the number of marathons achieved to date and proposed events must be submitted.
Lorna Cullen Luton
Call for justice?
We are amazed that the athletics world is so eager to be part of the reinstatement of drugs cheat Ben Johnson.
Justice demands that a cheat at that high level be punished.
The two year ban which he received has been no more than a minor inconvenience to him.
As convicted felons are not allowed to profit from their crimes, then Johnson should not be allowed to benefit.
How can we ever hope to make the sport clean when we treat offenders so leniently?
William Metcalfe Newham and Essex Beagles 
WIN a pair of Saucony shoes with the Saucony Star Letter.
Each month we have a pair of Saucony shoes to give away for the best letter on a running issue.
The winner can choose between the Courageous II, the top of the range stability model, and the Azura II (pictured above), a racer/trainer.
VETS
BY SYLVESTER STEIN
A soldier's sobering tale
Here's a Veteran who's really among the medals.
He's won dozens of gold, silver and bronze medals as a distance runner…more recently he has been awarded the MBE in the New Year's honours list…and now he will be due for at least a service medal, at the end of the Gulf War.
An RAF Warrant Officer in the Medical Administration branch, this Veteran was in the war from the start, helping to set up a field hospital.
The runner in question is 52-year-old Hugh Barnfather, a longtime campaigner for Vet causes and a friendly coach and helper to many runners, both élite and ordinary.
Yet, I am not writing about him for the above reasons, it's rather on account of an unlikely weakness of his than for one of his many strengths.
He revealed the background of his little failing and what he was doing about it when talking to me about our tele-coaching scheme.
Anyway here is his story, read it and mark well, you who are tempted:
A runner since the early fifties, Hugh had an 18-month spell of injury in 1988, and when he started training again his weight had gone from 11 stone to 12st 4lb —‘and it felt like 16 stone when I was out running’.
To regain fitness and to find fresh enthusiasm, he joined a new club, Granta Harriers.
He said: ‘My lack of enthusiasm was due to alcohol!
And that's my reason for going public now, to advise, WARN OFF, discourage other runners from falling into the same trap as me.
‘I had developed a penchant for Southern Comfort over the years and when not running I soon began to surpass the 20 units of alcohol per week ‘allowed’ by the experts if you don't wish to become addicted.
‘The standard unit is half a pint or a single spirit measure, but my standard glass, poured with a generous hand, would contain four or five single measures.
I'd finish a bottle in three days and another over the weekend.
Drinking — and not training weekends — meant my weight stuck on 12 stones; trying to race on 20 miles a week, plus the drinking, was not on.’
Hugh duly met his come-uppance, at the BVAF Half-marathon in 1989 at Stoke Ferry, where he decided to run despite his lack of fitness.
‘I was thinking along the lines of a gentle 90-minute run…but gradually the women and the M60s and then even the M65s began to pass me.’
In fact, he ran 101 minutes.
Over the public address he could hear the voice of Bill Taylor saying, as he was struggling in: ‘This could be a new world record.’
Yes it could, but in the Over 65 Women's, for that was to greet Josie Waller, who was finishing just behind him.
Totally miserable, he had a long, serious chat with Mike Turner of Cambridge about his training and demon drink problems and went home with much to think about.
But thinking barely helped, his first action was to empty his bottle of Southern Comfort (and not into the sink!).
However, that evening he vowed never to buy another bottle.
Then he wrote to Mike for more ‘counselling’, whereupon Mike offered to coach him back to fitness — on the telephone.
It worked!
‘It was hard at first getting into the routine of doing a set programme, especially the 6am run, which started off at 30 minutes and is now at 50.
The Monday, Wednesday and Friday double-run, which included 30-minute repetitions, was also hard to get used to.
‘But my sessions gradually increased and my double-session intensified systematically until my weekends have also become involved and I am now on seven days a week.’
He soon improved his 10-mile time from 1:12 to 1:04:10, and now he has run a 1:02:50.
‘So I'm getting nearer.’
The improvements keep coming and have inspired him to draw up a four-point plan for Vets:
1 If you can get a coach or supervisor then go for it!
Listen and do as you are told and you'll never regret it.
2 If you enjoy a drink (and most of us do) watch your total for the week and don't be heavy-handed if you pour your own.
3 If you are coming back from injury or lay-off, go slowly — train progressively and do not expect to be doing the same times as you were before.
4 If you're a Vet remember the good times (sub-56 minutes for me), but don't chase them when they are far out of reach.
Keep ambitions realistic.’
Good luck to Hugh.
Let's hope he is able to get in some training at his field hospital so that he at least stays in touch with his fitness.
After all, there's nothing like good hard repetitions in the sand, which is what some of us sometimes trek over to Bournemouth or Blackpool for.
Better sill, let's wish him a very speedy return, so he can once again do his running over nice, muddy British countryside.
With a spicy noggin to follow — but just the one!
Hugh's proud citation
Hugh Barnfather was appointed Warrant Officer at the RAF Hospital Ely in October 1985.
He assumed the additional mantles of Officer Commanding General Duties Flight and the Families Officer.
He is able to draw on a wealth of experience and he has attacked all his duties with surprisingly youthful enthusiasm, tempered with a great deal of patience.
As Hospital Warrant Officer, he is a fair but firm advocate and enforcer of Service traditions and discipline.
He is responsible for 100 married quarters and is President of all the handover/takeover boards.
Warrant Officer Barnfather is renowned throughout the Service as an athlete.
At 52 years of age, he still competes regularly at a representative level, up to national standard, putting in creditable performances.
He is generally recognized as the historian of athletics in the Royal Air Force.
He is Manager of the Royal Air Force Veteran's Team, Veterans' Representative of the Royal Air Force Athletic Association Executive Committee, Secretary of the Eastern Veterans' Athletic Association and Distribution Manager of the Royal Air Force's own Athletic magazine.
He is still able to assist with the production of the station magazine and is responsible for the administration of the Hospital's Amenity Fund.
He epitomises the Service's expectation of a Warrant Officer.
He is held in the highest esteem by all who know him.
It is recommended that Warrant Officer Barnfather be awarded the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire.
Hugh Barnfather…a man with a warning
Practical Running
YOUR ESSENTIAL TRAINING GUIDE
EDITED BY ALISON TURNBULL
TRAINING TIPS
TRAINING WITH TEMPLE
SEE YOU AT THE STARTING LINE
These are the traditional days of uncertainty even for those who have a place in this year's ADT London Marathon on April 21.
Whatever your situation, there is always accompanying doubt.
At present, there are about 25,000 of you, all suffering from a degree of doubt.
But I expect you doubt that too.
For instance, those who have missed some training, through injury, illness or lethargy, are probably wondering whether they have done enough.
And, those who haven't missed any training at all are also, no doubt, questioning whether they have done enough.
Those who have a cold or flu are doubting whether they have had enough time to get over the illness, even if it did strike last November.
And those who felt a niggle in their knee last month are wondering whether it will get better in April 21.
To be serious, there will inevitably be those who go down with flu in the last week before the race, and those with lower leg pain which is genuinely becoming worse day by day, rather than better.
These are the people who, however, hard it may seem, should really not even contemplate lining up at Blackheath.
It's far better to protect their health for another day, for another London Marathon.
For the majority of runners, though, the rapid approach of the race always reminds them of the training they meant to do, but never quite did, and of the aches and pains of the winter.
What they have to do, though, is to draw a line under their hard training up to April 7, two weeks before the race, and admit that what's done is done.
There really ought to be no further attempts to dramatically improve stamina now.
Instead, for the last fortnight, training should go into reverse thrust.
As a rule of thumb, I suggest that would mean the penultimate week's volume should be around two-thirds of its normal load, while the last week drops down to around one-third.
So occasionally, you can put your feet up instead of training on a wet and windy night and not feel guilty about it.
Riding a bike is a suitable analogy: if you have been pedalling very hard for a while you can stop pedalling and freewheel for a short distance without losing any speed.
And if the road starts to go downhill, you can even pick up speed without any further pedalling.
But when the road levels out, you will eventually have to start pedalling again.
The equivalent in marathon preparation begins when you are training frequently, and despite feeling tired for months on end, are actually creating that initial momentum.
Then when you finally and deliberately ease up, you will find that the quality of your running improves.
You have at last given yourself a full recovery between sessions, allowing glycogen stores to restock, tissue damage to repair, and fatigue to evaporate.
Why then, you might ask, do you not simply train a lot less all year round if it makes you feel that much better when you cut back?
The answer is that to improve fitness, the body needs to respond and adapt to a gradual and continual increase in training load.
And the fitter you become, the more intense the load has to be to produce that response.
But every so often(say, twice a year) you can deliberately ease off the training after a sufficiently sustained ‘input’ and briefly enjoy that feeling of coasting downhill on your bike.
That is exactly what every London Marathon entrant should be doing in mid-April — coasting.
For it is too late to rebuild the momentum.
And that is when the doubt comes in: ‘Have I really done enough to finish 26 miles strongly?’
That is also when you hear stories of doubting runners who have not covered more than 12 miles at a time in training suddenly attempting a 20-miler four days before the actual marathon, just to see if they can get that far!
They usually can; but they don't do very well in the marathon four days later!
So try to banish any such doubts in this crucial period.
The only time to test your stamina now is in the marathon itself, not just beforehand.
And, however little training you managed this winter, there will be plenty of others who did much less, and yet will have no qualms about lining up on race day.
Concentrate instead on getting everything ready for the big day.
Every item of clothing you wear, especially your shoes, should have been tried and tested on long runs to ensure there is no danger of an unsuspected seam causing you to chafe.
Don't wear anything, even socks, which are new and untested.
Eat well, but sensibly, in the days before the race.
Aim to increase the proportion of carbohydrates in your diet rather than the sheer volume.
Don't stuff yourself with doughnuts or chocolate, or anything to which you are unaccustomed, or indeed anything to which you are accustomed but which you might suddenly be tempted to gorge in distorted amounts.
I can't emphasise too strongly that preparing for a marathon involved retaining normal routine as much as possible, not abandoning it.
Only that essential easing down of training should deviate from the norm.
So try to maintain normal meals at normal mealtimes, and normal sleeping patterns as far as possible.
It may not be easy as the race gets closer, especially if you have to travel and stay overnight.
But there is no secret last-minute racing boost to be gained from doing anything different.
The secret, if there is one, is to try to keep your own comfortable routine.
Some things can't be avoided.
Cutting down on training, together with a natural apprehension, may make sleep a little harder to come by in the last few days, so staying up an extra hour may actually help.
But these are adjustments of fine tuning.
Don't neglect advance planning for race day, though.
Make sure you know exactly which of the starts you are supposed to be at, and when.
Check in advance your route to travel there, and if you are driving, make sure you know where to park.
If you are going by train, make sure you know the train times; it's on a Sunday, remember.
Don't leave these details to anyone else, because such apparently minor considerations can very quickly become major omissions if they are not looked after.
Many runners spend far too much time fretting about what pace they hope to run, or whether to wear gloves, while ignoring more basic details which could eventually affect their even getting to the start.
Finally, assuming that you have made it to the right starting line in plenty of time, wearing the right kit and your race number, and are facing the correct way when the cannon sounds, there is just one last piece of essential advice: don't panic!
One of the most common mis-judgements among all ADT London Marathon runners is to start too fast, stampeded into it by everyone else.
That communal release of euphoria across Blackheath results from the combination of the final arrival of ‘the Moment’, plus the increase in energy which easing down training will have brought.
The atmosphere is always electric, so it is an easy temptation to begin uninhibitedly, even for the very experienced.
So just keep telling yourself beforehand that whatever else happens, you are going to be the sole runner among the 25,000 who resolutely sticks to his/her comfortable training pace from Mile One.
Let all the others abandon their norm; you stay clearheaded.
And I will guarantee that, before you even cross Tower Bridge, you will be glad you did.
Cliff Temple
WOMEN
PROBLEM SOLVING ON THE RUN
BRAIN TRAIN
If I've a complicated feature to write, or a problem to solve, I usually duck out and go for a run.
Somehow all that jiggling about realigns my brain cells, clears my head, and back at the word processor the words flow freely.
I'm sure I'm not the only person for whom running improves creativity.
Women's Sport and Fitness (WS & F)magazine recently reported two projects which back this up.
Professor Joan Gondola of Baruch College in New York City set lateral thinking tests for two groups of women, exercisers and non-exercisers.
When asked what to do with a running shoe, the non-exercisers said ‘run or walk’ while the exercisers made suggestions as diverse as hammering in nails, killing cockroaches, or putting pot plants in them.
(Any more bright ideas out there?)
When the ‘lazy’ group started running, they soon reported a dramatic increase in creativity and productivity.
Gondola concludes: ‘Exercise makes us more aware, increases perception and stimulates creativity.
The relaxation frees you.
Answers come, decisions are made.’
On the West Coast, meanwhile,WS & F tracked down a gym where a group of women do a French conversation lesson while riding (quietly operating) stationary bicycles.
During the class the women pedal the equivalent of 12–22 miles.
Students say that pedalling helps their concentration — they have to use their brains because they don't have hands free to open dictionaries — and that the class helps to reduce the boredom of pedalling for an hour.
We've known for a long time that when you can talk on the run, the miles just fly by.
Members of the Reebok/RUNNING Magazine Sisters Network tackle just about everything: local gossip, the Gulf crisis, training tips, female problems, as well as personal bests and worsts.
Now the Network has over 100 local organisers, many of them recruited from the ranks of sports development officers all over the country, who are only too keen to incorporate running for women as part of their programme.
We hope this recent development will mean that many more women will be able to get together and run during the day or in the evening.
If you're not part of the Network yet — either as a beginner or as a supportive ‘Big Sister’— and would like to receive our free booklet Up and Running , please write to Reebok/RUNNING Magazine Sisters Network, PO Box 3, Diss, Norfolk IP22 3HH.
Alison Turnbull
MARKETPLACE
NEW LIFE FOR OLD SHOES
ADVANCED PULSE MONITORING
NOT JUST COBBLERS!
Shoes are to the runner as a dog is to man.
Not quite a personal friend, but close.
No other equipment in the running wardrobe warrants the same kind of loyalty or devotion.
Once you feel comfortable in a particular pair it can be a wrenching, if not expensive, experience to give them up when the inevitable signs of wear begin to show.
Even replacing them with the identical brand and model can still leave you with a sense of loss or disappointment.
An understandable emotion but an unnecessary one.
There is another option — the repair shop.
In most running shoes, as many of you already know, wear patterns are uneven.
While the uppers often irritatingly remain almost as new as they day they came out of the box, the outsole looks as though it's been left behind on the concrete, which of course it has.
As any cobbler worth his salt will tell you, this is not the time to toss those tired but precious shoes into the nearest bin, it's resole time.
A short painless time in the shop, a little expense and those old favourites will be back on the road again.
In principle any shoe can be resoled, but track shoes are done less frequently than road, fell or cross-country shoes.
The process is simple, the old sole is either scared off with a scaring knife or put under a heat lamp to remove the glue and peeled off.
A new sole is then glued into place.
As running shoe repair specialist Barry Hazard eagerly points out, resoling will not discernably alter the shoe.
‘We can take the old sole off and replace it without changing the shape of the shoe or damaging the structure.
The shoe feels exactly the same afterwards, which is the main reason runners want them resoled rather than buying a brand new pair.’
Finding a sole identical to the original isn't always possible, but generally the resoling replaces like with like.
Most shops carry a selection of outsoles, offering a variety of weights, widths, treads and materials.
The new sole may have a slightly different tread pattern or width but the shoe remains essentially the same.
A lightweight road shoe remains a lightweight road shoe, a cross-country shoe stays a cross-country shoe.
In theory, you can convert a road shoe to cross-country shoe or vice versa, but as midsoles and uppers are not designed for such changes, it would not always to wise to try to.
Turn around times for replacing a standard outsole can be as low as 30 minutes, but even when more complicated adjustments and corrections have to be made, shoes are usually back on your feet the same day.
So, there is no reason to blame a resole for lost training time.
If economics are on your mind, there should be no choice.
Resoling is markedly cheaper than a new pair of shoes.
A new sole will cost from £7–£15, depending on the material used, or about £4 for only a heel replacement.
If your needs go beyond the basic resole, repair shops can also help.
Restitching uppers, patching holes or individually tailored adjustments, such as lifting up worn shoes or altering the sole level, present little difficulty.
If you explain your personal requirements they claim they can meet them.
Even when you have to post the shoes, if you leave your phone number, they'll get in touch if there are any queries or proposals.
‘We can do anything with any footwear.
We do high quality repairs on high quality shoes.
We are certainly not High Street heel bars,’ insisted Peter Davis of Shoecare.
A committed runner himself and one of the original running shoe repair specialists, Davis claims that compared with the boom years of the mid-eighties fewer people now look to the skills of the cobbler.
Perhaps it's due to the high-tech nature of today's shoes, particularly the midsole.
Repairing the midsole, often the nerve centre of the modern shoe, can be more difficult.
Items like air bags, Hytrel tubes or ERS foam are not sold without the shoe.
Shoe manufacturers, who are in the business of selling shoes rather than repairing old ones, understandably guard such items jealously.
In most cases the cobbler works around these elements and if possible replaces a damaged area with a comparable material.
Midsole damage doesn't necessarily signal the end of your trusty old friend.
‘To say you have to buy new shoes just because the high-tech elements are damaged is a lot of bull,’ claims Vic Robinson of Cobblers Awl.
The signs of wear should be obvious for any regular runner.
With an outsole, when the midsole starts to show through, it's time to change it.
In the rarer case of a midsole failures the shoe often feels like a flat tyre, losing its bounce and becoming harder.
There is not limit to how often a shoe can be resoled or repaired, provided it retains support from the upper and midsole.
Repairs, which with any good shop are guaranteed, last as long as the original.
Wear on the shoe depends on the weight of the user and frequency of use.
If you weigh 16 stone and run every day, it will wear quicker than if you only put your eight stone frame into the shoe once a week.
So, if waving goodbye to those treasured old shoes is too much, or if you're biding your time to see what's hot in the annual shoe guide which will appear in next month's RUNNING magazine, just think cobblers.
Details of individual running shoe repair shops can be found in the RUNNING classified section.
Steven Seaton
THE STEAM WIRELESS
How do you know you're getting a good workout?
It's generally accepted that the ideal fitness programme is one that will push your pulse to between 70 and 80 per cent of your maximum heart rate and keep it there for at least 20 minutes, at least three times a week.
But unless you know how to do this, and what it feels like, this is very difficult to gauge.
Slower, and you don't reap the benefits of the run; faster, and you push yourself too hard.
You can't drive a car without a speedometer — how can you push your body up to the right speed without the same kind of feedback?
Carrying a full size electrocardiogram (ECG) machine around with you would certainly push your heart rate up, but would probably give you a hernia at the same time.
A portable pulse monitor is the answer.
RUNNING last looked at pulse meters in July 1986, when we found that the most reliable meter — and also the most expensive — was the Polar Electro Sport Tester.
At £166.75 this was far too expensive for most runners to even contemplate.
Apart from accuracy and price, what set the Polar apart was that, unlike the other portable meters, the runner did not have to be wired up with unsightly cables leading from the electrodes attached to the chest.
A tiny radio transmitter on the chestband sends messages to the wrist-watch receiver without wires.
Five years later, Polar technology is available to the runner for £99.99 — a more attractive proposition at a time when many more runners are aiming for quality running.
The Polar Pacer's large face display is worn on the wrist like a watch.
The chest strap (comfortable to wear when running) contains a transmitter which sends signals to the wrist strap.
A flashing heart tells you that it's working and the numerals show your pulse rate in beats per minute (bpm).
A booklet tells you how to work out your optimum exercising level.
The rule of thumb for working out Maximum Heart Rate (MHR) is 225 minus your age in years.
If you are 36, for example, your MHR would be 189bpm.
So you should try to exercise between 70 per cent(132bpm) and 85 per cent (160bpm) of MHR.
The Pacer allows you to set a bleeper in five beat increments, ie, if you are 36 between 130 and 160.
After a 10-minute warm-up and stretch, you programme the bleepers to go off when you go too slow or too fast, and adjust your speed accordingly.
We let the Pacer loose on two testers — one fast, one slow.
The faster runner ran consistently above 85 per cent of his MHR, especially on hills, without discomfort.
He didn't really believe that it would help for steady running.
‘I could see some uses for it in interval or hill training, but I'd appreciate more suggestions for speed work in the booklet.’
The slower tester ran just below 70 per cent of MHR and found it uncomfortable to push any harder for 10 minutes, let alone 20.
‘But I can see the potential of it.
I'd set it five or 10 beats lower till I could complete a 20–30 minute run without bleeping — then set it higher.’
As well as establishing your optimum running speed, the Pacer is a useful adjunct to stress management, pregnancy, and rehabilitation after injury.
I set the lower limit to 50bpm and willed my resting pulse to go down till the bleeper sounded, by which time I was breathing deeply and totally relaxed.
Out of interest I drank a cup of coffee and watched the pulse zoom up.
Pregnant women are generally advised to reduce their MHR by about 20–25 per cent— the American College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists cautiously recommends that pregnant women don't exercise above 140bpm — so the Pacer could help you run sensibly during pregnancy.
The Polar Pacer is available, price £99.99 + £3.50 p+p from Bodycare Products Ltd, 57 Fieldgate Lane, Kenilworth Lane, Warwickshire, CV8 1BT or 0926 50935 for a list of stockists, which includes all branches of the Sweat Shop.
Bodycare will be on stand 92E at the London Marathon Exhibition.
Alison Turnbull 
The Statpak featured in last month's Marketplace is distributed by BPL Foothealth, Little Bourton House, Southam Road, Banbury, Oxon OX16 7SR 0295 759606.
SAFETY TIPS
PRACTICAL DOGHANDLING
RON HILL'S Golden Rules OF SAFE RUNNING
DOGGY DOOS (AND DON'TS)
For some the only problem encountered with dogs is getting the brown stuff out of their outsoles, but dogs are clearly more of a pest than this, if our postbag is anything to go by.
Not content with ravaging postmen, our canine friends, it seems, now rate runners' legs high on the menu.
Unfortunately, few of us are blessed with the bushman knowhow of Crocodile Dundee to soothe the savage beasts.
Ron Hill's Golden Rules of Safe Running say: ‘Be wary of dogs — slow up when approaching and shout to owner ‘Is he all right?’’
You came up with many more ideas — from the cowardly to the violent.
Some showed a deep understanding of doggy psychology.
G Lawrence of Great Barr, Birmingham is a police dog handler with 10 years' experience of owning German Shepherd dogs.
He has ‘survived the attentions of an outraged German Shepherd, a very dangerous Rottweiler, a determined Dobermann as well as several very dodgy mongrels’.
He doesn't agree that you should say, ‘Is he all right?’ to the owner, as ‘the dog might think you have issued a challenge’.
He says:
1 Run on the pavements with an eye to what lurks in gateway and garden.
Keep to the outer side of pavements and be prepared to walk or divert past any dodgy dog.
2 Don't run directly at any dog or owner — run at an angle and watch the dog.
3 If you see a dog flatten its ears and tail and stalk towards you, stop running, walk away, and find a wall, tree or car to hide behind.
‘If you do get attacked, remember that shouting and waving your limbs about will egg the dog on.
Stay as still as possible.
Don't pull away as chunks of you may detach themselves.
You should try to find out where the dog lives and report the incident to the police.
Even if they don't prosecute you may still have a civil claim against the owner for your injuries.
Also, seek medical help, especially outside the UK, as rabies is still a possibility.’
Mr J B Holt of Guiseley, is all for defensive tactics: ‘Stop immediately.
Stand still.
Don't speak to it.
Don't look at it.
Don't touch it.
Don't bend down.
Keep sideways to it.
Offer the back of your hand, with fingers turned inwards, if you feel it wants to make contact.
Walk slowly away when it loses interest.’
Peter Maisey of Cosham, Hants, has a more friendly approach, since he believes ‘a dog bounding towards you is probably more intent on play than dinner.
Stop running — it is probably excited by your running and if it is going to bite, running away won't help much.
Show no fear.
Be friendly towards the dog.
Pat it and play if necessary.
If you are friendly, it is likely to try to bite other runners.
The only time I have ever been bitten was when running with a partner who was petrified of dogs.
He hid when the dog approached, and it promptly sank its teeth into my leg.’
Stopping, slowing and playing are the diplomatic solutions, but multiplied by the numbers of dogs in most local parks, they make for a badly interrupted run.
John Crix of Sale has been more aggressive with the dogs that frequent his local canal towpath.
‘Fortunately, I'm 6ft 3in, weigh 190 pounds and have an excellent command of Anglo-Saxon English.
I heaped much obscene verbal abuse on various owners to the extent that several begin to leash in their ugly mutts when they saw me coming.
I think others decided to avoid the canal altogether.’
David Kerr of Stevenston, Ayrshire, finds that ‘the best defence is attack.
The wilder and louder you are the better it is.’
Psychological warfare isn't enough for some people.
David Rosser of Ammanford, Dyfed, carries a small water pistol that he squirts into dogs' eyes, and also confesses to bombarding them with small pebbles.
We can't really recommend such desperate measures, since we don't want you to get on the wrong side of that civil action.
The Dazer was reviewed in RUNNING last May, and Andrew Green of Farnham has been happy with his.
‘I only use it as a last resort, when the dog is impeding my progress.
The dog usually just stops dead or veers off on a different course.
As the sound is inaudible to the human ear the owners are unaware of my actions, avoiding possible conflict.’
The Dazer is available priced £29.95 including p&p and VAT, from Dazer Freepost, London SW11 6BR.
Or there's chemical warfare — but who wants to carry an aerosol can of doggy deterrent around with them, even if it is CFC free?
‘Just think ‘balls’,’ says Mick Cummings of Chester-le-Street.
Aniseed balls that is.
Keep three or four aniseed balls in a small pocket and drop a couple near the offending dog.’
Thank you for all your words of wisdom.
This month's award of Ron Hill Run-a-Brite vest, hat and gloves worth £30 goes to David Kerr for his simple and non-violent tip.
‘Pretend to pick up a stone and throw it at the dog.
It is not the stone which stops the dog.
But the picking up strikes a chord and going through the motions always works.
This has never failed me.’
Please , can we close the doggy postbag for now!
Remember that RUNNING is looking for all kinds of safety tips.
For example, with fell running and mountain marathons gaining in popularity, how about some ideas for safe running off the beaten track?
FITNESS CLINIC
DIET
CALVES
VASECTOMY
Q&A
LEAN TIMES
Q
Last year I was in pretty poor shape through years of dedicated indulgence — 38 years old, 5ft 10 ins and 16 stone.
But in the hulk of neglect was a healthier me battling to get out.
So I started running.
Three months later I am fitter and have lost two stone.
But my weight loss has stopped and I am despairing of reaching my target weight of 12st 7lb.
I eat around 2000 to 2500 calories per day, have a sedentary job and my weekly exercise schedule is as follows two x 30 minutes, one x 6 miles, two x 30 minutes weight training.
Can you suggest ways to help my weight reduction?
A
If you are to follow a weight loss programme, while continuing to exercise at your present level, there are two important points to remember.
While decreasing your energy intake, you must continue to eat enough essential nutrients, such as vitamins, minerals and trace elements.
You must also be careful not to cut back too much on food or you will not have enough energy to cover your training needs.
It is especially important not to reduce the carbohydrate content of the diet.
The ideal type of diet to be following is, therefore, one that is high in carbohydrate and low in fat.
Also, if you are drinking alcohol you should stop or at least cut down on low alcohol drinks or extending alcoholic drinks with low calorie mixers can be helpful.
Calorie intake raises two points.
The first is the obvious one of accuracy when estimating.
If your actual intake is in excess of your estimate, that would account for the plateau effect that you are experiencing.
The second thing to consider is that if you are eating the amount you say, then this may be too much.
An energy deficit of 1000kcals per day below requirement will achieve weight loss of one kg/week.
For the majority of men leading a fairly inactive life an intake of 1500kcals will probably produce the desired weekly weight loss.
However, as you are leading a more active life than the average man, you need to take this into account when calculating your energy requirement.
A rough way of doing this: Energy needed to run (kcals) = Distance (k) x Your weight (kg).
Using a calorie counter you can then choose starchy foods to meet this extra energy need.
Initially this will not amount to very much, but as you increase your distance you will need to step up your intake more.
Jane Griffin
CALF SCARS
Q
Four years ago I tore a calf muscle while playing squash.
There was a loud noise and my leg would not support me for several weeks.
I eventually exercised the leg, particularly carrying out a stretching routine and also used ice packs.
If running strenuously, I wear a neoprene support, without which I feel as though something is hitting the muscle, with accompanying stiffness.
I stretch for at least 10 minutes every morning and try to warm up and down for running and cycling.
My current mileage is only 10–20 miles per week, but I would like to move up to longer distances and triathlons.
A
From what you describe there is a strong possibility of a great deal of scar tissue in the muscle bulk, which will probably have healed tight.
It is, therefore, vital that you stretch before and after every run and also on the days when you don't run.
This will keep the muscle fibres mobile and elastic.
It is important to hold the stretches for two minutes in a position of mild tension, not pain.
It is very likely that since the calf injury the strength of the muscles will have deteriorated considerably.
Wasting of the large muscles starts after 24 hours, so having to lay off running for several weeks could have a considerably detrimental effect on muscle power.
Very often this aspect of rehabilitation is overlooked because once a person starts to walk without discomfort or restrictions the strengthening programme is stopped.
Any exercises which use the calf muscles, such as heel raises, hopping, standing on one leg would be beneficial.
If you can improve the power of your calf muscles you will find that you can build up your mileage without difficulty.
Mandy Johnson
‘SNIP’ NOT TO BLAME
Q
Two years ago, I had a vasectomy, and since then I have had pain in my groin and scrotum when exercising.
The specialist diagnosed an ‘inflamed pubic bone’ and recommended that I wear an athletic support for sport.
However, this has not solved the problem.
Recent X-rays and ultra-sound scans of my kidneys, bladder and testicles have shown no abnormality.
Both my GP and the specialist are convinced that my complaint is entirely separate from the vasectomy.
I have had to stop running (along with tennis and badminton) because of this pain, and this has eased the problem.
After a recent game of tennis I could barely walk.
Is this the problem I have heard described as ‘jogger's testicle’?
A
It is clear that both your specialist and GP feel that your vasectomy operation is a red herring with regard to the pain which you are suffering.
However, the two were concurrent, and it is true that vasectomy operations can leave post-operative complications of which pain is one.
But it is not common for the pain from the operation to be stimulated solely by athletic activity, and a musculo-skeletal cause in the groin is far more likely.
I would suggest that you refer to the December 1990 edition of RUNNING Magazine in which the causes of groin pain are discussed.
If bladder and testicles are found to be clear of disease, the most likely culprits are an adductor strain or osteitis pubis.
It is simple to test for adductor strains, just lie on your back with feet outstretched and ask a friend to attempt to separate your ankles while you hold them together.
Pain equals an adductor strain.
While there may be pain on pressure over the centre of the bony pelvis if osteitis is present, you may also get pain if you attempt sit-ups, kick a ball or even turn over in bed.
So if you believe that you are suffering from one of these conditions, you must exercise and stretch as shown in the article.
These diagnoses seem somewhat more likely than ‘jogger's testicle’.
Sometimes the testicles suffer from under or over-suspension, either of which can cause discomfort, but this is unlikely to have been caused by a vasectomy operation.
Patrick Milroy
DON'T FORGET PEAK PERFORMANCE
In this month's Peak Performance you'll find:
•Latest research on whether running and exercise can reduce the risk of cancer
•What's the best way to cope with viruses
•All you need to know about herbal medicines
All this and much more in the March issue of Peak Performance, the UK's only running research newsletter, available only on subscription.
A 12-issue year's subscription costs just £28.
To order, send your cheque, payable to Stonehart Leisure Magazines Ltd, to Peak Performance, SLM, FREEPOST, Romford RM6 5NP.
CROSS-TRAINING
STEP AEROBICS
STEPPING OUT IN REAL STYLE
If you are recovering from an over-use injury, an immediate return to tarmac-pounding is not a very good idea.
It's back to the stationary bike or jogging in the pool.
For those of you shying away from hopping around in the water and tired of pedalling away on a bike, a new stepping machine from Powersport International could be just the thing you're after.
The Air Step, which retails for £395.00, demonstrated what it could do, when tested over eight weeks by a group of army recruits.
The recruits showed a 15–25 per cent increase in aerobic fitness and a reduction in body fat greater than normally achieved by cycling and aerobic dance.
If that doesn't attract you or you're not interested in the solitary life of home exercise, you could instead try Step Reebok, the latest buzzword in exercise-to-music, which we used to call aerobics, didn't we?
This low-impact, high energy workout promises the aerobic equivalent of a seven mph run with the impact to the legs equivalent only of a three mph walk.
Even if you are not a great fan of exercise-to-music and think stepping up and down on a bench isn't exactly going to be a barrel laughs, you may still find this fun.
There are more ways to step up and down from the specially-made benches than you could possibly imagine, and, for the puny-armed, the well thought out choreography incorporates upper body work, too.
Getting legs and arms working in perfect harmony takes a while — but learning is part of the fun.
And, don't forget, it reaches muscles even Heineken would be hard pushed to find.
Anyone interested in finding out more about the Air Step should contact Powersport International Ltd, Bridgend Industrial Estate, Queens Road, Bridgend, Mid Glamorgan CF31 3UE.
YOUNG RUNNER
SMALL SCHOOL SUCCESS
SCHOOL RUNNING CAN BE FUN
When I was at school in the seventies, one afternoon every week throughout the winter term, I put on a pair of ill-fitting plimsolls and plodded miserably, and for no apparent reason, around the wet pavements of a Sussex market town.
This, I was told by the teacher who tracked up in his car, was cross-country running.
Almost 20 years later, six days of the week, from September through April, I run with at least 15, sometimes with 50 — which is the whole school — enthusiastic eight to 13-year-olds.
We go out in all weathers.
We run down woodland paths, over rough pasture where the beef cattle join in and gallop alongside us, up over the convex slopes of the Sledging Hill, along a winding track through an overgrown shrubbery, which they call The Jungle, and out beside a string of fishing ponds.
This, I think as the under-11 team nips past to finish, is more like what cross-country running was really meant to be.
Despite, though also because of, the small size of our school, it enjoys a great deal of running success.
We regularly win the local schools' evening league.
We maintain an enviable record against schools five and 10 times our size.
We even occasionally make the headlines — one year the senior team beat Millfield Junior, for example.
As well as this inter-school success, each year nine or 10 pupils run in the District Trials.
A few of the older ones qualify for the County Trials.
A couple may reach the County team of 16 runners and maybe one will reach the dizzy heights of the England Schools Final.
When this happens the rest of the school, who along the way have trained with the successful runner, may have beaten him on occasion, have been course markers, marshals, timekeepers, supporters and team-mates, really feel that sport isn't just another soap opera glimpsed on television or paraded through the back pages of the newspapers — it's something that they are actively experiencing at first hand for themselves.
For the eight to 13 age group, it is this feeling of complete involvement, that is the most vital part of their early development as runners.
A typical week's training for a 13-year-old likely to win a place in the County team totals less than nine miles.
It might include a 3000m timed run, 15 minutes Indian File, a school relay competition mixing up all the age groups, a leisurely scenic run, and a short pyramid session around the soccer pitch.
This is not a particularly heavy physical workload.
If it is run on grass and preceded by stretching and loosening exercises, it will not put an intolerable burden on a healthy youngster.
Piling up the miles should never interest the coach at this level.
It is the quality of the training to which he should devote himself.
Children of this age are very eager to learn.
They want to know what and why and where and how.
If the runner can be told exactly why he or she is doing a particular type of training, what bodily changes it will bring about and how he or she should run to achieve them, then those 15 minutes a day of quality training are more than enough.
Too many coaches simply scale down adult training programmes for this age group.
What is far more important is to work on creating an atmosphere, a climate, where running is the norm.
In a small school it is possible for everyone to start their different distances together.
If, when on a first ever run, the new runner, aged eight, finds himself or herself lined up next to another runner wearing a County vest the beginner begins to realise anything is possible.
To create this small world where running is routine the coach must run too.
It doesn't matter where he/she finishes, but whether the coach is only asking the eight-year-olds to spring 50m or trying to get all the senior team to really race hard over the first 1500m, he or she must be seen to experience it too or the children simply won't believe the coach can know what he/she is talking about.
Before long with everyone else participating, even the teachers, running becomes an intellectual pursuit for the child.
A way of finding out things not only about going faster and further, but also about the new things the child suddenly finds himself able to do.
In many cases success for one of our runners has meant a breakthrough in a problem with which he has been struggling in the classroom.
To find yourself able to leave everyone, and everything, behind just by drawing on the strength of your mind and indeed your body is a very liberating experience.
As the young runner's confidence grows in this way the coach's job is to fuel the novice's dreams by suggesting practical ways in which they can be achieved.
As long as a sensible training programme is followed, the child's body will develop at a pace that will match his/her ambitions.
When I talk with children I used to coach, who are now working their way up the ladder of older and older age groups, I often think of my first experiences of cross-country running.
Maybe if I'd been encouraged then to find pleasure and personal fulfilment instead of pain and resentment I could manage to beat the under-11s on those final few metres.
James Driver
RUNNERS' RIGHTS
TRESPASSING
WHITHER SHALL I WANDER?
Dave Hewis, from Bideford, North Devon tells how he was nearly lynched by a lady landowner.
‘In my lunch hour I run a three and a half mile circuit of the village where I work.
The run used to be three miles but I added a quarter mile spur in order to use the time to best advantage.
The extra spur is a rutted track just wide enough for a car.
‘I turn round at a leaning gate post where the gate is permanently open, if somewhat askew.
On the other side of the gate there are several abandoned cars and an old caravan.
I have always assumed that the other side of the gate is private property and that somewhere deep within the woodland is a cottage.
In three years of running, I had met neither pedestrian nor vehicle along this track.
‘However, on the day in question I turned round to see a car coming slowly towards me, and I stepped aside.
One of two women in the car asked if they could help me.
On my negative but friendly response they asked if I knew I was trespassing.
Again answering no, I apologised but asked them to tell me what objection they had.
‘They ignored this question, and aggressively asked me for my name, address and my employer's name.
Feeling completely innocent, but taken aback, I supplied the information and carried on with my run — it was a fast second half.
‘During the afternoon an irate woman rang my workplace to ask who I was and what I was like.
Our manager replied that it was not company policy to divulge personal details of employees (mad joggers or not!) and that if she wanted to take it further, she should write in.
We've all had a good laugh about it, but it does raise the question of trespass and the rights and wrongs of access to runners,’ writes Dave.
Practical Running tracked down a very useful little booklet which we hope will help Dave, and others, to sort out such disputes in future.
Out in the Country — Where you can go and what you can do — is published by the Countryside Commission.
Dave needs to establish whether the track is a Public Right of Way.
He can do this by consulting the ‘Definitive Map’; 1:25,000 scale maps which show all the rights of way.
Most country and metropolitan district councils in England and Wales hold definitive maps, and you can ask to see them at council offices or sometimes at the public library.
If the track is a public right of way, Dave should report the incident to the local highway authority, although some districts and parishes have powers to maintain footpaths and bridleways and to take action if anyone obstructs them.
‘In reporting a problem to the highway authority,’ the booklet advises, ‘you should give them as much information as possible about what is wrong and where — give a grid reference if you can.’
If Dave has no joy with the local highway authority, he could try enlisting the help of a local councillor, or a local branch of the Ramblers' Association might take up the case.
Dave was right to leave quickly.
‘If you enter land which does not belong to you, against the wishes of the owner of that land, without a legal right to do so, you are a trespasser, even though you may be unaware of the fact that you are trespassing.’
Trespassing is a civil, not a criminal offence — you cannot be prosecuted even if the notices say so.
But you can be asked to leave, or sued if you cause damage.
‘If you do trespass and a landowner or occupier asks you to leave, you should do so by the shortest practicable route.’
However, if the landowner threatens you with a firearm, it is comforting to know that he or she would be committing a criminal offence.
A copy of the booklet has been sent to Dave Hewis, and he's gone away to pore over the Definitive Map for his area — we'll let you know how he gets on.
If you want a free copy of the booklet, please send sae (at least 9″ by 4″) to ‘Out in the Country’, 19/23 Albert Road, Manchester M19 2EQ.
REVIEW
DRUGS AND SPORT
SPEED TRAP
‘At 15, he looked more like 12; a skinny awkward kid of 93 pounds in tattered black high-top sneakers, he looked slow and he ran even slower than he looked.’
So writes his former coach, Charlie Francis.
Some 10 years later, Ben Johnson was world 100 metres champion and record-holder, rich and famous.
At one level, this is the classic rags-to-riches story of the poor kid from the ghetto, how he overcomes poverty and prejudice and how, helped by his faithful coach, he fights his way to the top, meets the Champ (Carl Lewis), loses, comes back, and wins in the final reel.
At a deeper level, it is a very good book about the nature of track and field today.
I learned more about coaching sprinters by reading this book than I have in the past 30 years in the sport.
The first thing that comes through is that Charlie Francis is a very good coach.
We follow his transition from international sprinter to club coach and then to the mastermind of an élite group of world-class sprinters — Angella Taylor-Issajenko, Tony Sharpe, Mark McCoy and Desai Williams were all medal-winners with Ben Johnson in the Commonwealth Games of 1982.
Francis acknowledges the tremendous influence of Gerard Mach, the successful Polish sprint coach who became national coach in Canada in 1973.
Through applying Mach's training ideas, by putting in unpaid coaching for two or three hours a day, five days a week, and by keeping his doors open, he built up a group of 30 young sprinters in Toronto within a year.
Nine months later, Francis' team dominated Canadian sprinting, and the following year Angella Taylor became the first of the group to reach world class.
Within 18 months of taking up the sport, she was timed at 11.20 and 22.74 for the sprints, won medals in the Pan American Games and came fifth in the World Cup.
A great advertisement, you might think, for the use of steroids — except that at that time she didn't use them.
Ben Johnson improved in four years from being a skinny undersized 15-year-old to running the 100 metres in 10.25 and becoming one of the world's leading juniors — on nothing more exceptional than plenty of food, regular training and competitive instinct.
It is only at this point that we come to the central theme, the reason why all those who wish to understand the problem of drugs in sport should read this book.
Francis' account of his methods in administering anabolic steroids to his athletes is factual and detailed and there is no reason to doubt that he is telling the truth.
The original dosage he administered was five milligrams a day for three weeks, followed by three weeks off the drug.
By contrast, he says, the standard dose for East German female athletes was 20 to 40 milligrams a day, increasing slightly each year.
In the world of American football and powerlifting, where sheer bulk was an asset, he quotes one lifter as taking a steroid ‘cocktail’ at a dosage of 450 milligrams a day.
What is documented in the book is what everyone in sport has known for years — that the use of steroids has been widespread in many sports since the sixties.
If America and Eastern Europe have been the world leaders, the only countries in the world that can claim to be clean are those where the athletes are too poor to afford the drugs.
It is obvious that the punishing cost of libel actions prevents Francis from making direct accusations against current athletes.
The evidence for regular steroid use among now-retired American and East German athletes is well documented.
Francis tells of a Canadian discus thrower, Rob Gray, who had worked for many years to reach the 58 metre mark.
The Olympic qualifying standard had been set at 64.50m so he went seriously into steroid use for the first time and threw a Commonwealth record of 67.32 within a few months.
Without naming anyone, he points a finger at a number of recent American gold medallists and shows surprise that the British drug testing programme produced no positive results for two years except in the case of pole vaulter Jeff Gutteridge.
We know, though we cannot prove it, that there are some extremely prominent British athletes who have used steroids for years.
Our coaches and officials know this too, yet they say nothing.
Charlie Francis is guilty of a sporting crime — of that I am sure — but what about the guilt of those in high officialdom who have allowed the situation to go on growing for 20 years without trying to stop it?
Charlie Francis' reason for putting his athletes onto steroids was quite simple — everyone else was doing it.
When Angella Taylor improved to 22.7 for 200 metres, Marita Koch improved the record from 22.06 to 21.71.
To Francis, the use of steroids was just one extra training aid, to be fitted into the pattern along with weights, drills, warm-weather training, competitive cycles and overseas tours.
As time passed he compared notes, revised his dosages and kept an eye on the testing programme, but the thought that it was wrong does not appear to have troubled him for long.
The message was: ‘If you don't take it, you won't make it.’
A lengthy chapter is devoted to the history of drugs in sport.
This is interesting, but it is not a justification.
There is, after all, a long history of wife-beating and of genocide, but that does not make them excusable.
The reasons that Charlie Francis, Ben Johnson, Angella Taylor and the rest took drugs are that the rewards were great and that they thought they could get away with it.
The rewards are bigger than ever, which means that everyone — governing bodies, teachers, coaches, press and TV — has to take a positive anti-drug stance.
For competition to be fair and meaningful, either everybody has to be drug-free, or everybody has to be on drugs — which do we want?
The irony of this fascinating book is that it shows that Charlie Francis was doing very well as a coach without giving drugs to his athletes.
It is sad that a man with so many good qualities should have led so many down the wrong path, damaging the sport he obviously loves, but I feel that the Charlie Francis story still has a long way to go.
Bruce Tulloh
Speed Trap by Charlie Francis, with Jeff Coplon, published by Grafton Books 1991, pp 306, £14.99 (hardback)
I FIND THE LAST 50 METRES THE HARDEST
Due to a good response, Cliff Temple will be staging extra coaching advice clinics for personal consultation at the St Lawrence Sports & Physiotherapy Clinic, Canterbury, Kent, during April, besides his regular Wednesday evening clinic.
For details ring Fiona Errington on 0227 761186.
The gadget to keep pace with your workouts
A step forward…
The Air-Step
The unbeatable lightness of racing!
A pair of racing shoes could lift your performance or leave you with an appealing but unnecessary extravagance.
Steven Seaton looks at the current market.
The winning edge for competitive swimmers sometimes means a shaven head.
In running the same course of action is likely to do little more than raise a few curious glances from fellow competitors.
Runners are more conservative, instead of their heads they look to their shoes to give them the competitive edge.
The shoes they invariable look to are racing flats.
For some runners, particularly the top ones, they are essential.
At that standard the energy saved by running in a shoe at times weighing under 150g, can significantly alter the outcome of the race.
But for those of you battling against yourselves and the clock, rather than fellow competitors, are they equally necessary?
Certainly these sleek, feather-light, multi-coloured wonders have an appeal, but do we really need them?
The answer, for most of us, is probably no.
Racing shoes are designed specifically for élite runners, for whom marginal differences weigh heavily.
As a rough guideline, if you are not running sub 2:40 for the marathon or below 1:30 for the half, you don't need them.
Even if you do run inside these times make sure you choose racers appropriate for the distance and your weight.
The lightweight 155g Nike Duellist, for example, is designed for distances up to the half-marathon, whereas the 280g Brooks GFS105 is intended for those heavier runners.
For distances up to 10K, racing shoes are practical for a wider market.
Over these shorter distances where time on the feet is reduced, racing shoes can benefit most runners whether actually or psychologically.
If you have never worn them before, racing flats will feel hard and narrow, particularly if you train in a usual high midsoled road shoe.
They are made on a narrower last and in the interest of weight reduction, sacrifice all the midsole cushioning and stability features of a conventional trainer.
As the outside and upper are also designed with weight rather than durability in mind, unless you are exceptionally light on your feet you would have to be either foolish or wealthy to train in a pair of racers.
This year's crop of shoes is a mix of established names and new blood.
It is a persistent complaint of runners that in the drive to innovate with new models, manufacturers frequently discontinue their favourite shoes.
Not this year.
Brooks, for example, keeps the popular King Konquest and Blast, while modifying the GFS100 racer/trainer to the GFS105 and introducing the Kona for competitive triathletes.
Perennial favourites from Nike, the Mariah and Duellist are supplemented by the Pegasus Racer, which will probably capitalise on the name and success of the Pegasus trainer.
Saucony and Asics have similarly updated popular existing lines.
On the new side of the market, specialist retailers are expecting Reebok's Hexalite Racer to challenge the leading sellers and Turntec's Flexlite II, which incorporates the newly-developed ART energy return system to arouse interest.
The information below give you an idea of what is currently available on the market.
If you want more or have any doubts about your suitability for racers, then seek advice from a specialist retailer.
You can find your nearest one in the running shop directory at the back of the magazine.
Not pictured but also currently available on the market are:
MIZUNO RCT RACER TP
250g Compression moulded EVA midsole on a nylon mesh synthetic upper with suede overlays.
Blown rubber forefoot outsole with solid carbon rubber heel.
Designed for the 10K or half-marathon.
From £43.50.
MIZUNO SKY ROAD MARATHON TP
165g Ultra lightweight specialist marathon shoe, nylon and satin mesh upper with EVA compression moulded midsole.
Mizuno H2 heel wedge with transpower in the forefoot.
From £52.50.
1 BROOKS KONA 180g EVA midsole with Hydroflow and Kinetic Wedge.
Snap and toggle lacing system designed for triathletes £49.99
2 BROOKS KING KONQUEST FLAT 155g For the lighter runner, moulded EVA midsole with carbon heel block.
£44.99 Suitable for distances up to half-marathon
3 BROOKS BLAST 200g Available in men's and women's models built on a curved last.
EVA midsole with Kinetic Wedge and Hydroflow.
Carbon heel.
£49.99 For all distances including marathon
4 BROOKS GFS 105 280g A racer for the heavier runner or trainer for lighter ones.
Compression-moulded EVA midsole with Hydroflow.
Solid carbon heel.
£59.99
5 NEW BALANCE NBX850 297g Three density C-Cap midsole with Rebound Wedge at the heel.
Racer/Trainer £69.95
6 NEW BALANCE NBX840 274g Three density C-Cap midsole and Rebound Wedge.
A lightweight trainer suitable for racing £59.95
7 RON HILL RT ILLUSION 260g Racer/Trainer with waterproof synthetic leather upper and medium density EVA midsole £34.99–£39.99
8 NEW BALANCE COMP600 198g Features a dual density C-Cap midsole with lightweight synthetic upper.
A racer for distances up to marathon £39.95
9 RON HILL STREET RACER 230g EVA midsole, lightweight polyester upper makes it suitable for distances up to half-marathon or a marathon for the lighter runner £32.99–£37.99 depending on size
10 NIKE AIR PEGASUS RACER 220g Made on wider last.
Phylon midsole with air unit in the heel.
£46.99 For all distances
11 NIKE AIR MARIAH 205g Air cushioning unit encapsulated in a polyurethane midsole. £49.99 For all road races including marathon
12 ADIDAS TECH RACER 180g Single density EVA midsole with compact rubber outsole. £39.99 For mid to long distances
13 NIKE DUELLIST PR 156g Ultra light shoe for distances up to half-marathon.
Phylon midsole with same lightweight upper as MARIAH £44.99
14 TURNTEC FLEXLITE II 260g Compression-moulded EVA midsole, ZO&sup2; gel insert in heel sock liner and ART system in the rearfoot. £64.95
15 REEBOK HEXALITE RACER 166g Hy Elvaloy midsole with Hexalite in rearfoot. £49.99 For all distances up to marathon
16 SAUCONY SCEPTRE 210g Compression-moulded midsole with Stabil wrap and Torsional Rigidity Bar.
XT 600 outsole. £49.99
17 ETONIC STABLESPEED 252g Compression-moulded midsole with neutral DRP Plus for stability.
£49.99
18 ASICS GEL LYTE III 290g Moulded PVC heel counter on a three density compression moulded EVA midsole.
Gel unit in forefoot £64.99 Intended as a racer trainer for all distances
19 ASICS GEL LD RACER 210g Two density compression-moulded EVA midsole with Gel unit in forefoot. £49.99 Suitable for racing over any distance
Track and road — Solly's twin peaks?
Jon Solly is alive, well and back after four years in the wilderness.
The former Commonwealth 10,000m champion spoke to Conor O'Hagan about life, the marathon and everything
Back on track or new King of the Road — where is Jon Solly?
Third in the 1990 UK road rankings at 10K, second at half-marathon and second in the marathon, that's where.
Yet to much of the British public, Jon Solly's last visit to Planet Earth was on the occasion of his surprise 10,000m at the 1986 Commonwealth Games in Edinburgh — one of the highlights of the event.
Fourth place in the Diet Coke Great North Run, a win at the Julie Rose 10K in a course record time of 18:49 in October, followed within weeks by a second placing in the Minneapolis/St Pauls Twin Cities Marathon with a third ranking UK time of 2:11:04.
More of a knock at the back door than a storming of the castle gate perhaps, but something is going right for Jon Solly.
At last.
So, is Solly Britain's newest marathon prospect, or a revitalised 10,000m hero with something to prove?
Despite what may have appeared as the rejuvenation of an all-but-lost career, Solly is still a long way from committing himself to the marathon.
‘I badly want to run well again over 10,000m.
It's been really getting me down for the last four seasons — I've been running disgustingly.
I know I can't run 27:08, at least not without resorting to recreational narcotics, and I can't honestly see myself reaching the real top level at 10,000m.
But I can see me running faster than I have before.’
Bold stuff from a man whose pb of 27:51.76 is almost five years behind him, but Solly's accentuation is firmly on the positive.
‘One of my problems over the last few years has been that I'm amazingly optimistic — really stupid in fact!
But if just once I feel I've run as hard as I possible could, in good shape, and I've still only done 27:50, maybe I'll be happy to say, ‘Oh well, Solly, you've been kidding yourself all along’.’
The choice of Twin Cities as his marathon debut was made carefully by Solly and coach Alan Storey, former national marathon coach.
‘There were lots of reasons for choosing that race rather than a higher profile one.
The worst possible thing for me would have been to have gone through the half in 63 or 64 minutes, just being pulled along by a fast field, and then to have blown up over the second half.’
Money also came into the equation: ‘To be honest, another reason for choosing a smaller marathon was that I could make more than by entering a big autumn marathon, like New York or Chicago.
In the big ones the money goes to the names as appearance money, and I'd be unlikely to figure in the serious prize money.
‘At Twin Cities [which is organised by the US-based Association of Road Running Athletes, and pays only prize money]I was able to do much better.
If I do an autumn marathon this year, and I probably will, money will be a definite factor in deciding which one.
But I'm unlikely to do the New York Marathon in any case, because I'm very much a rhythm runner, and I don't think it's the course for me.
‘The reaction I got from the Twin Cities race was really out of proportion,’ he says with appropriate modesty.
‘I suppose it's just because things are a bit dire on that front at present.
As some people have pointed out, in the mid-eighties that time wouldn't have been much to write home about.’
After his relatively sudden rise to fame at Edinburgh, where he claimed the Commonwealth 10,000m title in only his second race over the distance, Solly's four-year hiatus tested optimism to the absolute limit.
‘For two years I was crippled by repeated foot injuries, caused simply by the shoes I was wearing.
There was nothing wrong with them — they just didn't suit my feet.
It took me all of 18 months to figure out what was going on, which says a lot about me.’
The next problem was, he admits, entirely of his own making.
Like many distance runners in the eighties, Solly experimented with altitude training, and discovered too late that it takes more than thin air to do the trick.
‘I completely messed myself up going to altitude.
After two years of going to Kenya I've only just realised what it is you're supposed to do — walk!
Do all the same training, but do it slower.
I know it sounds stupid, but I was trying to do all my sessions at the same speed I was used to at home.
So, of course, I wasn't recovering properly between sessions.
I would feel tired, back off for a couple of days, but then go straight back into it again.
It was all so daft!
I assume that was why I was running so badly in the track season.
‘I only realised what the problem was when I went to Kenya straight after Twin Cities.
I was running very slowly, simply because I was so tired, but it felt right for a change.
So now I know, but the result is that I've had two years of injury, followed by two years of doing completely the wrong thing.’
He rejects any doubts that the marathon and 10,000m can be accommodated within the same training regime.
‘People think that once you move up to the marathon, then bang, that's it, there's no way back.
In a lot of cases that does seem to happen, but I think it's partly because people do the wrong things in training.
‘I remember just before Steve Jones had his big breakthrough in Chicago 1984, Alan said half-jokingly that all you have to do for a marathon is overtrain at 10,000m.
The change of emphasis really isn't that major, and you still need more speed than most people think.
‘It isn't just long steady runs — in fact I didn't do any more plodding about before Twin Cities than I do for my 10,000m training.
The fact that some supposedly knowledgeable people think the two incompatible just shows how ignorant they are.
Look at Carlos Lopes — I wouldn't compare myself with Lopes, but the fact is that he ran his fastest 10K while he was training for a marathon [Lopes ran the then second fastest ever 10,000m, with 17:17.48 in July 1984, just one month before winning the Olympic marathon in a record 2:09.21].
‘Last year I won the Julie Rose 10K in a time which was within 10 seconds of my track best for the season, which is indicative of how badly I ran on the track.
But I did that on marathon training.
It was interesting to find out that the work I was doing actually suited my 10K needs.’
Solly's years in the wilderness were more than just a dearth of high-profile wins.
‘I really did disappear completely.
I was training on my own at the time, and seemed to be constantly injured, so I wasn't racing much.
It was so depressing!
I'm not into the club scene at all, though that's less through preference than because of the way things have worked out.
‘Nowadays I do some of my training with people like Tim Hutchings, Gary Staines and Steve Harris.
Training alone has never bothered me at all, but it's nice to be able to go down the pub for a good chinwag after a session.’
Remarkably, given his evident potential over a distance that is far from overloaded with British success, Solly's lean years brought little evidence of concern in official circles within the sport itself.
‘I had virtually no contact from the Board at all in that period.
It's just classic isn't it?
The only time anyone other than Alan helped me was when Andy Norman, via John Bicourt, found me someone who helped me with my back problems.
But that was basically a case of Bicourt doing the Board's job.
‘In terms of maintaining contact with athletes, the Board rely on people like Tim Hutchings to do things for them.
He's often in contact with them, telling them what's going on.
Of course, they'd like all athletes to be like Tim, but that just isn't reasonable.
The people involved in administering the sport just aren't part of the scene, not the people I see at races…not there .
Go to a road race or track meet in Britain or Europe and it's people like Alan you'll see.
Come to think of it, I'm not sure I even know who Mike Farrell [AAA/BAAB General Secretary]is!’
Solly's criticisms are delivered more with humour than malice, yet they are nonetheless strongly felt.
He is keenly aware of the paradoxical gulf between British standards in distance events, and the much-lauded strength of our sprinters.
‘One of the things that is often said about the success of British athletics at the moment is that it hides an awful lot that's wrong.
I think that's true.
It's papering over huge cracks.
Frank Dick has done a great job with the shorter track events, but there's a huge difference between those and the distance events.
You need a different approach, and of course, you have to understand the problems involved.
‘I remember at the 1987 Europe Cup in Prague, when I wasn't in great shape.
Frank came up to me and started telling me how I should run it.
This was almost the first time the bloke had spoken to me about anything, never mind about 10,000m running, and here he was telling me how to run tactically.
‘It was so naive —‘hang in there’ and go for the sprint finish.’
Great Frank, but unfortunately my strengths just don't allow me to run that way.
That just emphasised to me what a gulf there is between our sort of running and the shorter events, which the Board don't seem to have recognised.’
Now 27, Solly feels both the ability and perhaps more importantly, the desire to make his comeback a successful and lone one.
‘I could keep this up for quite a while!
I really like doing this —love it in fact.
The travel particularly, but generally, it's just a really good way making a living.
In any case, I'd do it even if I had a job.
The last time I had an office job was in 1986 — it was a disaster, and I'm pleased to be able to say that I haven't done a day's work since.
‘I'm having a damn good time, and sometimes I worry that I'm going to have to pay for it all when I'm 40.
In the meantime I'm doing Open University courses at home.
Last year it was the 19th century novel and its legacy, now it's Shakespeare.
You should try it!’
The 1991 season may turn out to be Jon Solly's last serious crack at the 10,000m, but he is confident that he can get as far as Tokyo for the World Championships.
‘All I have to do is get through the trials,’ he says with ironic humour.
‘After that I suppose I'll start training for another marathon, but I've never been good at looking to the future.
All I hope is that I don't end up in an office again.’
That was the year that was: 1986, and Jon Solly (main pic)takes the Commonwealth 10,000m title,above left sets a 3000m pb of 7:50.20 at Crystal Palace…and a 5000m best of 13:22.39 in Helsinki
‘Alan's my driving force’— says Solly of his coach and mentor, Storey
‘I'm having a damn good time’
‘I completely messed up going to altitude’
CANOE HIKE RAFT TREK THEN…
Carry on up the jungle
For those with an undying desire to stretch themselves to the limit, the Raid Gauloises should fit the bill, according to Jeremy Hart.
Deadly snakes, dangerous jungle and swollen rivers — what more could a humble daredevil want?
No one forced Francoise Jacquier to spend 10 days crossing Central America's highest mountain, tramping through jungles inhabited by some of the world's deadliest snakes or rafting down swollen rivers.
At home in the French Alps she lives comfortably, surrounded by the trappings of a successful career as a gynaecologist.
For kicks, she climbs mountains and skis, so she is not left wanting for adventure.
Francoise has a weakness though — an insatiable appetite for pushing herself to the limits of sporting endeavour in the most stunning natural locations.
Gerard Fusil, a French radio journalist, suffers the same insatiable affliction as Francoise, along with hundreds of other amateurs who want to cheat death with a dramatic natural backdrop, but his connections within the French media gave him the chance to create an annual event to satisfy even the most daredevil adventurer.
A yearly budget of a million pounds from the cigarette company make Fusil's dream for an annual multi-discipline event in the most beautiful corners of the world come true.
Whereas most French adventures focus on mechanical sports, such as the Paris-Dakar Rally and the 2000-mile Harricana Snowmobile Race in Canada, Fusil was adamant that any sports in what he called the Raid Gauloises would be human or animal-powered only.
‘People were looking for something closer to nature than races like the Paris-Dakar.’
For the inaugural Raid Gauloises in New Zealand in November 1989, Fusil chose running, rafting, canoeing, climbing and horse-riding as the modes of transport for a 250-mile race for teams of five (including at least one woman).
Splashed all over the press and shown nightly on French television, the Raid Gauloises became an overnight sensation — but in France only.
Of 35 teams in New Zealand for the first Raid, all but five were French.
Fusil was not concerned by the lack of foreign interest in the first race — more worrying was the fact that no French team finished in the top three.
The three local New Zealand teams made sure of that.
Scott Bramwell, a 27-year-old river guide from Queenstown was a member of the second-placed Triple Challenge Team in 1989.
‘Local knowledge counts for a lot…we hardly pulled out the maps [in New Zealand],’ he said.
Fusil chose Costa Rica as the venue for the 1990 Raid Gauloises, held over 10 days in December.
Wary of the advantages the Kiwi teams had had on home ground, Fusil refused to name the route, but still made one vital error (and gave away a crucial piece of information for the Costa Rican teams) by saying it would be a coast-to-coast race across the Central American country.
‘Coast-to-coast was the signal,’ according to Roland Cervilla, a trainer with Team Costa Rica, one of two local teams entered.
‘There are only two places you can cross from coast-to-coast and one route takes 14 days, so Fusil's route could only be in one place.’
All the teams from France, Belgium, Luxembourg, Italy, the USA and New Zealand knew was the length of the race (10 days minimum), its location (Costa Rica), the modes of transport,(running, rafting, canoeing, horse-riding, climbing, and parachuting) and the dangers (poisonous snakes, extreme temperatures and a harder race than 1989).
Gerard Fusil was only too aware of the dangers the 175 racers faced between the Caribbean and the Pacific coasts of a country aptly nicknamed the Switzerland of Central America.
Before leaving the sumptuous confines of the hotel in the capital, San Jose, Fusil showed the teams live examples of the country's most poisonous snakes.
Britain's only racer, Mike Browne — owner of the Snow and Rock chain of outdoor clothing shops in London, actually looked forward to seeing some snakes en route.
What concerned the 42-year-old was the possibility that the race might be too easy.
‘I'd be disappointed if it was an old ladies' outing.’
Francoise Jacquier, waiting in the Caribbean port of Limon for the start of the race, seemed more worried about the effects it would have on her.
‘We all live such privileged lives that I need to try to recover the basic feelings like hunger, exhaustion and tiredness,’ she said.
From the palm tree-lined Playa da Bonitas, 70 inflatable canoes burst through the surf on the signal of Gerard Fusil's starting pistol.
Like a scene from Hawaii Five-O, two- and three-man teams sunk their paddles deep into the warm salt water and paddled hard along the coast for four miles towards the entrance to the Tortugero Canal, an inland waterway running parallel to the coast.
Scott Bramwell, a last-minute deputy for an injured member of the Franco-Gabonese Delmas team, relished the canoeing and rafting.
‘It was tough,’ he said after 12 miles and three hours of canoeing against a two mile an hour current.
In temperatures nudging 90 degrees and 75 per cent humidity, the racers drank plenty of liquids.
‘I drank at least four litres during the canoeing,’ Bramwell said.
Technically the 1990 Raid Gauloises was not coast-to-coast across Costa Rica.
Fusil decided to leapfrog a treacherous 50-mile section between the Caribbean coast and the foothills of the mountainous interior of Costa Rica to keep the duration of the race down to 10 days.
The teams felt the rhythm of the race had been interrupted.
From 90 degrees balmy heat on the coast, a climb of 3600 feet dropped the temperature to 65 degrees.
High winds, rolling mist and heavy rain made the cool mountain air feel wintry.
Morale only picked up after the restart at the beginning of a 70-mile, three-day run and walk up and over Mount Chirripo.
At intervals, Fusil flagged away each quintet up an innocuous-looking farm track.
The innocence of the track lasted only a mile before splitting into three or four overgrown paths made slippery in the torrential rain.
Fusil said: ‘Their feet will get wet in the mud and the paths are dangerous because it is slippery and there is a steep drop down to the river.’
To get ahead of the teams and join them halfway up the 12,000 foot mountain, Fusil flew a few journalists over the forest canopy just a few feet above the top of the trees.
Every now and again the forest would be split by a tumbling river or a path covered in shiny brown mud.
Six hours from the start, in a wide lush valley, Fusil had placed his first checkpoint.
Timekeepers waited in the heavy rain for the teams to pass, a doctor sat in his tent for potential patients and a journalist from the French daily sports paper L'Equipe sat with a telephone plastered to his ear filing a story to Paris.
Telephones in the middle of the jungle do not come cheaply — this one was a portable satellite telephone, complete with dish, costing the journalist £10 a minute to use.
In contrast, on the hillside overlooking the valley was a traditional Indian village with no electricity or running water.
How some teams managed to climb Mount Chirripo amazed even Gerard Fusil.
‘It was difficult and steep,’ he said.
‘And at night the temperature was only five or six degrees.’
With wet, wrinkled feet rubbing inside their sodden boots, teams clambered on hand and foot to scale the mountain.
The female member of Scott Bramwell's Delmas team suffered severe altitude sickness as they reached 12,000 feet and she had to retire.
The rest continued, although unable to win with less than all five team members.
Using their local knowledge, Team Costa Rica and Team Cafe Britt raced ahead of the other 33 teams over Chirripo.
Using ski poles to take some weight off his knees, operated on only eight weeks before, 53-year-old Nathaniel Grew led Team Costa Rica into the tiny village of St Gerrardo.
The whole population turned out to greet the local heroes at the village hall for an equipment check.
‘We got only two hours sleep on the mountain,’ Grew said.
Controversy had preceded Team Costa Rica.
With a parachute jump as the finale to the whole race, Fusil had ruled that each competitor be certified to jump with rectangular parachutes.
In hospital for his knee operation, Grew had been unable to get his certification.
Fusil was uncompromising about the consequences.
‘They can't win,’ he stated.
‘I told Nathaniel that he must have completed two jumps.
It's a matter of security.’
The local teams were outraged, but the ruling had no bearing on the result.
Fusil had been worried that the two local teams would walk away with his event for a second year in succession, but he had his hopes firmly pinned on the ultra-fit, para-military French police team, GIGN, to uphold French honours.
On the Rio General, a 55-mile-two-day rafting section and a 25-mile horse ride 'n' run stage (three horses per team — the other two competitors must run) to the finish, GIGN — who live and train to SAS standards in a castle outside Paris, edged ahead of the local teams.
Team Costa Rica were openly demoralised and reduced to tears by their disqualification and Cafe Britt had any chance of success stolen from them with the retirement of an injured team member.
GIGN, with the finish of all but the parachuting stage within sight, gave up all chances to sleep for 58 hours to pull out a three hour lead over the second placed team, L'Arche.
Motivated by the lure of the finish, the riot police team ploughed through 40 miles of mangrove swamp to the first sight of the Pacific Ocean at Porto Juminez.
Behind GIGN was a human chain of exhausted teams.
Miraculously, although some teams had lost up to three of their complement, they plodded on.
Gerard Fusil, relieved that so many teams had made it across Costa Rica, decided to make the parachuting stage for fun only, making GIGN the winners at the end of the ride 'n' run.
Team Costa Rica could not have won regardless of the parachuting, having lost one team member to injury on the penultimate day.
The exact location of the third, million-pound Raid Gauloises is still a secret, although Fusil did say at the finale party in Costa Rica, ‘It will be in Africa, not the Sahara Desert or the Africa you see on safaris.
There will certainly be a section where competitors will travel in pirogues (boats) pushed by poles and perhaps a paragliding section.’
He has learned from New Zealand and Costa Rica not to say too much too soon.
UK competitor Mike Browne was keen to see snakes
The mountainous section took its toll on Nathaniel Grew
The author wishes to acknowledge American Airlines for their help.
Try a little self-control
You don't have to have a personal coach to put together a successful training schedule.
Try the DIY approach advocated by Benji Durden
Do you sometimes feel that your training is going backwards regardless of the amount of hard work you put into it?
If this is how you describe your running, it may be you are running with no plan and no sense of direction.
Sometimes this happens if you're self-coached, and, while you can read stacks of training articles, it's difficult to sort through all the opinions and ideas.
It's hard to know what's best for you.
In this article you'll find guidelines and a training framework around which you can build your own effective schedule without the help of a personal coach or adviser.
These guidelines, based on my 20 years of running experience and coaching athletes, such as Kim Jones, will keep you moving forward on a steady progression towards your ultimate running goals.
You must first determine your present fitness level.
This may seem quite simple, but it is easy to delude yourself.
For example, at the peak of my running career in 1983, I tore my plantar fasciitis and spent much of the next three years running at less than 100 per cent .
In early 1986, my foot finally healed and I began to train as if I was as fit as I had been before my injury.
As a result, I continually broke down.
Eventually, I came to my senses and accepted that I was not fit enough to train like a 2:10 marathoner.
I would have saved much time and pain if I had paid more attention to how I was racing.
This is one way to determine your level of fitness.
If you are just beginning to run, this doesn't apply to you just yet.
Later, you'll use races to help monitor your progress, but first of all you need to go through some basic steps to establish the habits and strengths needed for a good running programme.
Also, examine how your training has been going.
If it seems you are training hard — perhaps you are fatigued all the time — you are probably training at too high a level.
It's far better to undertrain at a consistent level rather than to overtrain, which inevitably leads to staleness and possibly injury.
After coming up with at least an estimate of your starting point, you need to decide where you want to go.
Goals will help keep you motivated and make you want to run, and they'll also help you plan a specific, personalised training programme.
Most can for simplicity sake be loosely classified as one of three types: fantasy goals, long-term goals and short-term goals.
Fantasy goals can be anything from running in the Olympics to breaking a world record or winning the Boston Marathon.
Depending on who you are, some of these fantasies may well come true, but for most of us, these are dreams that we keep to ourselves for company on lonely training runs and to help with motivation.
I dreamt of making an Olympic team when I was in high school, a rather far-fetched dream for a 4:36 miler, but that dream was part of what got me through all those hard times during the years that I was losing race after race in college.
Long-term goals are those that you realistically achieve with patient, thoughtful and careful training.
For beginners, this might be simply finishing a marathon one day.
For experienced marathoners, it could be qualifying for the Boston Marathon.
These long-range goals shape our long-term training plans.
Short-term goals should be achievable in the near future if the vagaries of daily life or training mistakes don't constantly get in the way.
These include goals, such as racing or training at a consistent level.
Short-term goals provide stepping stones and needed reinforcements to help you stay motivated in the chase for these longer-range goals.
When deciding your goals, you need to keep in mind your level of fitness and choose goals that are realistic.
For example, you shouldn't set a goal for a 10-minute improvement in the 10K.
If you set unattainable goals, you'll only become extremely frustrated with your running and racing.
Also, try not to set conflicting targets.
One of the things that has been hardest for me to deal with in coaching is runners who want to train for both the marathon and the mile at the same time.
Narrowing your focus helps you to achieve the best results.
Very few runners can have as wide as range of distance as Rod Dixon of New Zealand, who performed well at the full range of competitive distances, taking the bronze medal in the 1972 Olympic 1500 metres, fourth in the '76 Olympic 5000 and winning the '83 New York City Marathon.
Once you know approximately where you are in your training and where you want to go, start  pencilling in your goals in a running calendar.
With your long-term goal in mind, select a race on a date that allows you time to prepare thoroughly.
For example, don't choose a marathon a month away if you are just beginning to plan your training.
To prepare adequately for a marathon, I think you should allow 26 weeks if you are inexperienced and at least 12 weeks if you have run several.
Next, select a few races prior to your target race that will serve as your short-term goals and fitness checks.
For example, if your goal is to run a marathon, you should schedule a race about every three to four weeks prior to the marathon.
As you plan these, remember to allow more time between longer races for recovery.
When you feel you have a reasonable schedule of races planned, begin to build a training programme around that schedule.
There are many different ways to train for distance running, but here are some basic rules.
You need long runs to build a base or foundation of aerobic strength.
Hill running or intervals will improve your strength and leg power.
Tempo runs or low-key races increase your anaerobic threshold and give you experience running at race pace.
Finally, you need enough rest to allow for adaptation to the training.
You should never increase a long run, tempo run, speed session or total weekly mileage by more than 10 per cent over the previous week.
It's also a good idea to back off three to five per cent every second or third week to give yourself more rest and sufficient recovery.
I've developed three specific 10K training programmes: beginner, intermediate and advanced (see tables).
Select the one that suits your fitness level, and, if necessary, modify it to suit your individual needs.
Next, mark your calendar.
Here is a breakdown of a typical week into the types of workouts scheduled for each day.
Sunday: Long run.
This is the most important workout of the week.
What matters most is the total time spent running, not the distance covered.
If you follow the 10K schedules provided, the most advanced runner will not do anything longer than two hours.
How you run these work-outs is also important.
Try to keep your overall pace as relaxed as possible and aerobic.
Monday: Easy days of 30 to 40 minutes on Monday, Wednesday, Thursday and Saturday.
Again, the amount of time you run depends on your current fitness level.
Remember, these are rest days in your training, so you can always do less than I recommend in the specific schedules.
In fact, you can take a day off.
It isn't necessary to run seven days a week to improve fitness.
I normally skip at least one day every two weeks.
Olympic marathoner Ed Eyestone never runs more than six days a week, even when preparing for a marathon.
Tuesday: Hill repeats.
Between your two easy days, find a hill that takes from one and a half to two minutes to run.
Do a 20 to 25-minute warm-up before beginning your repeat.
Run the first effort moderately to ease into hill running.
Jog back to where you started the hill and do the next repeat.
Make each succeeding effort a little harder, but none of the repeats should be all out.
Afterwards, warm down for 20 to 25 minutes.
After five weeks of hill work, you'll change hill repeats to fast repeats on a flat surface.
It's best to do these on the track, but if one is not available, you can do repeats of two and a half to three and a half minutes on the road.
Again, warm up for 20 to 25 minutes, do your repeats and warm down for 20 to 25 minutes.
Run the repeats at a steady tempo but, as with the hill repeats, build into the workout by running the first a little easier than the rest.
Do an easy two-minute recovery interval between each repeat.
If you don't recover sufficiently in this time, just slow down your repeats.
Friday: Tempo run.
After two easy days you're ready for a workout that includes a warm-up, then a hard effort in the middle and a warm-down.
For example, you are following the beginner's running schedule.
The first Friday is a 40-minute workout.
You begin by running 16 to 17 minutes at the pace you would do your Sunday long run.
Then pick up the pace to within 20 to 30 seconds per mile of your 10K race pace and hold that for seven minutes.
Finish by slowing back down to normal training pace again for the last 16 to 17 minutes.
Later, you will break down the middle portion of these work-outs so that you will alternate quick and easy paces.
Again, looking at the beginner's schedule, on Friday of week three, you will run for a total of one hour.
Warm up for about 22 minutes.
Then run five minutes quick and five minutes easy.
Repeat five minutes quick and five easy.
Follow this with 22 minutes at normal training pace.
Races: Write in any ‘stepping stone’ races that you will be running prior to your long-term race goal.
In general, don't do a hard run on either of the two preceding days or the day after a race.
If the race means you will miss a long run, replace your next hard day with the long run if your schedule will allow it.
Remember, the long run is the most important work-out, and the race itself easily replaces a speed session.
Although I've presented this training programme with specific work-outs on specific days, it is the work-out sequence that is important, not the days of the week.
For example, if you want to do your long runs on Thursday or Saturday, that's not a problem, as long as you shift the other workouts accordingly.
And  remember , never run hard two days in a row.
One final comment before you start writing out your master plan for reaching running goals: Use a pencil.
Life has a way of changing the best of plans.
A running calendar is simply a tool to guide you in the direction you want to go.
You must be willing to take detours when they come up and not panic because you are not following your plan exactly.
And above all, always enjoy running.
10K TRAINING SCHEDULES Here are specific training schedules designed to get you in shape for a great 10K race performance.
Note that workouts are given in minutes not miles.
In the Friday workouts, ‘q’ stands for quick pace and ‘e’stands for easy.
For example, 0:55w2(5q/5e) means that you will run 55 minutes and in the middle of the workout, do two sets of five minutes at a quick pace followed by five minutes at an easy pace.
Benji Durden, who ran in the 1980 Olympic marathon, lives in Boulder, Colorado, where he has coached several élite runners, including Kim Jones, twice a runner-up in the New York City Marathon.
Runner's World 1/91
These shoes have run 2500 miles!
Publicity-shy James Zarei is a legend in the world of ultra running.
But Gentleman James never runs to win or bothers with pbs.
As Rob Howard explains, the challenge of running is reward enough.
Every morning at about 5am, come rain or shine, James Zarei leaves his South Croydon home on his morning run.
When even the milkmen and the postmen are not on the streets, he sets off for his daily three hour run, then swims for an hour before finally starting his day's work as a leather goods salesman.
It is a routine which would break most people, but Zarei is a top class ultra runner and this relentless pounding of the streets of London is merely preparation for some of the world's most gruelling races.
He has raced across Siberia, through the Hoggar Mountains of the Sahara, run 440K from Hiroshima to Nagasaki, completed the Spartathlon several times, and regularly wins stage races, 24-hour and 48-hour races throughout Europe.
In countries, such as Japan, Belgium, and even Ireland, his runs have made him a well known figure, but he remained one of Britain's unsung sporting heroes, until a magnificent record-breaking run at the NALGO 6-day race last October finally brought him into the headlines.
Despite an interruption to the race and appalling weather, he ran 622 miles, covering over 100 miles a day and running further on each consecutive day.
It was a race which highlighted his incredible distance running ability, and the TV and newspaper press naturally assumed that Zarei was an athlete dedicated to winning and record breaking, but nothing could be further from the truth.
What really sets James Zarei apart from the rest is not his physical ability, but his mental approach to running.
The truth is that he only races as a personal challenge, or for the pure enjoyment of running.
He never runs to win.
From the moment he decided to take up running nine years ago at the age of 38, Zarei had never been interested in running against the clock, or in beating others.
Always a determined character, he gave up alcohol and smoking the day he pulled on his running shoes, and he quickly found that running long distances was his forte, and that it provided a challenge to fit his temperament.
‘I was attracted to running because it is a sport where you depend only on yourself to achieve something and from the start I just wanted to enjoy it, not to beat others.
I quickly began running every day and naturally wanted to run further.
I never ran marathons, but gradually increased my distance, starting with a 30-mile race, then the Isle of Man 40 on the TT course, where I did well, and the following week I ran from Edinburgh to Glasgow, which is about 50 miles and came in about second or third.’
The fact that he can't remember the exact distance or his position is typical of the man, such things don't matter to him.
He never wears a watch whether racing or training, never records his mileage, and has no idea what his personal bests are over any time or distance.
If invited and able to get the time off work, he will go to races anywhere in the world, whatever the distance, yet he never trains for any particular race.
‘I just do my daily training, and if a race comes up I go, but without setting any targets.
In a way the races are a bonus, but it is my daily runs that are important.
It is beautiful to go out in the morning and see the world waking up.
It prepares me well for my day's work.
Running is a part of my life and not just a way to prepare for races.’
His morning swims at the Queen Mother Leisure Centre in Victoria are a vital part of his training which he describes as ‘a treat for my body after the running’ and, like many other runners, he will go out for a long run on a Sunday.
The only difference is he might run from London to Brighton, which is over 50 miles, and possibly back again.
He once ran a marathon for training, but only after running 15 miles to get to the start and ‘warm up’.
He finished incredibly in ‘about 2:46:00’.
The invitations to foreign races started coming in after he ran ‘about 162 miles’ in a 24-race in Chorley, and Zarei has made the most of them, often running ultra races consecutively and by doing so he has more than proved a point about his approach to running.
‘I never force myself, or run for a record and if you are not running under pressure you can achieve more.
I read that runners could only run five ultra events a year, but that year I ran eight, then 13 the next year and 18 the next, and I think others began to realise you can do more if you take the right approach.’
The most extreme examples of his appetite for running came in 1989 when he ran 1800K in five races within a month.
He started with a best time of 7:17:00 at a 100K in Belgium, then won a 24-hour race in Belgium with a distance of 156 miles, before winning the Greystokes 24-hour race in Ireland comfortably.
Then he flew to Japan to run the 440K from Hiroshima to Nagasaki in a new record time of just over 57 hours, and moved on to Siberia for a 13-day stage race covering 50K a day.
The Russian race, on which the competitors were accommodated on a train following the race route, proved to be a harrowing experience for Zarei, but not because he had been doing too much running.
Clouds of large mosquitoes swarmed around the runners and he was so badly bitten that his arms and legs were bleeding, making him ill.
Against doctor's advice, and protected by specially made up mesh clothing, he continued to the finish.
In such a situation, it is hard to believe Zarei's claim that he is still enjoying running, but an essential part of the make-up of any top ultra runner is a fierce determination to test themselves to the limit.
Like the rest of Britain's many great long distance runners Zarei has this ability to ignore the pain and keep going.
He will admit that he is not running just for his own enjoyment, but against himself to see what he can achieve.
The result will often be that he wins the race.
There are times, however, when even that motivation is not enough to push him on to success and the Spartathlon is the perfect example.
He once finished third, but more often he has sacrificed his own chances by slowing down to help British runners who were struggling to complete the course.
His explanation is simple: ‘Of course, I could have done better, but I enjoy the friendship of running and would never run past someone I could help get to the finish, even if I could win the race.’
Not surprisingly, such unselfish acts by a runner whose ability commands respect, have made Zarei one of the most popular figures in ultra running, and he was recently referred to by one of his rivals as ‘Gentleman James’.
Another race he could have won was staged across the Hoggar Mountains of the Algerian Sahara, where, after running a marathon a day in intense heat for 13 days, he deliberately slowed to allow another runner to win.
He felt sorry for his opponent, whose close friend and helper had been taken to hospital during the race, so he decided to give his spirits a lift by allowing him to win, but did so without letting anyone else realise exactly what was happening.
A naturally shy man, who doesn't boast about his achievements, and had never previously agreed to any magazine interview, Zarei will not say who the winning runner was, and is reluctant to talk about the times he has put sportsmanship before victory, unless his motives are misinterpreted.
The last thing he wants is to be dubbed ‘Saint James’.
After that race his family remembers him coming home with badly bruised and torn feet and looking like a skeleton.
At the time he said never again, but a few years have gone by and he has a different perception.
He says it wasn't too bad, and he would run a similar race if the chance came up.
We all to some extent remember the good times and forget the bad, but perhaps that is another important part of the make-up of the ultra runner.
If their memories dwelt on the pains, they would quickly push themselves to a point where they gave up running altogether.
Since he has a very fluent running style, with little lateral arm movement and a very low leg lift, it is often hard to tell when Zarei is weary, but at the 6-Day race on the Gateshead Stadium track last October, it was clear he ran to his absolute limit.
There was no deterioration in that lovely running style, but the strain showed in his sunken eye sockets and through his gritted teeth as he circled the track to the bitter and glorious end.
What the admiring spectators didn't see was Zarei sitting in the first aid room and insisting those helping him look away as he took off his socks, ‘because I don't want to frighten you’, and later on slipping a tape of Irish Folk music in to his Walkman as he went back on to the track and muttering quietly to himself, ‘that will help me stop thinking of the pain’.
By the end of the race he had lost nearly two stone from a frame that has no spare fat, and it took him a week to start eating properly again and a further three weeks to regain the lost weight.
It didn't show too badly when he finished the race with several layers of clothing on to try and retain some body heat in the cold driving rain.
In the end it was a bitter-sweet victory, as although he broke several British records at intermediate distances, and set a new British all-comers record, he missed breaking the British 6-day record of 623 miles, set by George Littlewood at Madison Square Garden in 1888!
After all he had been through he had missed the longest standing running record of them all by just one mile!
Afterwards he simply said: ‘It was my biggest achievement yet and I was not at all disappointed as I did something that I thought was beyond me.
It was my first 6-day race and I came here to enjoy it with no plan or target, so I'm very happy to have had such a successful run.’
Apart from bringing Zarei into the limelight, the race also raised two other issues, his nationality and sponsorship.
Although he has lived in the UK since 1969, Zarei was born in Iran and is often listed as Iranian, but he is officially a British athlete, and won an England vest when competing in the Milton Keynes 24-hour Championships in 1989.
Although successful, Zarei has only received sponsorship from the sports centre where he swims, and recently from the American company Alena, which provides energy bars and drinks, but it was the state of his shoes which drew attention at Gateshead.
The uppers had come completely away from the soles of the toes and the treads had been worn so smooth he had taken a hot knife to them in an attempt at a retread!
The sight of them would be enough to give designers of air balls, gels and energy return systems the jitters, and although he has never measured his mileage, he estimated he had run at least 25,000 miles in them, and possibly more!
Fortunately, those 600 were the last for those shoes as Nike came round with a pair, but Zarei did seem disappointed at the lack of regular sponsorship.
With the minority status of ultra running and his own unease with publicity, the fact that he has no sponsors is hardly surprising, especially as he admits to not running to win, but the Zarei philosophy of running takes that into account.
‘Any sponsor would have to realise that although I might lose an occasional race when I could have won, I am able to run far more races and to winy many, only because I don't put myself under any pressure by expecting or even wanting to win.
The idea that a runner can win more by not trying too hard is not likely to be well received in the hard-bitten commercial world of sports retailing, but if the winter miles are currently very wearisome and every race is a struggle to gain a few seconds, you might try leaving your watch off at a race or two and see if the Zarei approach puts a bit of the enjoyment back into running.
Spartathlon heroes, Terry Edmondson and Zarei
Almost there…
Zarei nears the end of the Milton Keynes race
‘I would never run past someone I could help get to the finish, even if I could win the race’
CHOLESTEROL
why the jury is still out
Cholesterol is in the dock, accused of being a killer.
Jane Griffin outlines the case for the prosecution and the defence
Is cholesterol good or bad for runners?
Does it matter how many eggs a runner eats?
Should you know your cholesterol level, after you may well take your pulse or heart rate regularly when you have been out running, so why not ‘know your cholesterol number’ as the Americans would say?
Is there more than one type of cholesterol — a ‘good guy’ and a ‘bad guy’?
What is cholesterol?
Cholesterol is a natural substance found in the body tissues of animals but not plants.
It has a soft, waxy nature and chemically it is important to know that it is insoluble in water.
This is relevant when you come to look at how cholesterol is transported around the body.
Cholesterol is present in all animal cell membranes and in the blood.
It is also found in body fat and it accumulates in the liver, muscles and walls of blood vessels as part of a disease process.
The human body contains more than 100g of cholesterol.
Though cholesterol has a bad reputation, a raised level of cholesterol in the blood being one of the risk factors associated with heart disease, it is actually an essential component of the body.
It maintains the flexibility of the cells so that they can function effectively.
Cholesterol is also the starting point for the body's manufacture of bile acids (which are need for the digestion of fat), steroids (including those all-important male and female sex hormones) and vitamin D (which is made by the action of sunlight on cholesterol in the skin).
About three-quarters of the daily requirement for ‘new’ cholesterol, some 700mg, is produced within the body, mostly in the liver.
The remaining quarter (200mg), comes from diet.
Only about 50 per cent of the dietary cholesterol is absorbed, so the actual daily intake is about 400mg a day.
The body is normally able to control the balance of cholesterol, by producing more if the intake is low or less if the intake is increased.
About one in 500 of the population seems to have an inherited fault (ie, it runs in the family) in this control mechanism.
Their bodies seem unable to sense a high intake and continue to manufacture cholesterol in excess of requirements.
This condition is known as ‘familial hypercholesterolaemia’(too much cholesterol in the blood) and it is usually treated with drugs and a strict diet.
Far more often though, a raised level of blood cholesterol is caused by eating too much fat, particularly saturated fat — but more of this later.
Good and bad cholesterol
Cholesterol, whether it is absorbed from dietary sources or manufactured in the body, is transported in the blood to the tissues needing it.
As cholesterol is insoluble in water, it has to combine with a soluble protein in order to form a soluble lipoprotein.
Lipoproteins come in various shapes and sizes but most of the cholesterol is carried in rather small particles called low density lipoproteins or LDL — so-called because of the preponderance of lipid to protein, giving the particles a low density.
The type which has more protein to lipid is called a high density lipoprotein or HDL.
LDL carry cholesterol to tissues where the cholesterol is off-loaded to be used for building membranes or for conversion into various hormones.
The protein part of the LDL reacts with another protein in the membrane of the tissue, where the cholesterol is to be off-loaded, rather like a key fitting into a lock.
The piece of membrane where all of this action takes place breaks off and is swallowed up by the cell.
The cholesterol is released and is incorporated into the cell's internal membranes.
Excess LDL, rejected by the now full-up cells are deposited in the walls of the arteries, where they can build up and make the arteries narrower.
This narrowing or furring up of the arteries can slow down the flow of the blood to your heart (giving rise to the condition known as angina) or even cut off the supply completely, at which point a heart attack then occurs.
The more LDL you have in your blood, therefore, the worse it is for your heart.
However, if a cell has too much cholesterol, it can be removed by an HDL particle colliding with the cell and picking up the cholesterol that is excess to requirements.
When the HDL get to the liver, they interact with receptors that are specific for HDL.
Then the cholesterol is taken into the liver and eventually removed from the body.
The more HDL you have in your blood, the better it is for you.
So, yes there is ‘bad’ cholesterol, the LDL which are associated with a greater risk of heart disease, and ‘good’cholesterol, the HDL which appear to have a protective effect.
This all has great relevance to the regular runner as you will soon see.
Measuring your cholesterol
How do you know if you have a raised blood cholesterol level?
As there are rarely any symptoms (until it is too late!), you won't know unless you go and have your blood tested.
There are two ways of testing, one is the ‘instant’ test where a pin prick of blood is taken from your finger and a small desk-top analyser instantly reads the amount of cholesterol.
Alternatively, you can have a sample of blood taken and sent away to a laboratory for a much fuller analysis.
As you have seen there are different types of cholesterol and other fatty substances in the blood and a balance is important to help reduce the risk of heart disease.
For instance, another type of fatty substance in the blood is the triglycerides.
These are also ‘baddies’ as they make the blood more liable to clot, so the fewer of them you have in your blood the better for your heart.
A fuller blood analysis will, therefore, give you a much better picture, with values for total LDL and HDL cholesterol and triglycerides.
It is advisable to avoid ‘High Street’ testing of blood cholesterol (eg, in health food shops).
A Standing Medical Advisory Committee with the unfortunate acronym of SMAC, has warned against such testing (as well as ‘impromptu testing by General Practitioners with machines borrowed from drug companies’,(British Medical Journal, July 21, 1990).
The concern is twofold.
Firstly, there is worry about the quality assessment of the procedure and secondly the availability of people to interpret the findings and give the right advice.
A report in The Observer (September 30, 1990) revealed just how unreliable the High Street testing results were and, therefore, how misleading.
In one human ‘guinea-pig’, blood cholesterol concentrations varied between 5.7 and 7.99mmol per litre.
It is difficult to define an optimum level of cholesterol in the blood.
It is not like glucose, which has a controlled concentration between well-defined limits, above or below which the effects of hypo- or hyperglycaemia are readily apparent, as all diabetics know.
The range of blood cholesterol concentrations is much broader and the effects of straying much above or below ‘the normal range’ are not readily apparent in the short term.
Experts generally agree that you should aim to have blood cholesterol levels of less than 5.2mmol per litre.
However, other risk factors must be taken into account — those that you cannot change, such as your age, your sex and any family history of premature heart disease — and those you can change, such as smoking, high blood pressure and an inactive lifestyle.
The more risks you have the more important it is to do something about your blood cholesterol level.
Risk factors for heart disease do not just add up, they multiply.
A cigarette smoker has twice the risk of having a heart attack than a non-smoker.
A combination of high blood pressure and raised blood cholesterol concentration increases the risk fourfold, add smoking to that and the risk becomes eightfold.
So, a person with a higher than normal cholesterol concentration carries a relatively low risk if he/she does not smoke, has low blood pressure, is not overweight, exercises regularly and has no history of heart disease in the family.
In the UK, the average cholesterol concentration is about 6mmol per litre and each year, in this country, about 300,000 people have a heart attack of whom about 180,000 die.
Diet and blood cholesterol
Apart from very strict vegan diets, where no animal food of any sort is eaten, the average daily intake is between 350 and 450mg.
The main sources are eggs, kidney, liver and roe (including taramasalata).
A lot is made of high and low cholesterol foods, especially in the USA, but cutting back on foods which are high in cholesterol does not make a lot of difference to blood cholesterol concentrations.
It merely seems to stimulate the body to produce more and more to match the daily need.
If your blood cholesterol concentration is not influenced so much by the amount of cholesterol in your diet what does cause it to rise to unacceptable levels?
It is, in fact, the amount and type of fat in the diet that is the key issue.
Fats are made up of units called fatty acids — saturated, mono-unsaturated along with polyunsaturated fatty acids.
Each type has a slightly different chemical structure and differs slightly in how it behaves in the body.
Foods tend to contain mixtures of these fatty acids, but obviously some foods have higher proportions of some than others.
A diet high in saturated fatty acids (high in animal and hard fats) tends to raise the blood cholesterol concentration, particularly the LDL, in some people.
Polyunsaturated fatty acids, found in some plant oils, some margarines and most fish oils, reduce the blood cholesterol.
They do so by hurrying the loss of cholesterol in the bile.
Mono-unsaturated fatty acids were, until recently, considered ‘neutral’ in their effect on the concentration of cholesterol in the blood but new evidence suggests that they are at least as beneficial as polyunsaturated fatty acids.
Olive oil is high in mono-unsaturated fatty acids.
As polyunsaturated fatty acids are less effective in reducing blood cholesterol than saturated fatty acids are in raising it, it is better to reduce the total fat, and particularly saturated fatty acid intake, than to eat more polyunsaturated fatty acids.
Some forms of dietary fibre, such as that found in oats, vegetables and fruit, are also able to reduce the level of blood cholesterol, possibly in the same way as polyunsaturates.
For more information about reducing the fat content of your diet see RUNNING No 106.
Exercise and cholesterol
Regular aerobic exercise, such as running (or very brisk walking, swimming and cycling) can lower your risk of heart disease in two ways.
Firstly, for many it can help to control body weight because regular, vigorous exercise lasting for at least 20 to 30 minutes increases your energy output and helps you use up body fat.
Regular means at least three times a week and vigorous as anything that leaves you slightly breathless, but not gasping for oxygen.
Secondly, exercise can increase the amount of HDL, the ‘good guy’ and lower the total amount of cholesterol you have in your blood.
An editorial in The Lancet (November 10, 1990) entitled ‘Who's for tennis?’ but which could have just as easily been entitled ‘Who's for running?’sums up the present state of the art and looks particularly at a new piece of research carried out on civil servants.
Studies of Whitehall civil servants in 1973 and 1980 suggested that vigorous exercise at weekends was associated with less heart disease.
These early studies did not, however, establish whether any particular form of exercise was beneficial, nor whether there was a threshold of activity that has to be exceeded before benefit can be detected.
The study which was carried out last year confirms that exercise is associated with a reduced risk of coronary disease only when the exercise is both vigorous and current.
The piece concludes ‘All dynamic exercise is probably good, but the more the better’.
So, keep on running, keep your fat intake under control and if there is a history of heart disease in your immediate family (a close relative under 50), it would be prudent to have your cholesterol tested by your doctor.
Reading between the lines
You don't need a palm-reading fortune teller to find out how long you might live.
Recent research shows that you may be able to predict your own destiny — and even change it — by checking your body's blood-cholesterol levels.
Epidemiologist Gerardo Heiss, and other researchers from the University of North Carolina, found that current levels of cholesterol can be used to predict a person's mortality rate for the next 10 years.
The researchers studied 2541 men, aged 40 to 69, for an average of 10 years.
Over the 10-year span, the risk of death from cardiovascular disease for a man with previous signs of the disease increased from 3.8 per cent to 19.6 per cent, while their cholesterol levels rose concurrently.
But men who showed no signs of cardiovascular disease and had desirable levels of cholesterol at the start of the study had a risk of death that increased only slightly, due to ageing, from 1.7 per cent to 4.9 per cent.
They concluded that people with high or borderline high (above 200) cholesterol levels who reduce them will benefit more than people whose levels are within the desirable range.
‘A person who has symptoms of cardiovascular disease has much more to gain from reducing lipid levels [because he or she already has a higher risk of dying from the disease]than does someone with desirable lipid levels,’ he says.
Melissa Fiesta
Runner's World 11/90 
The study confirms that exercise is associated with a reduced risk of coronary disease only when the exercise is both vigorous and current
RACE SERVICE
EDITED BY CONOR O'HAGAN
RACING AHEAD
Keeping the opposition at bay
Bournemouth Bay Run
April 28, 1991
The south coast resort of Bournemouth may not be everyone's choice for a summer holiday, but when drawing up your hectic April racing calendar give the Bournemouth Bay Run your strongest consideration.
This year is the 10th anniversary of the half-marathon, which is one again expected to attract a field of more than 1000, with a strong challenge to John Boyes' 1984 course record of 1:06:09 in prospect.
It's a highly competitive event with pace and pedigree and was rightly selected as one of this year's Star Rank Hot 100 races.
Originally intended as a race to raise money for charity, the success of last year's event allowed the organisers to donate over £3000 to the British Heart Foundation and other local groups.
The route this year will once again start from Bournemouth Pier, run along the promenade up to Hengistbury Head, before leaving the line of the sea as it heads up the scenic cliff tops and down to Boscombe Pier.
It then climbs the inevitably steep hill back up to Alum chine on the return leg to Bournemouth.
It's a scenic coastal route from which, on a clear day, the Isle of Wight comes into view.
The surface is exclusively tarmac and but for the odd hill is relatively flat, say race organisers.
(I believe we usually call this undulating!)
Entry forms and further details of the race can be obtained from:
Miss G Keifer, Recreation Section, Town Hall, Bournemouth, Dorset BH2 6DY.
Pfizer's Thanet Coastal Marathon
April 7, 1991
Scorpions, it seems, are not the only things with a sting in the tail.
The Pfizer's Thanet Coastal Marathon has painfully earned its reputation of saving the worst until the very end of the race.
This tough and challenging rural course finishes with a series of hills, which seem to grow steeper and more demanding as the time to challenge them comes around.
If this kind of challenge is what you're looking for, move quickly, it will be your last chance.
Waning interest from the local running community has forced the organisers to declare this year's race the 10th and last.
For those of you familiar with the Thanet area, the route starts and finishes in Hartsdown park.
It then breaks into the countryside, heading out to Manston before swinging along the coast past Ramsgate and then…the torture begins.
Hill after seemingly endless hill take you through picturesque Broadstairs, Margate and back to Thanet.
Those of you with a nautical leaning can enjoy a view of the lighthouse at Northforeland, along with some pleasant sea views as you glide along the coast, claim the organisers.
It seems doubtful.
Every finisher gets a commemorative piece of horse brass, while higher places can expect to take home vouchers and a variety of other prizes.
Rejects from London have an added incentive for putting their talents on show.
There is a reduction of £1 off the £6 race entry fee on production of the reject slip.
The local Marathon Headquarters Hotel has also entered into the spirit of the event by offering a discount to runners looking to make a weekend out of it.
Entry details are available from Mrs C Patrick, Recreation Division, Hartsdown House, Hartsdown Park, Margate CT9 1QX.
Second Chance Half-marathon
April 28, 1991
In April, the eyes of the running fraternity focus firmly on London.
But they are not alone.
Charities equally look south, either with the eyes of one beholding a feast or of those deprived of a seat at the table.
Some charities with a high public profile, reap rich rewards, others find the competition far too stiff.
One such charity without the national clout to penetrate the increasingly competitive London market is Second Chance, the head injuries support group of Wakefield's Pinderfields Hospital.
Instead of resting on its fundraising laurels, it has for the second year turned to race organising as a means of generating essential revenue.
The organisers say April 28 will see the second running of the Second Chance Half-marathon.
‘Last year we went into the race blind, but it was a great success.
I would like to think this year we will raise more than £6000 and reach the limit of 500 applicants,’ commented race secretary John Holliday.
If you make your choice of races by the scenic nature of the route rather than the needs of the organisers, you probably won't be excited by this one.
Starting at the outskirts of Pinderfields, it's a solid 13 miles of undulating tarmac broken up only by the grass playing fields of Pinderfields at the finish.
The only site of note is a pass over the M62 motorway, which honestly doesn't stand out in my top 10 sights of Britain.
What the race lacks in scenic views, it makes up for in celebrities.
Gordon Kaye, star of 'Allo 'Allo, has confirmed that he will be on hand to start the race and present the prizes.
The top five men and women will win vouchers, the top 100 finishers a T-shirt and everyone receives a commemorative mug and certificate.
Times to beat from last year are Kevin Brown's 1:07:21 and Chris Buckley's 1:24:25 in the women's race.
Further details can be obtained from J F Holliday, 6 Abel Mead, Leeds LS16 8LB.
REPORTS
FROM OUR CORRESPONDENTS
Expressly Marrakesh
Marrakesh Marathon
January 13, 1991
Marrakesh really arrived as a marathon on January 13 when Osmiro de Souza Silva of Brazil, ran alone from 29K to a 2:09:55 ($12,000 cash) victory over a respectable field.
He and Julius Sumawe, of Tanzania, passed halfway in 1:04:45 after easily discarding the rest of the field in the first kilometre.
Sumawe, who had a previous best of 2:15:26 and was an early Berlin pacemaker until a lace came loose, was then overhauled by the Soviet Muhamed Hamat Nazipov (2:14:04 and $9000) and Mohammed Salmi, an Algerian run over in last year's race (2:14:19/$7000) but the Tanzanian's 2:14:22 was also inside Jan Hurak's previous 2:14:30 record.
Poland's Isabella Zatorska, in her marathon debut, took the women's $5000 in a time of 2:38:05 with Soviet Valentina Lunyegova right on her heels and another Pole, Czeskawa Mentlewicz narrowly squeezing under 2:40 to make the national squad.
To add to Marrakesh prestige, the event received royal patronage on the eve of the race and was renamed the Grand Prix Hassan II/Marrakesh International Marathon.
Massive and beautifully-designed trophies were awarded to the top three men and women as the personal gifts given by the king, the princes and the princesses respectively.
If a million are estimated to have watched Berlin, close to that number lined the roads encircling the walled Moroccan city.
The highways were kept free of traffic for four-and-a-half hours until the last straggler finished.
Nothing like the presence of a monarch to keep the police on their toes!
Do Souza Silva reached Marrakesh only the day before after a 7000K flight from Rio, but he didn't seem jet-lagged.
On October 28 he ran a 2:12:17 pb in Chicago following 2:14:50 on August 12 when second to Suleiman Nyambui in Moscow.
His Marrakesh time was a South American record, eclipsing the 2:10:42 of Nivaldo Filho, another much-travelled Brazilian, in Rome on November 18.
Filho, like Osmiro and many Brazilians, fits several marathons into the year and seems to thrive on it, contrary to we Brits who counsel caution.
The Marrakesh field also included many dollar-hungry Soviet, Polish and East Africans, who support these Third World marathons without demanding excessive start money or expenses.
The result: a solid midfield from which a fast time can be generated.
On a tiny budget, Marrakesh had outpaced London, New York, Los Angeles, and Tokyo.
First Moroccan home was Abderahim Benradoune (10th with 2:16:29) who in August was in the Marrakesh team that was prominent in the Great Run from Glasgow to London.
Some 19 athletes were inside 2:20 and 141 broke three hours on a splendidly sunny North African day.
A parallel half-marathon was won by local Youssel Benrkik in 1:04:56.
Houston-Tenneco Marathon
January 20, 1991
Houston, Texas
The Houston-Tenneco Marathon has never paid a penny of ‘start money’ in its 19 years of existence.
As a result, its fields are competitive with a dozen men and women hoping to win the $25,000 first prize, and if not, go away with at least a little piece of the $160,000 prize money.
That's about where Canada's Carey Nelson, 27, a newcomer to marathons, fits in.
Few thought that the winner's cowboy hat (and $25,000 cheque) would come his way but rather that American Paul Pilkington, the 1990 winner, or Soviet Ravil Kashapov, or even Kenyan Sam Ngatia, a frequent competitor over 26 miles, would scoop the lot.
But Nelson, from Vancouver, pulled off the kind of Houston-Tenneco Marathon win that the race has come to expect — a total surprise.
Nelson's reason for running Houston was wanting to run 2:12 as he tried to quality for Canada's World Championships team.
His only previous try at the marathon was 2:15:27, although that was good enough to win the Toronto Marathon last September.
England's Veronique Marot, 35, travelled to the event for a different reason.
She runs well in Houston, having won the race in '86 and '89.
She wanted an indication that she was on target for a good performance in the London Marathon on April 21.
Nelson ran easily among a lead pack of six through 30K, then caught hopeful Leonardo Reyes of Mexico at 38K.
Reyes, 28, was slowed by cramps, and couldn't go with Nelson.
Nevertheless, he led a three-four-five finish by the Mexican runners.
It wasn't Reyes that had Nelson worried, but Czech Martin Vrabel.
At 36, Vrabel was running his ninth marathon, and was closing fast on Nelson.
‘I thought I had a good chance of winning in the end,’ Vrabel said.
‘So did I,’ added Nelson, whose time — 12:12:28 — was a three-minute improvement over his previous marathon best.
Vrabel finished some 12 seconds behind.
Marot was the day's biggest winner, with her $25,000 prize plus $7,000 more in bonuses for leading at two of the three ‘prime’ positions in the second half of the race.
Her challenger was Denmark's Dorothe Rasmussen, who tried to leave Marot at 30K.
They had passed halfway together in 1:1:40.
That pace suited Marot, but not Rasmussen.
‘At one point I thought about stopping,’ Rasmussen said, ‘but that would have been a first for me, because I've never dropped out of a marathon.’
Marot won comfortably in 2:30:55; Rasmussen finished two minutes later, in 2:32:58 with Olga Appell of Mexico taking third place in a time of 2:33:18.
Punchbowl Marathon
February 3, 1991
This 33-mile London Distance Walkers' Association event is unique in its link with the International Association of Ultrarunners.
Some 230 starters contested the race which followed an undulating course over chalk, sand and mud from Whitley.
The ground was hardened by a sharp frost making the going firm on a fine, sunny day.
Competitors started at staggered times but with the leaders all setting off within three minutes of each other, the competition  benefited from an added edge.
The main obstacle was the steep Crooksbury Hill after 19 miles, with the Punchbowl being a descent.
The Crawley AC pair of Charlie Malmsbury and David Beattie shared first place after a four-minute difference at the half-way stage.
Harry Townsend 
RACING AROUND THE WORLD
TRAVEL
Hurricane Hugh storms in
Hugh Jones' racing exploits have gone down in tropical history.
Here he describes how he took the Caribbean by storm
A lot can be learned about a place on a long Sunday morning run.
We had arrived in Barbados only 12 hours earlier, and instead of dead streets and dog walkers, I was running into another world.
By 6.30am the sun was already well up, along with the people.
Thankfully there were not that many in cars.
Passing by pedestrians in their Sunday best, I caught wafts of perfume and coiffure.
At every bus stop there were colourful clutches of women in long dresses with well-scrubbed children, bound for church.
I went past one as the sounds of the seven o'clock service grew from behind the gaping shutters.
I ran up the island's Caribbean coast, catching sight of white sandy beaches in the gaps between buildings.
Hotels and houses nestle among the vegetation.
Although this area is built up, nature bursts out all around.
Coconut palms bow towards the sea, banana trees afford shelter at bus stops and vividly coloured croton hedges separate the patch of one clapboard chattel house from the next.
There is no visible grinding poverty and no antagonism towards tourists.
Other runners waved, but there was no more reaction from pedestrians to the eccentric prospect we must present than there is in Britain.
‘You running on the wrong side of the road,’ I was told by one serious 10-year-old.
I shouted thanks and crossed over, though I was on the same side as every local runner.
To avoid the crowded coast road, I turned inland on weekday training runs.
A series of wave-cut terraces demanded an initial decision on the degree of difficulty for each run.
One level up, there was a polo field which looked useful for efforts.
Early one morning, I ran up to find the horses had the same idea.
I completed my 100 metre strides after they'd gone, my heels flicking up the divots on to the back of my head.
In terms of exercise, horses seem better provided for than runners.
My long runs were mainly around the Garrison Savannah, the colonial army parade ground now a racecourse.
On Sunday mornings our pace was regularly cut as we passed the animals on their way to bathe in the bay.
The human race came around soon enough.
We lined up across the broad esplanade between the Prime Minister's Office and the clear Caribbean Sea.
Before the start the lawns in front of the building had been dotted with runners encamped in pools of shade.
Warming up has an ironic meaning in the tropics.
The snag was how to move muscles without overheating.
In practice, the solution was a minimal warm-up.
So you were left quite unprepared for the lightning 10K race start, made worse this time around by a shouted count-down.
Then, it was elbow-dodging for the first few hundred yards, but after a mile I found myself in front.
Richard O'Flynn, a training partner of John Treacy's with a personal best of 28:20, made an early surge as we ran down an avenue of skyscraping cabbage palms.
As we turned towards the town, Gary Westgate, with a sub-29 minute performance to his credit, contested the pace.
Chris Buckley and Hans Koeleman were still there at halfway, as we passed before the stony gaze of Nelson's statue.
We headed out along the waterfront towards the port, but it felt as if I was treading water.
Then suddenly, at the same point as the previous year, I rejoined the leading pair and hit the front, swinging tangents across the tarmac.
A head stuck out of a clump of spectators at the 7K mark: ‘Come on Jonesy, all Barbados wants you to win’.
And it all began to happen.
Chris Buckley and I became detached as we ran side-by-side towards the town.
Then suddenly I saw daylight over my shoulder as he appeared to falter.
That's how the heat hits you, with finality but no forewarning.
Through the main shopping street, I increased my efforts and hit Bay Street, winning by 100m.
Engulfed by a sea of media correspondents, I shuttled back and forth, hardly saying hello to family and friends, before being led over to the bandstand.
Moments before the Prime Minister presented me with the trophy, I was asked if I would pose in the sea for a tourism promotion picture.
However, the light was fading and so the presentation was made.
I was due to run the marathon the next day.
At 2.25am, our child fell out of bed with a bump.
I read the hands of the clock wrongly, thought it was 5.10, and awoke with a jump, believing it was five minutes before the start of the marathon.
Unable to sleep, I hitched a ride up the road to the start.
A daunting figure came looming out of the night.
Bare-chested, a handkerchief over his head and baggy black pants billowing, only the walkman marked Peter Maher apart from a latter-day Henry Morgan, so pirate-like was his appearance.
It was appropriate warm-up garb, as the Run Barbados Marathon was to go from the point of this historical settlement (established 1627) to Sam Lord's Castle, built with the profits from a wrecker's booty.
The route was daunting.
Reversed from previous years, the last 10 miles included a long climb to begin with and continued on higher ground, which was exposed to both direct sun and prevailing wind.
I thought little about this prospect or indeed, about the opposition, as I was not intending to go the full distance after my exertions in the previous day's 10K.
Poor road surfaces and flickering street lights inhibited my early pace.
Women in nightdresses peeping out of roadside houses lent a surreptitious air to the first few miles.
Dawn broke as the field passed through a shuttered Bridgetown, and I began to pass through the field.
Knots of spectators were there to cheer me on aggressively, and by 10 miles I had caught Peter.
A sort of cat and mouse game followed, especially going up the long hill, but we eventually settled on a dead heat.
Sam Lord's Castle is now a luxurious hotel owned by race sponsors Marriott's.
After lengthy media interrogation about the race and our tie — which the commentators had talked into an exciting crescendo — we flopped into the swimming pool.
We chose the pool because the Atlantic beaches would have been too rough after the race.
At a celebration on the Bajan Queen cruise the next evening.
I got into conversation with Tony Fessal, who had been third in the previous year's 10K.
He suggested a run in a 10K on St Lucia's National Day.
We were intending to visit the island anyway, so on arrival a week later we called on Tony's coach.
Jimmy James is a  restaurateur and running enthusiast who spent years in Britain.
He fixed us up with a drink, accommodation and a training session that evening.
The race was more difficult.
Everyone knew when and where it was, but nothing more.
In town later that day we met a PE teacher, who guided me to the sponsor's offices for a form but no further information.
Heading out to the start in Jimmy's van, we saw tell-tale road markings; it must be more than 10K!
Despite the billing on the T-shirts we were told, as we interrupted the jouvert (dawn fiesta) to line up beside Scotty's Bar, that it was 20K.
St Lucia is volcanic rather than coral, so the terrain is much more rugged than that of Barbados.
The course switch-backed along the main road through hills covered in lush vegetation.
On the way back we passed Rodney Bay Marina (the finishing point for the Atlantic Rally for Cruisers still being contested) and large tracts of land cleared in readiness for development.
To date tourism is important but unobtrusive on the island.
We dog-legged out to Pigeon Point Fort, which had defended the island rather unsuccessfully in years gone by: it changed hands 20 times, mainly between Britain and France.
We took the road back into the tumbledown town of Gros Islet, and finished amid the tumult of the jouvert outside Scotty's.
We went to the capital, Castries, for the afternoon's festivities but arrived too late to see the round-the-town mile (that's about as far as it is).
The winner had finished fourth in the morning's race.
Cycle races followed, and after them no one wanted ti disperse.
We sat around the square feasting on barbecued chicken and beer.
Back in Barbados, we got down to the serious business of Christmas.
After this exotic series, the running was due to taper, but it was still an essential antidote to Barbados recipes for seasonal indulgence.
The events also take you to places that mere sunbathing wouldn't.
All too soon, I was swapping the monkeys and mongooses of the Barbadian backwoods for the rabbits and rodents of Hampstead.
John Boyes set the time to beat at Bournemouth in 1984
The route took the runners around Marrakesh's elegant city wall
Jet lag didn't stop de Souza Silva from taking the honours
Marot…on target for a good run in London
Australian Russell Foley ran to an impressive victory in the picturesque General Portfolio Canterbury 10 on January 29 with 48:30.
Some 36 seconds adrift in second place was Mike Grafton.
The ubiquitous Penny combination led Cambridge Harriers to victory in both team races.
Keith Penny was first Vet home in seventh place overall 50:16, while wife Glynis won the women's race outright in 56:25.
Above , the start of the St Lucia 20K.
Below , Jones enjoys a cat and mouse battle with Maher in Barbados
The local press just had to hear every race detail from Jones and Peter Maher
‘Come on Jonesy, all Barbados wants you to win’
RUNNING TO HELP OTHERS
CHARITY TALK
Granting their wishes
The success of the 1990 ADT London Marathon has allowed it to make grants totalling £247,300 to London Boroughs.
When the marathon was originally started in 1981, one of its original aims was to raise money to provide recreational facilities in London.
This year's donations were the largest given in a single year.
Among the nine projects  benefiting from this year's grants were Southwark, which receives £29,555 to provide floodlighting at the Orchard Sports Centre and the London Duke of Edinburgh Gold Award Scheme, which gets £25,000.
In its 10-year history, the London Marathon has made grants of almost £900,000 for recreational facilities in the capital.
Commenting on this year's grants, Race Director Chris Brasher said: ‘It's a fantastic achievement and one of which we are very proud.
No other major marathon in world consistently produces a surplus for the benefit of the city through which it runs.’
Recruitment drive
Money raised by runners for Birthright in 1990 will fund one of its research projects for about 12 months.
The cash raised came to £25,000, much of it from 60 sponsored athletes who ran in last year's ADT London Marathon.
Now it is aiming to recruit 100 runners for London 1991 and is eager to increase contributions from various other regional running events.
Birthright is the appeal arm of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists.
It funds research into the better health of women and babies around the country.
The research looks into gynaecological conditions from cancer to the menopause, infertility or pregnancy-related problems, together with work on the problems of babies before, during and after birth.
Each year it starts about 15 new research projects, in 1991 these will address such problems as the association between smoking and cervical cancer and why high blood pressure affects one in 10 pregnant women.
More details are available from Birthright, 27 Sussex Place, London NW1 4SP.
Aspiring to great things
Sport is a great equaliser.
Every year races, such as the London, demonstrate how disabled and able-bodied athletes can compete side-by-side in the same competition.
The Association for Spinal Injury Research Rehabilitation and Reintegration (ASPIRE) aims to use sport to further integrate disabled and able-bodied people.
Through its fundraising activities ASPIRE has already financed the construction of a £2m Sports and Rehabilitation Centre and wants to do more.
Contributions from runners usually make up around £20,000 of ASPIRE's annual revenue.
The revenue target for 1991 is the sum of £500,000, needed to run the Sports and Rehabilitation Centre, to build new facilities and to fund research projects.
Further details can be obtained from the Association for Spinal Injury Research Rehabilitation and Reintegration, Royal Orthopaedic Hospital, Brockley Hill, Stanmore, Middlesex HA7 4LP.
On the run for a good cause
Going to prison in unquestionably a traumatic experience.
It does not, however, have to be the end of your life nor, as two inmates from Leyhill Open Prison are showing, does it have to be the end of your running.
Tony Ross, a running enthusiast who runs between 30 and 40 miles a week, and fellow inmate Keith Arliss plan to raise money for charity by running and cycling to nine prisons in Wales and the West Country.
Money raised from their endeavours will be divided between the Abused Children's Action Group and the Victims of Crime Support Group.
The pair are looking to businesses and local traders in the areas they are running through to offer support, either by making direct or sponsored cash contributions, or by donating equipment.
They also intend to encourage groups of inmates at the prisons they are visiting to hold their own fundraising events to further support their efforts.
Details from Tony Ross (960), A-Unit, HMP Leyhill, Wotton-Under-Edge, Gloucester GL12 8HL.
WIN A GRANDSTAND VIEW OF THE LONDON
As a spectacle few events match the ADT London Marathon.
With this year's addition of the IAAF World Marathon Cup, the 1991 race promises to be the best ever.
But unless you spend the night before patiently reserving your patch, finding a prime viewing spot can be like trying to catch the tube in the morning rush hour.
For a privileged few there are no such problems.
They are the ones who can look down on the competition from the grandstand near the finish on Westminster Bridge.
RUNNING Magazine in co-ordination with adidas UK is offering 10 readers the chance to join them.
We have five pairs of VIP grandstand seats which will go to the winners of our charity competition.
The ADT London Marathon and charity go hand in hand, so we want to hear about your charity running experiences, whether at London or other events around the country.
This may involve raising money, donating time or possibly recovering from a serious illness to compete in a race for charity.
Any charity-related story qualifies.
The five stories which catch our eye will win the author a pair of tickets and may appear in the magazine in future months.
Send in your stories in no more than 300 words and make sure they reach us by March 30.
As well as the chance to witness the climax of the men's and women's World Marathon Cup and watch a friend or relative struggle over the line, the tickets also include breakfast at a London hotel, once again courtesy of adidas UK.
So start thinking about those charity experiences and make sure you write to us by March 30 to have a chance of winning.
Send your entries to adidas Grandstand Competition, RUNNING Magazine, 60–71 Goswell Road, London EC1V 7EN.
THE RUNNERS' NOTICEBOARD
CLUB NEWS
Bitten not smitten
Vauxhall Motors, a major sponsor of British athletics, is under attack over major plans to redevelop its Luton sports grounds into a multi-million pound leisure complex.
The Brache Estate sports ground occupies land sold by the late Lady Zia Wernher to the car company on condition that it be used for sport.
Vauxhall Motors AC is one of several sports clubs that uses the land regularly.
It uses the ground's grass areas and cinder track for training.
Several notable internationals have trained at Brache, including David Bedford, who used the facility in preparation for breaking the 10,000m world record in 1973.
Tony Simmons set a world age 16 best at Brache in 1965, with 30:16 for six miles.
Under a plan passed by Luton Council's planning committee, Vauxhall would build a 153-bedroom luxury hotel, with 60,000sq ft of office space, a health club, swimming pool and bowling alley, plus factory units on the site.
Although Vauxhall has given assurances that all existing facilities will be replaced, it is understood that many will be at out-of-town sites.
Luton's only other training track is the all-weather facility at Stockwood Park, which would involve lengthy travel for many club members.
Despite strong protests, both from users of the Brache ground and from residents, Luton's Conservative-controlled council has backed the plans, which will now be submitted to the Department of the Environment for final approval.
A reason for running
The Royal Marsden Hospital Cancer Appeal, which is one of two official charities nominated by the 1991 IAAF ADT London Marathon, is appealing to clubs for support in raising funds through sponsorship.
Any clubs or individuals wishing to help can contact Jeremy Ward at The Royal Marsden Hospital Cancer Appeal, 203 Fulham Road, London SW3 6JJ.
Spring Sprint date
The Capital Road Runners' Spring Sprint on April 14 is not, as reported in Club News (March 1991) part of the General Portfolio Road Race series.
The Spring Sprint is organised by Capital Road Runners with East London Runners, and is supported by RUNNING.
Just your cup of tea
The 100K Association has decided to widen its interests, and will henceforth promote ultra events of all distances and durations.
From this year, the Association will organise an annual British Ultra Distance Cup, consisting of five events, including two of 100K.
Entrants for the Cup need not be members, but the 100K Association will award special prizes for members.
There will also be awards for best novice and most improved 100K performance.
This year's selected events are: May 6, Feltham Puffers 24-hour; June 2, National 100K Championships; July 21, Lincolnshire Ultra 100K; August 24, Two Bridges Road Race 100K; and the London to Brighton Race 52 miles, October 6.
BMRC folds
The British Marathon Runners Club will be wound up on August 1 after 13 years.
The decision to fold follows a club meeting at its Coventry base, which was attended by only four out of 1200 members.
The BMRC was founded in 1978 as a forum for marathon runners with a pb below the then relatively élite 2:30 mark.
With the marathon boom of the early 1980s, however, the club's membership leapt.
The qualifying time was relaxed to three hours, and many of the early members felt that the BMRC had lost its original purpose and relevance.
According to BMRC secretary Dick Hughes, the club's half-marathon championships at Coventry, and the marathon championships, the Pennine Marathon, both of which are on July 7, will go ahead.
WIN OUR NATIONAL FUN RUN TROPHY
RUNNING Magazine has joined forces with the National Fun Run to create a new award in recognition of the best club team performances in this year's race.
The National Fun Run is one of Britain's biggest participatory sports events, and like RUNNING Magazine has, since 1978, fuelled the running boom by drawing ever more people into the sport.
We will be looking for the team that shows most strength in depth, across a range of ages, and both sexes.
In keeping with the original aims of the National Fun Run, we want to encourage clubs to enter teams which reflect their whole membership, rather than just their fastest runners.
The scoring system for the RUNNING Magazine trophy will reflect these aims, and will be detailed in a future issue.
Competing for the trophy will not interfere with your eligibility for the traditional category prizes awarded at the National Fun Run.
All teams will be scored in the normal way for these awards.
Clubs of all sizes — whether they have 20 or 200 members — will be eligible to compete for the RUNNING Magazine team trophy.
There will be additional trophies for second and third team performances.
Further details and entry forms for the RUNNING Magazine trophy will appear in future issues.
But if you wish to receive a priority entry, just fill out and return the coupon left to RUNNING Magazine/National Fun Run, 67–71 Goswell Road, London EC1V 7EN.
Billy Dee is among the dozens of athletes who train at Brache Estate