

ADORNO'S REPROACH: REPETITION, DIFFERENCE AND TELEVISION GENRE
John Caughie
In two recent articles in Screen , Steve Neale has gone some way towards extending the theorization of film genre along both general and particular lines.
In ‘Questions of genre’ he has returned to such fundamental terms of genre poetics as expectation, verisimilitude institutional discourses and practices specific to cinema; his essay on the American war film breaks down the homogeneous generality of a single film genre into particular typologies of form, structure and discourse which play out particular regimes of power and ideology.
In this way, he has moved consideration of film genre from the broad, structural categories of earlier film theory to historically attentive readings, informed by a knowledge of both forms and institutions.
What is at stake in this, and in the work of a number of other writers whom Neale acknowledged, is a sensitivity to generic difference as much as to repetition, and, in particular, to generic difference which cannot simply be assigned to the magical agency of authorship.
Reading Neale's articles in the immediate context of teaching for the first time a course dangerously titled, ‘Television Theory’(is there such a thing?),
I am struck by the pervasiveness of assumptions of genre in writing and thinking about television, and by the simultaneous difficulty of identifying where the theoretical groundings of these assumptions lie.
In its endless repetition week in and week out, and in its flight from the prestige of one-off production towards the reliability of the serial or the packaged series, television seems to involve a process of categorization more  intense even than that of the mass production of Hollywood cinema in its classical period.
Contemporary popular music, in fact, with its fine tuning of genre mutations and blurrings and its rapid responsiveness to demographics, might be a more productive place than popular cinema from which to start thinking about the processes of television genre.
And yet, despite the centrality of categorization and genre to television production and consumption, there seems to lie little more behind most theoretical writing about television fiction than the given institutional programme categories — soap opera, sitcom, drama (with or without some recognition of cross-overs and mixing).
Frequently dependent on assumptions of common cause with film theory and criticism, television genre theory is uncomplicated by the longer and more complex history of aesthetics and poetics.
This article, then, is motivated by a dissatisfaction or a discomfort with most of what passes for television theory: the doubts about the existence of anything which can usefully be called television theory are real.
Questions of genre, of the organization of repetition and difference, seem fundamental to television, not only as an institution and a discourse, but also as a form of subjectivity.
The understanding of that subjectivity, though it is qualified by ethnography and empirical study, is still a central problem for theory.
Starting from a point further back in the development of a theory of television than that from which Steve Neale begins for cinema, I want to suggest some ways of thinking about television genre, which, though they will not deal with particular programme categories, may open out some more complex ways of thinking about the aesthetics and poetics of television.
The article, then, is exploratory rather than definitive, inciting theory rather than assuming it, attempting to open up some territory or to clear some ground rather than to fortify a final position.
I want to begin with a question which Neale does not explicitly address, but which seems to me to be a particular blind-spot which has determined the shape of television critical theory: the question of value.
Adorno's reproach
With or without Horkheimer, with or without the Frankfurt School, the name of Adorno has come to stand in cultural criticism for an immediately knowable, instantly impeachable thought-crime: ‘cultural pessimism’.
His denunciations of the ‘stylized barbarity’ of the Culture Industry, most notably in Dialectic of Enlightenment written with Max Horkheimer in 1944, have provided an effective springboard from which to launch counter-proposals for an approach — to television particularly — more user-friendly to the complexities  of address and response in popular or ‘mass’culture.
With irresistible irony, Adorno and Horkheimer's brilliant critique of the remythologization of the Enlightenment has itself, in precisely their own terms (‘using the devices of familiarity and straightforward dismissal to avoid the labour of conceptualization’), been turned into myth.
While it may not now be possible fully to recover their critique of mass culture from the totalizing force of its own negative rhetoric, it is at least possible to regret the ease with which it has been adopted as the convenient apostasy of a new rhetoric, operating as a kind of semaphore, signalling correct positions across great distances with a simplified and purely functional code.
Here, briefly, I want to take their critique seriously as a way of identifying the issue of value, of resisting the more celebratory aspects of an accommodation to the logic of commodification and consumption, and of recovering some of the ground lost or forfeited by critique.
Fredric Jameson, in his recent study, finds in Adorno's cultural critique,
one crucial thematic differentiation between ‘genuine art’ and that offered by the Culture Industry: both raise the issue and the possibility of happiness in their very being, as it were, and neither provides it; but where one keeps faith with it by negation and suffering, the other assures us it is taking place.
Negation — the refusal of the administrative rationality of the bourgeois Enlightenment — lies at the heart of Adorno's project, and at the heart of the whole notion of critique and critical theory.
The immediate historical provocation for their critique of conformity, indifference and the apparent predisposition to barbarity is clearly, for Adorno and Horkheimer, the rise of fascism; but what is more generally at issue is the intrusion of Enlightenment rationality, capitalist common-sense and the logic of commodification into the very core of the cultural field and the aesthetic.
In Adorno's aesthetics, the value of the cultural and the aesthetic lies in difference and negation and it is this which is threatened by the commodification of culture.
Developing since the Enlightenment of the eighteenth century, accelerating in the nineteenth century in step with the acceleration of capitalist industry, the process of intrusion increasingly separated culture out into the familiar contours of ‘high’ and ‘low’, isolating what it could not assimilate.
By the middle of the twentieth century, Adorno found himself confronted with a cultural field in which the squeezed and narrowing pinnacle of aesthetic difference and negation had all but detached itself completely from the squat, commodified mass of capitalist ‘affirmative’ culture.
For Adorno (as, at around the same time, for Clement Greenberg), the ‘genuine’ avant garde, represented most emblematically in his writing by his teacher, Schoenberg, was the last vestige of ‘authentic art’whose  difficulty and inaccessibility were the marks of its unassimilable difference and its negation of bourgeois rationality, capitalist purposiveness, and what Peter Sloterdijk would later call ‘cynical reason’.
The planned and formulaic rationality of the Enlightenment, according to the critique, is increasingly marked by the familiar, the conventional and by ‘sameness’: a sameness which need not exclude difference, but contains it within the rational, functional and acceptable forms of its own choosing.
Acceptable difference, rather than weakening the force and the confidence of normative rationality, tightens its grip and extends its appeal.
It is characteristic of the sickness that even the best-intentioned reformer who uses an impoverished and debased language to recommend renewal, by his adoption of the insidious mode of categorization and the bad philosophy it conceals, strengthens the very power of the established order he is trying to break.
False clarity is only another name for myth; and myth has always been obscure and enlightening at one and the same time: always using the devices of familiarity and straightforward dismissal to avoid the labour of conceptualization.
Adorno's critique, therefore, and in particular the critique of the Culture Industry is mounted from the increasingly beleaguered and restricted field of the avant garde, and it is this, in part , which wins it the current disapproval of the more enthusiastically affirmative, apparently democratic, or outright populist approaches to popular culture.
Undoubtedly, the failure or unwillingness of Adorno and Horkheimer to find difference in the cultural find which they survey in the Culture Industry essay — American popular culture of the thirties — is damaging.
The particular avant-garde perspective of their critique (as of Greenberg's) makes it difficult to avoid first impressions of a conflation in their work of ‘genuine art’ with ‘elite art’.
It is, however, worth noting some symptomatic cracks in the uniformity of their scorn for the products of the Culture Industry.
The suggestive outlines of a hierarchy of disdain can be traced: the ‘tragic Garbo’ is preferred to Mickey Rooney, Betty Boop to Donald Duck; their most acerbic denunciations are reserved not for ‘amusement’or ‘light’art in themselves, but for the attempt by the Culture Industry to absorb ‘light’into ‘serious art’, accommodating difference to the familiar —‘Benny Goodman appears with the Budapest string quartet’.
Entertainment seems historically rather than essentially debased, and what emerges is a recognition of the historical possibility of popular entertainment as an autonomous art which might turn on its head the seriousness of official, rational discourse.
Adorno and Horkheimer, the apostates, may not be so far away from Bakhtin, the new prophet, as some critical celebrants of carnival might admit:
The eccentricity of the circus, peepshow, and brothel is as embarrassing to (the Culture Industry) as that of Schoenberg or Karl Kraus.
Like Bakhtin, Adorno and Horkheimer recognize the capacity of physical art and non-sense to negate oppressive reason, though they shut off (only more explicitly than Bakhtin) the possibility of this capacity being realized in contemporary culture:
In some revue films, and especially in the grotesque and the funnies, the possibility of…negation does glimmer for a few moments.
But of course it cannot happen.
It cannot happen not because the forms of negation are mindless, but precisely because they are too mindful of meaning and significance, constantly reminded of rationality and purposive thought:
The culture industry is corrupt; not because it is a sinful Babylon but because it is a cathedral dedicated to elevated pleasure…
The culture industry does retain a trace of something better in those features which bring it close to the circus, in the self-justifying and nonsensical skill of riders, acrobats and clowns, in the ‘defense and justification of physical as against intellectual art’(Wedekind).
But the refuges of a mindless artistry which represents what is human as opposed to the social mechanism are being relentlessly hunted down by a schematic reason which compels everything to prove its significance and effect.
The consequence is that the nonsensical at the bottom disappears as utterly as the sense in works of art at the top.
The fusion of culture and entertainment that is taking place today leads not only to a  depravation of culture, but inevitably to an intellectualization of amusement.
Like Bakhtin, again, Adorno and Horkheimer maintain that mass or popular entertainment finds the condition of its existence and its significance in its relationship to ‘official discourse’ and the culture industry.
Bakhtin continually recognizes that the parodic force of popular-festive forms could not survive unqualified after the force of the sacred word which they parodied had itself been qualified by the dawning administrative rationality of the Renaissance: the dawning of exactly that rationality which provides the pre-history of Adorno and Horkheimer's critique.
Similarly, though from a different historical perspective, Adorno and Horkheimer, confronting the massive extension and technical development of that rationality, acknowledge the possibility, and even the residue, of difference and negation in the nonsense of eccentric entertainment — a residual refusal of official meaning — but can place no faith in its capacity to survive as anything more than fun, as anything  other than acceptable difference within the logic of capitalist culture and the totality of the culture industry.
Where Adorno and Horkheimer differ from Bakhtin, and where their ‘pessimism’ emerges most clearly, is in the absence of his sense of the dialogic: of ‘serious’and ‘light’, ‘authentic culture’and ‘entertainment’, in dialogue with each other, each working on the other, each qualifying and transforming the other, sometimes in unpredictable ways.
However rhetorically brilliant, the critique which Adorno and Horkheimer in Dialectic of Enlightenment offer is ultimately a totalizing discourse in which the dialectic struggles and twists against itself, serving only to tighten the knot which binds it.
It is in the myth of Odysseus that they most poignantly figure out the tragic paralysis of the dialectic, and, by extension, the quandary of cultural critique: to steer past the temptations of the Sirens whose fatal song cannot be resisted, Odysseus stuffs his men's ears with wax so that they will not be distracted from their rowing, and binds himself to the mast with orders that he must not be released.
He, ‘the seigneur’, hears the ravishing beauty of the song, but cannot act and is not free; they labour and act in a practical fashion, but do not hear.
What Odysseus hears is without consequence for him; he is able only to nod his head as a sign to be set free from his bonds; but it is too late; his men, who do not listen, know only the song's danger but nothing of its beauty, and leave him at the mast to save him and themselves.
The sense of tragic beauty which characterizes their recasting of the myth of Odysseus permeates much of the critique.
Its metaphors of inevitability and its intricate dialectical traps construct a myth of Enlightenment which has emotional as much as analytic power.
At the same time, it builds a prison-house of rhetoric from which there may be no practical possibility of escape: as later with the writings of Baudrillard, their critique, in its totalizing embrace, always seems to have a neutralizing answer to suggestions of difference.
It is not hard to see how attempts to value popular culture or television, or to legitimize their academic study, come up against Adorno and Horkheimer as a check which it may be easier to think around than to think through.
Simply to dismiss their work as ‘pessimistic’, however, or to use it emblematically as a naive position which we now know better than to take seriously, seems to me hopelessly to devalue the currency of critique.
Day-to-day television, in its regularity and its availability, seems regulated by repetition and modulated by acceptable difference.
Somewhat perversely, however, what I want to retain from Adorno, and from his consistent reproach, is the centrality of difference as negation rather than as variation: a difference which is not ‘indifferent’, but in which something is at stake; and a difference, more  difficultly, which is not solely dependent on what Raymond Williams somewhere calls ‘the more negotiable process of consumption’.
If this involves smuggling something of an avant-garde sensibility into the theorization of television, so be it.
The question of difference and singularity was always there for ‘classical’ film theory as an underpinning, whether acknowledged or not, for the valorization — and particularly for the legitimation as ‘progressive’— of a popular culture which is produced as product and circulates as commodity.
However anti-elitist and however defensive of a culturally democratic popular, within a modernist film criticism growing out of romanticism a canon emerges in which difference was (and is) identified with the author whose individual signature separates the text and the oeuvre from the cynical indifference of mass production.
Within a modernist film criticism inflected by structuralism or poststructuralism, generic production is valued as different by its inability to resolve the social contradictions which its repetitions and conventions are there to repress.
In both, ‘irrationality’— in the form of authorial personality, unconscious contradiction or excess — is discovered as negation at the heart of the commercial and purposeful rationality of capitalist production and bourgeois ideology.
Adorno's critique, in fact, was never as far away from the motivations of cultural criticisms as one would imagine from the myth.
Postmodernist criticism, however, slipping away from critique and negation with varying degrees of enthusiasm, seems to challenge the security of values.
It seems to invert the hierarchy, apparently renouncing the modernist insistence on difference and originality, and seeking value instead in repetition in its various forms: recombination, refunctioning, pastiche.
But it is worth noting that at least for the criticism of popular culture, and of television in particular, this apparently postmodern move may have less to do with a radical change in the terms of value than with a fundamental shift of attention — and of political faith — from the text to the audience.
Rather than finally rejecting difference as the central term of critical value, this criticism instead relocates value onto the difference of consumers: it is in consumption rather than in the text that originality and creativity are to be found.
Clearly there is something very important going on in this move, and at one level it is indeed a necessary corrective to the textual isolationism of much modernist criticism.
For television, in particular, where the text is itself both a theoretical problem (where does a television text begin and end?), and a banal critical object (in comparison with the things people do with it), it may be inevitable that attention fastens on an ethnography of consumption rather than on the objects of production.
And there is empirical evidence in this ethnography for an understanding of the social subjectivity of viewers which is inescapable for theoretical work on television.
Ethnography, however, is a fairly disciplined pursuit, and it is worth stressing David Morley's recent warning that the problem of the ‘ethnography’ of some recent writing is its lack of discipline, and its lack of an adequate sociology.
The warning is clearly important.
Here, for my argument, I would extend it to say that, in the absence of an adequate sociology, such ‘ethnography’ comes dangerously — close to confusing itself with aesthetics, confusing description with evaluation.
Simply (or not so simply) to relocate value onto consumption not only misrecognizes ethnography, it also leaves behind it a problem in the aesthetics of production — a problem which has both critical and political dimensions.
It gives criticism, and critical theory, no way of knowing what it is for: no way, that is,— of arguing for one kind of production against another, or of valuing some forms over others.
Critique is replaced by commentary, and by an act of faith in the capacity of consumers to do surprising and amazing things with what they daily receive.
Questions of genre, central to any theory of television, are inextricably bound up with questions of repetition and difference, and television raises these questions in quite specific ways.
Adorno seems to me to situate the problem, without necessarily being the solution to it.
While attentive to the spirit of his reproach, it is not enough to retreat into the security of a duality — even a dialectic duality — in which difference is always already valorized against the corrosiveness of repetition; but nor is it enough simply to reverse the poles and allow the current to run the other way.
Fredric Jameson, in his article ‘Postmodernism and the video-text’, comments that experimental video may, provide a useful vantage point from which to think about commercial television:
In that sense, thinking anything adequate about commercial television may well involve ignoring it and thinking about something else: in (this) instance, experimental video….
This is less a matter of mass versus elite culture than it is of controlled laboratory situations: what is so highly specialised as to seem aberrant and uncharacteristic in the (world) of daily life…can often yield crucial information about the properties of an object of study whose familiar everyday forms obscure it.
While agreeing with the spirit of Jameson's suggestion that an avant-garde sensibility may displace and make strange the regularity of everyday television, it is not enough to appeal to an already formed avant garde— formed in another place or at another time and for another purpose — which can be hauled in and held up to television as a template of value.
The notion of an avant-garde sensibility here functions simply as the ‘other’ of existing television (just as much of the most interesting experimental video refunctions existing television as its other), a point outside the discourse of actually existing television from which we can argue about what it is that we  actually want.
Adorno seems to offer such a ‘sticking point’, and for that reason it seems worth confronting his critique rather than burying it as myth.
It is, in any case, one of the problems of television theory that, like television itself, it tries to operate without a history: it has no Bazin or Eisenstein to test its grounds.
Adorno offers one starting point for such a history.
But while his writing on mass culture might be used to place on the historical agenda of television theory the idea of difference and of the avant garde, the particular forms which that idea might take for television at the end of the twentieth century cannot be predicted from his work.
I want now to turn to some questions of form and genre, trying to identify a particular set of formal and institutional parameters for television, and returning at the end of the essay to questions of value.
Television genre and novelistic discourse
Discussions of film and television genre habitually nod towards the broad stylistic categories fundamental to literary aesthetics since Aristotle — epic, lyric, drama, comedy, tragedy — and quickly move on to the more immediately recognizable categories under which industry products are branded and sold — horror, western, musical, soap opera, crime series.
There are of course exceptions — film noir, melodrama and, for television, prime-time melodrama are critical attempts to define a genre or distinguish a subgenre where no industry label exists — and in television there is increasing recognition by both critics and producers of cross-generic mutations which defy easy categorization.
Broadly, however, it remains true that marketing and programme categories provide the base point from which most critical work on film and television genre proceeds.
Clearly these are important categories in that they have come to define the narrative expectations on which genres play, but it is important to recognize their limitations.
How far can one go with a classification which includes 'Allo!, 'Allo !(1984-),Blackadder (1983-), and M.A.S.H .
(1972–84), or The Bill (1988-),Miami Vice (1984-) and Hill Street Blues (1980–9) except to define each series as constituting its own generic subcategory?
Such a definition may indeed give important critical insights into the immediate workings of individual series and into the system of expectations which they put into play, but it seems, in the end, to add very little to a theory of genre.
Again, quite usefully, such classifications will throw into relief the difficulty in television of generalizing across national systems in the absence of the kind of international standard which classical Hollywood cinema has provided for the understanding of cinema.
They also demonstrate the very considerable importance of scheduling and demographic targeting in establishing distinctions within broad categories: in order to make sense of broad programmatic genres like soap opera or crime series it always seems necessary to identify them with a qualifying time-slot — daytime soap, early evening soap and prime-time soap; or, in Britain, pre-nine o'clock crime series (the tradition of Dixon of Dock Green (1955–76),Juliet Bravo (1980–9) and The Bill (1988-) and post-nine o'clock crime (the subgenres of The Sweeney (1974–8) and Taggart (1985-), and of the US imports).
Broad generic categories, then, seem only to lead to narrower subgeneric subcategories, though that in itself may be a useful exercise in classification.
It is also clear from the case study of MTM, edited by Jane Feuer, Paul Kerr and Tise Vahimagi, that other agencies than genre have to be brought in to trace and explain consistencies within and across television series.
There may be more significant consistencies to be traced across the corporate authorship of MTM in programmes like Hill Street Blues and St. Elsewhere (1982–8), or across the individual authorship of Steve Bochco in Hill Street Blues and L.A. Law (1986-), than can be traced across hospital melodramas like St. Elsewhere and, say,Dr. Kildare (1961–6).
More recently,Twin Peaks (1990-) may be less surprising in its unsettling mix of crime, pastiche and parody when it is recognized that its coauthor, Mark Frost, was also a script writer of the first Hill Street Blues series.
In other words, studies of television genre begin to reinvent some of the wheels which film authorship and genre studies set in motion some time ago.
All of this may provide important insights into the functioning of particular programmes, series and programmes categories, and necessary tools in the critical analysis of television.
It is the necessary end-point of the detailed study of television programmes.
What it does not seem to me to offer, and what seems crucial for the intensely generic regime which television operates, is the beginning of a theory of genre specific to television which addresses not only the systems, but the forms of subjectivity which these systems imply.
As a way of approaching such a theory, I want to step back from questions of programme categorization and return to prior questions of the poetics of genre in case there is something there which the more immediate premisses of popular genre have been missing.
In his very influential chapter on ‘Literary genres’ at the beginning of his book,The Fantastic , Todorov distinguishes ‘three aspects of the literary work: the verbal, the syntactical, and the semantic’.
The verbal aspect, ‘resides in the concrete sentences which constitute the text.’
It relates both to ‘the properties of the utterance itself, and to its ‘performance, to the person who emits the text and to the person who receives it.’
(‘These problems’, says Todorov parenthetically, ‘have hitherto been studied in terms of‘point of view’.)’
The syntactic aspect refers to,
relations which the parts of the work sustain among themselves (the old expression for this was ‘composition’).
These relations can be of three types: logical, temporal, and spatial…
The semantic aspect refers to the ‘themes’ of a literary text.
Although Todorov advances no ‘general hypothesis’ about the articulation of literary themes, he does, as a structuralist, believe them to be finite and knowable:
…we may safely assume that there exists some universal semantics of literature, comprehending the themes which are to be met with always and everywhere and which are limited in number; their transformations and combinations produce the apparent multitude of literary themes.
Literary works are constituted by the complex interrelation of these aspects which can be isolated only in analysis.
Although it may blunt some of the sharpness of the terms, we might map their literary specificity against terms traditional to film and television analysis such as‘style’(or ‘mise-en-scene’), ‘narrative structure’, and theme.
Importantly for the point I am making about the study of television genre, Todorov closes his summary of propositions thus:
The concept of genre must be qualified.
We have set in opposition, on the one hand, historical and theoretical genres: historical genres are the result of an observation of literary phenomena; theoretical genres are deducted from a theory of literature.
Further, we have distinguished, within theoretical genres, between elementary and complex genres: the former are characterized by the presence or absence of a single structural feature; the latter by the presence or absence of a conjunction of such features.
Everything suggests that historical genres are a subgroup of complex theoretical genres.
This offers two distinctions which seem useful for thinking about television genre: a distinction, on the one hand, between historical and theoretical genres, and, on the other, between elementary and complex genres.
It also implies a relationship between the two.
Much of the writing about television fiction seems to me to remain at the level of elementary genres, grounded in the dominance of the semantic aspect, with relatively little analytic or historical attention to the ‘verbal’(style, mise-en-scene) or the ‘syntactic’(narrative structure): there is very little close textual analysis of television fiction, and there is no scholarly history of the development of television form to compare with the histories which have emerged of early cinema.
This may be an effect of the uncertainty around television's textuality; but it is now an extremely limiting effect for the development of theory.
With respect to the distinction between historical and theoretical genres, my concern here is with theoretical genres.
For what follows, I want to suggest, first, that the study of observable, historical television genres — the largely elementary, predominantly thematic categories of television schedules — needs to be underpinned by a much more complex understanding than we presently have of the theoretical genre of ‘television narrative fiction’ to which they belong; and, second, that that understanding may best be approached by placing television narrative fiction in some definite historical and theoretical relationship to a yet wider generic category: that of novelistic discourse.
‘Of all the major genres’, says Bakhtin in his essay ‘Epic and the novel’,
only the novel is younger than writing and the book: it alone is organically receptive to new forms of mute reception, that is, to reading…
This accounts for the extraordinary difficulty inherent in formulating a theory of the novel.
For such a theory has at its heart an object of study completely different to that which theory treats in other genres.
The novel is not merely one genre among other genres.
Among genres long since completed and in part already dead, the novel is the only developing genre.
It is the only genre that was born and nourished in a new era of world history and therefore it is deeply akin to that era, whereas the other major genres entered that era as already fixed forms, as an inheritance, and only now are they adapting themselves — some better, some worse — to the new conditions of their existence.
Compared with them, the novel appears to be a creature from an alien species.
It gets on poorly with other genres.
It fights for its own hegemony in literature; wherever it triumphs, the older genres go into decline.
The work of Bakhtin has been ‘taken up’ in television writing — most problematically in some appropriations of the theory of carnival developed in Rabelais and His World — and the critical vocabulary of the ‘chronotope’and ‘the dialogic’which is developed in his extensive work on literature, culture and language is beginning to achieve some deserved currency.
What has not been developed to the same extent is the suggestiveness of his work on the novel for theories of genre, a suggestiveness which I will only touch on here, but which seems to me to be worth a great deal more investigation and discussion.
Bakhtin himself extends his concern and his enthusiasm from the novel — a particular form existing within a definite historical period — to a more extensive novelistic discourse of which the novel itself is only one historical development, a development which, in its complexity and ‘polyglossia ’, most fully realizes the potential of the  genre.
The distinction is clearly similar to that between Todorov's historical and theoretical genres.
What I am suggesting for an understanding of the workings of television generic fiction and its associated forms of subjectivity (or, indeed, of narrative cinema and its subjectivity), is that it may be more fruitful if we approach it as an historical development of the complex, theoretical genre of novelistic discourse rather than as a collection of autonomous elementary, historical genres.
Just as Bakhtin, somewhat scandalously, traces the rise of the novel back to the romances and adventure narratives of Hellenistic Greece, so it may be useful, if equally scandalous, to think of film and television narratives as forward projections of the same novelistic discourse into new media using radically different technologies of transmission and reception.
Such an approach is not at all for the sake of establishing some banal historical continuity, or of demonstrating a universal homogeneity of narrative; rather it allows precise tracings of specific historical shifts and distinct orderings of narrative and the novelistic, generic responses to historical, technological and social re-orderings.
Bakhtin's enthusiasm for the novelistic is indeed inspired by its very responsiveness and its capacity to be changed.
Methodologically, the ‘chronotope’— the specific organization of space and time within the work or within a genre — is at the centre of Bakhtin's tracings of the changes within genres and of the boundaries between them.
‘The chronotope’, according to Michael Holquist and Katerina Clark, ‘both defines genre and generic distinction and established the boundaries between the various intrageneric subcategories of the major literary types.’
In his return to classical Greek narrative, for example, Bakhtin distinguishes three spatio-temporal regimes which, he argues, still leave traces in contemporary narratives: romance ‘adventure time’, the ‘adventure time of everyday life’ and ‘biographical time’.
In the ancient romance, the initial event (boy meets girl) and the final event (boy marries girl) are separated by a series of Events which have no causal relationship and no natural location, and which, though they impede the relationship between the boy and girl, do not change it.
The characters — if such a term is even appropriate — do not grow; the chronotope is ‘characterized by a technical, abstract connection between space and time, by the reversibility of moments in temporal sequence, and by this interchangeability of Space.’
In the adventure of everyday life, on the other hand, the characters are affected by the events (however fantastic) that befall them, and the progression of changes fixes the order of events, giving a materiality to space as the scene of transformation and metamorphosis: ‘Space becomes concrete and saturated with a time that is more substantial.’
Biographical time, the most complex of the three, the most various in the chronotopal forms it takes, and the most influential on later developments of the novel, places  character at its centre, organizing space and time around it, variously tracing time as a spiritual or intellectual journey through a symbolic landscape, unfolding character through a series of acts and deeds, or tracing character through the different components of domestic and public life — family life, conduct in war, memorable sayings.
Each of the three basic chronotopes which Bakhtin describes has resonances for later forms of the novelistic, and particularly for the generic forms of popular narrative.
More generally, though, his discussion of these chronotopes exemplifies the way in which the shifting organization of space and time can be used to plot generic change.
David Bordwell, in his discussion of the classical Hollywood system, identifies a tripartite paradigm of devices, systems (system of narrative logic, system of time, system of space’), and relations between systems.
The classic Hollywood narrative, he proposes, in a manner quite similar to Bakhtin's, is defined by the centrality of a logic of causation to which character is central, and to which space and time are always subordinate: ‘In the Hollywood style the systems do not play equal roles: space and time are almost invariably made vehicles for narrative causality’.
The novelistic of classical Hollywood cinema, that is, develops a chronotope in which time is cut to the economy of narrative causation and motivation, and space is the scene of narrative action.
As a starting point for thinking about the novelistic of television, I would propose a chronotope which, while retaining the centrality of character, frees space and time to a much greater extent from the strict service of narrative logic.
More precisely, I would propose a chronotope, definitive for the development of a specific televisual novelistic, for which the foundational element is an  interruptable time.
It should also be added immediately that this chronotope, this regime of space and time, is much less determinate than that of classical Hollywood, less regimented by the precise divisions of labour and skills and the forms of standardization appropriate to the particular kind of industrial production out of which ‘classical, rules developed.
In the absence of this ‘classical’ formation, we are looking for tendencies and trends much less sharply and universally defined, but no less definitive for tracing the particular mutation of the novelistic effected by television.
It should also be added that there is, of course, a history to ill this; or rather, to complicate matters, there are several quite separate histories determined by the historical development of different national broadcasting systems.
For British television drama, for instance, and for American television drama till the mid-fifties, a particular combination of live studio technology and a respect for theatrical naturalism placed time and space more at the service of  performance than of narrative logic, seeking a continuity — rather than an  interruptability — of time and space in which the actor could unfold the truth of the performance, or, more practically, in which mistakes on the studio floor could be minimized.
Or, again, space figure differently in the socially responsible naturalism of a public service system, where it figures as a representation of a real environment, than it does in the ‘market’ realism of entertainment television where it functions as a scene for action.
And, of course, there is a much shorter history of interruption in many European broadcasting systems than in the more fully commercial system of US broadcasting (and those histories show signs of reversal in new systems such as satellite and cable).
Each of these local conditions leaves traces in the development of television form: hence the difficulty of establishing general rules, or of defining a universal television, or even of predicating a classical standard.
Nevertheless, within the variations and local conditions, if we are thinking in terms of a specifically televisual addition to the forms which the novelistic has taken since the Greek romance, the organization of narrative around the expectation of interruption seems to me to be central.
Just as journal serialization affected the chapter formation and the structure of the nineteenth-century novelistic, so also the expectation of the break, mediated by the specific form of attention which audiences are believed to give to television, produces a mutation within the novelistic towards segmented narration.
Unlike the novelistic of cinema or of the twentieth-century novel, the television novelistic is organized around interruption rather than around closure.
This, though it is everywhere as various and as changeable as the biographical time which Bakhtin finds in classical Greek literature, can nevertheless still be identified as a distinctive and possibly definitive generic shift.
This suggests a number of avenues which historical and aesthetic research might pursue, or at least it offers a way of organizing and disciplining some intuitions.
Most interesting, perhaps, is the extent to which attention to its organization of time around interruption and the consequent segmentation of its narrative might place televised fictional genres or subgenres in a fairly continuous line of popular novelistic forms for which the feature film represents a break rather than an exemplary object.
Think, for instance, of popular theatrical melodrama and the continua interruption of the narrative line by songs, displays, tableaux or ‘turns’; or of the short serialized forms of the early popular press, or of comic stories; or of the form of radio sitcoms until quite recently.
Going back further, there are traditions of oral narrative and of theatre to which the organization of television around interruption and lose attention would be quite familiar.
And even for the novel, closure at a single, uninterrupted sitting is the exception rather than the rule.
Clearly, it is the concentrated and closed narrative form of the feature film that  is out of line, a rupture within a generic tradition of the popular novelistic from which television's mutations are more continuous.
Nor are these simply questions of the formal rules of genre and generic transformation.
The importance of Bakhtin's method lies not simply in the formal identification of a genre or a subgenre or a chronotope, but also in the connection which he establishes between internal generic form and external history.
If the everyday, as Lefebvre defines it, is ‘whatever remains after one has eliminated all specialized activity’, then it is important to acknowledge television as most characteristically a part of the everyday (an everyday which, Lefebvre argues, is a historically limited phenomenon), characteristically occupying everyday time and only on ‘special’ occasions occupying ‘special’time set aside for it and it alone.
Tania Modleski, arguing within the specific context of women's work and the forms of daytime television, has suggested the ways in which an interruptable, segmented television narrational time might flow smoothly into the interruptions and segmented structures of a particular form of the domestic everyday, generic form nesting easily into the rhythms of everyday reception.
Situated within the everyday, television differs quite fundamentally from cinema which is still, characteristically, a ‘specialized activity’.
It may, however, be less different from other forms of everyday narrative activity (like gossip or conversation, for example).
All of these differences, and these different kinds of difference, echo, and are echoed in, the organization of narrational time.
What they demonstrate, yet again, is the inappropriateness of theories which go no further than cinema, and frequently no further than film theory of the seventies, for an understanding of television's articulations of the novelistic.
The significance of understanding these differences in their various material and historical forms seems to me to lie in the way they point to the differences of television's subjectivities.
The understanding of specific forms of subjectivity and specific processes of identification has always been mysteriously lacking or sadly disappointing (or depressingly familiar) in television theory.
Here I want to draw attention to an article by Beverle Houston, ‘Viewing television: the metapsychology of endless consumption’, which seems to me to be one of the few serious attempts to theorize television subjectivity, and one which deserves more attention.
In it, Houston attempts to relate the familiar interruptions of television narration to questions of desire, differentiating the production of the subject specific to television from that of cinema:
It may be said that the social work of the cinema is to naturalized certain sense of individual subjectivity by producing cinema-viewing as a timeless and abundant experience.
This effect, of course, has a complex role in the circulation of money, power and sexuality, but its direct role is that the spectator say: I want the cinema experience again.
At the ideological level, the goal is to reinforce the unified subject as an intermediate step in reproducing a certain social world.
This is not the definitive work of television.
Its function is more directly linked to consumption, which it promotes by shattering the imaginary possibility over and over, repeatedly reopening the gap of desire.
Television sets up an obsessive acting-out of desire, which the spectator tries to assuage by consuming the television text itself in its unique promise.
Of television we say: I want it as I have never had it.
The unique promise of television is of an availability which is not dependent on the presence of the image as is cinema's, but derives from its ‘endless flow’, available at the touch of a button even when the set itself is off.
This flow, argues Houston, evokes a different moment from that of the secularity of cinema, suggesting instead,
the first flow of nourishment in and from the mother's body, evoking a moment when the emerging sexual drive is still closely linked to — propped on — the life-and-death urgency of the feeding instinct.
The flow of nourishment, then, is, for Houston, the formative figure for a psychoanalytic, or ‘metapsychological’, account of television's promise of full subjectivity, just as the mirror figures for the specular subjectivity of cinema.
But, just as the cut projects the cinematic imaginary into the symbolic, so interruption, for television, marks the impossibility of the promise and the dream of endless flow.
The work of the symbolic, of the American television institution, in articulating this technical and imaginary possibility is to break it, interrupt, withdraw by separating the text into saleable parts, breaking up the promise of coherence and wholeness into short sessions, as it were, constantly jerking us out of the dream of coherent signifieds into the world of the endless play of signifiers.
The symbolic reproduces this imaginary in discrete, regulated entities — small, discontinuous, easily consumable like the bits of information on a computer screen, like the items in the supermarket, like the small, framed and mirrored segments of the glass-skinned skyscrapers that offer us gleaming reflections of our lives from moment to moment in the high-income, high-tech regions of the American urban environment.
TV offers, not access to an imagined coherence of a subject and a signified, but instead an extremely intense miming of the sliding and multiplicity of the signifier.
Thus Houston attempts to think through the difference which television's textual specificity presents to theories of the  psychoanalytic and semiotic subject, while recognizing at the same time the interrelationship between that specificity and the specificities of institution and viewing.
One of the implications of the argument, which there is not space to develop here, is the suggestive qualification which is offered to that familiar figure of cinematic theory, the Symbolic Father —Nom du Père , figure of the Law, administrator of knowledge and prohibition — by the determining centrality for television of the concepts of flow and nourishment and their symbolic association with the providing, mediating Mother.
The analysis associated with the Name of the Father, castration and the Oedipal seems to me to have less purchase in thinking television than it has had for cinema.
Equally suggestive, and even more central to my argument, is a decisive shift in emphasis from the spatiality of the imaginary of cinema — an imaginary sustained by the image and threatened by the cut — to the temporality of television's promise of endless flow — an endlessness continually denied by interruption.
That shift from the irreplaceability and loss imposed by the cut to the resumption always allowed by interruption suggests again something of the difference of television, and the inappropriateness of a theory of subjectivity which takes castration as a defining moment.
It is here, in fact, that I have one reservation about Beverle Houston's article, around her use of the term, ‘desire’, and its place in the formation of the television subject.
There is a distinction, originating in Freud and developed by Lacan, between ‘need’, ‘demand’ and ‘desire’in which needs can be satisfied by the adequate object (food), demands, while aimed at an object, are addressed to others (the demand for love or attention disguised as a need for food), while desires have no real object, relate only to fantasy, and cannot be satisfied (the desire for unity and plenitude).
It seems to me that the impossibility of desire, and its exclusive relation to fantasy, has to be qualified in the face of the possibility — always implied by interruption — of resumption, of a return to normal service.
This possibility of resumption, of the fulfilment of the promise of endless flow temporarily threatened by interruption, seems to me to operate in a quite different way than the cinematic cut, occupying a different structure of time, a different relation to fantasy, and motivated less by desire, loss and lack.
Television, of course, inherits much of the formal rhetoric of cinema, but the prohibition of the cut seems less central to it, and less definitive for its subjectivity, than the promise of its everyday availability.
The terms of desire, fantasy and the unconscious as they have functioned for film theory seem to me to lose much of their explanatory power at the level of subjectivity and identification, and it may be, as Gillian Skirrow has suggested for video games, that television can be more adequately thought through a theory of object relations.
The point I am making, here, is tentative and preliminary: it is  simply that, unlike cinema which is still a ‘specialized activity’, television's relation to the everyday seems more determining than its relation to fantasy.
This limits, or complicates to a high degree, the explanatory force of a psychoanalytic discourse whose terms are founded on an Oedipal moment of lack, castration and desire.
At the same time, this point of difficulty, like the difficulty surrounding value, needs to be thought through rather than thought around, complimented and qualified by ethnography rather than simply disqualified by it.
Thinking, then, of the novelistic discourse as a definite and historically extensive genre, I would suggest that the specific contribution which cinematic variations of the discourse made to the genre may have been the cut.
While the subordination of time and space to narrative causality is shared with many literary forms, and while many twentieth-century literary and artistic forms adapt to their own purposes the principles of montage and the manipulation of time and space learned from cinema, the cut as a fundamental figure of the rhetoric and the immediate experience of narrative — field/reverse-field where the slash represents a cut, or the conventional point-of-view structure of look/object/look — gives cinema a generic specificity.
The motivation which the cut institutes at the level of the movement from frame to frame in continuity editing is foundational for identification and subjectivity in cinema.
This rhetoric, though in highly adapted forms, is subsequently shared with television.
What television, on the other hand, adds to the history of novelistic discourse, its definitive contribution, is a particular development of the interrupted and interruptable narrative, a narrative form built on the principle of interruption and therefore organizing expectation and attention in the short segments which will soften the disruption of being interrupted.
Each of these generic and subgeneric additions.
variations and mutations changes the economy and the ecology of the genre, its structures and its subjectivities adapting to the shifts in the chronotope.
The results of the segmentation which follows from the expectation of interruptable time can be traced in the increasingly familiar forms of television fiction: an extended, rather than condensed form of the novelistic, in which attention is dispersed rather than concentrated; highly populated narrative communities in which causality is less essential than character to the sense of continuity; a narrative structure which need not end (because not driven by causality), but which, if it does end, may end arbitrarily.
Each of these seems to derive something from the interruptable time of the television chronotope, and its consequently segmented narrative.
The development of the television subgenre of the novelistic is not a completed form and may never reach classical definition, but it can be traced historically from forms of narrative inherited from radio, theatre and popular entertainment  to forms more appropriate to the specific conditions of television.
What I have tried to show in this section is that before we can fully understand the particular historical genres which appear under the labels of programme categories, and, even more importantly, before we can understand the forms of subjectivity which they imply, we need to place them in their historical and institutional relationship to the theoretical genre of novelistic narrative.
Genre, verisimilitude and industry
In his article, ‘Questions of genre’, Steve Neale deploys Todorov's distinction between ‘generic verisimilitude, on the one hand, and, on the other, a broader social or cultural verisimilitude’.
Verisimilitude is defined by Torodov as ‘the individual text's conformity to a textual norm external to it’, a conformity whose importance is that it ‘produces the illusion of realism’.
This illusion of realism can be the result either of the text's conformity to the rules of the genre (which Todorov associates with classicism) or with ‘what readers believe is true’(which he associates with naturalism).
In the latter, it is ‘public opinion’—‘a scattered discourse that in part belongs to each of the individuals of a society but of which none may claim ownership’— which underwrites the verisimilitude of the text, allows its relationship to its referent to be probable, necessary, and therefore true, and naturalizes its conventions: ‘public opinion therefore functions as a rule of genre that relates to all genres.’
In a classical system, Todorov argues, several genres may claim their right to represent reality and each will have its own measure of verisimilitude to the extent that it conforms to its own internal rules.
At the same time, public opinion may qualify and grade the measure of its ‘realism’, and some genres may be more ‘verisimilar’ than others: ‘In other words, the law of certain genres coincides with public opinion; but the latter does not have absolute rights.’
‘The doctrine of naturalism’, on the other hand, ‘is situated at the opposite pole.’
The naturalists do not admit that they are referring to rules of genre; their writings must be true , not just likely.
Actually, this signifies that the only rule admitted is that of public opinion.
The direct consequence of this principle is the reduction of all genres to only one; if the rules of a genre contradict this verisimilitude, the genre is suppressed: in the doctrine of naturalism, there is no place for the poem.
Some of Todorov's terms are problematic: ‘naturalism’ has a difficult history, particularly for television; and ‘public opinion’assumes an integration of the audience which television increasingly recognizes as disintegrated.
The underlying distinction, however, seems particularly suggestive for thinking about television.
I have argued above that the absence of an international standard such as is provided for cinema by Hollywood makes it difficult to think of a classical system for television.
Even within national systems, the structure of the television schedules, and the different interpretations which are given to different injunctions — with different degrees of force — to inform, entertain and educate, make it difficult to think of television as a single formal system.
At the same time, using Todorov's distinction, it does seem possible in relation to television narrative genres or subgenres to identify classical tendencies which depend — in the last instance — on conformity to rules and conventions for their verisimilitude, and to distinguish them from naturalist tendencies whose verisimilitude makes claims to be grounded in social reality — or at least claims to represent what people believe to be true.
It is, indeed, difficult to avoid the generalization that while classical tendencies are increasingly becoming the ‘dominant’(in Jakobson's sense) in a commercial system such as that epitomized by US broadcasting, naturalist tendencies remain the dominant in the UK where public-service values retain an increasingly tenuous hold.
Clearly there are exceptions and variations.
On British television, for example, sitcom may be the narrative genre most resistant to generalization, including the ‘classical’Blackadder as well as the ‘naturalist’Bread (1988).
British soap opera and crime series, on the other hand, are predominantly ‘naturalist’ in the sense in which Todorov used the term.
On US television, it may be the crime series subgenre which comes closest to naturalist verisimilitude, and certainly the eighties generation of Hill Street Blues and Cagney and Lacey (1981–8) seemed to resemble more closely what people believe to be true than the more apparently formulaic structures of Kojak (1973–7), Starksy  and Hutch (1975–80) and Charlie's Angels (1976–81) or the more obviously cinematic forms of Dragnet (1951–8).
But this historic drift towards naturalist verisimilitude is constantly undermined — in the eighties generation of crime series, in daytime and prime-time soap, and in series like Moonlighting (1985–8),thirtysomething (1987-), or, most notoriously,Twin Peaks (1990–1)— by a growing ‘classical’ inclination to ‘play around with the conventions’through dream sequence, fantasy and self-reflexiveness.
What can be said about the most recent generation of US television narrative subgenres is that they display on the screen a much higher awareness of the conventions they are operating than is the general rule on UK television, and they are therefore much more inclined towards an ironic or parodic re-scoring of generic regimes.
Two things can be said about this to avoid the impression that the different tendencies are simply expressions of a ‘national character’, or of the irresponsibility of entertainment against the social purposiveness of public service — though the latter explanation, if understood historically rather than morally, is not completely without foundation.
In the first place, in aesthetic terms, Steve Neale follows Jakobson in relating the concept of verisimilitude to the question of generic change and transformation.
Referring to literature, painting and language, Jakobson shows how the conventions which guarantee a form's verisimilitude and secure it in public opinion have temporal limits on their effectivity: through time, convention becomes cliche, picture becomes ideogram, genre becomes formula, and tradition becomes prison-house.
Formulaic genres and cliched conventions can no longer claim any purchase on vivid immediate reality, and hence lose their place in public opinion.
Jakobson uses the analogy of language:
Everyday language uses a number of euphemisms, including polite formulas, circumlocutions, allusions, and stock phrases.
However, when we want our speech to be candid, natural, and expressive, we discard the usual polite etiquette and call things by their real names.
They have a fresh ring, and we feel that they are ‘the right words’.
But as soon as the name has merged with the object it designates, we must, conversely, resort to metaphor, allusion or allegory if we wish a more expressive term.
It will sound more impressive, it will be more striking .
To put it in another way, when searching for a word which will revitalize an object, we pick a farfetched word, unusual at least in its given application, a word which is forced into service.
If we follow this, the play with conventions, in television narrative subgenres as much as in language, may not simply be a classical (or postmodern) fascination with language games, but may also contain a ‘naturalist’(or modernist) desire to revitalize forms that have become stale and hackneyed, and are no longer adequate to the world in which people believe.
Generic playfulness in television is as likely to fall within the characteristically modernist desire for a modernization of expression as it is to constitute a postmodern avant garde, and the two should not be confused.
At the same time, the process of generic change is not simply an aesthetic question but is crucially inflected by the pressures and constraints of industry and institution.
The relationship between industry and genre is widely accepted, though less widely researched.
Here, I want to identify one feature of that relationship which seems to me to be crucial in understanding generic transformation in television, and the specific and different forms it takes in the US and the UK: the organization of the schedule.
At this precise stage of the development of UK television, defined by a limited number of channels (satellite and cable are not yet definitive) and by a continuing, fragile respect for the traditions of  public service, the schedule is still organized to allow the public to choose between a range of ‘services’.
By and large, and allowing for spoiling operations at key points in the evening, programmes are arranged within time-slots to avoid outright competition for the same demographic group or taste constituency.
The choice presented to viewers tends to be between genres and subgenres rather than within them.
At the present stage of development of US television, on the other hand, the schedules of the majority viewing channels (and this is of course complicated by the much wider dissemination of cable) are stripped in a way which concentrates particular genres and subgenres within the same time-slot: the competition is directed quite blatantly at the same demographic group or taste constituency, and, characteristically, for the network viewer, the choice is within genres and subgenres rather between them.
It seems to me that this difference in the structure of the schedules goes a long way towards explaining in industrial terms the relative stasis of British television subgenres like sitcom, crime series and soap opera, and the drive towards innovation found in the corresponding genres on US television.
As long as 'Allo! 'Allo!,
Last of the Summer Wine (1974), or Taggart have their own audience and their own time-slot, why should they innovate?
For US television, on the other hand, competition for the same audience within the same time-slot drives producers and planners to look for the new exploitation angle which will differentiate their product within the market, propelling genres and conventions along the track of transformation and mutation.
Competitive market differentiation leads, then, in the same direction as the aesthetic process of verisimilitude: towards innovation, generic mixing, mutation.
But whereas aesthetically the transformation and revitalization of conventions may be motivated ultimately, even in its classical forms, by a desire for a verisimilitude guaranteed by ‘public opinion’, the need of the industry for new exploitation angles may exceed this aesthetic impulse, going beyond verisimilitude to the point where a series takes its significance not from an agreed or conventionalized similarity to the world, but from its difference to other series.
Generic convention, that is, gives up its claim to refer to a world outside television, or to ‘what people believe to be true’, and internalizes its play.
It is at this point that Todorov's ‘classicism, is projected towards postmodernism.
With Twin Peaks , the fascination is in watching, with mounting incredulity, the parodic games of multiple genres and thoroughly cliched conventions, which are striking not through their revitalization of verisimilitude in new forms but through the unlikeliness and inappropriateness of their combination.
For US television, such a postmodernism can be seen less as an aesthetic reaction to modernism than as part of the logic of a ‘classical’ concern with convention produced by an economic structure which needs product differentiation within a highly  competitive market.
If US generic production seems more dynamic than that of the UK, it is because the economy is driven by difference as much as by repetition: while the one secures recognition of a welcome familiarity, the other differentiates this familiar object from all competitors and discovers the ‘exploitation angles’ which will make it different and completely unexpected within a genre and a medium which is all too familiar.
Generic parody
There is, then, an institutional as well as an aesthetic logic to the playfulness with generic convention which characterizes a growing number of US ‘prestige’ genre series and serials: the subversion of conventions is becoming conventional.
Since it is supported by demographic shifts towards the breakup of the mass audience into niche markets, it is a trend which may become a continuing tradition.
In part, it is simply a process of modernizing the rules of verisimilitude and refreshing its conventions.
But if we are to understand it, and, particularly, if we are to distinguish within it between cynical accommodation and genuine playfulness, we are going to have to go beyond the embarrassingly inappropriate assumption that it has something to do with ‘Brechtian’ distanciation or ‘modernist’self-reflexiveness.
That there are distanciations and self-reflexivities is apparent, but to attribute them mechanically to Brecht or to modernism is formalist in its most naive sense.
I have suggested elsewhere that a more aesthetically and historically television.
Irony is at the same time a characteristic form of the contemporary imagination and a way of thinking the specific forms of engagement which the distractions of the everyday and the interruptions of its temporality might facilitate in television viewing.
Within a theory of irony, a theory of parody seems equally essential for understanding recent generic mutations.
Such a theory of parody might point towards the conditions of existence —— the possibilities and impossibilities — of television's difference and negation.
Again, I can only indicate beginnings here, but the possibility of parody brings me back briefly, at the end, to the question of difference, repetition and value.
‘Parody’, says Linda Hutcheon,
in its ironic trans-contextualization and inversion is repetition with difference.
A critical distance is implied between the background text being parodied and the new incorporating work, a distance usually signalled by irony.
But this irony can be playful as well as belittling; it can be critically constructive as well as destructive.
The pleasure of parody's irony comes not from humour in particular but from the degree of engagement of the reader in the  intertextual ‘bouncing’(to use E. M. Forster's famous term) between complicity and distance.
Such a bouncing of complicity and distance is a characteristic form of engagement in generically mixed forms such as Hill Street Blues ,St. Elsewhere or thirtysomething : a form of engagement in which identification and recognition are liable to be wrong-footed at any moment by ironic distance, and, at the same time, ironic distance is liable to be caught out by sudden empathetic recognition.
In an early episode of Hill Street Blues the ‘joke’ of a ‘nut’who thinks he is Dracula, complete with cape and thirst for blood, is caught out by the discovery that he has hanged himself in his cell.
thirtysomething continually moves the viewer (particularly, it has to be said, the male, white, middle-class viewer of a certain age) in and out of identification with characters she-and-particularly-he would rather not be, and in and out of dilemmas she-and-particularly-he would rather not recognize.
This unstable identification — much more unstable than the forms of identification usually associated with cinema — is reinforced by the much looser rules of engagement implied by television's interruptable time.
While specific instances of such instability lack moment, little indications of the small ‘incorrect’ pleasures and uneasy recognitions on which niche-audience television thrives, nevertheless the bouncing of complicity and distance defines forms of identification and subjectivity which, in their turn, define television's capacity to be critical.
For Bakhtin, the radical force of the novelistic was grounded precisely in its capacity to put into play a multiplicity of languages, and parody opened up official discourse to travesty and irreverence:
For any and every straightforward genre, any and every direct discourse — epic, tragic, lyric, philosophical — may, and indeed must itself become the object of representation, the object of a parodic travestying ‘mimicry’.
It is as if such mimicry rips the word away from its object, disunifies the two, shows that a given straightforward generic word — epic or tragic — is one-sided, bounded, incapable of exhausting the object; the process of parodying forces us to experience those sides of the object that are not otherwise included in a given genre or a given style.
parodic-travestying literature introduces the permanent corrective of laughter, of a critique on the one-sided seriousness of the lofty direct word, the corrective of a reality that is always richer, more fundamental, and, most importantly,too contradictory and heteroglot to be fit into a high straightforward genre….
Ancient parody was free of any nihilistic denial.
It was not, after all, the heroes who were parodied, nor the Trojan war and its participants: not Hercules and his exploits but their tragic heroization.
The genre itself, the style, the language are all put in cheerfully irreverent quotation marks and they are perceived  against a background of a contradictory reality that cannot be confined within their narrow frames.
For television, this sense of parody, in its generic playfulness, is distinct from the satirical forms characteristic of British television for which, despite their ‘scandalousness’, the truth is a fixed position from which public behaviour may be castigated and public morals improved.
Bakhtin's parody is about unfixing.
Its interest is in its potential to put official discourses into ‘cheerfully irreverent quotation marks’.
Television generic series, even the ‘cheerfully irreverent’Twin Peaks , cannot simply be shoe-horned into parody, their ‘weirdness’ a guarantee of heteroglossia and travesty.
The generic mixings and mutations, however, towards which television may have an aesthetic and an economic inclination do seem to provide the grounds for specific forms of parody.
This seems to me to make parody and irony worth understanding more precisely.
But, to return one final time to Bakhtin, in case he is appropriated yet again to legitimate a selective and ludicrously ahistorical celebration of ‘carnival’:
In modern times the functions of parody are narrow and unproductive.
parody has grown sickly, its place in modern literature is insignificant.
We live, write and speak today in a world of free and democratized languages; the complex and multilevelled hierarchy of discourses, forms, images, styles that used to permeate the entire system of official language and official consciousness was swept away by the linguistic revolutions of the Renaissance….
[The]new languages provided only very modest space for parody: these languages hardly know, and now do not know at all, sacred words, since they themselves were born to a significant extent out of a parody of the sacred word.
Within the conditions and constraints of commercial or public-service television, the capacity of parody and irony to be critical or to negate the logic of commodification in any real sense is extremely limited.
Within the everyday repetition of television — the routines of presentation, the everlasting serials, the standardizations of time-slot — difference has a short life, the unexpected quickly instituted as an expectation.
Any desire for an avant-garde negation has to be framed by that context: a context which invites a combination of modesty and cunning — the bouncing of complicity and difference, for example— rather than the heroic agonism of the historic avant garde , or the desperate formalism of the once-and-for-all ‘progressive’ text.
It does not seem to me to address the problem to say that if the producers produce the programmes the audience will supply the criticism.
This essay is not a search for the new progressive text, nor for the new ‘sacred word’ which will bring it into being.
In suggesting ways in which the shifting structures of  repetition and difference can be traced, what it has attempted to do is to open up some new contexts, both theoretical and institutional, in which texts and genres can be thought, and to reopen some old points of difficulty which still serve as sticking-points against the slide into accommodation.
That special thrill:Brief Encounter , homosexuality and authorship
ANDY MEDHURST
A gay text is one which lends itself to the hypothesis of a gay reading regardless of where the author's genitals were wont to keep house.
Gregory Woods
…finished reading Present Laughter.
What a wonderful play it would be if — as Coward must have wanted — all those love affairs were about homosexuals .
Sir Peter Hall
Death In Venice gives gay people a special thrill, and therefore it is  a  gay novel .
Delegate at the 1987 International Scientific Conference on Lesbian and Gay Studies
Authorship is hardly a hot issue these days.
The very word itself conjures up ancient dusty battles over the cultural legitimacy of cinema, battles that were fought, won and forgotten long ago.
The idea that a film's director is the primary, shaping source of its meaning is simultaneously inscribed as middlebrow commonsense (see the film review columns of The Observer ,City Limits , or any publication targeted at the bourgeois intelligentsia, with their umbilical linking of film title and director's name) and dismissed as hopelessly outmoded by every branch of recent critical theory.
It is a dead debate, and its tombstone was the BFI Reader Theories of Authorship which offered an inbuilt teleology, a narrative trajectory which led me, as a postgraduate student, away from the embarrassments of romantic individualism to the chastening rigours  of poststructuralist thought.
It was a tempting package, and I bought the whole deal — the Author was, beyond question, buried, and Roland Barthes led the funeral procession.
My induction into this orthodoxy coincided, however with my growing engagement with the politics of gay culture, and here a different version of Barthes (that most rapturously polysemic and flirtatiously comic of writers) was important.
I became increasingly interested in gay men's specific ways of seeing the world — what one might call, to use a now unfashionable phrase of Raymond Williams, male homosexual structures of feeling — but to qualify for inclusion in this framework, texts had to pass an ‘authorship test’(‘is/was he gay?’) that harked back to the bad old days of crudely biographical criticism.
There seemed to be a double standard at work, albeit one rooted in political expediency — Authorship was bad, Gay Authorship was good.
That distinction, shockingly banal though it is, has been hard to shake from my mind, and its persistence is one of the things I want to explore in this article.
I also want to address two more complex issues in textual and sexual theory: firstly, the political implications of poststructuralist attempts to discredit notions of authorial agency; and secondly, the related debates in gay theory around what have come to be known as the poles of ‘essentialism’ and ‘social constructionism’(terms I will elaborate on later).
I want to use one film as a springboard into these questions —Brief Encounter (1945), written by Noel Coward and directed by David Lean.
This is not, I suspect, the most obvious of choices, so perhaps some explanation is necessary.
It is part of the accumulated folk wisdom of gay male subcultures that the homosexuality of an individual will reveal itself primarily through matters of taste — not good or bad taste but particular taste, a fondness for certain cultural artefacts above others, a set of preferences that proclaim one's sexual affiliations as clearly as any sloganeering T-shirt.
For British gay men, at least those of my acquaintance, loving Brief Encounter is one such marker.
One reason for this, I would suggest, is that Brief Encounter is not simply the tearful tale of heterosexual romance that it appears to be: beneath, or alongside, or overlapping this narrative is another, quite specifically related to the homosexuality of its author.
Employing the naively biographical paradigm of Gay Authorship,Brief Encounter shows Noel Coward displacing his own fears, anxieties and pessimism about the possibility of a fulfilled sexual relationship within an oppressively homophobic culture by transposing them into a heterosexual context.
The furtiveness and fear of discovery that end Laura's and Alec's relationship comprise a set of emotions that Coward would have felt with particular force and poignancy, and which gay men ever since have responded to with recognition and admiration.
I do not offer that reading as any startling new interpretation; it is a decoding of the text that many gay men (and no doubt a sprinkling of perceptive heterosexuals) have made.
One, the British gay director Richard Kwietniowski, has taken the simple reading a stage further by making the prize-winning short film,Flames of Passion (1990), which is both pastiche of and homage to the Coward original, reworking its iconography into an updated story of gay romance that begins with hurried glances on a station platform and, times having changed, ends with intertwined consummation on the train.
His film, Kwietniowski straightforwardly claims, is one that would have been approved of by Noel Coward's unconscious.
There is, then, a long-established subcultural reading of Brief Encounter that cuts across its ostensible/mainstream meaning, but does this have any substantive base in the text itself or is it only a collective fantasy, a shared ‘special thrill’?
Before tackling the theoretical problems raised by that question, it will be instructive to look at the volatile critical reputation of Brief Encounter within British film culture, since this can be linked very closely to shifting paradigms of authorship.
Brief Encounter , British cinema and cultural standing
The theme and situation are universal.
They belong to all human beings whether they have individually endured a similar love-tragedy or not…
It would be difficult to find a more profound story of distressed love in the history of the cinema.
Roger Manvell  
To see [Brief Encounter]again…at the Baker Street Classic, is to see another film entirely…the audience in this usually polite and certainly middle-class hall couldn't restrain its derision and repeatedly burst into angry exasperated laughter…a well-spoken young lady…finally cried out ‘Where the hell is Milford Junction anyway?’
Flames of Passion (A.B.F.I. Production; photographer, Tony Clancy)
Raymond Durgnat
More than any other single film,Brief Encounter has operated as a barometer of the prevailing assumptions in British film culture.
It was released in December 1945, to an overwhelmingly positive critical response that praised its ‘maturity’ and ‘realism’, and also hailed it as the latest success from the Coward/Lean ‘team’, which had, during the Second World War, produced three notably successful films, namely In Which We Serve (1942),This Happy Breed (1944), and Blithe Spirit (1945).
This run of critical and box-office hits prompted C. A. Lejeune, film critic of The Observer , to claim:
these Coward films are probably the nearest things we have to a valid modern school in British cinema….
You often hear people say, ‘Why can't we make films over here with the taste and art and honesty of the French cinema?’
In his own way, and in his own idiom, Coward does.
What is striking here is not just the confidence of the assertion of quality, but the unquestioned awarding of the credit to Coward.
The literary bias of British film reviewing has rarely been quite so plainly stated — Coward is the established name, his reputation guaranteed by years of theatrical success, hence he takes precedence over the mere maker of pictures.
In 1946, however, Lean directed his first film without a Coward connection,Great Expectations , and the huge reputation and success this enjoyed coincided with the start of the long postwar decline suffered by Coward — the net result was that the writer's contribution to the earlier films' success became progressively marginalized, a state of affairs hardly helped by the increasing influence of French auteurist models of film analysis on British critics.
Roger Manvell's The Film and the Public , published in 1955, still held Brief Encounter in very high esteem, placing it in a chapter rather disingenuously called ‘A miscellany of films’ but which is clearly intended to signify a pantheon of cinematic greats.
(There are extremely instructive comparisons to be made between the films that make up Manvell's ‘Miscellany’ and the ‘pantheon’of directors listed in the first, 1962, issue of Movie — the changes are an eloquently stark illustration of the massive reorientation of British film culture.)
So, Coward is elevated to join the likes of Greed (1923) and Paisa (1946) and Le jour se lève (1939), but Manvell  cautiously refuses to bestow individual plaudits, preferring to see the film as ‘one of those rare films for which one can never be sure to whom the real credit is due…an example of the unity achieved by the cooperation of many creative minds’.
Eventually, though, he singles out Celia Johnson's acting followed by Lean's direction.
Coward was beginning to disappear.
The date of The Film and the Public is significant — 1955, just one year before the whole ‘Angry Young Men’ circus.
Anger was, above all, a theatrical phenomenon and Coward exemplified the type of theatre that was under attack.
The films made from ‘Angry’ texts seemed to mark a similarly definitive rejection of the previous orthodoxies, with Brief Encounter acquiring an unenviable figurehead status as the paradigmatic sexless, middle-class, British film — hence the scorn of the audience that contained Raymond Durgnat.
As Durgnat himself put it, to explain the film's fall from grace, ‘Jimmy Porter came along’.
There are subtexts here concerned with gender and sexuality.
It is Coward who is singled out for specific blame by Durgnat, his screenplay compared explicitly/dismissively to women's romance fiction as if that, by itself, was a confirmation of worthlessness.
More generally, the ‘Angry’ movement had been characterized by strong antihomosexual prejudices (John Osborne's Look Back In Anger and Kingsley Amis's Lucky Jim are full of bullishly heterosexual scorn for ‘effeminacy’) which found Coward an ideal target.
If Brief Encounter were to be critically favoured at all, it had to be rescued from the discredited label of Coward and conclusively assigned to the body of texts marked ‘Lean’.
This process, begun in 1946 with the acclaim for Great Expectations , reached its peak with the 1974 publication of Masterworks of the British Cinema , a book that included the script of Brief Encounter but zealously forbade its readers to praise the man who wrote it: ‘Brief Encounter , indeed, constitutes almost a declaration of independence on Lean's part from his fruitful but by 1945 no doubt increasingly constricting association with Coward's writing.’
The hegemonic assurance of that ‘no doubt’ speaks volumes — the Author was dead, long live the auteur.
Or, in terms of the concerns of this article, the gay writer had been effaced, leaving a blemish-free heterosexual text.
Authorship, biography and sexuality
Victor: I'm glad I'm normal.
Amanda: What an odd thing to be glad about.
While I would insist on the centrality of Noel Coward's sexuality to the patterns of meanings that I see in Brief Encounter , I would not wish for one second to hold him up as any kind of gay martyr.
The mythologies of tragic sacrifice that have coalesced around gay writers  like Oscar Wilde and Joe Orton tend only to impede a fully contextual understanding of how their sexuality and textuality inform each other.
I have no desire to add Coward to that mythology, besides which he was, judging by the biographies and his own diaries, an intolerable man — snobbish, reactionary, racist, lamenting Labour election victories and the decline of Empire, welcoming Gandhi's assassination, oozing sycophancy towards the British (and any other) royal family, and describing the Beatles as ‘bad-mannered little shits’.
Coward was not, to use a rather tired phrase, a positive role model.
Nonetheless, his plays (including Still Life , on which Brief Encounter was based) can be productively mined for half-hidden endorsements of sexual options that strayed beyond the expected confines of domesticated heterosexual monogamy.
This can partly be accounted for by the social milieu in which many of them are set, that stereotypically ‘Cowardian’ world of elegant hotel bedrooms where the cocktail shaker is always within reach.
Otto in Design For Living can boast that
‘Our lives are diametrically opposed to ordinary social convention.
…We've jilted them and eliminated them and we've got to find our own solutions for our own peculiar moral problems…
We're not doing any harm to anyone else.
We're not peppering the world with illegitimate children.
The only people we could possibly mess up are ourselves, and that's our lookout…
Therefore the only thing left is to enjoy it thoroughly, every rich moment of it, every thrilling second…’
because he lives a life where material luxury has bought him out of the social expectations imposed on less fortunate people.
In the same play comes the following exchange:
Gilda: ‘If we were ordinary, moral, high-thinking citizens we shouldn't have had an affair at all.’
Leo: ‘Perhaps not.
We should have crushed it down.’
which, in many ways, is the entire story of Brief Encounter encapsulated in two lines.
Moreover, even when Coward seems to be advocating sexual experimentation, he stops far short of specific details.
As Alan Sinfield has put it, he ‘validates deviant sexuality when it is part of a general bohemianism’ but nothing more concretely radical is put forward.
Perhaps now might be the point to question whether this type of analysis belongs in Screen at all— isn't it unreconstructed literary criticism of the most discredited kind, combing through the textual evidence to find traces of what the author ‘really thought’?
I plead guilty, partly, but in my defence I want to return to the point I signalled earlier, that a biographical approach has more political  justification if the project being undertaken is one concerned with the cultural history of a marginalized group.
To be sure, we have all moved on since films directed by Hitchcock were unravelled in the search for strands of ‘Catholic guilt’, but equally I still teach gay students who find it genuinely empowering to learn of the homosexuality of a cultural figure as one contributing factor to the work that he/she produced.
It is also important to stress that this reclaiming of Coward as relevant to gay culture is very different from the limiting ways in which some heterosexual critics have mobilized the fact of his sexuality.
What happens there is that a ‘really gay’ reading of Coward is put into play, much as I have already done with Brief Encounter , but on the grounds that a homosexual writer can only write about homosexuality (analogous cases would be the insistence that Edward Albee's Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf is ‘really’about a gay couple, or that Tennessee Williams's Blanche Dubois is nothing but a transposed drag queen).
I would refer back to Sir Peter Hall's comment on Present Laughter here — for him the failure of that play is in direct proportion to its not being about homosexuals.
In this way the homosexual writer is granted a dubious measure of liberal pity (‘if only he hadn't lived in such a repressive world’) while at the same time the heterosexual critic distances the threatening possibility that a homosexual writer might have a great many insights into the codes, mechanisms and ideologies of  heterosexuality itself.
That such insights are available to gay people (whether we are writers or not) should come as no surprise — from birth we are relentlessly socialized into a heterosexual identity that we may later choose to reject but which remains an always familiar landscape — those on the margins of a culture know more about its centre than the centre can ever know about the margins.
Brief Encounter (Courtesy of the Rank Organization plc and B.F.I. stills archive)
The importance of Coward for gay culture is not simply one of thematics; there are also broader, crucial but treacherously nebulous questions of tone, attitude and feeling.
What I want to get at through these quicksand-like words is how Coward shared and contributed to making the male homosexual structure of feeling that I and many other contemporary gay men find in his writing.
Richard Dyer has described how Coward's songwriting, along with that of other gay lyricists like Cole Porter and Lorenz Hart, can be productively reread in terms of their specifically homosexual perception of the double-edged nature of romantic love — simultaneously wanting it desperately to happen but convinced of the impossible ridiculousness of any such desire.
That sense of ‘bitter-sweet’(the title, perhaps not incidentally, of one of Coward's greatest stage successes) strikes me as a crucial component of the structure of feeling I am interested in here.
Dyer's list of songwriters could be updated, for example, to include the Pet Shop Boys, whose records plug directly into that passionate desire/impossibility of fulfilment bitter-sweet double-bind (a song like Rent exemplifies this).
Connoisseurs of the self-referentiality of gay culture might care to note that the Pet Shop Boys' Neil Tennant frequently lists Coward's Sail Away as one of his favourite songs — it is hard to conceive of any other contemporary pop star having the wit or sly wisdom to make such a choice.
If plays like Design For Living or Private Lives foreground the witty, hedonistic, passionately abandoned side of the bitter-sweet couplet, then Brief Encounter is the key text of the opposite side.
It is a text which explores the pain and grief caused by having one's desires destroyed by the pressures of social convention and it is this set of emotions which has sustained its reputation in gay subcultures.
I ought to add, perhaps, that gay men do not regard this film with nothing but sad, solemn recognition — the characteristically gay male urge to mock and undercut what one genuinely and deeply feels, what Dyer brilliantly calls ‘the knife edge between camp and hurt’, can be evidenced by pointing out that one of London's most crowded and cruisy gay bars is called ‘Brief Encounter’, though one is, alas, unlikely to meet anyone resembling Trevor Howard therein.
Gregory Woods's remark, quoted at the beginning of this article, suggests, in a rather deliriously utopian, post-Barthes kind of way, that any text can be opened up to a gay interpretation if gay readers decide it to be appropriate — authorial intention is here surrendered in favour of a sort of subcultural authorship, a collective ‘special  thrill’, a method of analysis based on a recognition of shared structures of feeling.
Similarly, Alison Hennegan has described how as a teenager she hunted out lesbian fiction and based her decisions to investigate one text rather than another on clues as vague and ‘irrational’ as a publisher's logo or a particular chapter title.
Hunches these may have been, but they were almost always right — critical theory may not have the language to describe this method of discovering homosexually-relevant material, but as a subcultural practice, a particularly attuned set of decoding skills, it undoubtedly exists, as I and any other gay person can testify.
Knowing an author's homosexuality makes that decoding far easier (if at the same time rather less triumphant there's an undeniable pleasure in finding out that a favourite writer, actor or director you have admired for years turns out to be gay, as you always privately hoped and ‘knew’) but it returns us once again to the problem of biography, the danger of regressing to a simplistic reading of texts which simply locates their meanings in the author's life story.
Yet this is a problem that needs to be faced, because the reading of Brief Encounter that I have outlined reintroduces into the critical game that most awkward of players — the historical, flesh-and-blood person of the author.
The Author has staggered from the deathbed, so is it time for critical analysis to pay attention to real people's lived lives, their traceable, material existences?
If so, there is much rethinking to be done, for the theoretical paradigms that have dominated the last twenty years have nothing resembling an adequate critical framework for dealing with a factor as flagrantly nonabstract, as defiantly corporeal, as embarrassingly tangible as this.
Essences, sensibilities, identities
There is a danger, though, that the kind of gay cultural archaeology described above (a sort of retrospective ‘outing’) can degenerate into the construction of an ahistorical ‘gay sensibility’.
The appeal for tolerance by gesturing to lists of Famously Artistic Homosexuals is one of the classic tropes of gay self-justification — it goes ‘Sappho, Michaelangelo, Shakespeare…and me’— and it needs always to be resisted because it seeks to extend contemporary definitions of sexuality back to incorporate historical periods when categorizations of the sexual were quite different.
In short, the ‘gay sensibility’ is a rhetorical deployment of essentialism.
The essentialist view of homosexuality seeks to forge links between all people who enjoy same-sex relations, regardless of gender, race, age, class or period.
It is, on any logical grounds, patently nonsensical, as Jeffrey Weeks has argued:
we cannot…simply assume that nothing changes, that gays and  lesbians have always existed as we exist today…that there is a mystical continuity between our desires and their desires across the range of cultures and histories.
We do not do it for any other aspect of our social existence.
We should not do it for our sex.
Opposing that essentialist version of homosexuality is an analysis which, drawing above all on the work of Foucault, sees homosexuality as a social construction, culturally and historically specific, sensitive to cultural and historical change.
This ‘social constructionism’ can in turn be linked to that whole shift in critical thinking which has sought to undermine any credibility in the unified subject as a source of meaning, and most crucial here has been the contribution of psychoanalysis.
These arguments are more than familiar to readers of this journal and, considered purely as philosophical debates, they are impressively rigorous and difficult to refute.
Where they become problematic, especially for members of marginalized cultural groups, is in what they begin to mean if we take them out of the pristine hot-house of the academy and put them into the messy struggles of day-to-day life.
To regard homosexuality as a social construction and nothing more is, potentially, to put another weapon in the hands of those who would like to see it quite literally erased from the world — if it can be constructed, then it can be deconstructed, so what are all those queers still doing here?
Gay intellectuals may dismiss essentialism as a bogus utopia, but it has provided the emotional power behind a great deal of gay activism — it is much harder to claim civil rights for a discursive construction.
The pragmatism of political urgency must be allowed to sully the purity of intellectual thought; what is needed, at least in the short term, is what Gayatri Spivak has referred to as a kind of ‘strategic essentialism’.
Otherwise marginalized groups run the risk of theorizing themselves out of existence.
Besides which, what is so attractive about this surrendering of unitary identity, this fetish for fragmentation that characterizes so much of modern intellectual life?
Is it always a good idea to slaughter the Author?
Three quotations from feminist, black and gay perspectives, helpfully problematize that question:
…the postmodernist decision that the Author is dead, and subjective agency along with him, does not necessarily work for women and prematurely forecloses the question of identity for them.
Because women have not had the same historical relation of identity to origin, institution, production, that men have had, women have not, I think,(collectively) felt burdened by too much Self, Ego, Cogito, etc.
It never surprises me when black folks respond to the critique of essentialism, especially when it denies the validity of identity  politics, by saying ‘Yeah, it's easy to give up identity when you got one’.
Should we not be suspicious of postmodern critiques of the ‘subject’ when they surface at a historical moment when many subjugated people feel themselves coming to voice for the first time….
Narrative identification…is being rejected…at a point in time when gays can claim they still have not had it.
An initial period of identification is important to a repressed group that has never had adequate self-images.
The last of those three comments was, it is true, written almost fifteen years ago, long before the more than ‘adequate’ gay images of My Beautiful Laundrette or Law of Desire or Torch Song Trilogy , but I think the general point stands: before we stampede to dispense with ‘identity’, let us consider whether it still has its uses as a rallying point for political action.
postmodernism is less liberating for some social groups than for others — though there is a point to be made here about the extremely close links between postmodernism as a general theoretical superstructure and camp as a specific homosexual practice.
I have, perhaps rashly, elsewhere published the baldly provocative claim that ‘postmodernism is only heterosexuals catching up with camp’ and I think the relationship between the two discourses remains a fruitful area for further study.
Crudely, the sense of blurred boundaries, of disrupted hierarchies, of disrespectful, intertextual playfulness, of the delight in superficiality and the wearing of cultural masks — all these were fundamental to the strategies of camp long before postmodernism lurched into view.
One of the key crossover texts, perhaps, is Barthes's Mythologies , for what is that but a series of camp readings?
Name one heterosexual male theorist who could display such interest in wrestling, washing powders and Greta Garbo.
Authorship is identity in the textual sphere, and hence gay people, like all marginal groups, have, at present, a political stake in wanting to hold on to the Author despite her/his expulsion from prevailing postmodernist theories.
We need to construct our histories through examining the records left by those who went before us, not in a blunderingly literal-minded fashion that sees fictional texts as factual ‘evidence’, but by studying how texts mediate the contradictions and challenges faced by those who carried a homosexual identity through a heterosexual world.
This can only be done, of course, with authors who lived within modern categorizations of sexuality — but that period, after all, does include the entire history of the cinema.
To see essentialism and social constructionism as polarized opposites may be useful for rhetorical purposes, but any fully-sensitive analysis of culture and sexuality must constantly negotiate between the two.
Organizing around the politics of identity may  well overlook the troubled, shifting role of the unconscious in the formation of subjectivities, but such exquisite philosophical niceties often have to be shelved when dealing with palpable, material discrimination.
I have read my Foucault, I am aware of the conceptual shortcomings of a timeless, essentialist homosexual identity, I might even want to take the step of putting quotations marks around the word ‘gay’— but the man who queerbashed me some years ago did not put quotation marks around his fists.
An emotive example, to be sure, but sexuality is not a topic from which emotion can be expelled, because the categories of sexuality are experiential: I cannot be purely theoretical about homosexuality, because I am not a purely theoretical homosexual.
Neither was Noel Coward, and, despite the multitude of other differences between us, that shared fact persists and continues to inform, shape and intensify my love of Brief Encounter and the tears it always makes me shed.
Condition critical
Peter Keighron
For some thirty years now we have been swamped with books, journals, articles and debates on the theory of cultural politics and the politics of culture.
The rapid growth of film and media studies in colleges and schools has been dominated and shaped by the cultural theories of the left.
And yet in 1984 Colin McArthur could justifiably complain about
…the lamentable failure of left periodicals such as Marxism Today and New Socialist to operate a sustained, as opposed to intermittent, engagement with cinema and television.
As with so much else, Gramscian ideas about the political centrality of culture seem beyond the scope of the orthodox left in Britain.
Six years on and the left's critical engagement with cinema and television is even less sustained, even more fragmented.
While left academics queue up to deliver their twenty thousand words worth on the latest nuance of postmodernism, we look in vain for two hundred words on a new film or television programme.
What follows is an attempt to understand some of the historical problems of left film and television criticism and to encourage debate about its future.
As a starting point I will look at the left's critical response to two recent films —Distant Voices, Still Lives (1988) and A Very British Coup (1988).
The choice of examples is not, of course, arbitrary.
These two films confront various issues of class and politics in British society and history and should, therefore, be ‘home ground’ for the left, providing an obvious and urgent point of political intervention.
But, before we turn to the left's criticism, it is both necessary and instructive to look at how the dominant rightwing, or  what I have termed here ‘mainstream criticism’, dealt with these films.
Their criticism must come first because, as McArthur notes, the ‘agenda setting power over the terms in which cinema is consumed in Britain remains with the Fleet Street (Wapping) nexus and their clones in television.
It is they, above all, who require interrogating when questions about film reviewing are posed.’
Reviews are particularly interesting because, as John Ellis says, they can reveal,…a certain relationship between a film and a privileged group who operate with remarkably similar aesthetic prescriptions’.
The political art of mainstream criticism
The key concept that floats to the top in mainstream criticism of Distant Voices, Still Lives is that of art.
The artistic merits of the film are unanimously praised within the ‘quality’ press, the only contention being as to whether it is a ‘near masterpiece’(Richard Nagire, The Sunday Times , 16 October 1988) or an unqualified ‘masterwork’(The Mail on Sunday , 16 October 1988).
At the very least it is a ‘genuine work of art’(Angus Woolf-Murray,The Scotsman , 19 August 1988) that will ‘secure a place in the history of English art, alongside Lowry or Lawrence’(David Robinson,The Times , 13 October 1988).
But the celebration of this act of creation is not offered as a simple honouring of ‘pure’ beauty, for the concept of art within which this praise is offered honours the film as much for what it is not as for what it is.
Thus Terence Davies is to be congratulated for having ‘wrenched high art from the lower depths of his deprived Liverpool childhood’(The Mail on Sunday , 16 October 1988), which is a ‘recreation devoutly to be wished’ and not least because ‘he has done it without rancour’(how typically British).
Here we find a perfect example of Bourdieu's contention that ‘An is the site par excellence of the denial of the social world.’
Terence Davies has apparently emerged from the representation of his social origins smelling of Art, and it is this very concept which mainstream criticism just cannot get enough of, for at its best (its most effective) it denies the social world at the very moment that it represents it.
Such criticism leads us directly to the higher plains of aestheticism from where it becomes possible to adopt a universal outlook, a point of view based on the sort of timeless values that enable one to study objectively (unsentimentally, unemotionally and ‘without rancour’) the lower depths of social reality.
Any grubby social thoughts the film might have evoked can be swiftly rejected in favour of a more universal muse.
Thus we are told by Robinson that Distant Voices, Still Lives is not really about working-class family life in Liverpool at all, for this is simply ‘a metaphor for the human condition that strikes universal chords’— chords which ring true through ages past, present and future, inspiring Beryl Bainbridge to opine that ‘I don't think anything alters.
We are all victims of the past…it could be anywhere’(The Independent , 13 October 1988).
By this fantastic ideological wrench these critics are able to turn the world upside-down to prove that those films that appear ‘…most local and concentrated are often the most universal in appeal’(Philip French,The Observer , 16 October 1988).
The point of this distinction between the social (the particular) and the artistic (the general) is precisely to deny there is any ‘real’ distinction to be made at all.
For we are all, whatever our social position, essentially judged by the same universal values.
Faced with a film that shouts of class society, poverty and history, mainstream criticism reaches for Art to apply a gloss of universal values.
Bainbridge pauses only to ‘thank God for those who died a thousand deaths through poverty.
At least they knew why they suffered.’
And such self-knowledge apparently breeds an admirable philosophy of stoicism and passivity in the poor who, according to Woolf-Murray, ‘carried their burdens without complaint because they were theirs and that was all’.
But exactly how does this all-pervasive apolitical concept of art become so suffocatingly effective?
Mainstream criticism of Distant Voices, Still Lives constantly referred the film both to art in general and to particular works of art.
Lawrence, Larkin, Lowry, T. S. Eliot and even the image of a ‘proletarian Proust’ are dutifully lined up to create an appropriate artistic canon within which the film may take its rightful place.
The purpose of all this cross-referencing and analogizing is not to gain knowledge of the text (or of art in general) but to function, as Bourdieu suggests, ‘to bring the work into an interminable circuit of inter-legitimation’.
The outcome of this circuit is the creation of the world of art and its corresponding world of art criticism which, while claiming to inform, functions primarily to exclude, creating what Bourdieu calls ‘the enchantment of artistic contemplation’.
It is exclusive inasmuch as it demands a recognition of a continuously expanding number of works of art, a process which finds its correlative in cultural criticism's developing complexity of coding, with the result that works of art and their criticism becomes increasingly ‘difficult’, forever demanding more time and more money to ‘appreciate’.
Thus, in order to fully appreciate Distant Voices, Still Lives , we would have to be familiar with the work of Lowry, Lawrence, Larkin et al— and to fully appreciate their work in turn demands familiarity with numerous other texts and artists, and so it goes on.
And who is being excluded in this process?
Most obviously the very people who Distant Voices, Still Lives is about — the working class.
When we turn to A Very British Coup , it is clear that the approaches which allowed mainstream critics to exclude any ‘extraneous talk of politics’ in reviews of Distant Voices, Still Lives could not be applied here, for this is a film which does little else than talk of politics.
Its most serious claim is that if a Labour party, elected on a socialist manifesto, attempted to carry out reforms which would seriously shift the balance of power in favour of working-class people, then the ruling class, aided and abetted by the media and US interests.
would undermine and eventually overthrow them.
Distant Voices, Still Lives (All stills from this production are courtesy of Channel Four)
Distant Voices, Still Lives
Distant Voices, Still Lives
In facing such a directly political proposal, mainstream reviews reverted to some tried and trusted critical tools in order to reaffirm the gap between fact and fiction, politics and culture, that the film is attempting to narrow.
A Very British Coup uses a fictional form to argue that its political content is, or could be, factual.
Mainstream criticism responds by claiming that both form and content are fictional.
In some ways the task of denying the programme's (political) content is made easier by first praising its (artistic) form.
By first establishing a formal highpoint, the critics are then able to look down upon the content, ‘objectively’ pointing out the division which they claim exists (which in fact they have helped to construct) between the two.
Credit is given where credit is due.
It is ‘well written’(Edward Peace,The Sunday Times , 13 July 1988) with a ‘certain stylish force’(The Daily Telegraph , 4 July 1988), the ‘verisimilitude achieved by…script and direction has been dazzling’(Paul Paterson,The Daily Mirror , 4 July 1988) and all are agreed that it is a ‘first class production’(Edward Pearce,The Sunday Times , 13 July 1988).
But the form is perhaps too good, for there is a growing fear that it will blind the viewer to the fact that  
A Very British Coup (Courtesy of Channel Four)‘what is at issue is the thinking’(Christopher Dunkley,The Financial Times , 6 July 1988).
And it is here, in the ‘thinking’, we are told, that the programme falls down due to the ‘lack of connection between reality and what you saw on the screen (Charles Catchpole,News of the World , 26 June 1988).
Thus A Very British Coup fails because, according to Pearce ‘it wants to have it both ways’, and instead of‘owning up to being fantastic tosh, it tried to be incredibly realistic’(Chris Tookey,The Sunday Telegraph , 26 June 1988).
The implication here is that the programme makers know really that their programme's political content is ‘fantastic tosh’(as we all do, don't we?) but are not ‘owning up’ to it.
It seems that the form of the programme is dazzling to the point of dishonesty, blinding the viewer to what seems so obvious to the critic.
Thus the critic's role becomes one of reminding the viewer that she/he is watching a work of fiction.
‘We are talking recreational therapy, the blowing of beautiful  iridescent bubbles,’ states Pearce.
Indeed ‘the whole piece is something of a dream’(Hugo Young,The Guardian , 21 June 1988), in which ‘you couldn't take a single thing seriously’(according to Pearce) because ‘any resemblance between it and the world of 1988 is due to administrative oversight’(Patrick Stoddart,The Sunday Times , 26 June 1988).
The urgency which mainstream critics applied to the task of denouncing A Very British Coup was no doubt fuelled by the fact that the film was screened as a three-week serial, hence reviewers were in the unusual position (for TV critics) of being able to influence readers as to whether they would watch future episodes.
But at times this urgency verged on desperation as we were told by Tookey that the film ‘utterly fails to convince’; by Frank Johnson that ‘its politics are so plainly  antediluvian ’; by Pearce that ‘you couldn't take a single thing seriously’.
Indeed ‘the whole scenario is desperately unreal’ and ‘strictly for the adventure playground’, according to Pearce.
But does it really take a trained critic to warn viewers of what is so plainly, desperately obvious?
Indeed it does, and it seems the job cannot be left to the mere television reviewer either, for criticism soon leaked from the cultural pages to the overtly political ones, even reaching as far as the editorial sections of some newspapers.
But having opened up the debate, most critics joined Pearce in immediately trying to close down the political questions raised.
Pearce dismissed the programme's central theme with a pat circular argument: ‘There is, and will be, no socialist revolutionary government to suppress, therefore it will not be suppressed.’
Besides confusing the reformist Labour government in A Very British Coup with a revolutionary one, he denies the central claim of the programme — that a reformist (let alone a revolutionary) government would be suppressed — and hence avoids discussion of the important  questions this raises about the British system of parliamentary democracy.
Pearce concludes:
the truth is that the far left is no longer that important.
It does not have the arithmetic to make any sensible capitalist take time off from lunch.
(The Sunday Times , 3 July 1988)
Judging by the amount of political column inches devoted to stating the ‘obvious’ irrationality of the programme's political contentions, it would appear that one or two ‘sensible’capitalist newspaper owners and editors did take time off from lunch to ensure the sensible British public did not get the wrong idea about A Very British Coup .
They are two very different films then, the one classified as pure art, the other as pure entertainment.
And, politics well aside, what unites them is precisely their purity, the fact that they can both be reduced to a matter of pure taste.
The mainstream critics' thankless task (their privilege) is only completed when every last cultural product is herded into this universal corral of taste where, to quote Bourdieu once more, ‘the most classifying privilege has the privilege of appearing to be the most natural one’.
So much for the mainstream, but how successful were the left at staying afloat in, or even swimming against, this formidable rightward moving tide?
In search of an alternative
In turning to the left criticism of Distant Voices, Still Lives and A Very British Coup , we need to make a distinction between what I shall term the ‘core’ and the ‘periphery’journals.
The core here refers to those journals which exist to promote left political comment and whose cultural criticism might therefore be expected to be consistently oppositional.
The periphery refers to practically anywhere (including the mainstream and ‘quality’ press we have already looked at) that oppositional or, as is more likely, alternative criticism might occur.
Given the number of left journals that declined to review Distant Voices, Still Lives , my summary of them will be all too brief.
Most left journals were either unwilling, or unable, to use the film to initiate any political criticism or debate.
Most had nothing at all to say about it and those that did comment relied to a large extent on a discourse and terminology borrowed from the ‘agenda setting nexus’ of mainstream criticism.
Those that did criticize or review the film, while being in total agreement with the mainstream that it was a ‘good film’, were unable to find any particularly political reasons for such valuations.
Maureen Watson's review (Socialist Worker , 26 October 1988) began with an assessment of the film's reception within mainstream criticism.
Watson duly noted the amount of ‘gushing praise’ the film was receiving, asked what all the ‘fuss’was about and, on finding no real answer, concluded that the reviews were ‘a bit over the top’.
Despite these reservations she thought that it was a good film but at the same time she upheld a longstanding tradition in Socialist Worker of avoiding any discussion of what a ‘good film’ might be.
The only other substantial left review was to be found in The Morning Star where Jeff Sawtell found the film politically distinctive because it was (unusually) a film ‘from within the class’ rather than simply being about the class.
The implied value of this being that like the sixties social realist films, such as Saturday Night and Sunday Morning (1960) and This Sporting Life (1963), it was a film that working-class people could relate to on an emotional level because ‘it so closely resembles aspects of your own life’.
Thus Sawtell ‘sat transfixed by the film's sheer beauty and its evident sympathy and understanding of post-war Britain's working-class culture’(Morning Star , 14 October 1988).
Moving outside of the core into the periphery, the reviews here tended to echo mainstream criticism in applauding the film's universal and aesthetic values.
Thus according to David Wilson, ‘it is a film rooted in personal memory but transcending it’.
Hence its ‘substance [its historically and socially specific setting]is mysteriously made something else’(Monthly Film Bulletin , October 1988).
And this, according to Brian Baxter, is all the work of Terence Davies, a ‘potentially great artist’ who has ‘evoked memories and then shaped them, as a painter or poet distills such images, into a coherent whole (Films and Filming , October 1988).
Interviews with the director (in City Limits and Time Out ) and reviews in film journals further emphasized aesthetic merits and attempted to place the film within an artistic-cinematic canon — dare one mention the greatest of all directors, Bresson?
(Brian Baxter,Films and Filming , October 1988).
Nevertheless, reviews within the periphery did begin to deal with the relationship between form and content in far more radical ways than left or core reviews were prepared to do and were even able to hint at possible political meanings that might be derived from this process.
Baxter, for instance, concluded that it was a ‘fierce movie…a social tract and a revolutionary one’, but, although he had been able to explain the way the film had produced such ‘fierce’ effects, he was unable, or not sufficiently politically motivated, to explain why it was so ‘revolutionary’as a ‘social tract’.
On the whole then, left criticism of Distant Voices, Still Lives was a missed opportunity to develop an effective political analysis of a ‘popular’ film.
But perhaps the critics hesitated when faced by a film whose politics were rarely foregrounded.
Surely when we turn to such a blatantly political film as A Very British Coup , it should be a  different story.
For here was a film that was quite obviously intent on initiating debate around important contemporary issues such as parliamentary democracy, the Labour Party, the role of the state, the role of the press, and so on.
All issues which the core left journals, and the left in general, spend most of their time and printed space debating.
So, given that the screening of A Very British Coup would be raising these issues in the homes of hundreds of thousands of working-class people (the very audience the left would dearly love to talk to), surely here was an opportunity the left would not hesitate to take advantage of.
Well, hesitate they most certainly did.
Apologies for absences must again predominate.
Neither Marxism Today ,Socialist Review nor Tribune had anything at all to say about the programme.
Those journals that did have something to say matched the mainstream press in concentrating on the ‘reality’ of the programme's scenario.
Sawtell stated that the type of socialist government that holds fictional office in the film ‘would only be elected in an era of raised class consciousness and class struggle’.
This argument was not expanded upon but the implication that there should be more evidence of ‘class struggle’ in the programme was picked up by Socialist Worker .
The one thing Ian Taylor found ‘utterly missing’ in the programme was the working class:
The nearest thing to a worker in the three-hour drama is politician Harry.
The only intimation of the working class outside of a meeting with TUC leaders is Harry's memory of his grandad (Socialist Worker , 18 June 1988).
In both of these reviews the programme's form is used to leap-frog into a discussion of its content.
While politics is discussed within the cultural space of the journals, there is no discussion of the politics of culture itself or the political questions raised by the form as well as, and in relation to , its content.
Much the same thing occurs in New Statesman & Society , but there is a significant shift here in that we begin to see cultural products (or rather questions raised by them) being discussed outside of the journal's cultural space — in the editorials and in guest journalists' comments.
This ‘promotion’ from the back pages to the front produced a criticism whose discourse was borrowed almost wholesale from the mainstream press.
A Very British Coup reworked the ‘familiar paranoid fantasies of the left which sees the ruling class conspiring to thwart the will of the British people’, claimed the New Statesman & Society's editorial (10 June 1988) in a statement that both echoed the views of mainstream criticism and distanced the magazine from those of the left.
As we move further into the periphery, we find a number of significant and interesting examples of critical commentary  appearing.
Interesting and significant not just in what they say but in where they are saying it.
Hilary Wainwright wrote in The Guardian (8 August 1988) and Ken Livingstone in The Evening Standard (27 June 1988).
This latter piece was very much a response to Roy Hattersley's article, ‘Let's Pretend Politics’(The Listener , 23 June 1988) which had totally denounced the programme's politics as ‘fantasy as distinct from political thought’.
Wainwright's, Livingstone's and Hattersley's articles all provoked various letters in response and hence we can begin to detect a limited, but not insignificant, space for discussion and criticism being opened up within the periphery of critical and not so critical journals.
Perhaps what was most lacking in the left's criticism of A Very British Coup was any general discussion of the distinct importance of television as a medium and, more specifically, the question of what makes it such a potentially politically effective medium.
Hilary Wainwright did begin to raise such questions in stating that truly radical television would have to address the needs of its audience if it was to be able to ‘imagine the real messy,[business of socialism]’.
Her article was significantly different from most oppositional criticism in that it was directly concerned with ‘the kind of television criticism should demand’ and as such implied an active link between socialists, critics and programme makers.
On a similar theme, Hugh Hebert produced a very interesting comment concerning the relationship between the form of A Very British Coup and its political effectiveness.
Over the top, I hear you say, and so it is — splendidly over the top and a moment that will remind you, adrift in the endless hours of pseudo-realism, that the screen does after all have transformative powers.
(The Guardian , 4 July 1988)
Hebert's and Wainwright's articles are encouraging because they begin to deal with their critical objects as a point of intervention within a political debate.
But, despite these glimmers of hope, this survey of the left's response to Distant Voices, Still Lives and A Very British Coup has, on the whole, demonstrated how much the mainstream operates a hegemony in the area of critical discourse.
The majority of the left's criticism failed to contest certain important divisions and distinctions (for instance, between art and politics, form and content) and hence failed to challenge the politically reactionary effects of such formulations.
Commentary on form is kept to a minimum and is almost entirely superficial.
Thus we are told that it is a ‘good film’, is ‘riveting viewing’ and has ‘excellent acting’but are never told what makes a film ‘good’, why certain images are ‘riveting’or what is ‘excellent acting’.
There is little talk of film as ‘film’, television as ‘television’ or of the two forms as different but connected social processes.
There is only the odd passing comment on what makes a  film or TV programme politically effective, how form and content might combine to produce the politically challenging and provocative programmes that the left would presumably like to see.
This absence is all the more surprising given that it is these very questions which have dominated much of Marxist cultural theory over the past thirty years.
So why has this critical theory had so little influence in the area of critical practice, why has there been no process of a filtering down of ideas from the ‘high ground’ of theory to the ‘lower ground’of journalism, reviewing and the more quotidian criticism?
We have to look at left criticism in the context of the harsh political climate in which it has had to survive, the resultant lack of opportunities to practice and develop, and the dominance of mainstream criticism and its supporting political ideas.
But while all this might explain the quantitative failures of left criticism it does not in itself, explain its qualitative failures.
And it certainly does not explain why those spaces of cultural criticism that the left does control — in the ‘core’ journals — should be so critically and politically inarticulate.
To understand this we need to look at the history of cultural theory and criticism in Britain over the last twenty to thirty years.
And where better to start than right here in the pages of Screen ?
For it was the early Screen journal that most clearly celebrated and promoted the development of film and television studies in Britain, fuelled, in the main, by the theories of Louis Althusser.
The rise and fall of Althusserianism and its ultimately debilitating effects on the left have been well documented elsewhere.
Suffice to say here that its effects on film and television studies is most evident in the split between ‘textualists’ and ‘contextualists’, the former emphasizing textual analysis and the position of the spectator, the latter more concerned with contextual inquiry and the role of the audience.
Though sharing many (often unstated) political aims, these two ‘tendencies’ soon developed separate journals, methods, references and devotees.
During the formative years of cultural studies in Britain ‘textualism’ was dominant, but the growing disenchantment with its Althusserian paradigm (of which the Screen/Screen Education division was just one sign) was due largely to the inability of that paradigm to inform a criticism of telling political intervention.
The domination of textual analysis produced, at its worst, cultural criticism of a wilfully indigestible form and, even at its best, it soon became clear that text-based analyses yielded only text-based solutions.
Theory and practice became absolutely autonomous spheres of influence with the result that left critics and reviewers were unable to develop the critical tools needed to shape a politically effective interventionist theory and practice of film and television criticism.
The reviews of A Very British Coup and Distant Voices, Still Lives have shown how this gap in left criticism was all  too easily filled by the ideas and discourse of the mainstream.
The sense of political focus that empowered the early Screen project has been dissipated.
This, coupled with numerous fragmenting experiences endured by the left over the last two decades, has made the prospect of any sort of political focus within the left in general, and in film and television studies in particular , both difficult and remote.
Indeed, for many the very idea of attaining a political focus has been discarded in favour of a celebration of fragmentation.
But as too many ‘left’ cultural theorists line up to claim their rightful place in the bin-bags of history, the space they have evacuated should not go unfilled.
And there are, of course, numerous ideas and people able to fill that space.
Pierre Bourdieu, for instance, whose work I have drawn on extensively here, is not alone in raging against those who celebrate the ‘aftermath of modernism’.
And, while fighting shy of political commitment, Bourdieu, like many, remains committed to the belief that the point is still not just to interpret, analyse or agonize about the world, but to change it.
And why not?
For if left cultural criticism is not about changing the world, in some small but not insignificant way, then what is it about?
Is it just to remain an afterthought, a theorization of a practice past, or is it to become a political intervention in a practice still happening?
As Mike Poole has said:
…what is ultimately at stake is not so much the kind of criticism television (and film) should get as the kind of television [and film]criticism should demand.
That is the real critical project — and as yet it has hardly begun.
REPORTS
Signs of the Times: A Decade of Video, Film and Tape-slide Installations, Museum of Modern Art, Oxford, 7 October to 9 December 1990; and Electronic Visions, Harris Gallery, Preston, 1 November to 10 December 1990.
Like the question of quality raised by Charlotte Brunsdon in these pages last year (‘Problems with quality’,Screen , vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 67–90), the question of aesthetics has returned to media debates after some years on the margins.
There is a lot to learn, for instance, in the area of apparatus theory.
The earliest video installations — associated with names like Vito Acconci and Bruce Nauman — made extensive use of time-delay mechanisms, exploiting and altering the instant playback facility of the electronic medium.
But this relied on the use of the old open-reel machines.
The onward march of technological progress has given us the user-friendly sealed cassette, much more difficult to damage or tamper with — or to intervene in (and to recreate on modern machines).
Such intervention in the hardware has characterized British avant-garde film (especially at the London Filmmakers' Coop) and video installation worlds.
David Hall exhibited at MOMA an elegant piece which drew on the lost potentialities of the Nipkow disc, mechanical heart of the early Baird Televisor, ‘superseded’ and eradicated by a progress which has been synonymous with standardization.
In the art world, if not in mainstream media and media theory, the hardware is seldom taken as given.
Video installations are, moreover, tricky things to install.
Multi-monitor works like those by Jez Welsh, Stuart Marshall, Susan Hiller and Judith Goddard must, especially in the Oxford retrospective covering a decade of rapid technological change, be affected by contingencies of synchronization, the degree of luminescence and colour response on different screens, mobile spectators and the vagaries of storage for an art form without an institutional archive.
This sense of accident is used to good effect by certain artists, for example Chris Meigh-Andrews, whose Fountain (1990), shown at the Harris, makes use of the wiring and playback decks as elements of the sculpture itself, punning on the flow of current, images and imaged water.
In Jez Welsh's Forest Fires (1983–90), the key auditory experience is that of the viewer's feet trampling over woodland debris on the gallery floor; Tina Keane's Escalator (1988) invites an almost architectural experience, as you walk through, below, behind and around the multiple screens.
What video art, video sculpture, video installation, video performance return to the moving image is space.
Film and television posit, in their dominant forms, the coherence of time and space, prioritizing the diegetic and virtual while eliding the time and place of viewing.
But video installation calls the viewer into spatial relationship with the object, a relationship carried over into a sculptural understanding of even single monitor works.
The classic teacher's image of subject positioning in the cinema — the fixed rows of banked seating — is immediately disrupted, along with the domesticity of the domestic TV.
The space of normal viewing belongs to the domain of undifferentiated, homogeneous, realist representation: a film is a film is a film, regardless of where it is projected.
We need only approach ideal viewing conditions.
place, on the other hand, is a determination of space as a coincidence of event and geography that is itself productive of meaning: as if a film were made only to be seen in one place, not another.
place is both a historical residue and a hard-won anchoring of work in ‘indifferent’, postmodern space.
In this instance, the instance of video installation, place is not, as Heidegger would have it, the return of the feudal anchor in the ground of feudal loyalties — the family home, the centre of worship, the manorial domain.
It is more the return of the materiality of the body to the field of the visible, as that has been remade in the dominant regimes of looking created in cinema and recreated in television.
A discussion event at Oxford covered issues of the traffic between high and popular art forms, problems of archiving and curation, the museumization of video, virtual environment experiments, interactive media, material film and more.
Yet the figure that returned constantly was that of the audience.
As Stuart Marshall observed pointedly, postmodernism authorizes but has yet to create a new populism.
It is the problem of an avant garde in the eighties: still without an audience, but now deprived of a viable vanguardist ideology.
What was surprising was the feeling that ‘we’ had to be involved with electronic media: otherwise they would stagnate into the old orthodoxies, the old ideologies.
Contemporary computer graphics and virtual environments (such as the NASA mask-and-glove system) disappoint with their slavish maintenance of monocular perspective.
In the work in both the Preston and Oxford shows, that perceptual centring is constantly challenged.
Though single pieces were restrained, the cumulative effect of a group exhibition was to reorganize spatial perception radically.
Here were audio spaces that, in certain instances, bled around comers out of sight of their sources; sculptural/architectural spaces around and through which the viewer must travel; virtual spaces of onscreen worlds; visual spaces of Greenbergian flatness, for example in Susan Hiller's well-known Belshazzar's Feast (1983–4), where images of flame move towards the purity of pixels (though she also devotes attention to the generation of images and gestalts from the eye itself); geographical spaces, notably in the move of Judith Goddard's environmental sculpture,Electron (1987), from Dartmoor indoors.
Despite the interchangeability of gallery spaces, anchoring the materiality of the installation in its specific site troubles unthinking acceptance of the virtual spaces of the video monitor (the ideal simulacrum), the internal space of video sculpture as hyperreal, and image space after the demise of the camera as core image-generator.
The video sculpture is unquestionably here , where the TV set is invisible, cloaked by the light of its images.
At stake is the undifferentiated circulation of sameness: the difference asserted in experimental media is an ethical and aesthetic imperative as much as or more than an ideological one.
In discussion, Anne-Marie Duguet outlined a history of the experimental imperative.
After an initial modernist interest in the medium as such, there came a shift away from the live or near-live interactive installation, and a closer engagement with the politics of representation.
But its characteristics were more at the level of perception than of narrative: peripheral vision; proximity to the image; and massive amplification of sound.
Simultaneously, the eighties have witnessed a shift from systems-oriented work to the capacity of the sensorium to process and transform data —— perception as apparatus — a shift towards virtuality and simulation typified by the video work of Thierry Kuntzel.
None of the Oxford work really paralleled this European and American shift, though Marty St James's and Anne Wilson's Portrait of Shobana Jeyasingh (1990) shown in the Harris exhibition (a relative of the works on show in early 1991 at the National portrait Gallery in London) works through many related concerns.
The Portrait shows the metonymic elements of the body of the South Asian dancer organized across fourteen screens: passionately observed; technically brilliant; and a vivid demonstration of the impossibility of TV flow ever completing even the description of a single human gesture.
At the same time, as with so much of the work at Oxford, it evidenced a return to the physicality of the body at the core of aesthetic experience.
Scripted, encoded, clothed in the scribble of Western electronic culture, yet the irredeemable flesh remains, not as other but as difference.
Much discussion at Oxford was devoted to the future.
for many, the key aspects are the transience of video sculptures and tapes, and the necessity to intervene in the apparatus itself.
For others, the central concern is the pursuit of audiences and the dilemmas that brings with it.
For me, the issues gelled around place, accident and the body.
Both the contingencies surrounding installations and the disequilibrium of material and virtual spaces seem to recentre the body as a zone of action — the body as sensorium as well as ground of representation.
This is the site of productive tension in Tina Keane's Escalator , poised between corporeality and virtuality, politics and aesthetics, Symbolic and Imaginary in its account of homelessness as actuality and metaphor.
An increasingly ergonomic and therefore telematic society keeps bodies in stasis while eradicating distance electronically.
Interactive media reformulate human interaction, minimalizing difference, maximizing control.
Magnetic recording media properties, notably that of erasure, are becoming vital formal characteristics of such media.
Contingencies can be wiped from memory, so that narrative closure becomes far more final, for example, than the ‘death’ of a game persona.
The most unsettling vision of this was suggested by Ceryth Wynne Evans, who described the use of virtual worlds to provide environments for people with disabilities, and questioned the relation of such erasable virtualities to the suffering body: with the body, we return to an ethical dimension of the aesthetic.
Electronic arts, still in their pioneer phase, risk dépassé avant-gardisme in order to intervene in hardware, form, technique, design and spectatorship.
It is worth noting that industry sponsors are significant contributors to such experimental work: the audience may be small, but it may also be crucial.
Sean Cubitt 
MIPCOM '90: US AND THEM; AN OUTSIDER'S VIEW
US is a very small production outfit that produces — on a shoestring — one of the UK's most successful ‘youth’ music shows:SNUB TV.
The basic premise of the show is that music programming, by and large, patronizes the audience and seems to be made by people who stopped actually being interested in music, especially new and underground forms, long ago — TV people.
We think we do it better.
SNUB is brash, adventurous and seriously underfunded.
We have a choice: either accept a UK transmission fee only from the BBC (in lieu of the usual Channel Four model of a full commission) or not make the programmes.
When the offer first came up we'd had an even lower-budget series go out on a national US cable network but, apart from that critically-lauded effort, no TV experience.
It's always hard to break into TV, but, these days, there's no getting over the fact that the recession has hit TV production, and it's even worse post the SKY takeover.
Outsiders — forget it.
We often feel like one of the black sheep of the independent sector — accepting a licence fee puts you in the not-serious programme makers' league.
But we were convinced we could make the series without the need to accept a ‘marriage-offer’— another favoured Channel Four model — which would mean an established production company would absorb us and our ideas and take the commission.
We could become researchers on our own programme — hey what a great idea!
We watched with horror that precise scenario unfold when Zenith was wheeled in by Channel Four to ‘co-produce’Big World Cafe with Vivien Goldman's company, Spellbound.
Vivien's good idea became a big-budget shambles, and Spellbound seemed to be eased out of the second series.
Thanks but no-thanks, we'd rather make the programme we want to, despite the horrendous budget problems.
The great thing about only having a licence fee is that you do retain complete editorial control and all the rights.
This is where the THEM comes in.
The obvious way to raise additional programme finance is to exploit those precious overseas rights.
Before the first series went out we got ourselves an established and admired distributor and waited for the programme sales cash to roll in.
Another problem — SNUB tends to favour those artists and musics that are not, by and large, commercially successful.
Not because we adhere to some outdated idea that to be commercial is to be tainted and somehow of no interest, but we felt we were redressing an imbalance.
No way do the charts tell the whole story — the new underground is of much more interest and relevance.
We were there not to service the latest release plans of the record companies but to represent a submerged but vastly influential music culture.
However this made naming names to sell the programme a little difficult: no big stars, no even moderately famous ones.
We did get some sales, but actually it felt like we were giving the series away.
There are a few examples of maverick programmes (like Rapido ) selling themselves, so, encouraged, we decided we had not too much to lose (more money…): we should check out the world's biggest film and TV market, MIPCOM.
I don't know what MIPCOM stands for.
It's one of a whole plague of M-words though: MIP-TV, MIDEM and no doubt others.
They are all run by one company, The Midem Organisation (or International Exhibition Organisation), that specializes in entertainment industry get-togethers of a massively corporate nature.
There seems to be a market for every month in the TV and film industry, but the two MIPs are the biggest.
MIPCOM and sister event MIP-TV are unwieldy events, attracting over five thousand registrants and hundreds of exhibitors.
They all take place in a huge modernist building on the sea front of the ultimate business watering hole, Cannes.
In the lead-up to MIPCOM, the tele-trade papers were full of dire warnings of the perils of MIPCOM for small independents — astronomical costs loomed as the principal concern.
With costs around £700 per company for registration, before any promotional literature, accommodation, flights and living expenses, you can see the problem.
Consider an ad. in the various publications that swamp the event or, more expense, renting an exhibition space (or, as many companies did, hiring a yacht moored to a pier just by the festival building), and you're obviously talking serious investment.
Beyond SNUB's limited budget for sure.
Getting there, getting in, and expenses, that's as much as we could manage.
In previous years the British Independent Programme Producers Association had taken a stand and we were initially distressed to find that this was not to be the case in 1990 — a decision based on the exorbitant cost (they will retain a stand at MIP-TV).
It would have given us a base at least to operate from, a place where we could be contacted, and where we might even meet some of our fellow producers.
We made the decision to go despite the lack of an organized UK presence — we are on-air with a new series running from January to March 1991 and we wanted to make contacts before then, rather than wait for MIP-TV to come around in April.
But if you have to choose one market and you're producing for or looking to sell to TV, then MIP-TV is probably the better place.
(That's hearsay, because we haven't attended MIP-TV ourselves.)
IPPA advised us, too late to our frustration, to contact a Euro-organization, called EUROAIM which is an EEC-funded umbrella for smallish independent producers.
EUROAIM provides subsidized back-up, from cheaper registrations and exhibition space to organized meetings with buyers from various Euro-broadcasters.
More of them later.
MIP is basically a place where the big guys parade their wares.
Most everybody who's anybody is there to sell.
But where there are sellers there are buyers, and it was this latter rare species we had set our sights on.
Market is the key word.
Most activity seems to centre on the exhibition space, the Palais de Festival, where on six floors exhibitors display their goods.
It's a bizarre bazaar.
You appear to be in some sort of surreal shopping mall, with the world's TV laid out for purchase: you almost feel like you should have a shopping trolley, to wheel up and down the aisles.
You can pass, in a short tour, the BBC, LWT, Granada, Central and a host of other UK broadcasters, Berlusconi, Freemantle/Talbot (‘The World's Biggest Supplier of Game Shows’, according to the slogan adorning their massive exhibition space), a bewildering array of Euro-broadcasters, MTV (USA) and literally hundreds of producers of everything from serious arts/documentary programmes to kids' animation, producers of ‘erotic’ material, light entertainment and cult films.
The lower the floor the more frenetic the activity seemed to be — like some sort of descent into Hades.
It does all appear remarkably accessible on first impressions.
Pay the admission and you're in, with access to the lot.
Though like all market-place democracy, you do have the feeling that what you're actually seeing is an impressive piece of set-building, that the real action lies below the surface, in some place where entry is rather more restricted.
Both observations are right.
You can make connections or deals on the floor, but you know that it's over that expense-account lunch, or in the private suite, the yacht, that real money is changing hands.
A problem we were already — to our distress — aware of, became more apparent in the course of our stay at MIP.
Music TV is by and large at the bottom of the heap when it comes to programme sales.
In fact in the MIPCOM Directory — a tome of some thousand pages — music is listed as either ‘Music programmes: classical or jazz’, but definitely not pop; or ‘Music video/ magazine’.
We fit into the latter category in these terms, but not in our own.
The problem is that with the advent of the ‘promo’ clip and the likes of MTV producing vast amounts of programming built around it, pop programming has become synonymous with music video, and no-one is going to pay you a lot of money for that, even if your programme (like ours) originates its own material.
MTV and the advent of satellite — so much of which relies on cheap pop programming — also signals for many countries the Americanization of youth  culture, and one way to indicate national resistance is to originate your own music television — which they all do these days.
This is not to say music programming doesn't attract money — it does — but money tends to congregate around the celebrity-strewn rock extravaganza, which is not our line at all.
Though if we did follow the dictates of the market-place, that's where we'd be heading, fast.
MIPCOM takes place over five days —— though not being exhibitors with all the setting-up and taking-down of displays (video-screens, logos, stylish furniture, programme brochures, all  de rigueur  )— we opted for just three days.
In that time we managed to talk to many broadcasters, primarily European (which reflects where we see our main market potential and the fact that MIPCOM did seem to have greater numbers of European broadcasters than from any other significant territory).
We didn't make a sale, though we did make contacts that wouldn't have been available to us otherwise.
Ironically, some of the breakthroughs we made were with others from the UK market.
We met, for instance, in one or other of the hotel bars that attract delegates of an evening, two commissioning editors we could spend months trying to reach back in London, the assembled ranks of the UK media (usually bemoaning the lack of good gossip pieces) and various other useful types who, post-event, look like providing some unexpected sales and coproduction outlets.
I suspect that has to do with having a basis on which to talk.
The subterranean world of the behind-the-scenes television power-brokers gets to meet up at these events.
Going along as a small independent with just a few programmes to your name does render you relatively powerless.
But the other thing of value that we came away with — much harder to define — was the beginning of an understanding of who's out there: who your market might be; what they are looking for; and how you might approach them.
This, we felt, was particularly true of the Europeans we met.
Next time we will have a basis on which to request a meeting, in advance — trying to arrange meetings on the spot becomes a nightmare of negotiating other prescheduled appointments.
Now, having checked out the way EUROAIM functions, we may decide to go as part of their umbrella.
If you are trying to sell programmes, there is no doubt that it's useful to have somewhere to screen excerpts at least.
And we were hard to contact — access to exhibition space means you can be found.
I did hear some buyers indicate that the EUROAIM scheme made it easy to avoid, en masse, many troublesome independents, as they were all grouped conveniently together, but I trust this was a minority position!
Lastly, one other strange bit of feedback we had after attending was that our presence was seen to indicate our ‘seriousness’ as a production company — some sort of trial by ordeal.
If you invest the time and money to project your programmes and ideas then you must be planning longevity, indicating staying power.
We do intend to get along to MIP-TV next April, so obviously we found the event of use.
In fact everybody at MIP complains about it, but they'll all be at the next one.
for anyone who has a programme with potential outside their own country, who wants to have a look around the industry for themselves and is interested in the television process (in all its manifestations).
I'd say go, even if it's only just the once.
You might make sales, you'll certainly make contacts and it probably won't put you off the world of TV forever.
Brenda Kelly 