

To my parents
CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
THIS IS ENGLAND!
AND THEY DON'T LIVE HERE
JIM FERGUSON'S FASHION NOTEBOOK
DISCOGRAPHY
THE PHOTOGRAPHS
INTRODUCTION
This book is my photographic vision of London's East End skinheads.
All the photos were taken between 1980 and 1981 and nearly all were shot in the vicinity of Petticoat Lane.
When I started the book in the summer of 1980, I knew none of the East End skins.
By this time all London's pubs and clubs had firmly shut their doors to skinheads.
The one remaining club,Squires , over the water in Catford, shut almost exactly as I started the book.
The only place where large numbers of skins regularly met was an aptly named shop off Petticoat Lane, called ‘The Last Resort ’.
The skins who patronised this shop, every Sunday and most of the rest of the week, were part of the skinhead revival.
The style originally formed in 1966 from a number of different elements which merged to give one strong and definite style by 1967.
This continued, although developing and maturing, until 1972, when it became lost in the emergence of new youth cults and fashions.
For most people who grew up before the sixties, skinheads are seen as yet another unpleasant and ugly aspect of modern youth.
The real origins and reasons for the emergence of the cult get lost in the outrage at the behaviour of those who possess the style.
These pages are intended as a guide to how the movement came about and to describe the archetypal skinhead of the 1967–72 period.
The people I have talked to, who were skinheads during this period, show such a pride and passion for their style, that it is to do them justice that these pages are written.
BANK HOLIDAY MONDAY 1980, SOUTHEND
ORIGINS
The date of the first appearance of a distinct youth style or culture in post-war Britain was in the early fifties.
At that time, some working class youths in London adopted as their uniform the long ‘Edwardian ’ coats and tight trousers which had previously been worn by young men-about-town at the time of the New Look.
They were known as teddy boys or teds.
They were devoted to rock and roll, they wore curious hairstyles with quiffs and DAs painstakingly greased into place.
They behaved as a group separate from conventional life.
In the early sixties, the teddy boys were succeeded by the mods, and their counterparts the rockers.
Skinheads could be identified as a separate group in 1968 because of their distinctive dress and appearance, the type of music which they liked and the tough, aggressive behaviour which they displayed.
The fact that a new youth style had emerged was not surprising.
What was new was that skinheads appeared to be not a continuation of a trend, but a change of emphasis or even a reversal in the development of style.
The sixties had seen a glamorisation of youth, with all its attendant absurdities, and the emergence of the skinhead style represented a counter-revolution.
The revolution took place amongst the working class youth of London and other cities.
This movement appeared more or less spontaneously and its emergence shows how this section of society still possessed its own individualism and independence.
The teds of the fifties had been replaced by the mods, who at first had been a very exclusive, almost secret, underground working class movement.
They wore immaculate clothes, regarded themselves as an élite and behaved like gods.
They bought the finest Italian suits and rode on Vespas and Lambrettas.
They decorated the scooters with artificial fur fabric and as many accessories as possible.
Contrasting with, and in opposition to, the mods, were the rockers or greasers, who with their leather jackets and heavy motor bikes were a diluted version of the American Hell's Angels.
Separate from these groups was the large mass of youth whose clothes were chain store versions of traditional styles.
Attention on fashion for most of the public was concentrated on women's clothes, with mini-skirts and boots emphasising the rapid change in attitudes.
While the mini-skirts and The Beatles made the news, the mods, who were only newsworthy when they rioted at seaside towns, developed their own independent styles of dress relatively uninfluenced by popular fashion.
Each successive age group wishes to establish itself as being different from its predecessors.
You share your identity with your mates at work or with your own age at school, not with your elder brother.
In establishing their own style, the younger brothers of the mods adopted certain elements of the mod style, combined them with items from traditional working clothes, borrowed some influences from the West Indian blacks and became skinheads.
EARLY SKIN WITH MODS, APRIL 1967
DRESS
The skinhead style is smart, clean and tough.
It is a precise uniform which proclaims identity.
As early as 1964 one could recognise mods — who resembled skinheads in that they had short, cropped hair, wore Ben Sherman shirts and Levis.
These styles can be seen in the pictures of mod rallies at seaside towns.
The mods eventually split into two distinct groups.
One group, the art college or trendy mods, developed a style of dress that became increasingly resplendent, while the other group, the hard mods, or the gang mods, developed into the skinheads.
The mods' fanatical eye for detail became an important element in the skinhead style.
The young people who developed this style rejected the finery and the slightly effeminate characteristics of the art college mods and the hippies for clothes that were more related to their working class background.
They needed clothes that would not get torn in a fight, which would stay pressed and neat and which would identify them in a crowd.
Donkey jackets, army greens, tough working jeans, industrial boots and braces fitted this need.
Steel toecapped boots, highly polished, became a badge of identity and a useful weapon until they were banned at football matches.
The third source of the skinhead style was the hip young West Indians of the inner city areas, such as Lambeth or Brixton.
The whites and the blacks mixed freely at dance halls and clubs, both indulging a common love of dancing and music.
The black boys were known as Rude Boys or Rudies.
They could be seen hanging around street corners in Brixton, dressed in their long black coats, later to become the crombies of the skinheads, with short trousers revealing white socks and flat, black shoes.
They viewed the world through dark wrap-around shades beneath pork-pie hats or stingy brims.
Their cool, disdainful attitude to strangers and their style and exuberance in the dance hall made them respected and admired by their white contemporaries.
Although the typical picture of the skinhead is boots and braces, the style changed in the evening when the skinhead went to dance halls and clubs.
Skinhead suits were much like those worn by the mods.
Whereas daytime clothes were loose and hard wearing, clothes worn in the evening were well tailored and expensive.
Suits by Dormeuil, a petrol blue and red two-tone suit, or a fine mohair suit were clothes which every skinhead would aspire to, but which few owned.
Silk handkerchiefs secured with studs were worn in the breast pocket of suits and crombies.
The skinhead style spread through the football clubs, the dance halls and the dance circuits.
It was well established before the media got hold of it.
The supporters of London clubs such as Tottenham ,West Ham and Chelsea , included many skinheads and these soon made their appearance known to rival supporters.
This new style had an electric effect on football matches.
Ian Walker recalls seeing 4,000 skinheads at a football match in 1968.
‘They all wore bleached Levis, Dr Martens, a short scarf tied cravat style, cropped hair.
They looked like an army and, after the game, went into action like one.’
To provide a more detailed description of the skinhead style and to record the changes over the years, such as the bowler hat, the suede-head and the smooth, see Jim Ferguson's illustrated skinhead fashion notebook later in this book.
PULP NOVELS, EARLY 1970's
HAIR
In addition to clothes, hair styles are an important indicator of who you are and the cult to which you belong.
The wartime spivs, the teddy boys and the mods each had their own distinctive hair style.
The hard mods had already taken to cropped hair by 1964 and the style was taken further by the skinheads, giving rise to their own name of peanuts and other names such as lemons, spy kids and no-heads.
‘Skinhead ’ had already been used to describe the US marines, but a skinhead crop is not a crewcut, which is close cut at the sides and flat on top.
The length of the cut is controlled by the thickness of the white plastic clip-on guard of the barber's electric razor.
There are four thicknesses of guard, with number one giving the shortest crop and number four the longest.
Partings could be shaved into the crop from front to crown.
Again, this feature was copied from the West Indians who used it as part of their own hairstyles.
Some skins went further than the number one crop and had a ‘dark shadow ’, but at this time they were never bald.
When long hair was the trademark of the hippy and the dropout, it is to be expected that an anti-hippy movement should adopt short hair.
A crop, however, has other benefits.
If you get in a fight, short hair is an advantage since your opponent cannot grasp it.
It has another practical benefit in that it is easy to keep clean and to wash.
It is also easy to manage when you are working.
Moustaches and beards were rarely seen on skins; shaving was obligatory and stubble not accepted.
However, some skins had long side-burns terminating at the lower jaw.
Hair styles varied over time.
In the early days, the crop was fairly short, then the number one crop came into fashion, giving skins the nearly bald look.
By late 1969, the length had increased, giving rise to a new name.
The suedehead had hair at least one and a half inches long.
It was neatly combed, parted to the side and styled.
By 1971, hair had grown to collar length and the final phase came in as the smooth.
The name came both from the general appearance and from a certain make of shoe with a pattern free surface.
Although the smooths looked nothing like their skinhead predecessors, they were the same kids extending the fashion.
Generally, short hair is associated in the public mind with convicts, prison camp inmates and the military.
It was exactly this mean look which the skins wished to cultivate.
MUSIC
It is difficult to imagine a youth cult without its own type of music.
Music serves to identify and unify members of the group, as well as to entertain.
The teds had rock and roll, called the Devil's Music by some American clergy.
The mods had soul, the Motown sound and beat music.
It was necessary for the early skins to obtain a separate musical identity.
They did this by adopting the Jamaican music which the black communities in South East London had brought from their homeland and which was the popular music of the Rude Boys.
In Jamaica a separate style of music had developed distinct from the jazz, rhythm and blues and the soul music from North America.
This music had a nagging, echoing, simple upbeat.
It has been described as clammy, pelvic and throbbing.
‘So gummy that you could throw it against a wall and it would stick,’ It was known as ska, blue beat or rocksteady, and collectively as reggae.
The music was being played, usually by disc jockeys and hardly ever live, in the dance halls and back rooms of pubs in South East London and North West Kent, such as the Daylight Inn , the Three Tuns , the Lord Palmerston and the RamJam club in Brixton.
The mods were already into this music and the skins adopted it as their own.
The music was extremely good to dance to and the skins were excellent dancers, although they turned to the slow, deep soul music for close dancing.
Reggae music was not organised like the popular commercial music of the big groups and their imitators.
Few white musicians were involved.
Reggae was played in discos with sound systems which accentuated the beat.
Interest was centred on the music rather than the performer.
Disc jockeys added a ‘voice’ to formerly instrumental discs which would then be recorded again for the second version of the same record.
Two disc jockeys would compete with each other in the clubs, taking turns to do their voice-over on the discs.
Recordings were put out by small companies and would have limited sales compared to popular, commercial discs.
Harry Hawke recalls that it was the aim of skinhead devotees of this music to keep up with the latest releases and consequently white-label, i.e. pre-release, copies of records were the mark of a skin who knew his music.
Although this was not the music of the star performers, some names became established.
There was Desmond Dekker ,Laurel Aitken ,(who claimed to be the father of ska),Bob Marley ,Harry J and the All-Stars .
Prince Buster , who was a former boxer, was another leading name.
Amongst the groups, there were The Maytals ,The Upsetters ,The Skatellites and The Ethiopians .
A discography for the years 1968–71, compiled by Harry Hawke, occurs later in this book and lists some of the better dance records of the time.
The white youths joined the blacks who were already fans of this music.
Reggae was a poor man's music and its themes were drawn from the ghettoes of Trenchtown, Jamaica.
‘54–46 — That's my number ’, for example, is a reference to a prisoner's number.
Songs spoke of drink, drugs, injustice and the underdog fighting back, although some were simply love songs.
This was not the rich pap of the commercial world and there was little money in it for the artists.
Producers had originally started off as sound-men and moved into recording a studio product made specifically for dancing.
Named dances would come and go and vary greatly from club to club.
The bouncy, jumpy beat in reggae was adopted by the skins and later some specific skinhead records were published.
The ‘Skinhead Moonstomp ’(1969) is probably the best known.
It urged skins to ‘I want all you skinheads to get up on your feet, put your braces together and your boots on your feet and give me some of that oooold moooonstompin!’ but it was a crude attempt to satisfy the skinhead market.
Other records aimed directly at skins were also pretty poor.
(Harry Hawke describes them as now sounding bad beyond belief).
The best records required more skill than just stompin' around.
To dance to them throughout the night required a great deal of energy and agility.
The former came from ‘blues ’(amphetamines) as it was common for dances to go on from Saturday into Sunday.
Another import from Jamaica was Rastafarianism, which was a mystical cult based on the accession of  Haille Selassie to the throne of Ethiopia and concerning the downfall of the white colonial races (Babylon).
The music of the Rastas was dub reggae, with a heavy slow beat less suitable for dancing.
Eventually, it became the main type of music played by the sound systems, as its popularity grew among young blacks who abandoned skinhead reggae.
Dub reggae had themes dealing with the overthrow of Babylon and which were openly hostile to the white world.
It dealt with Rastafarian spiritual entities such as Jah or with ganja (marihuana) which were not part of the skinhead scene.
The association of skins and blacks in a common form of music had come to an end.
BEHAVIOUR
At a time when middle class hippies, flower power, student mysticism and love-ins were getting the attention of the media, the working class youths of the skinhead movement adopted an aggressive form of behaviour, in keeping with the tough uniforms of their boots and braces.
The skins were passionately interested in football.
However, the increasing commercialisation of the game cut across football's working class origins and helped to create a situation in which football violence was common.
The clubs had experienced this violence since the early sixties.
The comparative affluence of working class youth in the sixties allowed the building-up of large groups of mobile supporters.
The first appearance at away matches of massive groups of skinheads, all uniformly dressed and intent on smashing their opponents into the ground, must have been rather unnerving for the managers of those clubs who were hoping to turn football watching into a family outing.
The clubs reacted by increased policing of the fans and by herding them into segregated areas of the terraces.
Special spiked fences were erected, there was the Arsenal cage, and one club was rumoured to have an underground room in which unruly fans were handcuffed to iron rings let into the walls.
These precautions served only to strengthen the aggressive nature of the confrontation, to spread the cult and to increase feelings of loyalty amongst the supporters.
Football was the major event of the week.
It offered all the excitement of an adventure with ‘yer mates ’, the chance to display fanatical loyalty to your club, to prove your hardness and win the admiration of your friends.
Clashes with the police and opposing supporters, and taking part in the ritual songs and chants of the football ground, together with the opportunity to get drunk and run amok, provided the sort of power and excitement which is normally denied to working class youth.
Since football was regarded as a battle, it was natural to use weapons.
Although some skins claimed that they were so hard that they did not need to use weapons, and there was no standard personal armament like the cut-throat razors of the teds or the bicycle chains of the grebos, a variety of weapons were used at football matches and other fights.
Initially, the steel toecaps of industrial boots provided a good way of savaging your opponent.
The police soon banned these as offensive weapons, especially when steel spikes were welded on to the toecaps, and more subtle weapons had to be found.
The Millwall brick, for example, was a newspaper folded again and again and squashed together to form a cosh.
Metal combs with sharpened handles were another example of how weapons could be made from objects which would not immediately attract the attention of the police.
Metal studded watch straps, sharpened coins, Kung Fu stars with the edges filed down, also came into this category.
In 1969, there was an epidemic of dart throwing.
Rice flails, which could not be taken into football matches, were used in street battles, as also were edges of razor blades taped to the inside of fingers or the instep of boots.
In order to conceal weapons, secret pockets were sewn into the linings of coats.
An interesting reaction on the part of the Midland supporters was to wear metal pit helmets, with the peaks sharpened to provide a cutting edge.
Weaponry is, of course, part of the ritual, and ingenious solutions to the police searches were part of the game.
A minor weapon in the fight against rival supporters was the use of the aerosol paint can.
‘Tottenham Skins Rule, OK?’ sprayed on every available surface in a Northern town was a good way of annoying your enemies and celebrating your power.
Skins were extremely defensive of their own territory.
Each gang, called a crew, had its own area which it defended against other skins and non-skins.
Fights between skins were usually the result of some territorial infringement.
Some crews, such as those from large housing estates, had 200 or more members.
Others, such as the one described in ‘The Paint House ’, were much smaller.
The method of transport, unlike the mods and rockers, was not an essential feature of the cult, although there were scooter skins with the scooter stripped to the bare essentials, and crews who used Ford Cortinas or Transit vans for getting about.
Public transport was an accepted way of travelling.
If a crew went to Southend on a Bank Holiday Monday, which was a traditional outing for London's East End, they would arrive in the town by train and walk as a group to the seafront.
Marching along the street, with boots thudding and fingers slapping (a peculiarly skinhead mannerism), all wearing the same clothes and the same haircut, the skinheads presented an image of power.
Chris Welch has written ‘The sight of cropped heads and the sound of heavy boots entering the midnight Wimpy bar or dance hall is cause for sinking feelings in the pit of the stomach.’
Even if no fight occurred, membership of such a group was an end in itself.
It was some time before the police learnt to react to these invasions by stealing the skins' bootlaces and in some cases their braces.
The reply of the skins was to use a short wire, such as a paperclip, to replace the laces in a way which could not be spotted by the police.
Braces were used for display, most jeans or trousers being self-supporting.
East End working class attitudes have been parodied by Alf Garnett as portrayed by Warren Mitchell, yet his strongly loyalist, anti-socialist, anti-foreigner, anti-intellectual, male chauvinist opinions appear to reflect real attitudes, only exaggerated for the purposes of the comedy.
Some of these opinions can be seen reflected in the behaviour of skins, but the parallel should not be taken too far.
For example, because of the extrovert character of the West Indian blacks and the music they played, there was no antagonism between skins and blacks.
Indeed, many blacks were skinheads or formed their own crews, such as the Kilburn Blacks and the Kilburn Whites.
However, Asian immigrants had a different, closed way of life and did not blend with traditional working class or East End ways of living.
Inner city areas faced the threat of settlement by immigrants or of demolition and removal to overspill areas.
Skinhead violence may be seen as one response to such changes in society.
Paki bashing was combined with queer bashing, squaddie bashing, grease bashing and student bashing.
This led to skinheads being both hated and feared.
As the media caught on to this aspect of the cult, it caused some skins to leave the movement and more violent people to join it.
Eventually, this was one of the reasons which led to its decline in 1971/72.
There was no point in being a skin if you simply got nicked by the police wherever you went.
A crew was predominantly a male group, like any other city gang, yet the skinhead girls eventually became an accepted part of the scene.
Moreover, since only a policewoman can search a girl and there are fewer women police than men, girls became useful carriers of weapons or pills.
The clothes of skinhead girls made them look superficially like the boys.
‘Can't tell boys from girls ’ has been the typical whine from reporters when faced by any new youth group.
Most skinhead girls, sometimes called rennes, would wear bennies, button-fly red tags, white socks and penny loafers or monkey boots.
As the fashion matured, they had short mini-skirts beneath three-quarter length two-tone jackets and fishnet tights.
The hairstyle would be a number two or three crop with feathered fringes all round.
Some had long straight hair.
The combination of fishnet tights, mini-skirts and cropped hair created an image which, at least to one observer, was absolutely stunning.
LEFT: DART THROWN AT FAN AT FOOTBALL MATCH RIGHT: KUNG-FU STARS AND SHARPENED DISC
SKINHEAD'S BANK HOLIDAY MONDAY, SOUTHEND 1980 TOP, 1970 BOTTOM
AUTHORITY
Attitudes to parents, school and the police were not specifically skinhead, but like that of other working class youth.
Being a skin did not normally imply a break with your family.
Mothers welcomed the short hair because it presented less problems than long hair.
Fathers liked the style because it was neat and workmanlike.
Unlike the families of middleclass dropouts, skinhead families were generally supportive, helping with money and acting as some sort of barrier against school and the police.
A skin would normally live at home.
School and the police share the dislike of most working class youth.
School, especially for unskilled youths, was where you learnt that society had little time for you.
There are some good teachers, but for most it is a case of ‘We piss them off and they piss us off .’
The happiness and general enthusiasm that children of all types experience in the first years of primary school evaporate as they become adolescent ant move into the secondary school.
In the end, the school tends to provide a value system based on the ability to pass exams.
Those who do not pass or who are not worth bothering about in terms of academic success get very little reward out of the school system.
They may be classed as nuisances or troublemakers.
‘We used to do the special classes, gardening and things like that.
We were a bunch of convicts, we were.
We got treated like shit, so we treated the teachers like shit .’
The police (Old Bill ) are heartily disliked.
Again, like teachers, there are one or two honest coppers, but in general they nick you for things you have not done or give you a sound slapping to make you remember them.
Fortunately for the police complaints department, skins seem to regard this as part of the normal way of life, in the same way they might get a good hiding from their old man to make them toe the line at home.
At football matches or at confrontations at seaside resorts the police have to put up with a lot of abuse.
For example, on Easter Monday, 27 April 1981, the skins at Brighton were penned into a small groyne by the police to prevent them fighting with the mods.
The skins taunted the police with what had happened at the Brixton riots a few days previously.
It was said of a similar occasion at Southend that the police were just rushing into the crowd and nicking anybody.
DECLINE
By the winter of 1969/70, skinhead hair was longer, parted at the side and styled.
The Tonik suits were being worn in the day instead of only in the evenings.
Shoes (loafers and royals) were replacing boots.
Braces disappeared and belts became more common.
The general effect resembled the mods of 1964/65 with their preppy look.
A new smarter image was favoured.
A caricature of the city gent was achieved by the combination of crombie, bowler hat and black umbrella, which sometimes had a sharpened ferrule.
This was the era of the suedehead.
The traditional cleanliness, freshness and absence of frills was still maintained.
By 1971 hair had got even longer and was now down to the collar.
The smooths with their girls, the sorts, had taken the scene.
The smooths bore little resemblance to the early skins, although they were clearly of the same descent.
This was the last phase in the development of the cult.
It did not last long and had largely petered out by early 1972, when budgie gear, baggies and flares with turn-ups, glamrock and other new influences had taken over.
POLICE KEEP THEIR EYE ON YOUTHS AT SOUTHEND, 1981
REVIVAL
The skinhead style never quite died out in the East End or in the industrial Midlands.
However, very few skins were seen on the streets between 1972 and 1976.
The long, hot summer of 1976 saw the rise of an extraordinary new youth culture, the punks.
In the following year punks fought teds in the King's Road, Chelsea, on Saturday afternoons.
Surprisingly, each of the opposing groups had their own skinhead supporters, most of whom were part of a skinhead revival.
As Dick Hebdige observes, the punks needed some support in their battles with the teds, since dressed in their bondage gear, the punks were no match for their more agile opponents.
The successors to the old skins tended to side with the teds, who were pro-British and for the Union Jack, whereas the punks were anti-royalist and happy to stick safety-pins into pictures of the Queen.
The skins who sided with the punks were a new breed, who wished to be seen as more anarchical and more shocking than the punks.
The new skins achieved this by reviving the most extreme elements of the old skinhead style and by exaggerating them.
Heads were shaved completely or the crop bleached, sometimes with Union Jacks or other symbols dyed into it.
Mohicans also gained popularity.
Only the boots, jeans and braces were revived, no suits were worn.
The swastika, already adorning many a punk T-shirt, was flaunted in the form of facial tattoos and the public were taunted with Nazi salutes.
The public and the teenage press were, in fact, already coming to terms with the punks, but these skins knew that no one could accept their brand of deliberate, mindless, gang violence.
The skins gave out the image of an almost robot uniformed army, in which attack on one individual would bring a violent response from the rest.
A picture of a skin handcuffed to a policeman showed the message ‘Made in London ’ tattooed fairly and squarely on his forehead, his face screwed up and two fingers raised to the camera.
The skins who supported the teds were traditionalists.
They were reviving almost exactly what the original skins had been, with their smartness, working class ethics and attitudes.
These people regarded the punks as if they were middle class hippies ten years on.
They hated the new plastic skins.
There were pubs in London which had a clientèle made up of original skinheads, whose age tended to be above 25, and at which none of the new boots and braces or plastic skins would be tolerated.
It was somewhere between these two factions that Madness and the 2-Tone bands appeared.
Madness was a good-time dance band playing old ska and rocksteady numbers.
‘Fuck art — let's dance ’ was not only one of their idioms, but possibly the best way of describing the feelings of many of these new dance bands.
Madness especially gathered a massive skinhead following in the beginning, but the music press were not prepared to leave politics out of their reviews.
They picked on the fact that some of the skins in the audience were members of the ultra-right wing British Movement and labelled Madness as a fascist band.
The only way to dispel this was to drop their skinhead supporters — and this they did.
A different music at the beginning of the revival, much more punk orientated, was provided by Jimmy Pursey and Sham 69.
His shouts of ‘Skinheads are back ’ gained him his skinhead audience too.
After serious trouble at Sham gigs, for example the one at the London School of Economics, they also deserted their followers.
The discarded skins were drawn to other bands, such as Skrewdriver, Cockney Rejects, Angelic Upstarts, Cocksparrer and Bad Manners.
These bands would either play their sets regardless of fights, or, in the case of Fat Man Doug Trendle — the front man of Bad Manners — would wade in and sort out the rucks himself.
Gary Bushell of Sounds music paper constantly reviewed bands of the Sham 69 mould.
This hard, fast and unmelodic ‘punk ’ music was said to be the new music of the skinheads.
It was called ‘Oi ’ music.
But after Acklam Hall and Southall, where serious riots occurred as a direct result of the presence of these bands and their supporters, little more was heard of the new skinhead music.
The skinhead revival is too recent to present anything but a confused picture to the observer.
The sight of skins fighting mods on the beaches of Brighton and Southend suggests that the new generation had forgotten their origins.
Revival is, in fact, the wrong word to describe the reintroduction of skinhead style, since the new skins were given a political role which was entirely absent from the original skinheads.
Moreover, revival is impossible where the context of the original years has disappeared.
Inevitably, revival means a new style, different dress, behaviour, attitudes and appearance from the beginnings of the skinhead cult.
THIS IS ENGLAND!
AND THEY DON'T LIVE HERE
by DICK HEBDIGE
I met Harry the Duck, a 16 year old skin in an East London street one hot July afternoon in 1981.
I asked him to write down what he liked about the skinhead style and, after a few moments' thought, he dashed off the above.
What he produced was a gen-u-ine statement of skin; a document to be placed alongside other such documents, delivered with the same How's-your-father flourish as a graffiti slogan on a council estate wall or a boot planted through an Asian's shop window or a gallon of petrol poured through the letterbox of a Bengali family's home.
(These things do happen.
It's not all ‘media hype’).
It speaks with an unmistakable inner city accent from the centre of a world everybody recognises even if it's only from the headlines in The Sun — a world full of ‘social problems’ where all the culprits and the victims live —‘niggers’, ‘hooligans’, ‘old biddies’.
This is the voice of Britain's dying patience.
It carries all the symptoms of the sickness — violence, resentment, an inchoate, bitter and arbitrarily focused rage…racism.
For Harry is the quintessential skin.
He embodies what everybody, Press included, Press in particular, takes to be typical of the skinhead movement.
He is awkward and not especially bright.
He is not articulate and he can hardly write.
His opinions are none too savoury (still less kosher).
He is not a pretty sight.
From the gauzy film of ginger hair which covers his scalp but fails to conceal it, to his gleaming Doc Martens, Harry is designed to make anyone who has even the smallest stake in the present scheme of things cross to the other side of the street.
He is the social worker's nightmare.
He doesn't correspond to any of the multiple fictions produced over the last hundred years or so by a long line of social reformers and slum missionaries of what the working class should be.
He isn't grateful or contrite.
He isn't even heroically rebellious.
Instead he is as incomprehensible as the blurred tattoos which decorate his skinny arms, as jumbled as his own words on What it Means to Be a Skin.
He is himself unreadable and hence ungovernable — a walking accusation levelled at the sympathetic educated sensibility which seeks simultaneously to understand him and set him on the straight and narrow.
He is that most traditional of stereotypes — the working class gone bad.
He is the Lout, the Urchin, the Wild Boy who haunts the pages of Charles Dickens and a thousand official reports on Juvenile Delinquency.
He is the point where Bill Sykes meets the Artful Dodger.
Every skinhead knows all this instinctively.
The style recalls some of the earliest images of British slum life.
(In Victorian times, the shaved head was the mark of the institution.
As soon as a slum kid entered a Ragged School or a Borstal or a  Barnardo's Home, the hair was shorn to prevent infestation).
The skinhead style, for all its apparent knuckleheadedness, is a consciously held pose, a deliberate turning back to earlier, more certain times when men were men and girls stuck by their blokes through thick and thin, a time when an observer could tell an individual's social status by merely glancing down at the footwear or at the way a person walked.
Just watch the way a skinhead moves.
The posture is organised as carefully as the length of the red tags or the Sta-prest or the hair.
There is a lot of lapel twitching.
The head twists out as if the skin is wearing an old fashioned collar that's too tight for comfort.
The cigarette, tip turned in towards the palm, is brought down from the mouth in an exaggerated arc and held behind the back.
It's a gesture reminiscent of barrack rooms and Borstals, of furtive smoking on parade.
That's the dance of Skin.
Compare it to the way a bobby pounds his beat or to the leisurely stroll Prince Philip adopts when he follows his wife on a walkabout.
Both Prince and policeman, their hands clasped confidently behind their backs, move as if they own the world.
Skinheads, on the other hand, are nervous and twitchy.
They're always jumping out of the frame (look elsewhere in this book at Nick's action shots of skinheads on the move…
) They're always on their toes, ready to respond to the slightest provocation, ready to defend the little they possess (a football end, a pub, a street, a reputation).
The dance of Skin is, then, even for the girls, a mime of awkward masculinity — the geometry of menace.
For skinheads are playing with the only power at their disposal — the power of having nothing (much) to lose.
The style, in other words,fits .
Contrary to the media stereotype of the mindless thug, it has its own logic, its own rules and reasons.
It makes its own kind of sense.
Two obsessions dominate the style: being authentic and being British .
BEING AUTHENTIC
Most skinheads see themselves as straightforward blokes and birds, more honest than the soul boys, more working class than the punks and the posers, rougher and tougher than the mods.
(‘I'm a member of the Women's Sportsfighting Club’, explains Carri a 17 year old skin from Clapham, ‘I do wrestling, judo, boxing and sportsfighting.
But I won't use a weapon…’).
Skinhead tastes are ‘right down to earth’.
That's why a lot of skins argue that the only ‘authentic’ music is the original Jamaican ska and rocksteady of the early to mid 60's.
Others will refer to vintage 2-Tone or Madness or Sham 69 before they all ‘sold out’.
And, of course, Oi has been invented to cater for this disillusioned neo-skinhead market:—‘Oi started after Sham 69 got famous’, said Roy, guitarist with The Last Resort, ‘All of a sudden , they didn't want to know skins.
And we were the ones who put them up there in the first place.
The Sham Army…’
Oi is a spiritual purge on everything that doesn't sound like the voice of the Mob with its back against the wall.
It aims to root out all the ‘impurities’ of ‘soft’, ‘pretentious’post-punk rock — artiness, ‘weird’, spacey lyrics, a studio-dependent electronic sound, a flirtation with sexually ambiguous imagery.
All these ‘taints’ have been boiled away in the good old-fashioned aggro of Oi.
On the face of it, Oi is performing a similar function to early punk — taking rock back to the basics, grafting a class accent on to the music, reviving the original rebel-delinquent cluster — the myth of Elvis-as-hub-cap-thief, a poor white loser up against the Law.
The desperate image of both skins and punks has helped to create the impression that these subcultures are completely untouched by ‘commercial’ influences.
And yet the popular music Press plays a key role in shaping new styles and sounds.
The rock weekly Sounds , we all know now, was instrumental in launching Oi.
In early 81, it tried to do for Oi what the New Musical Express had done for early punk, acting as midwife, prefect and publicist for a grassroots rock movement with political overtones.
In '77, the New Musical Express helped briefly to divert a lot of punks away from the nihilism of the Sex Pistols towards Rock Against Racism and the Anti-Nazi League.
Sounds had to take a different tack in order to push Oi (and boost its circulation).
The rhetoric was still aggressively populist but suddenly ‘hippy social workers’ and ‘machiavellian middle class communists’began to figure alongside ‘twisted nazis’as the enemy who seek to make moral and political capital out of‘authentic’working class youth.
The ground was thus prepared for a fully fledged revival.
A new Frankenstein monster was about to lurch on to the front pages of the tabloids — the proto-fascist skinhead, scourge of the immigrant and the helpless OAP.
For, despite the increasingly desperate efforts of Sounds to separate the skins from the swastikas, for many observers the timing of the skinhead revival and the resurgence of right wing politics in the inner city ghettos was just too close to be coincidental.
And for the lunatic fringe of the skinhead movement the swastika was clearly meant to stand again for Nazi (National Socialist).
It was taken out of the context of the early punks and placed alongside the hammer and sickle, the IRA and PLO slogans and any other symbols which could be guaranteed to raise the hackles and the eyebrows of the BOF's (remember them?).
In 1981, you couldn't pass off wearing a swastika as a sick joke.
The phrase ‘black humour’ had an altogether different ring once you'd caught the racist patter of the stand-up comedians who work the clubs and pubs round Brick Lane or the Mile End Road.
To wear a swastika in 1981 was to say that something real was on the march again.
In July, at the Hamborough Tavern in Southall, the bubble finally burst.
Frankenstein got his comeuppance.
Skinheads had converged from all over the metropolis to hear the 4-Skins play in the heart of London's Asian community.
The analogy with the Falklands crisis and the Falklands ‘spirit’ looks all too obvious now: true blue, white British boys, determined to win back the ‘burglar's spoils’, set out to defend the bridgehead deep inside ‘enemy territory’.
In answer to a series of provocations (young skins distributing Robert Relf leaflets, insulting Asian women etc), the Southall Asian Youth Movement decided to fight fire with fire.
They burned the place down.
One member of the 4-Skins, protesting his innocence of any B.M/N.F involvement to a journalist the next day, told a story which under less dire circumstances could rival the best of Buster Keaton in terms of pathos, slapstick and deadpan gallows humour.
Forced by the flames to abandon his set, he made his way (coughing) into the street and was immediately chased by two (‘knife wielding’) Asian youths.
After a few hundred yards, he sought sanctuary in a nearby house.
The door opened and the (white) resident brought a heavy frying pan down on his head.
He staggered off towards a nearby Black Maria (preferring, at this point, arrest to sudden death), jumped in the back and was greeted by one of the officers with the words ‘fascist scum’ and a ‘boot in the face’.
The story presents a picture of the luckless, homeless skinhead which corresponds closely to the movement's own mythology about itself.
Spurned by the Press, subject to unprovoked and vicious assaults by immigrants and policemen alike, denied gainful or meaningful employment by a heartless State, barred from the domestic hearth by severe, unyielding parents, the skinheads often see themselves as victims of almost Biblical proportions — as a stricken race of Jobs, as modern wanderers cast out into a cheerless world…
And, as with all myths, there's a kernel of truth in the skinheads' perception of themselves as outcasts.
They are denied any useful role in the present.
(‘I tried to join the army when I got out of Borstal’, said Kev, an 18 year old skin, ‘Do me bit and see the world and that.
It's got to be better than this.
The geezer at the recruiting office told me to fuck off.
Even they don't want blokes who've got a record…’).
They have no place in the future either (except at the bottom in the dirty, dead end jobs or at the back of the lengthening dole queues).
So instead they turn to the past, to an idea of what the unspoiled working class community might have looked like in its classic phase before the War, before bombs, bulldozers and planners together swept away the old slum environment with its maze of narrow streets, its self-contained economy of tenements and factories, corner shops and pubs, and its equally complex, ingrown network of grannies, uncles and lifelong ‘mates’.
Sociologists, describing the original skinhead movement of the late 60's called this nostalgic aspect of skinhead culture an attempt to ‘symbolically recover’ the sense of cohesiveness and community of the old working class slum.
Hence, they argued, the preoccupation of the skinheads with territory and turf, with local allegiances (The Shed Boys, the Tottenham Skins).
Hence also the exaggerated tribalism, the bullheaded racism of an Alf Garnett, the dogged male chauvinism of an Andy Capp.
But what exactly are the skinheads nostalgic for?
A way of life, a set of values and attitudes which, according to some social historians didn't emerge until the late 1800's when the British Empire was at its most powerful, when imperialism, nationalism and Toryism were beginning to figure prominently in the language of the pubs and the music halls.
The irony is that the skins in trying to be ‘authentic’ have ended up reviving an idea of working class culture which is frozen at precisely the point when a ‘real’, ‘authentic’working class identity was being positively eaten away from outside.
But they aren't alone in this.
Nostalgia for the good old, bad old days gives much of what passes for working class culture in the 1980's, its peculiarly sentimental cast.
There's nothing sinister or mysterious about wanting to preserve the best aspects of the working class tradition — the humour, the camaraderie, the sense of shared experience and shared hardships.
Coronation Street for instance, draws some of its appeal from this kind of nostalgia.
But at the moment nostalgia can be dangerous.
It can lead people to linking arms at Blackpool and, depending on whether it's the Labour Party Conference or the annual darts team binge singing The Red Flag or the Okie Cokie but it can also lead to a group of skins bunging bricks through a Pakistani's shop window.
Because, in the current climate of debate, the drive to preserve the boundaries of class through culture can dissolve (slip?) too easily into a concern with race, with the myth of white ethnicity, the myth, that is, that you've got to be white to be British.
After all, there were few people of Asian or West Indian descent in Britain's pre-war working class communities.
And you don't often see black or brown faces in Coronation Street .
BEING BRITISH
Ethnicity can be defined as an identification with real or imagined racial or national traditions.
It is usually associated with oppressed minorities.
Rastafarianism, with its focus on the African heritage, is the most obvious example in this country of a cultural movement based on ethnicity.
But ethnicity is also an option for whites who feel neglected or excluded:—‘The Spades have got their own culture’, said Mickey, an East Londoner in his 30's.
‘Don't get me wrong.
I've got a lot of coloured friends.
And they're decent people.
But they've got their own culture.
The Pakistanis have a culture.
It's thousands of years old.
But where's Our culture?
Where's the British culture?
You wear the flag and everybody slags you off for being a Nazi.
But it's got nothing to do with being a Nazi as far as I'm concerned…
We fought the Germans, the London people…
They (the skinheads) are just wearing the flag because they're patriotic.
What's wrong with being patriotic?…
This is England.
And They don't live here.
They know nothing about it (laughing)…
They're living in detached houses.
Driving around in a Rolls.
Be honest.
What the fuck are They going to know about Us…?’
The skinhead style is a defensive assertion of whiteness just as Rasta is a celebration of the black cultural roots.
Both can be seen as genuine attempts at making something out of nothing, attempts at getting something even if it's only a laugh out of a life which, in many cases, by 16 has already run into a collection of brick walls labelled ‘unemployment’, ‘shit jobs’ and ‘routine brushes with the Law’.
Both Rasta and Skin can be seen as bids for some kind of dignity, for what the late Pete Meadon, original mod and one-time manager of The Who once called ‘clean living under difficult circumstances’: grace under pressure.
The skinhead retreat into white ethnicity — for that's what the flag waving is really all about — is, simply, the Last Resort.
It's not surprising that an unemployed 17 year old pipe-fitter, like the one I spoke to called Chas, has an English Lion tattooed on his forearm and wears a White Power badge:—‘A Rasta can wear a Black is Beautiful badge and They all sit up and start clapping’, Chas told me.
‘I wear a White is Beautiful badge and get run in for being a racist…’
And what can I say to this?
That West Indians get it even worse?
That We must remember that 300 years ago British slavers dragged millions of Africans halfway round the world to work on British sugar plantations in the Caribbean?
That We should bear it in mind that blacks and Asians in this country have to cope not only with Chas's disadvantages but with additional discrimination because of the colour of their skins?
That's all true, of course, but Chas won't wear it because…where's the ‘We’ that links me to Chas?
I don't live as he does with my ‘nan’ in a 1930's council flat in Tottenham.
And it's unlikely that Chas's grandfather got much out of the British Empire beyond, in all probability, two or three years spent serving as a soldier in India, two or three years off the dole queue.
So ethnicity it is.
What alternative reflection of himself can the Left, for instance, offer Chas which is going to make any sense in terms of his own experience and the way he sees the world?
That he's the salt of the earth?
Roy, the skinhead guitarist, puts it this way:—‘All skins are for the flag but that doesn't mean they're all NF or British Movement.
Some are but most aren't.
It's like any other group…
How can I put it?…
You went to college so you got into the Socialist Worker's Party or whatever.
Naturally.
For people like me it's natural to be patriotic and to stick with your mates…’
Subcultures are a mass of contradictions.
Though they may be, at times, loosely allied to a particular kind of politics, that alliance is uneven and transitory.
There are black skinheads and SWP skinheads.
There are skinheads who will vote Conservative, Labour, Communist and SDP at the next General Election.
And there are skinheads who are fascists.
Most skinheads probably won't vote at all.
Most skinheads (like the majority of young people in Britain) couldn't care less about organised politics of any kind.
Some of the skinheads I've met admit to having ‘gone through’ one or other of the parties of the extreme right, but, after a brief commitment, the enthusiasm tends to lapse along with the membership.
‘I joined the BM’, one skinhead told me.
‘For the crack, like.
But They went on about Hitler.
He's dead.
I couldn't see the point…’
In general, racist jokes and asides amongst skinheads are no more numerous or self conscious than elsewhere in the broader streams of white working class speech.
This doesn't mean that this kind of racism isn't dangerous.
But it does suggest that racism is too deeply embedded in the whole experience of growing up working class to be the sole responsibility of skins.
Meanwhile the skinhead/NF stereotype serves a wider function.
It's a form of liberal scapegoating no less wrongheaded that ‘reasoning’(engaged in by some members of the Press) which converts every black boy into a mugger.
The tensions and anxieties which are inevitably entailed when a more or less racially homogeneous society becomes multi-racial are displaced on to a solitary figure — the leering bootboy.
In that way,it — the ugly fact of racism — becomes him, the skin.
It has a name.
It has a face.
It's Them, not Us.
Real skins are much less coherent than the stereotype.
Subcultures, after all, don't offer solutions to material problems.
They play back the problems symbolically in style, and style alone can't bridge the gap between contradictory responses:—‘I don't want blacks’, said one skin.
‘I don't want them in this country.
But don't put me name down.
A lot of me mates are black geezers and some of them are a bit tasty’.
A red-faced skin burnt by the one good day in last year's June sits on an empty stall in Petticoat Lane market in the late afternoon.
He tells me that the National Front's ‘a load of rubbish’, that politicians are ‘a waste of time’ and that when he sees his nan,…‘she's always on about me getting a job.
I don't mind working but what can I do?
Shit jobs.
I had one good job working in a record shop.
I was there a couple of weeks and the record business went bust and she had to close down.
Sometimes I think I'll do City and Guilds by evening class.
But I don't see the point.
I'm too far behind.
I can't see me ever catching up…(pointing to a nearby block of flats)…see that dump over there?
They reckoned They was going to pull it down after the War.
That's thirty five years ago.
What a State.
They've got to be worse now, haven't they?
The whole country's worse now…’
The bootboy seer speaks.
He opens his mouth and suddenly the ‘loutish threat’ becomes just a boy who can't see any future.
Like Harry the Duck he is an anachronism, born out of his time.
(Even the name ‘Harry’ belongs to a different generation).
Because the brutal fact is that big business no longer needs brute force (except perhaps as Exocet fodder).
It has less and less need for muscle and mechanical skills.
Instead we are living in a time when we can watch a TV ad which tells us that cars which are way beyond the range of most people's pockets are being ‘handbuilt (somewhere else) by robots’.
Historically, the manual working class is on the way out.
It's had its day in countries like ours.
But meanwhile, the Harrys and the Chas's and the Roys have to cope as best they can — victims of an economic shift which the boffins sometimes call ‘demanning’.
Unmanned, they float about like driftwood, secure in the knowledge that they've already lost.
But in the end, it's not all that bad.
You can always dress up in everybody else's deepest fears.
There's always the bravado and the boys.
There's always Borstal.
(‘They're trying to fit me up for burglary this time’.
complained one beetle-browed skin I talked to.
‘Look at me.
I couldn't organise a piss-up in a brewery let alone a burglary.
All I ever do is get pissed and do something stupid.’)
As a Last Resort, as a last romantic gesture, you can always throw yourself away before They do it for you…
I once asked a 14 year old who had the word SKIN tattooed across his forehead what he'd do if he ever lost the faith:—‘Cut me 'ead off’, he said grinning, ‘Or maybe grow a fringe’.
‘I DON'T KNow why I liKE BEINg a SKIN But I do.
I don't SEE WHy people grope us together as holigans 'cos we ain't alright you get troble makers in every facktion But They dont publish it if a niggeR does a old Biddy do they give us a faiR chance will someone as for stop being a SKIN I dont think I will.’
Harry the Duck Born TO BE A SKIN
THE DANCE OF SKIN
PATRIOTISM ON THE TERRACES, SPAIN 1982
THE SHAM ARMY, READING FESTIVAL 1978
Dear Ronnie How are you getting on as you can see at the top I have been put away in a prison.
On Monday we was in Camden and me and someone else did some prick over we smash his face in and cut him up.
so I called my mate and we ran off but the old bill got us.
(But we proved that skinheads rule london) anyway we got pull by the police and got dune with GBH.
Do not reply a letter to Lewis until I contact you because I could not be here.
I am still proud to be a skinhead goodbye for now from your true mate Malcolm PS you better still be a skinhead or else.
I will contact you
TOP: SOUTHEND 1980 BELOW: CONFISCATED STEEL COMBS
TYPICAL COUNCIL TENEMENT BLOCK
JIM FERGUSON'S FASHION NOTEBOOK
COATS 'N' 'ATS
Any coat sufficed in the winter '68/'69: army jackets; donkey jackets; your dad's five sizes too big tweed work coat; army and RAF great coats; parkas (preferably not swallowtail, but this wasn't crucial); lightweight nylon ‘surfer’ jackets; anoraks, fly-fronted macs, Levi, leather, denim, corduroy or suede jackets (or Wrangler), you name it — as long as it wasn't fashion — though Levi's tackle was always accepted, whatever it was, until 1970 when they brought out flares or bell-bottoms — orange tagged & pre-shrunk (see jeans section).
So their green suede jackets with leather collars were quite acceptable.
Denims & corduroy — buttons Leather & suede — press-studs.
Short straight, fly-fronted macs appeared with frequency in '69/'70 in off-white, iridescent blues & greys, etc.
They were worn with (or without) trilbies.
This was the skinhead outercoat (along with the sheepskins) & not the Crombie.
A sheepskin coat was the skinhead status symbol.
From the kickoff in '68 to the final whistle in '71 the coat could be worn with pride.
If ever there was a lull in its reign, it was when the Crombie was catching on — but when that reached saturation point sheepskins resuscitated with renewed vigour.
Jacket-length, finger-tip or full length — they all counted.
There were even imitation sheepskins, but worn at the risk of being considered a total nebbish.
The ‘Crombie’ is usually considered the skinhead coat — but only in the broadest sense of the word ‘skinhead’can this be accepted.
Skinhead haircuts & Crombies missed each other by the better part of a year & ‘crombie boys’ as they became known, often had shoulder length hair.
The first time I ever saw a skinhead haircut & Crombie on the same person was in 1978 or 9.
Crombies were skimpy Chesterfields and I never knew a kid to have one made out of real Crombie cloth.
They were nearly always fly-front affairs (occasionally black or non-fly) & a uniform developed around it: navy Crombie with red pre-folded (& stitched onto cardboard) pocket-square stick-pinned in; black & white check B. Sherman, open necked; Levi's Sta-Prest (probably black or white); red socks, black shoes.
This seemed the start of the rot (for us snobs).
Bowlers & brollies were added to this outfit — and in out-of-synch areas far from London, kids wore mixtures of suedehead hair, check shirts, Sta-Prests, boots, bowlers & brollies.
They would chase long-haired, beagle collar-shirted, baggy-trousered southern Keeper-Uppers with the Styles and call them ‘Hippies’.
Harringtons started with the suedeheads — part of the check shirt, Sta-Prest, Royals outfit — and ended with every able-bodied man woman & child by 1973!
Younger bucks were wearing them inside out by this time.
Levi denim jackets popular in '69 –'70,; especially in Liverpool!
Black shiny nylon or plastic bomber jackets seen here and there in '69/'70 season.
HATS
Bobbly football club hats & scarves.
Definitely not for hooligans.
‘Pork-pie’ trilbies came into prominence (again) in the short-hair phase, faded & reasserted themselves in early smoothie.
They were never essential but always worn on the back of the head.
You'd walk into a pub in one and, Whoop! someone wanted to try it on.
And someone else.
They would disappear faster than a Polaroid photo.
Pit helmets (hard hats) were worn in club colours at matches before & during skinhead, so they were not a skinhead ‘style’.
Rockers or nothings would wear them.
Bowlers were a short-lived fad in the City Gent Smooth look in early '71.
Football scarves were worn in all the familiar ways — neck, wrist, belt-loop, etc…
HAIR
The skinhead's immediate predecessor was short haired & neat.
He wore suits to dance halls.
In 1968 suits were with flares and turn ups & often worn with a v-neck pullover & no shirt, light weight Italian slip-ons.
On the street he wore Levis with turn ups, surfer jackets, Adidas trainers.
He'd branched out of mod and his look and outlook had changed little for years.
Mod's other branches had gone flamboyant or hippy or student or young married, but he'd stayed staid.
Although crew cuts had been around forever, all-over short hair of ½″ or less started in about '64 & was a conservative-suit-mod staple until '68 when it went even shorter — ¼″ and less & in '69 near-shaven styles (baldness never caught on) ½″ or so of hair in the 60s was not as noteworthy as a backward glance might suggest — because long hair got all the publicity, you'd think that everyone below 25 grew their hair long.
The age of hair was the first ⅗ of the 70s.
The working class adolescent of the 60s had quite a job deciding what to do with his hair.
Some did let it grow of course, but untold millions had little more than a short back & sides an extra 3 weeks on — if you see what I mean.
Lots of the slicker, more citified proles' sons had this extremely short hair by '68 after having had long hair.
The latest thing.
Others (conservative-mod element) had short hair anyway and now had it just a tad shorter — the new mood suited them.
And the younger kids who wanted to be ultra-mod, exaggerated the look.
There was no name at first.
Cropheads.
Peanuts.
Boiled Eggs, skulls & skinheads (no doubt many more) but skinhead was the wittiest, most descriptive & most difficult to say without sneering.
And the h is silent, o well spoken ones, as in ‘an hotel’.
When skinhead was established, a lot of these mod conservatives (mod cons) looked down on skinheads who would today be classed as skinheads themselves — but distinctions were finer then.
A lot of these same people would become suedeheads though — but it was more a matter of two styles merging.
But of course, some of these same kind did become skinheads — frequently the most fastidious dressers.
Anyway, back to the hair.
There aren't many variations possible on iron-filing length hair but there were some in '69.
1.
Could merge into the neck like a short back and sides.
2.
Squared off ‘Boston’.
3.
Rounded at the back.
Barber's clipper settings: 5–4–3–2–1–Stop.
No baldness.
Shaved partings went no further than the crown (not in rows down the back of the head.)
Sideboards were prized (if you could grow them) & real mutton chops appeared & looked very mean — although they were never in or out of fashion as such — just optional all the way through.
But have you seen photos of England's World Cup Squad 1970?
Some suedes grew 'taches, or tried to, and a dapper smootho touch was a little beard and tache like this…
True!
Suedehead — hair long enough to be influenced by a comb.
Lots of girls (& some boys) wore their hair no different to pre-skinhead (i.e. long) with all the right clothes.
Then some girls showed the way with this style.
I don't remember seeing any male skinhead hairstyle on a girl (which doesn't mean there weren't any).
This style came in longer & shorter versions — and later copies by some boys.
Non skinhead girls had similar cuts — Julie Driscoll influence?
Make-up was eye-heavy with pale lips.
Skinny  eyebrowns .
Suedehead girl hairstyles were, again, slightly longer equivalents of the males'.
Neat, side-parted, lots of forehead.
It looked quite good with Crombies & trilbies & was sometimes lacquered.
Styles became more back-comby bouffantish and rock-hard lacquered as smooth held sway, then the loose, fairly full on top but very long & layered at the back & sides cut of later '70/'71.
This was the long haired girls' compromise but it became very common early 70s style for girls & for boys.
Though usually in a scruffier interpretation.
The mid 70s soccer hooligan of fact and fable would most likely have some approximation of the long back and sides, short top & fringe.
HABITS
Girls practising dance steps in twos at bus stops — with thumbs in the air.
Combing a shaven head with a steel comb (just to show you'd got one — as if the faded shape of it in the back-pocket of your jeans wasn't enough.)
Wearing hankies in the ends of your boots because you'd bought them 2 sizes too big, and they were still floppy, with those grey flecked Millets hiking socks on!
Brut.
Practising freekicks, with no ball, on no pretext other than looking as if you'd have done a marvellous job if there had been a ball.
With those boots.
Keeping your hands deep in your jeans pockets because your braces are too tight & you balls are separating.
The idea of wearing the braces round your arse, Alf Garnett or late 70s style, hadn't occurred.
Wintertime rolling your shoulders after a fresh haircut because you're trying to retract your head into your coat because your head's got goosepimples.
Becomes a habit.
Running in a clump through a crowded station, like the Bash Street Kids, keeping perfect time with chant and clap.
The muffled thud of bouncing soles can be as chilling an accompaniment as the clack-spring of heavy metal.
The latter sound very 1970, especially if heard in tube trains.
Having a fat youth in your crew, whose shoulders were way above his head and who was brilliant at bristling.
Note Recent success of Bad Manners.
SUIT JACKETS
Single breasted, button 3, very high buttoning — sometimes button 4 or even button 5!
Narrow lapels 3″ widest).
Ever increasing pocket flaps (up to 4″ & beyond).
Ticket pocket (eventually multiplying to 3 or 4 up each side!)
Narrow shouldered, high, tight waist, very flared over hips.
RIDICULOUS/SUBLIME DETAILS
Top button of jacket buttoning under throat (top 1 or 2 only ever buttoned), millions of overlapping pocket flaps.
Centre vents reaching between shoulder blades, cuff buttons reaching up to elbow (sometimes cuff-link style).
Raised seam on shoulders.
TROUSERS
1969 basic — 18″ parallel self-support (clip on braces).
Usually worn long enough!
No pleats.
Variations on this theme — raised seams (sometimes ¾″ wide) ½″ turn-ups.
Zip adjusters.
Sewn in creases.
Ticket pockets, variously shaped pocket flaps — later ('71) appearing down the sides of the legs.
From 18″ in'69 went to 19″ to 10″ by'71 then flares with turn-ups in very late '71/early '72, then baggies!
Waistcoats or sleeveless pullovers sometimes worn with suits, though you couldn't see them when the top button was done up.
Not recommended when dancing.
Suits '68/'69 — mohair or as near as could be got away with.
Black, brown, navy, then tans and bronzes ('69/'70) into light and petrol blues (with red linings) in 1970.
Also early/mid '70 Prince of Wales checks & later '70 two-tone (‘Toniks’) materials and houndstooths.
Occasional experiments with geometric patterns in '71, '72 but mainly louder checks until tartan (restricted usually to trousers) in early '72.
Lapels started widening in late '71 & some rounded (tulip) lapels.
Swelled edges almost entirely replaced pick-stitching of earlier styles.
LEVI
Levis — Always No.1 in London.
Superseded by Wranglers in Midlands & North in 1970.
Levis had zips but otherwise the same as today's butterfly model.
LEE RIDER
None-too common all over land.
Baggier & higher waisted than Levis — same dimensions (more or less) as Wranglers.
WRANGLER
Wranglers reigned supreme everywhere outside London after late '69.
Wider legged than Levis and (like Lees) pre-shrunk.
'68 — jeans either simply rolled up or cut off at required above-boot height — though some were worn instep length by some.
Bleach — 1969.
Thrown on or crumpled up in a bucket of it.
Early '70 turn-ups disappeared — but jeans very short still.
Wide black or brown belts superseded braces on jeans in mid-suede.
Rolled up army trousers (‘greens’) were a Phase 1 skinhead accoutrement and sometimes baggy old man's trousers (to match baggy old man's shirts.)
Levi's only did Sta-Prest — and imitations always looked it — usually too tapered, crumply, and the wrong tones.
Local areas sometimes had a rash of certain coloured trousers.
E.g. everyone in some place might wear white Sta-Prests and the next mob might be all in dark green.
But generally, any colour would do — as long as they were Levis — proportions exactly right.
White did not look very crisp (pure white, not this modern off white).
Also dark green (can't remember pale green, 'cept imitations), black, light blue and later, in early '71 time, harsh bright colours appeared but didn't catch on widely.
Cords, white or beige, were worn early on in small numbers but in mid'71 black/bottle green/navy straight leg Levi cords caught on in a big way.
With or without turn-ups — but short nevertheless — worn with black shoes, black socks, patterned polo shirts.
Then flared cords appeared, and maroon ones as well.
Sewn in creases in trousers & jeans in later '71.
Tartan patches in '70 –'71; which re-surfaces in mid 70s with Bay City Rollers excessive use of it.
FAVOURITE SHIRTS
At the start — '68, '69, any shirt that was not ‘fashion’ was worn — old men's collarless & collared baggy-bodied styles, t-shirts, etc.
Some early skinheads went awry & wore tie-dyed granddad vests.
Early Ben Shermans had a low-set second button — so the collar sat fairly widely open, and were made from Oxford woven cloth so they were very comfortable.
White & pastel shades, then stripes of all colours & widths.
But no checks.
Some had single-needle stitching construction.
Later Ben Shermans followed other makers (Brutus, Jaytex) & moved the second button up to almost between the collar point buttons.
Poly/cotton non-Oxford weaves and checks (Short sleeved check shirts Spring 1970) but the best tartan shirts were by Brutus.
B. Sherman did some very clumsy checks — until those white with black/red/blue/green or yellow small checked shirts became part of the smooth uniform in 1971.
Dark coloured B. Sherms after checks — black, navy, maroon, green, red (early '71) then back to plain whites & pastels before the collar change.
In the North these dark coloured shirts preceded checks.
This style in plain colours — light & dark, then into the big rounded ‘beagle’ collars which went into all colours — and in checks & in different materials: cotton, cotton/poly, Oxfords, wool mixes, etc.
Often with big buttons like trouser-fly button size.
Flower patterns!
Plain & patterned knit shirts rounded or pointed collars.
Summer '71 — then return of the Fred Perry.
Early '72, points & high squarish collars.
Dark shirts in the latter half of the year 1970 sometimes worn with the stickpinned hank.
Short sleeved check shirts in earlier '70 worn outside trousers,(the ‘summer’ look).
This is what you did.
Button up shirt & secure tie & put a tiepin just above where jacket or waistcoat lapels meet.
Loosen tie & undo top button of shirt so that shirt collar bows out and tie arches forward like a cup handle.
Don't knock it in with your chin.
4 in hand or Windsor knot — though latter eventually took over.
TIES
regimental — club — old school — football, etc. polka dot occasionally — but generally very restrained, often a lot less adventurous than the multi-coloured & striped shirts.
Minority look in late '69/early '70 — side-parted hair (not skinhead) black or navy blazer with or without badge.
White cutaway-collar broadcloth shirt (Ben Sherman made these) Club, regimental, etc. striped tie with stick-pin; grey flannel parallels with normal size turnups, black toe-capped Oxfords.
From this very conservative look developed the later '70 suedehead — but then usually with football club badges on top pocket; pocket hankies with pin, Sta-Prest trousers, red socks & heavier shoes.
Oh, and probably a b&w check button-down.
BOOTS & SHOES
'68/'69 boots with concealed steel toecaps were often purposely worn to expose the metal.
Steel caps often polished or painted white (some bought white anyway.)
Steel heels, toe 'tectors & nails were all very well for noise & sparks but rough on  manoeuvrability .
Steel caps rated as offensive weapon, especially at matches, so the Dr. Marten soon banished the other styles.
Also, they shone!
The 8 eyelet Air Wear brown was by far the most popular, with the laces drawn through the heel tag & the trousers high enough to reveal this.
Cherry reds polish — brown, tan or red all over the boot, then black smeared in the creases — to antique it up!
The very low boot with white leather trim round the leg was fairly popular.
Black Dr. Martens virtually never worn until well into '69/'70 — it became a fad in early '70 & brown boots were often dyed black.
Then the police started wearing them!
The 11 eyelet Astronaut had no cachet then (over the 8 eyelet Air Wear — later Air Wear did an 11 eyelet too).
It was higher on the leg but didn't have that fancy tag!
Dr. Marten shoes were most frequently seen on younger kids who couldn't get hold of suedehead shoes.
‘Monkey’ boots were worn by girls & kiddies.
You couldn't often get big sizes in them & I don't think they did boys' sizes in Dr. Martens — when they did, some girls wore them.
In 1970–71 girls wore clumpy shoes with flared heels — and sometimes boys shoes, especially loafers.
Tights with patterns up the sides.
Then all over geometrically patterned tights, often white.
1968–69
Italian, French.
Black, tan, grey, etc.
1969–70
On some fastidious customers — with blazers & flannels (pre-smoothie).
1970
American brogues (called English or Scottish brogues in America).
Usually black grained, sometimes black or maroon cordovan.
Also '70, '71 —‘smoothies’.
Same as above but no brogue pattern and almost always a shiny black or maroon ungrained finish.
Both these styles and slip-on loafers were made by Faith Royals but only the brogue was popularly called ‘Royals’.
In many parts of the land you couldn't get ‘Royals’ so this sort of brogue (black) was worn as an acceptable alternative.
It was clumpier and less ‘town’ looking (Well, less N. York town!)
Similar case with the smooth — basically cheaper versions without all-round welt.
Believe it or not — one feeble attempt by shoe manufacturers to cash in was a ridiculous boot thing like this.
The laces were moulded on but didn't work!
There was a zip up the side!
Vileness.
1971
The handsomest loafer was again made by Faith Royal — lighter & less clumpy than others, and with the all round sole extension.
Maroon or black.
1971 (mid to late).
Heavy lace-up Norwegians with basketweave in the vamp.
Very clumpy on toe but trim around heel.
Worn with dark cords, etc.
Usually black, occasionally maroon.
Sometimes worn with black & white striped laces.
Similar styles shoes started appearing with wooden soles, then with higher heels and eventually into platforms (mid to late '72).
A minor revival of suede desert boots occurred in late '71 but dissolved under the platform onslaught.
With the advent of ‘glam’, some younger kids wore brightly painted Dr. Martens shoes (to match hair) then there was the crepe soled, brightly coloured shoes of '72 –'73.; Segs & such click-clack devices were a suedehead craze — causing delays and disappointment (for many) at dance hall entrances as bouncers checked shoe-soles & turned away dance-floor destructive over-metallised examples.
KNITWEAR
Skinheads wore any of the above styles all in plain colours.
Bright red was popular.
Crew necks were worn with button-down collars kept inside the neck.
When big round collars came in these were worn outside the neck.
Patterned Fair Isle yoke pullovers came in at this time, then polo necks.
More old man in the shapelessness of these fireside cardigans.
Sleeves usually pushed up towards elbows.
Very skinhead.
Commercialism competed in the shape of these short zip-up versions.
Not at all as skinhead.
Cheap, nasty, etc.
Aviator glasses hip in '70.
Donkey jacket Union shirt Clip ons Blue Jeans
Football scarf worn in the conventional mode British army two-piece NCB boots, white steel
Levi's two piece T-shirt Air Wair
Ben Sherman, button-down collar The mac Jeans Bouncing soles, etc…
Sheepskin
Finger Slapping This finger slaps into that one as wrist gets sloppy
Featherweight Cardy Bleach Monkey boots
Stinge Shawl collar Inverted turnup Moon hop astronauts
Parting
‘union shirt’ plain or stripe.
plain stripe
Shetland V-neck Patch Air Wair shoes
Navy Sherman Fawn suit Oxblood Cordovan Wing tip Brogues
Jaytex Sta-Prest Smooth leather uppers
Black hat Navy coat Red square b/w routine check shirt Red jersey White trousers Red socks Black shoes
Fred Harrington Levi
Polo neck 2 tone legs
Polo shirt Ruperts Loafers
White shirt Fair Isle yoke Black cords Black socks & Norwegians
DISCOGRAPHY
HARRY HAWKE
For the purposes of this discography I've ignored the most obvious ‘Skinhead’ hits and chosen, with the help of some friends, what I trust is a fairly objective selection of the best, and most popular records from 1968 to 1971.
The more obvious skinhead hits that Harry Hawke refers to are listed as follows, complied by Nick Knight…
The Photographs
It is important to stress that the photographs in this book are my highly subjective vision of skinheads.
I was not striving to record the truth, but a truth — my own.
August 1981 Nick Knight 
A TWELVE YEAR OLD
DOUGIE AND BRENDA
DOUGIE 9 MONTHS LATER
SHANE, ONE OF THE BOURNEMOUTH SKINS
TWO FROM BALHAM
TERRY
ROB AND NAZI ROB
ROHNA
BLACK SKIN
NICKY CRANE AND BELSEN BEV
CLAPHAM NORTH
JOE
SPIKE
KEV AND LEE
BEANO (NEW SUIT AND SOCKS)
RONNIE AND ANGEL
TRACY BAXTER AND FRIEND
CARRIE AT HOME IN CLAPHAM WITH HER MUM AND BOYFRIEND PAUL
CARRIE
CARRIE, MEMBER OF THE WOMENS SPORTSFIGHTING CLUB
CRAZY PAUL
TWO FRIENDS, PETTICOAT LANE
SUNDAY OUTSIDE THE LAST RESORT
DEL
KEV AT HOME
KEV AT HOME
TRACY AND FRIEND DISPLAYING TATTOO
MAD JOHN'S BOTTOM LIP
DISTRICT LINE TO VICTORIA
MIKE ‘RAVEN’ WHITE AT LOUIE'S
‘CUT ME 'EAD OFF, OR MAYBE GROW A FRINGE.’
DEL, MEMBER OF THE FULHAM FIRM
KEV'S FOREARM
TWELVE YEAR OLDS GIVING ‘TYPICAL SKINHEAD STANCE’ FOR THE CAMERA
GOULSTON ST.
TILBURY SKIN (PAKISTANI LATER RETURNED SALUTE)
BRICK LANE
TERRY'S TOOLS
BAD MANNERS CONCERT, HAMMERSMITH
SKIN, HEADING
SUNDAY MOD BASHING IN BETHNAL GREEN
TWO SKINHEAD GIRLS AFTER A BIG FIGHT
ACKLAM HALL
ACKLAM HALL
ACKLAM HALL
BEANO HUGGING LOCAL POLICEWOMAN