

The Patient at Home
The professional support team
Following a stroke, the patient may be kept at home, rather than being admitted to hospital.
This does not happen if there is any fear that the patient cannot cope, or if there is no one to look after him.
Home care for the stroke patient may be chosen because the patient's doctor feels that the necessary rehabilitation can be done at home, or might be best done at home; the patient may be more comfortable, and therefore more co-operative to treatment if he remains among familiar surroundings; he might be liable to excessive stress if parted from his close family, friends or a beloved pet; or it may be a temporary situation, in which the patient is waiting for a bed in a specialist rehabilitation unit to become available.
Head-injured patients are normally admitted to hospital and kept there until it is certain that they are fully fit to return home.
Like the stroke patient who has received hospital treatment, the head-injured patient may still be fairly disabled at the time he is discharged.
In all cases, the general practitioner continues to monitor the patient's condition, prescribing any necessary drugs, such as those needed to control high blood pressure.
Most importantly, he acts as the co-ordinator for the support services which the patient will need.
The team involved in the care of the patient at home includes the district nurse, the community chartered physiotherapist, the occupational therapist and the social worker.
If necessary, a speech therapist may be called on as well.
The district nurse is attached to the general practitioner surgery or health centre.
She may be specially trained in some aspects of stroke care, so that she has the title of stroke care nurse .
She is responsible for helping the patient and carers in daily tasks such as washing, bathing and going to the toilet.
Where possible, she will help teach the patient  how to cope with these needs independently.
Where necessary, she will supply useful items such as a wedge support, disposable sheets and incontinence pads.
She advises on skin care, particularly in relation to avoiding pressure sores, and may supply sheepskin heel muffs to protect the feet, and sheepskin squares for the patient to sit or lie on.
The district nurse usually comes to see the patient in the mornings, to help him get out of bed and wash.
The patient who cannot sit up may start by washing in bed, with the nurse guiding him, so that he does not risk over-balancing and falling.
As his condition improves, he gradually starts to wash while sitting, and later learns to get in and out of the bath.
The nurse may also come back in the evening, especially in the beginning, in order to help the patient with medicines, such as insulin injections for diabetes, and to position him correctly in bed.
It is essential for the carer to learn how to position the patient properly, so part of the district nurse's task is to teach the carer how to do this.
The community physiotherapist is part of the district physiotherapy service organized at the major local hospital, and the general practitioner has direct access to the service.
The physiotherapist liaises with the hospital when the patient is due to be discharged, if he has been an in-patient.
Her role may be restricted to advising the carers on how to treat the patient, and she may only visit the family once.
Ideally, the community physiotherapist takes on the wider responsibility  of not only teaching the carers, but also assessing and treating the patient's particular problems through a progressive rehabilitation programme.
She may come to see the patient every day, usually excluding weekends.
Having assessed the nature and extent of the patient's problems, she explains to the patient and his carers how the patient's physical recovery will happen.
She sets out the details of how she feels the patient should be handled, so that the carers and everyone else involved will all help him to move in the same way.
Day by day, she will give the patient an active treatment session through which he gradually relearns how to move on his own.
The occupational therapist in the community is normally employed by the social services department, and the initial contact is usually made by the general practitioner.
The occupational therapist's main role is to assess the patient's physical needs, and provide appropriate equipment to make daily life easier for both patient and carer, so that they do not expend unnecessary energy on functional tasks which would make the patient's condition worse, and possibly harm the carer too.
The occupational therapist might provide such items as a commode, blocks to raise the height of the bed, a suitable chair and possibly a wheelchair.
The occupational therapist's role usually includes advising on suitable types of clothing for the patient, partly to make dressing simple and practical, and also so that the clothing chosen is helpful in the process through which the patient relearns to dress himself.
The community occupational therapist also assesses whether the patient has any perceptual problems, such as an inability to recognize left and right, or total lack of awareness of the affected side of his body.
These difficulties have to be explained to the carer, as they can be hard to understand.
The occupational therapist plans suitable activities through which the carer can help the patient to overcome these perceptual problems.
The social worker might be called in by the general practitioner, district nurse, physiotherapist or the carer.
The social worker is not usually involved in the early stages following the patient's stroke, but may be called in later if the patient is fairly severely disabled, or is an old person likely to need long-term support at home.
In a sense, the  social worker is responsible for the emotional and material well-being of the patient.
There may be financial problems arising from the patient's illness, and the social worker can help in obtaining the benefit payments available from the State for patients and their carers, called the attendance allowance .
The carer may be under too much stress, both physically and mentally, to cope with paperwork relating to such matters as the patient's sick pay from work, relevant insurance claims, or simply organizing payment of the normal household bills.
The social worker can give practical help and advice on all these tasks.
The patient and carer might also need a home help to clean the house or flat, or the social worker may call in ‘care assistants’, who are trained in very basic nursing skills, if the patient is too heavy for the carer to handle and move about alone.
When there are problems in providing adequate meals for the patient, the social worker may bring in the ‘meals on wheels’ service.
In a few cases, the social worker might have to make provision for young children to be given temporary care away from home, for instance if the patient is a single parent without any relatives who could care for the children.
Similarly, pets such as dogs, cats or budgerigars have to be provided for, if it is not practical for anyone to look after them while the patient cannot.
Organizing the patient's living area
The patient needs space to move or be moved around in, and the home is organized accordingly.
If the patient is moving around in a wheelchair, some furniture may have to be removed from his room to allow enough space for manoeuvring.
The detailed arrangements vary according to the type of living accommodation the patient is in, but, if possible, everything is arranged so that the patient, carer, relatives, professional staff and visiting friends all move around without danger to themselves or the household furniture and decorations.
One priority is access to the toilet, or alternative toilet arrangements.
In most cases, at least in the early stages, the patient needs help when transferring onto a commode or  toilet, so there also has to be space for the carer.
If the patient lives in a house with a downstairs toilet, a downstairs room may need to be turned into a bed-sitting room for him.
If access to the toilet is difficult, perhaps because it has steps, or the room is too small for a wheelchair and the carer to manoeuvre in, he may have to be provided with a commode.
Sometimes a commode is needed anyway for night-time use, although the patient can manage to use the toilet when he is fully awake and can plan the visit.
Washing facilities are another priority, although in the early stages the patient might be washed in his room, as though he were in hospital.
For convenience, the patient's room is usually arranged as a bed-sitting room, if there is enough space.
However, he should be taken out of his room at least occasionally, if at all possible, if only to avoid claustrophobia.
It may be feasible for him to move into a separate sitting room for day-time activities, if the access is not difficult.
Special care must be taken to ensure that the environment is safe for the patient to move about in.
The floor must not be slippery, nor should there be loose rugs lying on it.
The furniture should be arranged to allow free passage, and it is probably wise not to have breakable ornaments or glass-fronted cabinets in the areas where the patient will be.
At least at first, sharing a double bed is unlikely to be comfortable or practical for either patient or carer.
If this was the sleeping arrangement prior to the patient's illness, the family may have to supply a fairly wide single bed for the patient, or the carer might sleep in a separate bed, leaving the normal conjugal bed to the patient.
The bed should be as wide as space permits.
It should be alongside the wall, or about one foot away from the wall to allow space for the carer, in case she needs to help the patient from that side.
The head of the bed should be against a wall, or should have a head-board.
When the patient is lying on his back, his hemiplegic side should be away from the side wall.
The bed height should allow the patient to touch the floor with his feet when he sits on the side on the bed, although his hips should be slightly above the level of his knees.
Most household beds need raising onto secure blocks to achieve this.
On no account should the bed have wheels.
It should be reasonably firm, but not too hard.
A wooden board between  the mattress and a sprung divan base is an acceptable alternative to a sprung mattress on a slatted wooden base.
When the patient is in bed, he usually uses up to three pillows plus a wedge cushion support for his head and shoulders, to counteract spasticity (p. 49).
His hemiplegic hip may be supported on a folded towel for the same reason, and he needs sheepskin muffs to protect his heels from pressure sores.
A duvet is more practical than sheets, blankets and eiderdown, although the patient may prefer them if they are what he is used to.
The patient's chair and table are chosen according to the principles already described (p.51).
They are positioned so that the patient can get to and from the chair without too much effort.
The table has to be solid enough not to give way when the patient rests on it, and it should be big enough to hold all the things the patient needs when he is out of bed.
However, as the table has to be moved out of the way whenever the patient gets up, it should not be too heavy, or have too many items on it at one time.
It is preferable to keep the table clear of objects other than those actually in use, while a sideboard within reach of the patient is used to hold the items which will be needed later.
If the patient watches television, it should be positioned so that he is sitting straight to see it: he should not have to turn his head, or bend or crick his neck.
Always check to make sure that electrical wires attached to the television or any other appliances, such as reading lamps, are well secured, so that they cannot trip people up.
Hemiplegic patients feel the cold, so extra home heating may be required.
In houses where only the ground floor is centrally heated, the patient may not feel comfortable in the upstairs area, so if this is where he is to be, for other practical reasons, he will need heaters in his room, or the central heating system should be extended.
If this creates financial hardship, the social worker may be able to help obtain grants to assist with the extra heating costs.
Even in a centrally heated home, the patient may still feel the cold, so he may need to be dressed warmly, and wear thermal socks.
He may even need to use a blanket over his legs when he is sitting in his chair.
On no account should he use a hot water bottle, as it is likely to scald his skin, especially on his hemiplegic side.
While the patient should be kept warm, his room should also be properly ventilated, especially if he is in it all the time.
If there is no other system of air-conditioning, and the window cannot be open all the time because of draughts or security, it should at least be opened once or twice a day for a spell.
Helping the patient to move around
Independence has to be achieved in stages.
You and the patient may be anxious for him to be independent, but he should not try to move about or do things alone before he is ready.
Both of you may also be keen for him to do ‘exercises, to improve his physical condition.
However, his ‘homework’ is strictly limited by the progress he has achieved during his rehabilitation treatment (p. 134).
Until he can hold himself safely in the correct positions without increasing his spasticity when he is lying down, sitting, standing, or walking, he has to be helped to move in every situation.
You have to be very aware of the patient's physical limitations in relation to his spasticity, in order to prevent him from trying to do more than he can, which would inevitably make his situation worse.
Getting the patient out of bed onto a chair, wheelchair or commode involves a lift or a transfer .
With a lift, the carer takes control of the patient's full weight, so that he makes no effort in the manoeuvre, even when his feet are on the floor and he is effectively standing up.
In a transfer the patient does as much as he can under instruction and with help from the carer, or he is able to transfer himself.
The patient is lifted if he has not recovered his ability to balance, that is, if he tends to topple and fall backwards and towards his hemiplegic side when he tries to sit or stand up without any support.
In this case, the district nurse or physiotherapist will teach the carer how to lift the patient safely, and the lift must be used every time the patient needs to get out of bed or up from his chair.
The point of using a lift is to prevent the patient from making any effort at all, so that he does not increase his spasticity by trying to achieve movements he is not yet capable of making successfully.
There are several methods of lifting patients.
They have been  devised to place minimum strain on the lifter and her back, while ensuring that the patient is not at risk of falling or being dropped.
Before the patient is moved, everything has to be arranged and ready.
The chair or commode has to be correctly positioned, for instance, and firmly secured to prevent it from slipping away as the patient is moved.
The wheelchair has both brakes on once it is in position.
The patient's clothing should also be checked, so that there is no loose flapping material to get in the way.
One commonly used lifting method is the pelvic lift .
To get out of bed, for instance, the patient is turned onto his side or lifted and then brought into the sitting position on the side of the bed.
The carer gently levers him forwards by  placing her hands behind his seat and swivelling his hips sideways and forwards.
His feet should be flat on the floor.
If he is moving to a wheelchair with a removable arm, it is placed at right angles to the bed, and his feet remain level with each other.
If he is being moved onto a chair with fixed arms, the chair is placed at an angle of about 45° to the bed, and the patient's foot which is nearer the chair is placed slightly forwards relative to the other.
The carer then asks the patient to clasp his hands together, and helps him to do this.
He holds his hands passively forwards, and places his head on the carer's shoulder, on the side away from the chair.
The carer stands with her legs on either side of the patient's knees, places her hands under the patient's seat, pulls his body-weight forward and in one movement lifts his pelvis and pivots him so that he sits down onto the chair.
The pelvic lift can also be used to move the patient from a wheelchair to a chair, or vice versa.
Both chairs are placed securely, with the free chair at a slight angle to where the patient is sitting.
The patient is moved forward in the chair, and he holds his hands clasped together, to avoid the temptation of pushing himself off his chair, or pulling onto the other chair, which would throw him off balance and increase his spasticity.
The carer then holds him in the same way as if he was sitting on the side of the bed, with his head resting on her shoulder, and lifts him up and round onto the second chair.
The belt lift is an alternative to the normal pelvic lift: the patient wears a strong webbing belt round the waist, and the carer pulls on this to lever the patient into position.
If the patient is very heavy, or the carer cannot manage for some other reason, the patient's moves during the day have to be carefully planned in advance, to ensure that two people can always be present.
The pelvic lift can be done by two people.
To lift the patient off the bed onto a chair or commode, one carer takes up the position already described, while the other stands behind the patient on the bed and guides the patient's seat up and round onto the chair.
If the patient is being moved between two chairs, the second carer stands between the chairs, again behind the patient.
In bed, the very heavy patient may be moved around with the Australian lift .
Two people stand on either side of the bed, facing the patient.
One brings the patient's head forward, so that he is sitting up but relaxed.
His knees are bent.
The carers then place one shoulder under the patient's shoulder nearest to them; they clasp their other hand to each other 's wrist under the patient's thighs, balance on their free arms, and lever the patient upwards or downwards in the bed by bending their knees and leaning towards the direction of the movement.
A transfer involves guiding the patient in the correct movements to get up safely, and offering minimal help, in the situation where the patient can balance successfully.
He may not have lost his ability to balance, or he may have relearned it through his therapy sessions.
To get out of bed, the patient first lies on his back, clasps his hands together, keeping his elbows straight, and bends his unaffected knee, keeping his foot on the bed.
The patient keeps his hands clasped together throughout the active parts of the transfer, so that he does not throw himself off balance by reaching out to grab the carer or the arm of the chair.
He then turns onto his hemiplegic side when the carer tells him to, and the carer guides the movement with one hand on the patient's shoulder, the other on his pelvis.
The carer lifts the patient's hemiplegic leg gently over the side of the bed, then places her hand on his stomach to stabilize him, and asks him to bring his other leg over beside the hemiplegic one.
The carer puts one hand under the patient's head and round the back of his hemiplegic shoulder, presses down on his pelvis and guides the patient to sit up.
With the patient sitting up with his feet flat on the floor, and the hemiplegic foot slightly forwards, the carer stands in front of the patient.
The chair, wheelchair or commode onto which the patient is transferring is placed on one side of the carer, sideways on to the bed.
The patient's hands are clasped together, with his arms straight, and the carer places her hands under his upper arms, to help bring his shoulders forwards.
He then leans forward, and is guided up and round, so that he pivots to swing his hips round and onto the chair.
The patient's basic daily needs
Toileting
Going to the toilet is an important part of the day's activities, and is likely to be the first thing the patient does.
The carer may find it repugnant at first to think of helping the patient with this basic human function.
It may seem easier if you remember that all parents have to do just this when they change a baby's nappies, wipe the baby's bottom, and ensure it is clean and dry.
At any age, good toilet hygiene is essential for preventing infections.
For the hemiplegic patient, it requires extra care, because the patient is likely to be sitting still for much of the day, which in itself may make him more prone to infections, and the risk is magnified if there is any damp or dirty material next to his skin.
If the patient can stand and balance, he may be able to use the normal toilet.
If he needs lifting, he is likely to need a commode, unless there is enough room around the toilet to allow for him to be lifted from a wheelchair to the toilet seat.
The occupational therapist may supply portable handrails in the early stages after the stroke, so that the patient has some support on each side while he sits on the toilet, although these should not be used to lean on when standing up or sitting down.
If the toilet seat is fairly low, the handrails may be fitted with a raised toilet seat between them, to fit over the toilet bowl, so that the patient can sit and stand more easily.
Later on, permanent handrails may be fixed to the walls of the toilet, if necessary.
If the patient is safe sitting up, he should be left alone for privacy while he is passing urine or faeces, and he should have a bell to summon help, or perhaps a stick with which to knock on the wall or floor.
The carer must ensure that the patient is cleaned thoroughly when he has finished.
Non-allergenic, non-perfumed wet wipes (or baby wipes) are best for cleaning the anal area, to avoid the risk of faeces remaining clogged in the pubic hairs.
After cleaning, the area should be dried most carefully with absorbent toilet paper or tissues.
You should encourage the patient to clean himself while you guide him.
If he cannot stand, the patient might be transferred to his bed before being cleaned, but if he is using  a commode, it is usually possible to clean him from under the commode seat, once the pan of the commode has been taken out of the way.
Some hemiplegic patients are incontinent, either because they have poor sensation and cannot feel when the bladder or bowel needs to be emptied, or because they do not pay attention and so forget to go to the toilet, or ask to be taken.
Toileting is a reflex, so they have to be taught control through a programme of toilet training.
The patient is placed on the toilet or commode every two or three hours, and the carer carefully explains why each time.
Inevitably, the incontinent patient needs cleaning and drying at very frequent intervals, to prevent infections such as cystitis.
If the patient is usually in control of his bladder and bowels, but suddenly becomes incontinent, you should tell the doctor immediately, as it may be a sign of infection or problems.
Constipation can be a problem among hemiplegic patients, especially if they over-eat while they are doing less physical activity than normal.
Changing the diet usually helps the constipation, especially if fibre is added.
The doctor may refer the patient to a dietician for a specific regime, or he may prescribe a laxative to ease the congestion.
The opposite problem of loose motions or diarrhoea should also be carefully monitored and corrected through altering the patient's diet.
If the patient needs to go to the toilet during the night, you should try to get him up.
It may be more practical to use a commode for night-time toileting, even if the patient is capable of getting to the toilet when fully awake.
Bottles and bed-pans are not really practical, partly because of the difficulty of positioning the patient properly to avoid increasing his spasticity, and partly because of the risk of unpleasant spillages.
Washing
If the patient was not admitted to hospital, or was discharged without having learned to wash himself properly, the community nurse attends to help him to wash, and to teach him and his carers how he can help himself.
When she attends for the first time, she assesses the patient: if he is out of bed  and eating his breakfast, for instance, she observes whether he can feed himself, or whether he needs help; whether he has perceptual problems; how good his balance is while he is sitting; whether he is limited by spasticity; what his posture is like; and then whether he is capable of standing and walking.
The nurse also has to check the bathroom.
There has to be enough space for her and the patient, and preferably room for the carer to watch the washing session as well.
The floor should not be wet, polished or slippery, and there should not be loose rugs on it.
If aids or alterations such as handrails or alarm buttons are likely to be needed, the nurse may liaise with an occupational therapist and social worker about having them supplied.
If he can, the patient walks into the bathroom with the nurse.
If not, the nurse takes him in a wheelchair.
If the wheelchair is too big to go into the bathroom, a Roamer chair may be supplied: this is a smaller chair on wheels, designed for short distances on flat surfaces.
In the bathroom the nurse helps the patient to undress, taking care that he does not  make any effort which increases his spasticity.
She then teaches him to organize his toiletries and himself in the same way as she would in the hospital setting.
The patient follows the same pattern of washing his face, then the rest of his body.
The carer has to be involved in this process, so that every time the patient washes his face, hands or body, you help and remind him to do so correctly, without increasing his spasticity or putting himself into danger through careless movements.
The message has to be reinforced all the time until the patient can wash himself properly and confidently, without losing concentration.
If the patient has good sitting balance, but not much standing balance, he may be able to sit in a hoist to be lifted into the bath.
The hoist is rather like a ski-chair with a bar in front of the patient, and may be attached to the side of the bath.
The patient remains sitting in it while washing, and is then lifted out.
With good sitting balance, the patient can sit on a chair or stool in a shower compartment.
This is a convenient way for the patient to wash himself all over, including his hair, provided there is room for the carer to help, if necessary.
If the patient makes good progress physically, with good recovery of balance in sitting and then standing, he may be able to get into the bath.
He might start by transferring himself from the wheelchair across onto a seat in the bath, and washing himself sitting up.
A shower fitment on the bath taps facing the patient makes it easier for him to wash himself thoroughly.
When he has good selective movements in his hemiplegic leg, he may be able to get down from the bath seat into the bath tub.
A non-slip mat in the bottom of the bath may be needed for this.
He needs excellent standing balance and selective leg movements to stand up and step into the bath, and even then he may need handrails on either side for stability and safety.
He will not be allowed to try getting into the bath until he is capable of making all the necessary movements with full control, and no increase in his spasticity.
When you are helping the patient to wash, you should try to follow the same sequence as the nurse, and remember to keep describing to the patient everything that is happening.
If he has severe perceptual problems, for instance, you may need to keep reminding him where his face is by helping him  to touch it, or he may keep forgetting to shave or wash the left half of his face.
The patient also has to learn to judge water temperature, and you have to be careful in the early stages that it is never too hot or cold for his comfort.
Eating and drinking
Carers often find it difficult to cope with the problem of feeding the patient.
Firstly, it involves a lot of work in terms of planning, preparation and serving the food.
Secondly, hemiplegic patients often have difficulties eating, chewing and swallowing, and this can seem repulsive to the carer.
If you do feel revolted when you watch the patient eat, you should not feel guilty about it, but neither should you let yourself become irritable with the patient over it.
If he becomes nervous about eating, it will make his physical difficulties worse.
The best thing is to discuss the situation with your doctor, social worker and family, and see if you can organize help for at least some of the meals.
If the patient cannot walk or be transported safely to the kitchen or the dining room, you have to bring the food to him.
If this involves a fairly long distance through cold parts of the house, you may have to buy metal dish covers, plate warmers and Thermos flasks to keep the food and drinks warm.
Food should not be too hot, however, so you should avoid serving piping hot boiled meals.
You have to plan each meal to make sure both that the patient has a well balanced diet, and that you do not spend too much time and energy on journeys to and from the kitchen.
For instance, it may  help to keep salt, pepper and paper napkins in the bedroom, if that is where the patient eats his meals.
Eating is obviously a basic need, but it also forms part of the physical rehabilitation process.
The patient has to be encouraged to eat his food correctly, as part of his recovery of control of his facial muscles.
He must sit upright at a table to eat his meals: he cannot eat off a tray sitting in bed or an easy chair.
Sitting in a good position for meals is an important part of the patient's recovery of sitting balance and control of his head movements.
He should be able to sit close enough to the table to rest his hemiplegic arm comfortably on it.
If his head tends to drop forward towards his plate as he eats, it may help to put the plate on a raised block on the table to reduce the distance from plate to face.
To help his awareness of his affected side, you can arrange his place setting with the plate or bowl in front of him and his glass or cup in front of his hemiplegic side.
Eating a meal is a good time for socializing, so you should try to eat your own meal with the patient whenever possible, or organize family members or friends to do this.
The patient may need help with eating.
If he has a facial palsy, he may find it difficult to chew and swallow, and you can help this by encouraging him to chew and clear food from the hemiplegic side of his face.
It can help if you gently stroke that side of his face as he eats: the physiotherapist will show you how to do this correctly.
Especially at first, you may have to keep reminding the patient to sit upright and take the food to his mouth, rather than letting his face droop towards his plate.
If he drools or loses food from the side of his mouth, you should help him to dab his mouth firmly with a folded napkin or handkerchief.
(Wiping the mouth is discouraged, because it can over-stretch the delicate soft tissues and muscles.)
The choice of food you prepare depends partly on the patient's taste as to the food he prefers, partly on his eating abilities or difficulties, and partly on dietary needs such as avoiding putting on weight.
If the patient can only use one hand, food should be prepared ready to eat, cut into manageable pieces.
When preparing his food, you should think in terms of providing a ‘finger buffet’ with foods you might normally eat with a knife and fork.
You may find the patient  has little interest in food, so he may need encouraging to eat a little at a time.
Overeating through boredom is a greater danger, so you should monitor the patient quite carefully to make sure he is not putting on excess weight.
If you find it difficult to know how much, or what types of food the patient should eat, you can ask your doctor to refer the patient to a dietician.
For breakfast, suitable food might include toast in small squares or fingers (already spread with butter or jam or honey, if necessary), cereals in large chunks, and banana pieces.
Bacon and bread can be eaten more easily as a sandwich than as separate items.
The main meal of the day may be eaten at lunch time or in the evening, according to your normal habit.
If the patient eats meat, it should be cut into chunks or cubes, not minced.
A meat burger in a bun is easy to manage with one hand.
Bones should be removed from chicken or fish.
Salmon is relatively easy to eat, otherwise fish pie with pastry and leeks or fish cakes may be the best ways to eat fish.
Vegetables should not be overcooked: firm al dente carrots, courgettes or cauliflower are easier to manage with a fork, and they help the patient to chew and swallow.
Peas, sweetcorn and mushy soft vegetables, on the other hand, are likely to be too difficult to cope with.
If the patient likes sauces on his food, it may be best to put a little directly on the relevant food.
For dessert, pieces of fruit are generally the best option.
The patient may need to eat from a bowl at first, as he gets used to eating one-handed.
A soup bowl with a flared rim can help prevent spillages.
Similarly, a plate with a slight rim prevents food from sliding over the edge too easily.
Some foods which are normally eaten on a plate, such as scrambled eggs, are best eaten from a cup or bowl and spooned up.
The patient might manage to cut up his own food with a combined knife and fork, or he may even learn to cut his food with one hand, alternating cutting and eating using a normal knife and fork.
Otherwise, chopsticks are practical for one-handed eating, if the food is cut up for the patient.
Chopsticks have the added advantage that they prevent the patient from guzzling too much food in one mouthful.
If the patient has problems holding his cutlery, he may need a thickened  handle, usually made of rubber, which slides onto a knife, fork or spoon.
The patient should not be allowed to drink too much, as he would need to go to the toilet too often.
Equally, he must drink enough to avoid dehydration.
He should have a glass of water with each meal, at least, and possibly in between meals if his environment is very warm, or if he is doing a lot of active therapy.
He may prefer still mineral water to tap water, so a bottle can be kept near him.
Acid drinks like orange juice should not be taken in large quantities: it may be preferable to squeeze or liquidize fresh fruit and dilute it with plain water, if the patient particularly likes fruit juices.
Tea and coffee should be strictly limited, and the patient should drink them from a small cup, and should not be given several cups in succession.
Alcoholic drinks should only be given if the doctor allows it, and the patient must not be allowed to drink excessive amounts of alcohol.
The patient should be encouraged to drink from a cup or glass with both hands clasped round it.
If he uses one hand on the cup handle, he should always have the other hemiplegic hand correctly positioned in front of him.
It is better for the patient to use a shallow cup rather than a deeper mug, partly to prevent an excessive fluid intake, and partly because he may have difficulty in judging the depth of a mug and so may tend to spill his drink.
A useful type of cup has a cut-out piece opposite the drinking side, so that the patient can tip the cup up against his face without hitting the bridge of his nose.
Dressing
The patient should not be expected to get dressed in the early stages following his stroke.
If he cannot put his clothes on himself, learning to get dressed is a necessary part of his rehabilitation programme.
Some patients relearn dressing very quickly, others extremely slowly.
The patient should not be pressurized.
Initially, it may be as much as he can manage to co-operate in changing his pyjamas, a relatively simple task with proper guidance.
He may need to stay in pyjamas and dressing gown for a long time until he can learn how to cope with normal clothes.
If you make him feel that he should be getting dressed, and he tries to do so before he is ready, in rehabilitation terms, he will certainly increase his spasticity and make himself even less capable of learning the movements.
If you force his limbs into clothes, the same effect follows: in the arm this can cause severe shoulder pain which will hold up the patient's rehabilitation.
The worst mistake is to leave clothes near the patient when he is unattended: he may fall over if he tries to put them on by himself, as he may not yet have realized that he cannot balance and move normally.
Getting dressed consists of a complex sequence of movements depending on the patient's ability to balance and coordinate his actions.
Dressing is a two-handed activity which is extremely difficult to do with only one hand.
It involves co-operation between both sides of the body: for instance, as one leg is put into a trouser-leg, the other holds the body upright; a sweater has to be pulled over the head and then organized so that one's arms can slide into the sleeves.
Buttons and zips are difficult to manipulate without one hand holding the garment steady.
Apart from the difficulties of physically getting into clothes and fastening them, the patient also has to identify what each garment is, which way it goes on, and to which part of the body each part of each garment belongs.
For the patient with figure-ground perceptual problems this selection and identification process is virtually impossible.
He has to relearn it stage by stage, building up his awareness through experience, in much the same way as a child learns about putting on clothes by himself.
If the patient has to get dressed before he is able to dress  independently, you have to dress him with care, so that he does not get involved in making any effort.
The carer learns how to dress the patient in the right way from the occupational therapist or physiotherapist.
All the clothes are chosen carefully, so that you can get them on without discomfort to the patient.
Sometimes, in hospital, patients are not given underwear, even when they wear outer clothes, so that toileting is easier.
However, this often makes the patient feel vulnerable.
It is probably preferable for the patient to have underwear if at all possible, for normal dignity.
While you are dressing him, you should make the patient aware of what you are doing by naming each garment as you put it on, and showing him that it is the right way round.
Although he must not make any physical effort, you should allow him to follow the sequence of movements that you are making, and tell him what you are doing and why.
Repeating the verbal descriptions is specially important for the patient with perceptual and speech difficulties, as it helps him to become familiar with the planning needed for each item of clothing.
The stage at which the patient starts relearning how to dress himself is determined largely by his progress in regaining his balance firstly while sitting up and then standing.
Good co-operation between the physiotherapist, occupational therapist and nurse is vital: the patient must not be taught several different ways of doing the same dressing task, nor must he be given tasks which he cannot achieve.
Everyone involved has to realize that the tasks are not relearned in an automatic sequence: the fact that the patient may be able to put on his sweater one day does not necessarily mean that he is immediately able to progress to putting on his trousers — indeed, he may have forgotten how to cope with the sweater the following day.
The therapist assesses what the patient should start with: he automatically starts with a pyjama jacket, if he has difficulties with this.
He then progresses to a simple upper body garment, such as a sleeveless vest or loose T-shirt.
Getting into a shirt comes at a later stage, a sweater later still.
Shoes and socks are tackled before trousers, and track-suit trousers with an elasticated waist would be chosen for either a male  or a female patient.
Underpants and knickers are harder to manage, so they are practised at a later stage.
All clothing is chosen in slightly larger sizes than normal, so that it is not too tight, and it is easier to slip on.
Fastenings are made as simple as possible: ladies might use an all-in-one slip-over brassiè, or one with front fastening; shoes might have velcro or elastic laces rather than normal laces; shirts would use velcro strips rather than buttons; men's trousers would have a zip fly rather than buttons, with a velcro fastening at the top; braces are easier to manage than a belt to hold trousers up; a lady's skirt might have an elasticated waist or a velcro fastening.
For a very large female patient, or one who has extremely poor balance, a wraparound skirt may be more practical.
A normal, loose-fitting skirt can be split up the side and fitting with a Velcro fastening.
This makes it very easy to put on and take off, even when the patient is sitting down.
When dressing practice starts, the patient is carefully positioned so that his hemiplegic arm and leg are well supported.
He has to be able to sit upright in his chair using his trunk muscles, without pulling or pushing himself up using his unaffected arm.
He may sit at a table, which has to be big enough to spread the garment out on it.
If the garment is a shirt, the front faces the patient.
The hemiplegic arm rests on the garment: if the therapist lifts it, she takes the shoulder and hand.
The patient is taught to lift his arm by gripping it behind the elbow with his other hand, drawing it gently forwards and up keeping the elbow straight, palm facing upwards, as he leans forwards from the hips.
The sleeve for the hemiplegic arm is gathered together, and the unaffected hand goes into it from the cuff, in order to draw the hemiplegic hand into the sleeve up to the wrist.
The sleeve is straightened out up the arm with gentle stroking movements by the unaffected hand.
To hold the sleeve up, the patient may take the collar between his teeth while he reaches behind his neck to bring the shirt behind his back.
Alternatively, he might spread the front of the shirt across his body to stop it from slipping down his arm.
Leaning forwards, the patient then slides his unaffected arm into the second sleeve.
He sits up straight to do up the buttons or velcro fastenings.
The  only fastening he cannot reach is the cuff on the unaffected arm.
A sweater is placed with the back uppermost, and the hemiplegic arm is placed beside the sweater.
The sleeve is drawn up, put over the hemiplegic arm, and drawn gently upwards.
The patient pulls the sweater over his head and then puts the unaffected arm into its sleeve.
Alternatively, the unaffected arm is put into its sleeve and the patient then pulls the sweater over his head, leaning well forwards from the hips.
The latter method requires very good balance in sitting, together with good forward mobility.
For trousers, socks and shoes, the garments are placed on a stool slightly to the side of the patient.
The shoes and socks might be on the floor if the patient is capable of reaching down for them.
The garments might be placed by his hemiplegic side, if there is no risk of him falling as he reaches for them, and if he is beginning to use the hemiplegic arm.
To put the trousers, socks and shoes on, the patient sits in a chair, and lifts his hemiplegic leg to cross over the other leg.
If he cannot lift the leg unaided, he may move it by clasping his hands together just below the knee, holding the shin bone firmly, and using his hands to lift the leg up, shifting his weight sideways towards his unaffected side as he does so.
Another method is to grip under the lower calf with the unaffected hand to lift the hemiplegic leg across.
If the patient cannot lift the leg across, the therapist helps by supporting it under the foot and thigh, and taking it up gently.
The patient puts the sock on his hemiplegic foot, then pulls the trouser leg on up over the knee, and then puts the shoe on the foot.
(The sock is usually prepared by the therapist, who rolls the top over.)
The hemiplegic leg is then lifted back to the floor, the trouser leg is pulled a little further up the thigh, and anchored in place by the patient crossing his unaffected leg over it.
The patient puts the sock on his unaffected foot.
He holds the trouser tightly outwards as he puts the unaffected leg into it, crosses this leg over the other again, and puts his shoe on.
He stands up with the assistance of the therapist: he may do his trousers up while the therapist makes sure he remains properly aligned and upright, or the therapist may fasten the trousers while the patient concentrates on standing and balancing.
Undressing is easier than dressing, as it does not involve so much planning, so even the patient with perceptual problems can generally manage.
It is generally done as a reverse of the sequence for dressing.
The patient often learns to undress by himself long before he can manage to dress.
The therapist may encourage him to practise taking off clothes by himself, having helped him to put them on, to build up his awareness and confidence.
The patient has to undress slowly and methodically, as there is a temptation to go too quickly, which might make him lose his balance and increase his spasticity.
For ease, upper garments like a sweater or shirt are pulled over the head first, and the hemiplegic arm comes out of its sleeve last.
Trousers are unfastened with the patient sitting down, dropped with the patient standing, and then removed with the patient sitting down.
The trouser, sock and shoe come off the hemiplegic leg last.
No patient is expected to learn all the parts of these sequences in one go.
Some of the movements may be modified according to the patient's abilities and limitations.
The process usually starts with practice of the initial movements for putting on a particular garment, before the garment is given to the patient.
The first sessions may be limited to the patient learning how to move his body, arm or leg into the right positions, while the therapist performs most of the actual dressing.
The carer is involved in the routine: you will watch the therapist at first, and then learn how much you can do to help the learning process at any stage.
The therapist will show you the techniques of helping the patient to cope with particular garments.
Gradually, as the patient learns how to dress himself, at least in part, the movement patterns become part of normal everyday life, and dressing becomes part of the patient's increasingly independent activities.
Activities, social life and work
The patient should not stay in bed without a special reason, such as feeling ill or exceptionally fatigued, or having a headache.
Even then, if at all possible, he should get up for meals.
He must not be allowed to think that staying in bed would solve the physical problems of his hemiplegia, as the opposite would certainly happen: he would become lazy, weak, and his spasticity would become more entrenched and pronounced.
It is usually a waste of time trying to explain the dangers, especially if the patient feels in a self-pitying mood.
Nor is it helpful to argue or get angry about it.
You simply have to try to organize each day so that the patient has enough, but not too many, useful, interesting and pleasurable activities to occupy him.
The choice of suitable activities is best made in consultation with the physiotherapist, occupational therapist and speech therapist, as they will be able to suggest the most appropriate pastimes to help the patient's mental and physical needs.
There may be appointments to keep, perhaps for treatment sessions with the physiotherapist or speech therapist.
These engagements and meal times should be considered the fixed points in each day.
Other activities are planned around them.
To programme the day successfully, you need to take into account how tired the patient is likely to be, for instance after a physiotherapy treatment session.
If he has a tiring morning session, for instance, he may need a rest period in his chair or in bed after lunch.
After the rest he should be involved in some activity which does not require too much physical effort.
As he gets fitter, he may be able to do two or three physically demanding sessions each day, interspersed with lighter activities and rest periods.
Whatever he is doing, you must remember that he must be positioned correctly at all times to prevent his spasticity from increasing.
While physical fatigue is one problem which needs careful control, boredom and lack of motivation are potentially far more difficult to combat.
It takes a great deal of sensitivity to provide activities which stimulate the patient's interest, without exhausting him or making him frustrated if he cannot achieve what he wants or what you hope for.
You need to  encourage the patient with gentleness, but you will probably have to be firm if he wants to stop a task simply because he feels bored and lazy.
While you can substitute another activity for one the patient wants to abandon, you should not allow him to stop and do nothing.
The more time in the day the patient is idle, the more he is likely to sink into a torpor of laziness.
It is specially important not to let him vegetate in front of the television for long periods.
If possible, he should not have a television in the room where he spends most of his time.
If he does, it should certainly not be on all the time.
Television watching should be selective, and you should try to discuss the programmes watched with the patient, or relate them to pictures and stories in books or magazines, so that some intellectual stimulus is involved.
Activities in the home
Having consulted the therapists about the best type of activity to choose for the patient, you may be able to work out how best to interest and amuse the patient through your knowledge of what he enjoyed doing before his stroke or head injury.
If the patient has perceptual problems, it is useful to draw or tape a line down the centre of his personal table, to help him differentiate between left and right.
Using a fluorescent marker to highlight the left side of any reading material, such as a newspaper, can help the patient to pay attention to the whole text instead of just the right half.
Jigsaws with large pieces help the patient to relearn how to match up shapes and images.
You may have to help him at first, but as he  progresses, he can tackle more complicated puzzles.
Many of the toys suitable for teaching very young children about matching objects, shapes and colours can help the patient with severe perceptual difficulties.
Games like dominoes and draughts can help both perception and memory.
The patient may find these activities both boring and frustrating, especially if you are constantly trying to make him concentrate on them as educational tasks.
Children in the family, such as grandchildren, nephews or nieces, can help by sharing these activities with the patient.
They are more likely to enjoy the games themselves, and so can help the patient to have fun as he goes through the relearning process.
The patient's memory can be retrained through simple exercises such as question-and-answer sessions after you have read him a short passage from a book or newspaper.
Radio programmes or ‘talking book’ tape recordings can be used for the same purpose.
Reading and listening can also help with speech and comprehension problems.
You can make up simple, large crossword puzzles for the patient to solve.
He can practise forming as many words as possible from one long word or a collection of single letters: the letter units from a Scrabble set are useful for this purpose.
The patient with mild speech and comprehension problems may enjoy playing Scrabble itself.
He may even be able to tackle learning a foreign language.
On the other hand, for a patient with severe word-finding difficulties, you may have to label all the normal objects round the home, and ask the patient to say the name of the object and point to it every time he wants something.
Learning handwriting with the non-dominant hand is difficult, so it usually comes at a late stage of recovery.
However, it is useful for the patient to practise writing words, so a typewriter or word-processor can be the answer.
It is slightly easier to feed paper one-handed into a word-processor than a typewriter.
A manual typewriter is physically harder to use than an electric keyboard.
If the patient is at the stage where he can write business or personal letters, he will probably prefer to use a modern electric machine or word-processor so that he can correct any errors easily and neatly.
If the patient had hobbies before his stroke or head injury, such as drawing, painting or needlepoint, you should try to make it possible for him to take them up again.
It is usually easy to secure a canvas or needlepoint frame in clamps so that the patient can work one-handed on them.
If he does not enjoy his previous hobbies because he cannot achieve his former standards, you can try introducing him to new, different ones.
It sometimes helps if you choose something you have not done before either, but which interests you, so that you can share the activity on equal terms.
Conversation is an important part of reviving the patient's ability to communicate and his interest in the world around him.
Your direct communication with the patient is a vital part of your care, so you should try to keep a time spare for simple conversation, no matter how busy you are with organizing the practical aspects of home life and the patient's needs.
Visiting friends can be a great help for this, and you can ask them to come prepared with items to read to the patient, or ideas to discuss.
The patient may also like talking to friends on the telephone.
If he cannot look up names and numbers in his address book, he may be able to memorize the order of a list of people whose numbers are entered into the memory of a modern telephone.
Then all he has to do is to press one digit, and the number is automatically dialled for him.
Working in the kitchen is a more practical way for the patient to relearn relevant skills.
He may need special implements, such as a wall-mounted tin opener which he can operate with one hand.
Your occupational therapist or physiotherapist will advise you about the many ingenious gadgets available which might be useful.
The patient may be able to wash up or cook, and practise planning and problem-solving.
Cooking from a recipe is a good exercise in reading, comprehension and translation of concepts into actions.
Even looking around the kitchen in order to make up the shopping lists is a task involving observation, forward thinking and memory.
Some activities in the kitchen can be done sitting in a wheelchair.
However, once the patient can stand and balance successfully, he can stand at the sink, and perhaps move sideways using the kitchen units for support, so the exercise also involves the physical work of balancing and transferring  weight.
You may need to stand behind the patient at first, to encourage him to move correctly and not in a ‘dot and carry, pattern.
You may also need to supervise the patient, in case he forgets what he has to do and leaves the gas on without lighting it, for example, or without putting the pan of food on the cooker.
He may get muddled, and perhaps put dirty clothes into the oven instead of the washing machine, or food into the dustbin instead of the saucepan.
You may need to keep repeating the names of foods and objects to reinforce his awareness, or to recite the order in which a task like cooking or washing up is achieved.
Gardening
The patient may have enjoyed gardening before his stroke or head injury, and it is an activity he can return to even with quite a degree of disability.
If he took no interest in gardening before his illness, he may find it refreshing to be outdoors looking at the different colours and shapes of the plants, smelling their fragrance, and watching the insects and birds they attract.
If it is warm enough for the patient to sit in the garden, he may enjoy just watching all the garden life.
However, he is likely to feel much more satisfied if he can take an active part in looking after the plants.
The garden can provide the patient's first opportunity to feel he has achieved something by himself: he can grow flowers to beautify the garden or provide cut flowers for the house, or he might grow vegetables or herbs.
You will have to work out the potential problems for the patient, and take care to avoid them.
You may have to organize the access to the garden for the patient.
If there are steps, he may need handrails if he is walking, or a ramp if he moves about in a wheelchair.
Wide paths are needed for a wheelchair, and the paths need to be smooth and free of weeds.
If the patient is walking, you have to be careful that the path is not slippery at all when he first goes outside.
It may need hosing at high pressure to get rid of any surface slime.
There may be areas of the garden which are specially suitable for the patient to work in: he needs to be able to reach the soil with his hands or tools without risking scratching himself on thorny plants or hitting his head or eyes on  jutting or overhanging branches.
Canes which support tall plants should have a cover over the exposed end, so that they are clearly visible and do not risk poking the patient in the eye when he bends over, or if he slips.
A soft rubber ball like a squash ball is easy to insert over each cane: your local squash club may be willing to give you discarded punctured balls.
The patient may not have full feeling in the skin on his hemiplegic side, so he should cover his arms and legs with clothing and both his hands with gardening gloves, unless it is really too hot for comfort.
If the weather is very sunny, the patient should wear a sun-hat and neckerchief, and he must drink water at frequent intervals.
You may need to watch him at first, so that you can clean and dress any grazes or cuts immediately.
Like any other gardener, the patient should be protected by anti-tetanus inoculations, so you should check with your doctor to make sure these are kept up to date.
Raised flower beds are ideal for people in wheelchairs.
Some flower beds may have soft, fertile soil which is easier to dig or hoe than hard or stony ground.
The patient who can stand and balance can work standing up, so he can probably tackle every job in the garden, from digging and weeding to mowing the lawn.
However, he is likely to need to rest at frequent intervals.
A small seat, which also serves as a kneeler when it is turned upside down, is a practical item which can be carried in one hand.
If there are comfortable and solid garden chairs around the garden, the patient can rest and relax in them when he needs to.
If the patient has recovered the use of his affected hand, he may be able to do jobs like digging and trimming the lawn.
He should work with lightweight tools: his spade, for example, should have a small blade.
Tools with extra long handles save him from having to bend over too far, which might undermine his balance.
If the affected arm is still disabled, the patient may still manage to link both hands round the handles of tools such as a hoe, rake or spade.
Otherwise he is restricted to those jobs which he can do one-handed.
Many garden tools are adapted for disabled people.
You can get every variety of fork, weeder, hoe, trowel or rake with long, medium or short handles.
Some implements  are set with the heads at different angles to make them easier to manoeuvre with one hand.
The patient may need help with organizing the tools and trying out new tasks at first.
If you have a shed, the tools need to be neatly arranged, each in its proper place.
A gardener's belt, with clasps and pouches for small tools is a practical way of carrying the tools around.
For larger items, a holdall like a sports bag can be useful.
If every tool is replaced in the belt or holdall after use, you will have less of a problem with tools being forgotten and left in odd corners.
All tools should then be returned to the shed or storage place where they are easily accessible.
Each session in the garden should be planned, so that the patient has a specific aim, such as weeding or planting flowers in a certain patch.
If he is an experienced gardener, you have to make sure that he sets himself achievable targets, and does not become over-ambitious.
If he has not done much gardening before, you can work together, so that you can enjoy sharing the tasks, and it is easier for you to assess when the patient has had enough.
If you do not have a garden, or if the access to your garden is too difficult for the patient, he can still enjoy doing smaller-scale gardening work using planters, tubs or pots.
These may be on a window-sill, balcony or patio, and are often more convenient to manage because there is a firm, hard surface to stand on, or to take the wheelchair.
The soil level is raised, so the patient can reach it without having to bend too far.
The patient may have to move about in a relatively confined area, so you have to make sure he can do so safely before he begins.
Apart from enjoying the achievement of working on his own garden, the patient may also like to visit parks and gardens open to the public.
Most should allow for wheelchair access, but you should always check by reading any brochures or information sheets, or telephoning before you go.
There may also be local gardening clubs or allotment societies which the patient can join in order to meet other gardeners, disabled or able-bodied.
The benefits of gardening as a hobby are wide-ranging: it is satisfying as a pastime with a visible end-product, and it offers a lot of opportunities for meeting like-minded people in a pleasant environment.
If you want  to find out more about gardening for the disabled before the patient starts, you can ask your occupational therapist for advice and available literature, look up books on the subject in your local library, or contact specialist organizations such as The Garden Club, the Gardens for the Disabled Trust, or the Royal Horticultural Society.
Sports
Many stroke and head-injured patients return to sports when they feel well enough.
They may even take up new sports which they had never tried before.
Many sports can be played and enjoyed one-handed, even if this does limit the player's performance a little.
Walking, cycling and swimming are healthy exercise which can help keep the patient's blood pressure down, if he does them sensibly, without putting himself under undue pressure.
Sports like bowls and snooker are excellent practice for standing balance, if the patient has recovered good balance and selective movements in his leg.
Equally, there are many games which can be played from a wheelchair, if the patient cannot stand, but his sitting balance is good.
There are many opportunities for disabled people to join in team or individual sports, and within some sports people with handicaps can participate with able-bodied people.
Two organizations which advise on sports for the disabled are the British Sports Association for the Disabled, and ‘Les Autres Sports’.
If he wants to take up sports again, the patient must be guided by his physiotherapist, so that he does not attempt exercises which are too hard, which would inevitably increase his spasticity.
His sports activities have to be carefully chosen and graded.
He should be encouraged to think of sport as healthy exercise done for fun, rather than for competition.
If he was involved in competitive sports before, aiming from the start at tournaments and championships places a lot of pressure on the patient, and it may lead to bitter frustration when he cannot reach his previous standards as quickly as he might hope.
Returning to competitions should be a long-term aim, provided the physiotherapist and the carers feel it is realistic.
It is important for the patient to be aware of the limitations  likely to be caused by his spasticity.
If he does sport independently, he has to concentrate on maintaining control over any associated reactions which could knock him off balance as he makes a physical effort.
If he has sports coaching or attends exercise classes where the instructor is not aware of the particular problems of spasticity, he should take care not to try any movement he is not capable of.
It is also true that exercise classes arranged specifically for hemiplegic patients are sometimes organized by people who are not aware of the nature of spasticity, so the carer and the patient must scrutinize any proposed activities before the patient tries to join in.
Going out with the carer
The patient should get out of the house at intervals, if at all possible.
If the access to your front door is difficult, perhaps with steps, you may need to have a ramp made, if the patient is still in a wheelchair.
If the patient cannot walk at all, you should have a special wheelchair for outdoor use; while an indoor wheelchair has large back wheels and relatively thin tyres, the outdoor version may have four small wheels with thick fat tyres, which should be kept pumped up to the correct pressure.
If the patient can walk, but your steps have no handrails, you should try to have secure rails fitted, preferably on both sides of the steps.
The social services and your community occupational therapist can advise and help you in this.
Otherwise, it may be easier for the patient to come out of the back door and walk or be wheeled out through a side gate, if it is all on a level.
For the first few trips outside, you should plan only to go a short way, so that the patient can get used to the distracting sights and sounds.
Even if he is walking well, you may need to take a wheelchair in case he gets tired, or you can plan the outing so that you walk short distances between benches in the street or local park.
If you do take a wheelchair out with you, never forget the support cushion for the seat, and make sure the footplates are always in place.
The patient should sit correctly at all times: he should not have to hold his hemiplegic leg up with his unaffected leg, as this is tiring for him, and creates the danger that his outstretched legs might  easily be jarred or hit.
You should teach the patient safety measures when going outside with the wheelchair: for instance, he must keep his hemiplegic arm safely on his lap, and he must always check that both feet are on the footplates before you set off.
You should always double-check that the patient is sitting up safely, and keep watch in case he changes position as you go along.
When you push the chair down kerbs or ramps it is safest to go down backwards, as the patient might fall out of the chair if he is facing forwards as the chair tilts downwards.
The patient may also need to practise being a passenger in the car: getting in and out may be difficult, so you may need help from the occupational therapist or physiotherapist to find the easiest way of managing.
Some cars can be fitted with a passenger seat which swings outwards at the touch of a lever to face the door, so that the patient does not have to twist to enter or leave the car.
If the patient still needs to use a wheelchair, you will need one which is fully portable and the right size to fit into the back of the car.
When you lift the wheelchair into the car, you should fold it so that it is sideways in front of you, with the handles to one side and clipped up; then lean over the chair to grasp the cross-bar under the seat; lift the chair up, step back with one leg, lever the wheelchair towards you, over your thighs, and then slide it into the boot, wheels first.
If your car seems totally unsuitable for transporting the patient, you may have to exchange it for a different model.
A three-door hatchback car may be more practical for the patient, because the front doors tend to be slightly bigger than in four-door cars, and there is plenty of room for the wheelchair in the back.
An estate car provides even more luggage space.
If the car is low to the ground, it is likely to be extremely difficult for the patient to get in and out, so you might try using a car in which you can raise and lower the suspension.
If you are taking the patient out frequently, and rely on the car as his necessary transport, you should qualify for a disabled permit to park in restricted areas.
You may also qualify for a Mobility Allowance to help pay transport costs such as the Road Tax, or other grants such as an interest-free loan towards the purchase of a new car.
Your social worker should be able to advise you about these.
Once the patient is used to getting out of the house, he can go out for social occasions.
These may be organized by local groups such as stroke clubs, so that patients and their carers get together for outings or entertainments and shows.
However, the patient may also like to go out to the cinema, theatre, concert hall, pub or restaurant in the normal way.
Facilities for wheelchairs in public places are variable in Britain.
The Disability Information Service Surrey (DISS) holds computerized information on facilities for disabled people throughout Britain.
You should telephone before venturing to a place for the first time, but it is probably wise also to go by yourself and have a look, to check whether you can manoeuvre the patient in and out of the building easily, and whether the toilet facilities are suitable.
If the patient can walk, you should make sure the access into the building is not too difficult.
If you go to a restaurant, it is worth telephoning beforehand  to inform the staff that you are coming with a disabled person, so that you can reserve a table at a convenient distance from the front door or the toilet.
If the restaurant has flimsy chairs or hard benches, you can ask for an upright chair with cushions and arms to be provided, so that the patient can sit in the correct position.
You can also ask for the patient's meal to be cut up in the kitchen ready to eat, although this is something that can be done when you order the meal.
The patient may feel embarrassed at first when he goes to places he does not know, but he will be made welcome if the restaurateur knows what to expect.
A few successful trips to restaurants will not only be enjoyable for the patient, but they will boost his confidence and help him to realize that he can take part in normal social life.
Going out independently
When the patient can walk safely, he may wish to go out alone, and you should encourage him to do this.
In order to be safe outside, the patient must be aware of his limitations.
Therefore, it is a good idea to ‘practise’ going out, so that the patient can find out how he copes.
You can plan the first outing as a short walk down the road and back: the patient walks ahead, while you follow at some distance, in case he gets into difficulties.
There are some predictable problems which might arise when the patient first goes out alone.
He may tend to walk slightly sideways towards his hemiplegic side, and therefore bump into people or objects, which can be embarrassing.
He is likely to be easily distracted by the sights and sounds around him, and this might make him stray into the road or trip and fall.
He may go too far for his capabilities and get too tired to walk back safely.
He may be frightened by crossing a road, by fast cars, by crowds or sudden noises, so that his spasticity increases; he may panic and freeze in these situations, so that he cannot move at all.
The patient has to experience walking outside in order to overcome these problems, so he might do several ‘practice walks’ before venturing out without you following.
It may help him to take his wheelchair out at first: pushing it may help him to balance more easily.
The wheelchair provides the ideal type of support, as the patient cannot lean on it as  he would on a walking frame, because the chair would tip up.
It may also be useful in case the patient becomes unexpectedly tired, and needs to sit down for a moment.
When he is walking outside, the patient has to be specially careful to lift his feet off the ground so that he does not trip.
He also has to learn not to watch his feet, because bending his head downwards will probably increase his spasticity, and make him more likely to fall.
Looking down carries the further risk of making him unaware of other dangers around him.
When he can walk outside confidently, the patient can plan to increase the distance he walks, or to go on the same route, but taking less time to complete his walk.
This type of training helps the patient to walk further without losing his ability to walk correctly.
Crossing roads is always frightening at first, and the patient may have to relearn how to use pelican and zebra crossings.
If he feels very unsafe, because the traffic is moving fast, he may prefer to ask a passer-by to help him across the road.
If he does, he should ask the helper simply to make sure that the cars stop for long enough to allow him to cross: the helper should not take the patient's arm and hurry him across.
If the patient cannot speak well enough to explain all this, he can carry a card explaining his problem, and what kind of help he needs.
Motorists should always remember that someone who is having difficulty crossing a road quickly may be panic-stricken by revving engines or impatient horn-sounding.
This is especially true for older people.
Drivers and riders should always stop still at pedestrian crossings, and not pull forwards until the person is safely on the pavement.
The patient with perceptual problems who cannot judge distances should not be allowed to go out alone into situations where he will have to cross roads.
In order to help the patient learn to judge distances, you can practise crossing roads with him, pointing out how far away any oncoming traffic is, and telling the patient whether there is time to cross the road, and, if so, how much time you have to get across.
Some patients, especially after a head injury, may become disorientated while they are out, so that they cannot find their way home.
If this is likely to happen, the patient should certainly wear a ‘dog-tag’ or carry an identity card with his name and address on it.
He might also wear an electronic tag  on his wrist, so that the carer can always pinpoint where he is.
When the patient is out alone, he may need to use taxis or public transport to get around.
He has to practise using buses and trains, perhaps going first with the carer, then with the carer following, and finally on his own.
Taxis are obviously easier to use, but if the patient cannot speak properly, he may need to use clearly written cards to explain to the taxi driver why he cannot speak, and where he wants to go.
Even if the patient cannot read properly, he may, with practice, be able to identify the appropriate card in a card index system, if the cards are very clearly presented, and perhaps colour coded as well.
Planning each outing is good training for the patient: if he has difficulties with programming, you might go over the plan with him each time before he goes out, and ask him to say out loud exactly where he is going and how he is going to get there.
For greater mobility, the patient might learn to ride a tricycle or a bicycle with stabilizers, so that he can travel further and carry loads.
A motorized scooter or buggy provides more mobility with less effort.
In all cases, the patient should learn how to control the vehicle with absolute confidence before venturing out in it, and he must obey the rules for road safety.
If the general practitioner pronounces the patient fit enough, he may be able to start driving a car again, although he may need to retake a driving test if he has not been able to drive for several months.
His car may need to be specially adapted, for instance if he cannot use his hemiplegic hand to operate controls or the hand brake.
The Banstead Place Mobility Centre has full facilities for training disabled drivers and for assessing what alterations their vehicles might need.
When the patient restarts driving, he may gain confidence by having lessons through one of the major driving schools, such as the British School of Motoring (BSM), which have specialist instructors for people with physical handicaps who are learning or relearning driving.
He can ask the school, the major motoring associations, his social worker or his general practitioner whether he needs to attend one of the recognized centres for handicapped drivers.
In any case, he has to notify the Drivers' Medical Branch of the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Centre if he has any kind of  disability when he resumes driving.
On no account should he be allowed simply to get in his car and drive around before he has been pronounced competent to drive, and has organized his driving licence and insurance accordingly, if for no other reason than that his insurance would be invalid if he did have an accident.
If the patient cannot walk, he may still be able to go out independently in a wheelchair.
For short outings, he may be able to operate an ordinary wheelchair, but driving these one-handed requires enormous effort, so an electrically operated wheelchair is preferable.
This at least gives him the freedom to go out for air and to do errands such as visiting local shops or going to the hairdresser.
It also gives him practice in planning outings and taking some responsibility for his own actions.
If relearning to walk safely takes several months, going out in a wheelchair alone can prevent the patient from feeling too housebound and frustratingly dependent on other people for his mobility.
Getting back to work
In Britain most people who are in full-time contracted employment receive full pay for six months, followed by half pay for a further six months, if they have a serious illness or accident which prevents them from working.
In the early stages of recovery following a stroke or head injury, it may seem impossible that the patient will ever be able to work again.
If the patient is already close to retirement age, and prefers to take early retirement if sufficient benefits are available, then it may be sensible to take this option.
However, if the patient is younger, and would wish to return to work, you should not make any hasty decisions about the patient's long-term prospects of returning to employment.
Remember that recovery is a slow but continuing process, and that there is no doubt that the patient will improve, provided he does not have any major setbacks.
The patient who was self-employed with his own business before his illness may have much greater financial difficulties than the employed worker.
He may also face the prospect of long-term hardship, if he cannot return to work at all.
This is one of the reasons why anyone who works for himself should make sure that he is fully covered by insurance providing for loss of earnings during a long-term illness, as well as insurance against the possibility that he might not be able to work again after such an illness.
If money is short while the patient is ill, there is great pressure on the carer and the family, and often it may mean that the patient is unable to receive the specialist rehabilitation treatment which is increasingly difficult to obtain under the National Health Service.
If poverty is a long-term prospect, it is likely also to affect the morale of the patient and his carers.
However, the patient may be able to return to his own job, when he is sufficiently recovered.
On the other hand, he may no longer be capable of doing what he did before, although he could still cope with other kinds of work.
A welder, for instance, may not recover sufficient balance or hand control to go back to welding, but he may be able to work light machinery.
In many cases companies might find alternative work for their employees, or even create new jobs for them within their capabilities.
British companies are beginning to  be more aware of the needs of their disabled employees, and the potential benefits of continuing their employment.
However, it has to be said that the British lag behind other European countries, particularly Germany, in this respect.
If the patient has problems with his employer, he may need to apply for professional help through his social worker.
The Disablement Resettlement Officer, a government official, has the brief of settling disabled people into full, useful employment.
If he cannot persuade a former employer to take the patient back, he may be able to find suitable alternative work through his knowledge of other companies.
He can often find suitable work for the previously self-employed patient.
For the young patient with a stroke or head injury, work may be found in specialized government sheltered workshops, where disabled workers have facilities and staff tailored for them.
The largest company employing disabled people in Britain is Remploy, which is run as a profit-making business, but equipped with machinery specially made for use by the disabled, and supervisors who are trained to help the disabled staff cope.
When the patient returns to work, he will probably have to work part-time at first, as he gets used to the discipline and pressures of working again.
A woman who has recovered from a stroke or head injury may decide she would like to work for the first time, as part of the challenge of overcoming her illness.
She too should find suitable work, and start with just a few hours, perhaps one or two days a week, before building up towards full-time work if she wishes.
The carer should always be positive if the patient does have the ability and opportunity to return to work.
It may involve you in extra duties and worries at first: for instance , you may have to take the patient to his workplace by car, and collect him again, and the timing may not be convenient for you.
You may have to organize different kinds of help in the home, if the patient has been doing tasks and housework.
You may worry if the patient gets very tired or anxious about his situation.
You may need to help the patient at work, especially if he is returning to his own business.
However, if you and he can overcome the early period and settle back into regular work routines, it is a vital part of his full recovery.
Caring for the carer
In the early stages of recovery following a stroke or head injury, you, as carer, have to be nurse, therapist, friend and companion to the patient.
It can be an isolating experience.
The patient's condition might change only slowly, as he can go on recovering over several years.
Your ultimate aim is to help the patient back towards normal life, if possible, so you should try to help him keep in touch with friends and acquaintances.
This is another reason for you to maintain your own social life, or to build up a new network of friends, if necessary.
If you have a wide range of social activities, the patient may be able to join in some of them with you, even if he cannot resume his former independent interests.
You may find that people offer you conflicting advice and opinions about your duties and the patient's condition.
You should try to build up a network of people you trust, based on your professional support team who know the patient's case in detail.
Further support can be gained from joining an organization such as the Chest, Heart and Stroke Association  (CHSA): among their other activities, they support a national network of local clubs where carers and stroke victims can meet to share their experiences and enjoy socializing together.
If there is no local group at a convenient distance from you, you could ask your therapist to put you in touch with other carers and patients, so that you can form your own support group, even on a very informal basis.
When you look after someone who is even only partly disabled, there is always a risk that you become so engrossed in his problems and needs that you forget to look after yourself.
This can exhaust you, both physically and emotionally, which undermines your efforts to help the patient, so that you are both likely to end up suffering more.
Any significant stroke or head injury which happens to a person within a marriage, friendship or family situation alters your possible future plans as well as your day-to-day life.
While the patient is suffering the frustrations and discomforts of being ill, you are likely to be worried about the long-term prospects of his recovery, how long it might take, or indeed whether he will recover at all.
You may find it difficult and depressing to envisage the future with this uncertainty, especially if you have, for example, made plans for your mutual life right up to retirement stage.
Shorter-term planning is inevitably affected.
A young couple may have to shelve plans to have a baby, at least for the moment.
You may have worries about whether the patient can return to work, or how you can plan future holidays for yourself or the family.
On a day-to-day level, you may find yourself with responsibilities you did not have previously, such as organizing the household accounts and paying the bills.
Perhaps the patient always made the key decisions in the home, or you may have taken those decisions together, whereas you might now find yourself having to make the decisions for the patient, yourself and other members of the family.
If you are looking after ageing relatives, or if you have young children, looking after an adult disabled dependant as well can add a heavy burden to an already crowded day.
If the family finances have been badly affected by the patient's stroke, you may have to go to work as well as making provision for caring for the patient.
If he was the sole breadwinner, you may have to go out to  work for the first time.
You must not underestimate how much practical, physical and emotional strain this situation creates for you.
You may have time to prepare for it while the patient is in hospital, but the reality is still likely to hit you hard when he comes home.
If you can, you should try to work out in advance what the patient needs for his practical comfort; how you are going to arrange his living quarters and his access to the bathroom and toilet; and how he is going to occupy his time.
At the same time, you should try to think ahead about your financial situation.
You must take every opportunity to discuss the practical problems with your doctor and the social workers, occupational therapists and physiotherapists, to take advantage of their experience of dealing with similar situations, and to let them know if there are any particular difficulties you think you might be facing.
Emotional aspects may be harder to cope with, as they are harder to share.
If you were close to the patient before his stroke, and were used to showing him affection by touching and kissing him, and if you still feel the same warmth for him despite his illness, you can help his morale greatly by continuing to behave as before, even if he seems not to respond.
If you had a sexual relationship before, there is no reason not to continue, if the patient shows interest.
The sensation of the genital organs is normally unaffected by a stroke, for instance, and having intercourse is not dangerous for the patient's blood pressure.
You can talk to specially trained counsellors about any sexual problems: SPOD (Sexual Problems of the Disabled) is an organization offering advice on the emotional and physical aspects of resuming (or starting) a close relationship with a physically handicapped person.
However, if you feel repulsed by the physical changes caused by the patient's illness, you should still try to behave gently and affectionately towards him.
If you feel you cannot do this, or if your relationship before the stroke or head injury was hostile anyway, you should discuss this problem with the doctor before undertaking the responsibility of looking after the patient.
If you feel you have to make decisions such as leaving the patient or getting a divorce, you should discuss the prospects within the whole family as well so that communally you can come to the best solution for all concerned.
You may find it helpful to contact RELATE, an organization of trained marriage guidance counsellors with a special interest in the problems of the disabled.
They have many local branches, so you can check in your local telephone directory whether there is one near you.
The patient's attitude to you and other people around him can change dramatically because of his stroke or head injury.
He may suffer a severe personality change from which he might not recover.
His perceptual difficulties may make it impossible for him to recognize you and his immediate family or your relationship with him.
In some cases the patient recovers from this state, and relates to his family as before.
In other cases he remains cut off, although he may then recover well enough physically and mentally to start a new life, perhaps even setting up home with someone else and taking on a new job.
If the patient has changed a lot in his attitudes, you should bide your time at first, if you can, in case he does recover to become as before.
Head-injured patients, especially, can be aggressive in the first stages of their recovery.
They may also show inappropriate behaviour, which should be treated by a behaviour modification programme worked out by the therapist and the psychologist.
The carer is vital for reinforcing the programme: when the patient behaves correctly, he is rewarded with praise, whereas his bad behaviour is ‘punished’ by being ignored.
The carer has to refuse to respond to shouting or aggressiveness or any other kind of unacceptable behaviour, to prevent it from becoming a source of attention for the patient.
The carer has to issue the command ‘No!’ if the patient behaves badly.
If this fails, the carer should leave the room, or take the patient into another room where he will be alone for a time.
Emotional lability, in which the patient responds with exaggerated emotions, for instance bursting into tears without any real reason, is often a problem for stroke and head-injured patients.
An even more embarrassing version of this is reversed emotional lability, in which the patient responds to a situation with the opposite emotion from normal.
For instance, he might burst out laughing on being told of a tragedy, or cry at joyful news.
This is usually not  because of any lack of understanding of what has been said, but simply because he has lost the normal control of his emotions.
The problem usually gets better gradually, but the patient may be left with a residual tendency to respond oddly in certain situations.
This usually lasts longest in patients with speech problems.
It can sometimes be difficult to determine whether the patient is ill-tempered and perhaps foulmouthed towards you because of the immediate effects of his illness and the frustration he feels, especially if he cannot speak normally, or whether it is part of a personality change which is going to last indefinitely.
Some patients with severe behaviour problems, especially as the result of head injury, may have to be admitted to special treatment units for behaviour modification therapy.
If the situation lasts for a long time with no sign of improvement, you should discuss the future very carefully with the doctor or hospital specialist, rather than trying to cope in a hopeless situation which cannot resolve itself.
Even if you are coping well enough overall, you may sometimes be provoked into anger against the patient, either because of his behaviour, or because of your mutual frustration at the situation his illness has created.
You may even feel like hitting him.
If you reach this stage, you will probably feel guilty about it, which adds to your own discomfort.
What you should recognize is that it is a warning sign that you have been doing too much, and that you need to get away from the patient, at least for short periods in the day, if not for some days or weeks.
The patient may be too dependent on you and too demanding.
He may use a type of emotional blackmail against you and other people close to him, by constantly demanding attention but refusing to allow other people to perform necessary chores for him, on the grounds that ‘you do it better’.
Rather like a spoilt child, he can force you into feeling that his survival depends on your constant presence and care.
You should try to look at the situation objectively and philosophically, and, if you can, keep a sense of humour.
In fact, it is better for both of you if the patient is looked after by several people rather than yourself alone, even if you are not at work and could be with him all day every day.
The social services may be able to provide help to reduce your  burden.
Although the patient may feel more comfortable with you because of your familiarity, you can delegate everyday tasks such as taking the patient to the toilet, or helping him to eat, provided that you make sure the helpers understand how to treat the patient gently, and how to help him position himself correctly in order to control his spasticity.
You can teach other members of your family how to take care of the patient in this basic way, or professional ‘babysitters’ who can come in to spend a few hours with the patient so that you can get away.
If they learn how to handle the patient with the same care that you have learned from the physiotherapists, occupational therapists and nurses, the patient will be perfectly safe.
If necessary, you can ask the professionals to teach your helpers, to be absolutely sure they learn how to handle the patient accurately.
You need to pace yourself, so that you do not get carried away by the never-ending tasks that could fill your day with frenetic activity.
It is all too easy to sacrifice every waking moment to the duties of running the house and looking after the physical needs of the patient and other members of the family.
Even then, you might still finish each day feeling guilty about the many chores which inevitably remain undone.
In order to maintain a proper balance in your life, you must be prepared to allocate some time to yourself each day.
If you cannot organize people to come into your home to look after the patient, he may be able to attend a local Day Centre run by the Local Authority.
In your free time, you might go to the hairdresser or beautician regularly, work out in a gymnasium, do a sport, go swimming, go out to films, concerts, shows or restaurants, visit friends, take up a new hobby, take evening classes, or join a social club.
If you feel specially stressed, you could go to relaxation classes, or ask your doctor to arrange counselling for you.
You might prefer simply to sit alone in a separate room and listen to music or read a book.
Time spent on yourself in this way will also benefit the patient: if you keep yourself physically fit and mentally alert, you will be better able to offer him worthwhile emotional support, and you will find your situation less draining.
A longer holiday period away from each other is also valuable if you are looking after the patient full-time.
You  may be able to arrange respite care in a recognized rehabilitation unit, where the patient will receive rehabilitation treatment as well as being looked after.
Treatment may also be available in a Young Chronic Sick Unit or, for the over-65s, in a Geriatric Unit in a hospital.
Otherwise, the patient might spend some time in a private nursing home, possibly paid for by the State.
Usually the patient is taken into one of these units for a specified period such as a fortnight, but the time allocated might be indefinite in an emergency, for instance if the carer is ill.
The patient is admitted to one of these units in order to allow the carer the freedom to go away on holiday, as it is well recognized that carers need a proper break at intervals, so you should not feel guilty about taking advantage of the opportunity.
Your reward, as carer, is knowing that you have done your best to make the patient comfortable and happy, and to help him through the recovery process from his illness, however long it takes.
You should always remember that you can only look after the patient successfully if you also look after yourself.
Checklist for the carer
Always remember that controlling the patient's spasticity is a 24-hour-a-day job, and you have to help the patient to achieve this.
Learn the correct methods of handling and positioning the patient to help him control his spasticity.
Do not let the patient smoke, if possible.
Check that he takes any medicines prescribed for him correctly.
Get the repeat prescriptions in time so that he is never left without.
Make sure the patient has a good diet.
Make sure he drinks enough fluids, but not too much tea or coffee.
Learn the easiest and most efficient ways of handling the patient, so that you can help him move about without hurting yourself or wasting energy.
Let the patient act for himself when he can, provided that he performs the movements correctly and without increasing his spasticity.
Be patient if he moves or speaks slowly: give him time and encourage him to express himself.
Never ask or expect the patient to perform actions that his physiotherapist considers are too hard for him.
Encourage the patient to do the types of activities recommended for him, and try to prevent him from sitting idly, or gazing at the television.
Stimulate him to activity, but don't push him too hard.
Don't undermine the patient's confidence by accusing him of not trying when he cannot fulfil a task.
Try to avoid shouting at him or upsetting him emotionally.
Set aside time to sit with the patient to relax and talk.
Encourage him to socialize with family and friends.
Let him rest if he becomes tired or frustrated.
Let him get used to being looked after by other people, but make sure they understand how he should sit and move.
Once he is safe, let him spend some time alone.
Take him out of the house as soon as possible, and encourage him to go out alone when he is safe to do so.
Spare yourself: allow yourself some time away from the patient each day, if possible, and organize longer breaks for holidays at intervals.
Use the expertise and facilities of your local authorities and voluntary services for practical help, advice and social activities.
Think positively, and encourage the patient to be optimistic.
Encourage the patient to go back to work, at least part-time, if this is possible.
If you experience difficulties with any aspect of the patient's care, ask the relevant specialist from your rehabilitation team what you should do.
THE REHABILITATION TEAM.
THE PELVIC LIFT.
THE PATIENT HOLD THE CORRECT POSITION DURING WASHING.
THE PATIENT WITH PERCEPTUAL PROBLEMS MAY NEED CONSTANT GUIDANCE WHEN WASHING OR SHAVING, TO REMIND HIM THE AFFECTED HALF OF HIS FACE EXISTS.
DRINKING FROM A CUP.
THE PATIENT RESTING, SITTING IN A CHAIR.
LIFTING THE WHEELCHAIR INTO THE CAR: BEND YOUR KNEES TO LIFT THE WHEELCHAIR UP, THEN SLIDE IT INTO THE CAR BOOT.
A MOTORISED BUGGY PROVIDES INDEPENDENT MOBILITY.
BACK TO WORK HAIRDRESSING AFTER A STROKE: STANDING ALL DAY AND USING BOTH HANDS WITH PRECISION.
Physiotherapy Treatment
Physiotherapy treatment is vital for the patient's progress and physical recovery.
Skilled treatment for the hemiplegic patient is very specialized, and there is no viable substitute for it.
Everyone involved in caring for the patient has to learn some of the techniques of handling and positioning him, in order to provide continuity.
However, these elements of care should not be confused with the treatment methods themselves, and there are clear delineations between the various professional practitioners.
While good co-operation from the nursing and medical practitioners speeds up the rehabilitation process, only the chartered or fully qualified physiotherapist with specialist training in the treatment of hemiplegic patients is equipped to provide a total programme of rehabilitation, based on an individual assessment of the patient's limitations and potential.
Although the ultimate goal of rehabilitation is for the patient to be able to walk and function independently, not all patients can be expected to recover fully.
However, virtually all patients can benefit from rehabilitation and learn to do at least a little for themselves, which alleviates some of the burden on the carer.
There is no time limit on the patient's capacity for physical recovery, although an experienced physiotherapist usually knows within the first few weeks of starting treatment how quick or slow a hemiplegic patient's physical recovery is likely to be.
Many patients go on improving their physical abilities for years after their stroke or head injury, if they continue to have skilled rehabilitation guidance.
The primary aim of modern physiotherapy treatment is to re-educate normal movement.
In order to do this, the physiotherapist has to understand what normal movement is.
The principle underlying this treatment method is the certainty that the central nervous system is capable of recovering function despite being damaged: any lesion in the  brain, such as a blood clot, only interferes with one part of the brain, while other parts of the brain, plus the spinal cord, are left undamaged.
The capacity of the central nervous system to recover function is technically called neuroplasticity .
However, recovery does not usually happen by itself.
The brain needs information which provides the experience of controlled movements, in order to respond with the ability to produce the same movement control.
The information required is proprioceptive: it has to provide a kind of internal sensation or perception in order to activate the correct response.
The physiotherapist has to analyse what kind of proprioceptive information the patient needs in order to relearn how to move normally, and this is different for every patient.
Then she has to work out how to deliver this information to the patient in the most effective way.
This is how the physiotherapist directs the recovery of the central nervous system.
The patient's affected side should work again with proper co-ordination within the whole body system.
A brain lesion or injury usually causes some measure of spasticity, which is an interference factor preventing normal movement.
The central nervous system adapts towards the spasticity, allowing it to dominate all the patient's movements, if it is not carefully controlled.
The patient may try to use his ‘good’ side to compensate for the affected side of his body which he cannot move at will.
But this overworks the undamaged parts, resulting in increased spasticity.
Spasticity can also cause pain anywhere in the hemiplegic side: the pain may occur when associated reactions happen, for instance when the patient is asleep, or when he is moving without proper control.
The physiotherapist has to counteract the effect of spasticity and its concomitant associated reactions through skilful handling, controlling and positioning of the patient's body parts.
By creating favourable situations and environments in this way, the physiotherapist makes it possible for the patient to move actively and specifically without effort.
When the patient's spasticity is controlled, he will no longer experience any pain.
This kind of treatment is always dynamic, never passive, and the patient is totally actively involved in it.
If you watch the treatment sessions, you may sometimes think that the  patient is not taking any active role in initiating movements, whereas the physiotherapist seems to be doing the movements for him.
This is a technique designed to teach the patient how to follow a movement, adapt to a change of posture and cope with different situations without producing spasticity through making too much effort.
He is in fact participating by following the physiotherapist's instructions and relaxing into the required movements.
He has to be able to reduce the tension (technically tonus ) in his muscles before he can make controlled movements.
The background to active movement is the patient's control of his posture, and his ability to balance upright against the effect of gravity.
Once he has this control, he can progress to making selective movements .
These are more complex isolated actions performed by only one part of the body, such as bending a knee, bringing one hand to the mouth, or using the fingers individually as in pointing, or picking up objects.
the physiotherapist's role
The physiotherapist is motivator and facilitator, inspiring and encouraging the patient to do what he can at every stage.
Each stage involves goals for the patient: while they have to be progressive, they should always be attainable so that the patient remains well motivated, and avoids depression.
The physiotherapist has to have enthusiasm for the task she and the patient are undertaking.
Although she sets the goals for him to achieve, in fact success depends on the mutual effort of the physiotherapist and the patient.
If the physiotherapist sets the correct goals, they will be achieved, but she has to recognize that each patient reacts differently to rehabilitation, depending on a variety of factors.
Some patients begin to recover their ability to balance and to use their limbs fully within two to three weeks, whereas others may take months or years to reach their full potential, especially if they have perceptual problems and severe spasticity.
The physiotherapist has to be encouraging at all times, but this stops short of praising the patient when he has not achieved a required movement.
Appropriate feedback is vital in the patient's relearning process, so he receives praise only when  it is deserved: if he fails in any way, the physiotherapist remains encouraging and positive about it, but shows him how and why he went wrong, or she may simply leave that task for the moment and return to it later, when the patient can concentrate and get it right.
One important goal for the patient is walking, but he has to be ready before he tries.
If he cannot balance and control his movements, it is no use for him to try to practise ‘walking’ with the help of therapists or nurses.
It would amount to no more than the patient being dragged around with maximum support, using his unaffected side to try to keep up, and holding on to his helpers for dear life.
He would inevitably be frightened by the experience, because he would know that he cannot yet expect to walk safely.
As a learning experience, early walking without movement control does not contribute any kind of useful information to the patient's brain, so it is not a relevant exercise for the patient to build his movement progression on.
This is why the patient is no longer given a tripod or quadrupod and taught to walk by using his unaffected side and leaning heavily on his support.
This ‘compensation’ method of walking may seem to get the patient on his feet more quickly than the modern method, but it leaves him overusing his unaffected side, therefore he is constantly increasing and fighting against his spasticity.
This is not only likely to be painful for him, but it undermines his stability, so that he can only walk slowly, with constant concentration, and he is much more likely to fall over if he has to change direction or if he is distracted.
Planning the treatment programme
The sequence of modern physiotherapy treatment normally follows a pattern: the patient has to recover his ability to balance first and foremost; then he has to recover his ability to transfer his weight from side to side; standing balance is the next stage, accompanied by the ability to sit down from standing up, and to stand up from sitting; selective movements using the affected arm and leg come next; then he learns to make steps, followed by walking; function in the upper limb (arm) and controlling it in order to make selective  movements against gravity happens at a late stage; the final rehabilitation task is to regain functional, detailed movements in the affected hand and foot.
This sequence is not a rigid stereotyped order.
Many of the different parts of the rehabilitation programme are done in parallel, both within single treatment sessions and in the overall programme.
The rehabilitation programme is planned around each of these aspects in relation to the patient's specific needs.
In order to set out an appropriate treatment plan, the physiotherapist has to understand normal movement, and how brain damage interferes with it.
She has to know how to deliver appropriate information to the patient, to overcome the neurological deficit which is the result of the brain damage, and to help him react in the way she wishes by producing carefully controlled movements.
Through her handling techniques she has to be able to control and inhibit the abnormal tonus or tension in the patient's affected muscles.
There are certain areas of the body which can initiate movement patterns, if they are held and moved in certain ways, taking into account the effect of gravity on them.
These are called key points of control .
The main key points are the patient's head, shoulder girdle, spine and pelvis.
By handling the key points with different speeds and rhythms, the physiotherapist can change the patient's body reactions, especially in relation to automatic spastic responses.
Therefore, she often guides the patient by placing her hand on his chest, or both hands behind his shoulders or on his hip bones below his waist.
The physiotherapist must be able to assess the patient's needs, both overall and from session to session, in order to define an effective rehabilitation programme and to set him realistic goals.
It is also important that the physiotherapist should explain each part of the rehabilitation process to you the carer, teach you how you can help, and guide both you and the patient through each stage (and any setbacks).
what if treatment does not seem to be working?
If you feel the patient is making no progress at all, you should ask the physiotherapist if this is so, and why.
In the normal way, there should be some change for the better in the patient's condition, so if weeks pass and the patient seems static, you need to know why.
The physiotherapist may be able to point out changes which you have not noticed, but which show the patient has progressed adequately.
Otherwise, there may be good reasons why he has not advanced, perhaps because he has been ill or over-tired.
However, if it seems that the physiotherapist is not treating the patient effectively, you should ask whether, perhaps, he might be assessed and treated by a more senior physiotherapist, if he is attending a hospital department.
If none is available, it may be possible to arrange for a specialist physiotherapist to visit the hospital department to see the patient and suggest appropriate treatment lines to the physiotherapist there.
Otherwise, the patient might be transferred to a specialist Stroke Unit or have a private consultation with a specialist physiotherapist.
If you can afford private treatment, or you have medical insurance cover to pay for it, you may prefer to take on a full treatment programme with the specialist physiotherapist.
Otherwise, your hospital physiotherapist may be willing to see the specialist with you, for guidance which she can then put into practice herself.
If the patient has been seeing a physiotherapist privately, it still may be necessary to involve a second, specialist physiotherapist, if the patient stops progressing.
If you do change practitioners, it is vital for good communication to be maintained between the physiotherapists involved, and with the patient's family doctor.
The patient may not like the idea of changing, having got used to a particular physiotherapist, but if the change is made sensitively, the benefit of seeing a specialist will soon be evident, and he will adjust to the new situation.
Organizing the treatment sessions
When a specialist physiotherapist organizes a treatment session, every movement done by both patient and therapist has a purpose.
Out-patient treatment may be done in a hospital, clinic, private practice or at the patient's home.
In every case the physiotherapist tries to make sure the environment is right for the patient.
The room has to be warm.
Many patients find it difficult to concentrate in a noisy room, and are easily distracted, so the physiotherapist tries to reduce unnecessary noise.
If the treatment sessions take place in a large gymnasium, for instance, the physiotherapist will screen off a section of the space for greater privacy, and so that the patient is not distracted by seeing what is going on around him.
The session will be timed not to coincide with noisy exercise classes to music.
If the sessions are done in the home, family or friends will be asked to be reasonably quiet, and not to turn the radio or television up, or have noisy conversations.
The physiotherapist needs at least one plinth (treatment couch), which, at about 40 inches (about 1 metre), is wider than a manipulation couch, which is usually about 24 inches (60cm) wide.
In many specialist centres two plinths may be available in the treatment room for treating a single patient.
The treatment plinths are usually electrically operated, so that the physiotherapist can adjust the height easily while still supporting the patient, when necessary.
For home treatments, the physiotherapist may carry a folding board to place over the patient's bed for a firm surface.
Portable treatment couches are usually too narrow and lightweight for treating a hemiplegic patient.
When the patient is having long-term treatment at home, it is often worthwhile for him to invest in his own treatment plinth, if he can afford it, and if there is space for it.
The physiotherapist usually has several pillows available to support the patient, plus a wedge cushion, which is a foam support measuring about 2 feet (60 cm) long, 2½ feet (76 cm) wide, 6 inches (15 cm) deep at the top, tapering down lengthwise to form the wedge shape.
There may also be gymnastic balls of various sizes: these are like beach balls, but are made of extra strong plastic.
The physiotherapist may need the help of a second  therapist, especially for the head-injured patient or the patient who has had a severe stroke.
In the home she may ask the carer to perform the tasks of the assistant therapist.
The patient with perceptual problems may be treated by the physiotherapist and the occupational therapist simultaneously, to help his overall awareness.
The patient is expected to be suitably dressed for treatment: men usually wear comfortable, loose-fitting shorts, with adequate underpants underneath, while females wear shorts plus a camisole top, or a sleeveless vest with a comfortable brassière underneath it.
Patients are usually barefoot, unless there is some special reason why they need shoes.
A thin exercise mat is usually used for treatments where the foot touches the floor, to provide a secure and cushioned surface.
The mat prevents the hemiplegic foot from being over-stimulated by contact with a cold floor.
Treatment techniques
Every patient is treated according to his specific needs, and every physiotherapist treats her patients individually, so there is enormous variation in the ways different physiotherapists treat different patients.
You will not necessarily see your physiotherapist doing exactly the treatment techniques described below: she may use some of these techniques plus others she has devised herself, or she may use a completely different method.
It is important for you to understand what the physiotherapist does, so that you can follow any instructions the physiotherapist gives you for remedial work at home, and can appreciate the patient's progress.
You should never be afraid to ask the physiotherapist to explain what she is doing.
The treatment techniques we describe are not a treatment programme as such: they are examples of what you might see the patient doing, with explanations of what the physiotherapist is trying to achieve, and how the patient should respond.
Treatments with the patient sitting
When the patient sits on the side of the plinth for treatment, the height of the plinth is selected according to the work to be done.
If the patient has poor balance, he sits well supported on the plinth, with his feet flat on the floor.
He may start sitting like this in preparation for moving into the supine lying position (on his back) or, more rarely, into the prone lying position on his stomach.
Most of the work will concentrate on reducing his associated reactions, if these are strong and the patient's balance is poor.
If he is to practise standing up, the plinth height may be raised, so that he is perched on the edge with his legs fairly straight: this reduces the support under his seat, but makes it easier for him to stand.
The physiotherapist may sit or stand in front of the patient, or may kneel on the plinth behind him, according to the type of guidance she intends to give him.
With the patient fully supported, the physiotherapist may help him to do controlled movements with his pelvis: she places her hands on his hip bones, just below his waist and guides the pelvis in forward and backward movements.
The patient may then progress to moving forwards and backwards using his seat muscles.
This is part of learning to balance  successfully with the trunk well controlled, and without allowing associated reactions to distort the shoulder girdle or leg.
As a preparation for standing, the physiotherapist may place a large gymnastic ball on a table or second plinth in front of the patient.
The patient places his arms on top of the ball, and is guided in a forward-backward rocking movement, using the ball as a kind of roller.
This helps the patient to control his trunk movements symmetrically: he is guided into extending his trunk, stretching upwards, as he goes forwards, and then flexing (bending) the trunk as he comes backwards.
These movements are similar to the normal rotations of the pelvis when you stand up, so the patient is practising them in order not to jerk upwards awkwardly or sideways as he stands, as this would inevitably knock him off balance.
With the plinth raised, and the patient sitting forwards on the side of it, he may practise similar controlled movements for the pelvis, or the physiotherapist might mobilize the patient's shoulder girdle to reduce any spasticity.
The physiotherapist may also use this high sitting position to desensitize the patient's foot, especially if he has a strong positive supporting reaction (see p. 13).
If the patient has a positive supporting reaction, the physiotherapist places his  foot carefully towards the floor, grading the pressure it receives in order to reduce the automatic reaction of pushing down as soon as it makes contact.
In some patients there is a flexor reaction which makes the patient draw his foot away from the floor on contact.
In this case, the physiotherapist gives the sole of the foot gently graded stretching as it is placed to the floor.
When the patient can stand up successfully, without incurring any associated reactions in the arm, trunk or leg, he may practise standing on the hemiplegic leg with the normal leg off the floor, resting on a stool.
The physiotherapist controls the patient's balance reactions by maintaining control of the patient's hip and knee.
Advanced work for the hemiplegic arm may also be done with the patient sitting down.
The physiotherapist usually starts by mobilizing the shoulder girdle, moving it passively in all directions, to make it perfectly pliable.
She may also mobilize the hand, if it is tense and clenched.
Then the patient's arms are placed on a table in front of him with the hands flat and fingers spread open.
Holding the arms and  hands still, the patient moves his seat sideways a little, then backwards and forwards, so that he is practising using his trunk without provoking any unwanted activity in his affected arm.
The exercise is made harder by placing the arms wider apart on the table, and then by asking the patient to move the unaffected arm while keeping the hemiplegic hand still and relaxed in its position.
The patient might roll a small ball slowly round the table with his normal arm, watching his hemiplegic arm in order to control any signs of unwanted reactions in it.
In another movement pattern for arm and trunk control, the patient sits with his weight on his arms and moves his body, with the physiotherapist's guidance, so that his arms have to react to help his balance.
The later stages of arm control involve lifting the hemiplegic arm and controlling it in space while bending and straightening the elbow.
These movements are done with both arms together at first, then alternately.
When possible, the patient uses the hemiplegic hand to grasp objects or grip.
This may be linked to functional activities, like lifting a cup to the mouth.
At every stage, the physiotherapist checks that there is no spastic reaction arising from the movements being done: if necessary, she supports the shoulder girdle or elbow to help the desired movements to be made with full control.
Treatments with the patient supine
One of the reasons for placing the patient lying on his back is to practise the movements needed for getting in and out of bed.
He starts by sitting on the side of the plinth, and the physiotherapist may use mobilizing techniques to reduce any spasticity in the patient's trunk or arm.
The patient then turns backwards and lifts the normal leg onto the plinth while the physiotherapist guides the hemiplegic leg as it too is lifted up.
If the patient's spasticity increases as he goes through this sequence, the task is too difficult.
He can only be  placed in the lying position for effective treatment purposes when he can balance well enough to be taken through this pattern of movements without increasing his spasticity.
When the patient lies on his back on the plinth, his head, shoulders and trunk are supported on a wedge cushion.
If he were to lie flat, associated reactions might be stimulated by the pressure of the couch against the back of his head and upper back.
He might also press back against the plinth when he tried to move his seat or legs.
The wedge cushion has the further advantage of allowing the patient to see his legs without effort.
If the physiotherapist wants to support the head and shoulder girdle even more, as a further barrier against spastic reactions, she may also place pillows under the hemiplegic side.
Once lying down, the patient may practise the movements needed to move into lying on his side and to get up out of bed: for these, he needs to be able to move his shoulder girdle, trunk and pelvis in isolation from each other.
He may  practise selective pelvic movements, in which he isolates the actions of tilting the pelvis backwards, towards and sideways.
He may practise lifting the pelvis in order to turn sideways, which is an essential pattern for turning over in bed.
To help the patient gain control of his leg movements, the physiotherapist places the hemiplegic leg in certain positions, and asks the patient to maintain the position, checking that he can do so without an increase in spasticity.
He might practise controlled movements involving bending his knee, or bending and straightening his arm.
More complicated patterns for the arm involve holding it straight and turned outwards at certain angles, where the physiotherapist has placed the arm, and then learning to move the arm between two positions.
The advantage of supine lying is that it allows the patient to work more easily, because the effect of gravity is reduced, and the patient feels safe because he is fully supported, so he can concentrate on perfect control of the selective movements in his limbs: this is an important stage in the preparation towards making steps, and ultimately to walking.
Treatments with the patient standing
The patient's first experiences of standing up, in the early stages after his stroke or head injury, aim to help his body regain the tonus needed to hold itself up against gravity (pp.9, 115).
In the following stages, treatment in standing concentrates on restoring his proper balance mechanisms, so that he can make better quality selective movements using his trunk, leg and arm.
The patient may have his arms and upper body supported on the treatment plinth as he stands facing it, while the physiotherapist sits on a second plinth behind him.
The patient's plinth is high enough to support his arms comfortably at an angle of 90° to his body, while the second plinth is lower, so that the physiotherapist's feet are level with the patient's ankles, and her knees are roughly at the same height as his.
The patient's arms are straight, and spread slightly apart.
The physiotherapist, without shoes, places her feet over the patient's ankles to stabilize his feet, while her knees hold the outer sides of his lower legs, and her chest supports his seat.
From this position, the patient comes backwards towards the physiotherapist, without moving his feet or arms, while she controls the movement of his pelvis.
He practises tilting his pelvis in the correct pattern as he moves forwards and backwards, and he straightens and relaxes his knees as instructed and guided.
This is a pattern to prepare for the movement of sitting down and standing up.
To help the patient transfer his weight from foot to foot, a side-to-side movement of the pelvis is performed, with the patient well stabilized by the plinth he is facing.
When he has good balance standing up, the forward plinth may be lowered, and a gymnastic ball placed on it.
The patient places both arms over the ball and rolls it forwards while extending  his seat backwards, and then selectively tilts his pelvis forwards and backwards, keeping his arms well in position over the gymnastic ball.
As the patient stands up, he practises bringing the ball back towards him by bending his elbows with good control.
For greater support, the plinth in front of the patient may be lowered so that he can bend over it and rest his torso on it, with his head turned to his normal side, and his arms relaxed by his sides.
The physiotherapist then guides the patient in moving his hip, knee and foot selectively.
This position helps prevent the excessive trunk activity which might happen when the patient is standing erect, and it helps the patient to work from the very lowest part of the back, at the pelvis.
Most of the work done with the patient standing up aims to make his selective movements of better quality as preparation for making steps.
Apart from isolating the movements of pelvic tilting, knee bending and straightening, and foot mobility, the patient is taught to transfer his weight onto one  leg, in order to be able to move the other leg away safely.
The patient may stand on the hemiplegic leg, while the therapist moves his other foot into different positions, or asks him to move the foot.
His first steps are taken by standing on the hemiplegic leg and moving the normal leg sideways.
For this, the physiotherapist usually sits in front of the patient on a stool, in order to stabilize his pelvis and prevent him from folding in the middle.
She helps the patient transfer his weight onto his hemiplegic leg, and then release his normal leg so that it can move freely sideways.
Then the movement might be practised in the other direction, and the physiotherapist guides the hemiplegic hip and knee to move sideways with perfect control.
The patient may then practise walking sideways in similar fashion round the plinth.
Once the physiotherapist is confident that the patient has gained full control of his hemiplegic leg while making sideways steps, she then guides him through a sequence of forward steps, starting with the normal leg, transferring the weight onto that leg to move the hemiplegic leg, and maintaining good control of the pelvis during the movement.
Walking is taught through this detailed control of all the different aspects involved in making single steps.
The physiotherapist provides careful feedback, helping the patient to learn how much to lift each leg, where to place the leg and the foot, and when to make each movement.
If possible, the patient learns to walk without any support at all: if he learns to lean on a stick, tripod or quadrupod, his body balance is likely to become totally distorted, and he cannot learn the necessary body control to walk safely.
However, if the patient has learned to make steps safely, but still tends to overuse his normal side, the physiotherapist may supply him with a high stick to help him to balance better.
The stick is measured to the patient's normal hand held with the elbow bent to 90°.
This is totally different to the measurement for a walking stick to help an injured hip or ankle, and on no account should the stick be shortened.
The patient uses the high stick purely to help his balance, not to lean on.
He may be taught to hold it with the crook of the handle turned away from him, and his thumb over the top of the handle, so that he does not grip the stick too hard.
At a very advanced stage of rehabilitation the patient  practises controlling the hip swinging phase of walking, standing without support and maintaining his balance.
He may also do complex movements for his arm, such as holding a long  pole (like a broom handle) and moving it around and away from his body.
The physiotherapist may hold the other end of the stick and direct the patient's movements, guiding the patient's arm and shoulder girdle so that they move in the correct sequence.
With two long poles, the patient can practise synchronized arm movements.
Another advanced pattern is for the physiotherapist to hold a cloth stretched between her hands: the patient holds the cloth in his hemiplegic hand and follows the movements as the physiotherapist takes the cloth in different directions, guiding the patient's arm around, forwards and backwards.
Treatments with the patient kneeling
When the patient has very good balance standing up, some movements may be practised kneeling down.
These are usually related to functional activities.
For instance, if the patient likes gardening, it is useful to be able to kneel to reach the ground, and he also has to be able to get up safely.
Kneeling down on a soft surface, the patient may practise trunk movements using the gymnastic ball to support his arms and shoulders, while the physiotherapist controls the balance of his pelvis.
He can move forwards, rolling the ball forwards, and then come back almost to sit on his heels.
When he has mastered this type of movement kneeling, more advanced work might involve sitting on his heels and then shifting his weight towards his hemiplegic side to practise controlling his arm and the side of his trunk while some of his bodyweight is transmitted from side to side.
Kneeling can also be used to help the patient get up from the floor; most patients are taught to do this once they can walk, in case they have a fall.
If the patient can get into the kneeling position and then balance on one knee while bringing the other leg forward, so that he can lever himself onto a chair, he will feel confident that he can always get up, even if he is alone at home.
Treatments with the patient lying prone
Very few patients are treated in the prone lying position (on the stomach).
The patient would have to have an almost normal trunk, without any associated reactions or increased spasticity as he was placed in the prone position on the plinth.
He would be able to walk, and any work would be aiming to improve the quality of his walking, for instance if he had a slight limp.
The prone position is not used for elderly patients or those with severe perceptual problems who might become severely disorientated, with increased flexor spasticity.
To get into position, the patient can start by sitting on the side of the plinth, going down gently to lie on his back, and then turning over.
If he has had a very good recovery, he may get onto the plinth at a low height and kneel on all fours, and then be guided downwards to lie on his stomach.
Lying prone, the patient's shoulder blade can be drawn well forward, so that he can practise selective movements with his arm, particularly turning (rotation) in different directions.
He can also move his hip and knee into the extended position, with the physiotherapist carefully guiding his leg or controlling his foot.
A very advanced movement is for the patient to lift the hemiplegic leg backwards and take it behind him, in order to roll over onto his back.
One of the practical tasks which may be taught to the patient in prone lying is how to get up from the floor.
The patient may be placed on his stomach on the floor, and taught how to come up onto all fours, and then to kneel up, so that he can walk on his knees to a chair.
Alternatively, the patient might be taught how to turn over onto his side and then onto his back, and shuffle towards the chair on his bottom.
‘Homework’
The patient is not encouraged to practise walking at home until he can walk fairly normally, and without any increased spasticity in his arm.
Walking without full control of the spasticity would only make it more difficult for the patient to gain that control in the longer term.
On no account should the patient be allowed or encouraged to get himself around by dragging his foot and leaning on the furniture.
Therefore, you will be asked to continue using the wheelchair to move  the patient around until the physiotherapist is sure that he has reached the point where he can walk correctly and safely.
On the other hand, when the patient can stand up, he should use every opportunity to practise standing with proper balance.
For instance, when he is wheeled to the toilet, he stands up in order to get into the wheelchair, and again to move onto the toilet, instead of being lifted or transferred.
You have to make sure every time that the patient takes his weight as evenly as possible on both legs, with his trunk and arms in the right position.
The physiotherapist may show you how to practise standing and balancing, with the patient supporting his arms at the correct height, perhaps on a chest of drawers.
He may do the movements he has practised during physiotherapy sessions standing up, but supporting his whole trunk by leaning forwards over a cabinet or cupboard of suitable height.
Once he has learned to take steps, he can practise these at home, perhaps using the kitchen fitted surfaces for support as he moves sideways in each direction.
When he can make steps in the forward direction, you may be shown how he can use the lowest stair to practise stepping downwards while taking his weight through his hemiplegic leg and then through the normal leg.
If he uses the banisters to do this, there should be rails on both sides of the stairs, to encourage symmetry of movement.
If the patient's foot tends to twist as he stands on it, he may be given a special ankle support to help hold it comfortably in position.
As soon as the patient becomes familiar with the feelings he experiences during his physiotherapy treatment, he can practise pelvic movements at home, perhaps lying on the floor if he does not have his own plinth or a firm surface on his bed.
He may use a gymnastics ball, resting on a table, to practise trunk movements, as he has done during his treatment sessions.
You may also be shown how to guide his arm movements, if he has made a good enough recovery to practise these correctly.
‘Homework’ for the stroke or head-injured patient is not a question of ‘doing exercises’.
The aim is to reinforce the correct patterns of movement which the patient has experienced under the guidance of the physiotherapist.
All the movements have to be done absolutely correctly, otherwise  they make the patient's problems worse rather than better.
The correct movements are an extension of the positioning which you have already been using to maintain the patient in the right body posture.
The whole programme is a 24-hour-a-day rehabilitation concept, so it is vital that you understand what you and the patient should and should not be doing.
If in doubt, ask your physiotherapist.
BALANCE PRACTICE: THE PHYSIOTHERAPIST MOVES THE PATIENT AWAY FROM THE UPRIGHT POSITION, AND THE PATIENT RETURNS TO THE UPRIGHT USING TRUNK AND PELVIS.
THE PATIENT IS BROUGHT INTO THE STANDING POSITION, WITH THE PHYSIOTHERAPIST CONTROLLING THE PATIENT'S HEAD AND PELVIS.
THE PHYSIOTHERAPIST CONTROLS THE PATIENT'S PELVIS DURING ROTATION MOVEMENTS TO LOOSEN THE TRUNK AND SHOULDER GIRDLE.
GUIDING MOVEMENT FOR THE NORMAL ARM, TO PREVENT THE PATIENT FROM OVERUSING IT.
(THE PATIENT FOLLOWS THE MOVEMENT, WITHOUT PUSHING OR PULLING THROUGH HIS ARM.)
DESENSITIZING THE POSITIVE SUPPORTING ACTION; THE PHYSIOTHERAPIST CONCENTRATES ON LENGTHENING OF THE SOLE OF THE FOOT AND ACHILLES TENDON.
MOBILIZING THE SHOULDER GIRDLE TO RELEASE SPASTICITY.
MOBILIZING THE HEMIPLEGIC SHOULDER AND ARM.
SELECTIVE, GRADE ACTIVITY FOR THE PELVIS: THE PHYSIOTHERAPIST HELPS THE PATIENT TO TILT THE PELVIS, WHILE THE PATIENT FOLLOWS THE MOVEMENTS.
WORKING FOR CONTROL OF THE HEMIPLEGIC LEG AND THE PELVIS.
CONTROLLING THE PELVIS AND LEG, WITH THE PATIENT'S TRUNK SUPPORTED ON THE COUCH.
BALANCING ON THE HEMIPLEGIC LEG, PRACTISING WEIGHT TRANSFERENCE.
WORKING FOR SELECTIVE MOVEMENT IN THE KNEE, IN PREPARATION FOR WALKING.
ADVANCED BALANCE WORK, WEIGHT-BEARING ON THE HEMIPLEGIC LEG AND MOVING THE OTHER ACROSS THE BODY.
MAKING SIDEWAYS STEPS, STANDING ON THE HEMIPLEGIC LEG.
Case Studies
Dawn
Dawn was an attractive, lively girl who thoroughly enjoyed her work as a bank clerk, and whose social life centred on her favourite sports, hockey and tennis.
One night, at the age of twenty-six, she was the victim of an appalling accident, when she was passenger in a sports car which ran out of control and somersaulted, landing upside down.
The driver was killed instantly.
Dawn's life was saved because two trained paramedics, travelling in the opposite direction in their private ambulance, noticed the sports car travelling at high speed, then realized it had crashed, and turned round to offer help at the scene.
The paramedics resuscitated Dawn, who had stopped breathing, and they later received the Queen's Award for their prompt action.
Dawn was taken immediately to the nearest hospital and put on a life-support machine in the Intensive Care Unit.
Dawn's parents learned of the accident some three hours later, went immediately to the hospital, and spent much of the rest of the night waiting for information.
They were not encouraged to hope: it was likely that Dawn would die, but if she survived, the doctors could not be optimistic about her future condition.
Dawn was in a deep coma, and was not responding to painful stimuli, although her pupils were not fixed.
She had no obvious injuries apart from a broken shoulder blade.
Initially, the doctors were not sure whether Dawn had suffered brain damage, so they arranged for Dawn to be transferred, still on the life-support machine, to a nearby hospital which could perform a CAT scan.
Dawn's parents had to give their written permission for the transfer, which added to their anxieties about the situation.
The CAT scan apparently showed no damage to the brain, so it was something of a shock to the doctors as well as to Dawn's parents when she finally came round from the coma after about a week with a left hemiplegia.
Her parents were  told that Dawn had evidently suffered a stroke, and would probably recover to remain confined to a wheelchair.
The better news was that her intelligence was unimpaired.
Dawn's parents never understood at what stage Dawn had suffered the brain damage.
They found this confusing, and, to a certain extent, it became a cause of resentment.
Dawn had little physiotherapy treatment while she was in hospital.
Five months after the accident, her mother brought her to a specialist treatment centre in London.
Her balance was very poor; she could not stand up on her own, because strong associated reactions would pull her left side over; her left Achilles tendon was extremely tight; her left shoulder was very painful; her arm was pulled into a bent position, with the hand tightly closed in a fist (flexor spasm); she could hardly sit up straight because of the severe spastic muscle pull on the left side of her body; her mother had to push Dawn everywhere in her wheelchair, and give her total nursing support.
Physiotherapy treatment was aimed at reducing Dawn's pain, lessening her spasticity, and trying to recover selective control of the movements in her left foot, ankle and knee.
Dawn made good progress, and was soon able to stand up.
Some eight months after the accident, she could balance.
She was then able to walk with the help of a tall walking stick, and gradually improved to the stage of walking without a stick.
This was a tremendous achievement, as she recovered little selective movement in her leg, and none in her left arm.
Dawn spent fifteen months attending the centre.
A physiotherapist from Dawn's area accompanied her to the centre on occasion to observe the specialist care she received.
Dawn was then able to continue the same line of treatment with the physiotherapist locally.
During the long period of her recovery, Dawn understandably had bouts of severe depression, so at one stage she was referred to a clinical psychologist for counselling.
The psychologist worked on the assumption that Dawn should prepare herself for a life of dependency on others, so he did not try to motivate her towards self-sufficiency.
He referred Dawn to a neurosurgeon, who promised that he could operate to cure the spasticity which kept causing her muscles to tense up involuntarily.
Dawn and her family  were ecstatic.
Fortunately, however, they knew enough about Dawn's condition to question the neurosurgeon closely when he described how Dawn would be fully conscious throughout the operation so that he could identify the damaged brain cells which were causing the spasticity, in order to destroy them.
The surgeon was forced to admit that this operation would leave Dawn paralysed and wheelchair-bound for the rest of her life.
The family was intensely upset, knowing that Dawn was potentially capable of physical independence, even though her spasticity made it so difficult for her to move normally.
They all felt let down, and bitterly disappointed.
Most of Dawn's treatment was done privately, because she could not obtain adequate long-term treatment through the National Health Service.
She had to make a claim against the insurers, because her friend had not had full cover for his sports car.
The case dragged on, and the insurers made an offer of settlement.
Dawn was advised that she might obtain more money if she went to court, but she felt that this would be too hard for her emotionally, even though she had no memory of the accident or indeed of the friend who had died.
Therefore, three and a half years after the accident, Dawn accepted the amount offered, which was sufficient to pay back the £70,000 her father had spent on her treatment and a specially adapted car, and to provide her with an ongoing income to cover her living expenses.
The car was vital to Dawn's independence.
It was adapted to be driven with one hand, and Dawn had to retake her driving test.
It gave her the confidence to go out alone, even though walking was still difficult.
Two years after the accident, Dawn was able to go shopping by car, walking such distances as were necessary.
Another vital boost to Dawn's confidence and motivation was her introduction to the British ‘Les Autres Sports’, an organization which encouraged sports competitions for people with disabilities.
Four years after her accident Dawn took up the javelin, shot and discus.
Her only problem was her coach's lack of understanding of the problem of spasticity.
Like many people, he believed controlling the spasticity was simply a matter of trying harder.
He tried to persuade Dawn to ‘take a run at her throws’, despite her protestations that simply standing up and walking required constant mental effort on her part.
She  finally convinced him by trying to run into a throw, inevitably falling over and spraining her ankle.
From then on he began to understand how difficult it is to control spastic muscles.
Five years after the accident, Dawn was making the best of her new life.
She was training for the Paralympics.
She was totally independent, being able to cook, wash, look after herself and her home, drive and walk where she needed to go, even though she could not use her left arm at all, and she had to work constantly to control the spasticity in the left side of her body.
She decided not to go back to the bank, because they would have had to create a special job for her.
She felt this would make her ‘singled out’, so she preferred to take on similar clerical work doing the accounts for her father's farming business.
Her family remained totally supportive, and Dawn was beginning to enjoy a full social life again.
Through her sport, she met her fiancé.
They moved into a second floor flat, so Dawn now had to run her own home and travel to work each day.
Away from the slightly protected environment of her parents' home, Dawn's return to independent life was complete.
Stanley
Stanley, an American writer resident in Britain for over twelve years, had a sudden stroke while out eating dinner with friends.
He collapsed and became unconscious, so he was taken by ambulance to hospital, where he was admitted as an emergency.
The doctors diagnosed that he had probably had a left-sided embolic stroke, and decided that he did not need surgery, so he was treated on the medical ward, where he remained for about seven months.
He was forty years old.
It seemed likely that Stanley's stroke was connected with his lifestyle.
He was very sociable, and enjoyed eating, drinking and smoking.
He had often drunk to excess in alcoholic ‘binges’.
He had had a successful academic career at Cambridge University, where he had taken successive degrees leading up to his PhD.
He had subsequently been very successful as a writer.
At the time of his stroke, he had just finished a major biography, which had received critical acclaim, and he was researching for his next book.
The stroke had a devastating effect on Stanley's life.
It had produced a massive oxygen lack in the left side of the brain, leaving Stanley with a right-sided hemiplegia, complete loss of speech and understanding of other people's words, and a total inability to read or write.
His speech and comprehension problems made his initial rehabilitation treatment difficult.
When he was discharged from the hospital, he continued to attend for rehabilitation treatment as an out-patient.
However, his physiotherapist decided that he would progress better in a specialist unit, so he was transferred to the care of a specialist stroke treatment centre in London.
When he started attending the centre, he was still unable to speak, read or write, but his understanding of language was returning.
He could understand commands if they were spoken directly and in short sentences.
He could walk with the help of a nurse, but very slowly and with great difficulty, as his balance was extremely poor.
Improving his balance was the priority for the first phase of his treatment, combined with establishing stability in his pelvis, re-educating selective movements in his leg, relieving his shoulder pain, and encouraging active movements in his right arm.
He could not be left alone, as he was not safe.
He needed help for all activities, such as getting in and out of bed or the bath.
As he had lived alone before his stroke, he had to hire 24-hour nursing help, and a nurse accompanied him whenever he went out, which was initially only to attend for rehabilitation care.
Stanley also had to cope with epilepsy, a fairly common complication following a stroke.
His fits, which happened mainly in the evening or at night, would leave him disorientated and make his balance poor again.
His nursing care was gradually reduced as Stanley became more independent, but he continued to have a nurse in attendance overnight, when he was most likely to suffer the epileptic fits.
As Stanley continued to have problems travelling around, largely because of his speech difficulties, his family (in the United States) bought him a treatment plinth so that he could have physiotherapy care at home.
They had control of all Stanley's finances, as he obviously could not manage them himself.
For one year he had intensive treatment, with the physiotherapist and speech therapist attending his home  three times a week.
The physiotherapist showed all the nurses involved the handling methods for promoting Stanley's independent movement and for reducing the spasticity in his arm.
Because of this continuity of care, Stanley learned to co-operate with all his carers, and his independence gradually increased.
To help him communicate with people outside his own environment, a card system was devised by the physiotherapist, speech therapist and Stanley himself: a series of cards carried messages covering the various situations he would normally be in, with the explanation on the reverse side, ‘My name is Stanley, and I am unable to communicate with you because I have had a stroke.’
About two years after his stroke, Stanley had achieved virtually full independence.
With his inherent love of life, he started meeting people socially again, although he abstained from alcohol and cigarettes.
His card message system gave him the freedom to go out alone and hail a taxi, showing the driver the appropriate card for the place he wanted to visit.
He was even able to take his dog, his constant companion, to the local park in a panier on his three-wheeled cycle.
His family gave him control of his own finances again, so that he had to resume making budgetary decisions in his everyday life, such as choosing between a meal at Claridges or a physiotherapy session.
Stanley's physical independence was achieved because he was young and motivated.
He did not regain any ability to use his right arm, but he had minimal spasticity in it, and no pain.
He managed to communicate to a certain extent through gestures and facial expressions, and he could put together short sentences.
When his physical rehabilitation could be reduced to a maintenance level of about one session per fortnight, he started to attend the City University where the City Dysphasic Group organized special programmes in communication skills for adults who had suffered head injuries or strokes.
He also had a computer at home with simple tailor-made programmes designed to help him find and match words.
The one single disappointment to Stanley during his recovery was his inability to read.
He wanted to read books and the letters his many friends sent him.
Some of this frustration was alleviated by listening: he used the Talking  Books service, through which tapes are delivered to and collected from the home, and his friends would talk to him at length on the telephone.
When he wanted to make a phone call, he overcame the problem of looking up names and numbers by using a push-button telephone with a number memory.
Stanley had many friends, many long-standing, and some only recently met.
Even after his stroke, he still had a charismatic presence, and people valued his company.
He had a very strong character, and this helped him to live his life to the full, despite his disabilities.
He died suddenly of another massive stroke three and a half years after his original illness.
The crowd of mourners at his funeral bore witness to the affection and respect Stanley had earned through his life and work.
Rose
At the age of sixty-one, Rose had a massive cerebral haemorrhage.
The illness was sudden: Rose had generally been very fit and healthy throughout her life, apart from a tendency to faint in warm, crowded rooms.
Her husband Sid would recognize the warning signs when she turned pale and became anxious, and he would take her out of the room before she passed out.
Before her illness, Rose was a very sociable person, enjoying a full life with her husband Sid, who had retired two years previously.
They lived in Central London.
As a Jewish family, they lived a structured, close-knit life.
Rose used to get up very early, at 5.30 a.m., in order to finish the household cleaning and ironing before her husband woke up.
Before retirement, Rose and Sid had worked together very successfully in business, running hotels and gaming clubs.
Rose was also a skilful card player, and for several years she was world champion at poker.
She retired before her husband, but continued to run her household according to her strict routine, while enjoying more of her own social life.
In the mornings, for instance, after finishing the household chores she might go shopping, and then have lunch with friends.
She and Sid also travelled a lot, and were generally very content with their lifestyle.
On the day she was taken ill, Rose had a severe headache, which became so bad that she called her doctor, who asked a neurologist to visit her immediately at home.
The neurologist diagnosed a possible brain haemorrhage, and had Rose admitted to a specialist hospital in London.
She was taken by car, and walked into the hospital.
She was kept on bed-rest, and an angiogram was taken which showed that there was blood seeping into the brain from aneurysms which Rose had in fact probably been born with, but which had not caused any problems previously.
After a few days the surgeons opened her brain (craniotomy) from the right side, and clipped the aneurysms.
Rose's family was told that the operation was a matter of life-and-death, so they gave the surgeons permission, even though they were also warned that the operation could result in further bleeding and disability.
Rose was not told this, for fear of destroying her morale.
Unfortunately, during the operation, Rose did suffer further distress and bleeding into the brain, and was left with a very severe left hemiplegia.
Afterwards, she felt very much let down by the family's decision, saying she would have preferred to die rather than live in such a disabled condition.
Because she was physically worse after the operation than before it, Rose was convinced that the doctors had made a mistake, and for a long time she wanted to sue them.
After the operation, Rose remained in the hospital for four months.
She was in a coma at first, and then she suffered complications because her blood pressure became unstable.
She showed severe potential spasticity, so the physiotherapists took great care to prevent her from being twisted into deformity.
She also developed thalamic pain syndrome, a special complication in stroke when the patient has suffered really severe brain trauma.
The syndrome causes bizarre responses to any stimulus to the hemiplegic side, so Rose might feel very cold in very hot weather, for instance, or might perceive the lightest touch as extreme pain.
She also suffered badly from perceptual problems, losing her normal awareness of her own body and of the people and objects around her.
She was terrified that she might fall, and so used  to fight off anyone who tried to move her, even when she was sitting down.
Rose was unable to do much when she was discharged from hospital after four months, but she assumed she would recover all of a sudden, because her illness had come on so suddenly.
She was transferred from home to a private rehabilitation centre, but she was not happy there because she had little privacy, and her family could not travel to see her every day.
She was expected to join in class work, but her pain and spasticity increased because of the physical efforts she was making, and because of her stress.
After several months, Rose was still unable to do much for herself, and her physical condition was in fact worse.
She was discharged from the rehabilitation centre, and returned to the original hospital for out-patient physiotherapy treatment.
The physiotherapists began the task of bringing Rose's spasticity under control, and, some fifteen months after the stroke, she was referred to a specialist stroke treatment centre not far from her home for intensive rehabilitation.
She was still badly disabled, confined to a wheelchair, and unable to control her spasticity at all, even when she was sitting or lying down.
Her left arm was locked to her side, because her shoulder was extremely painful.
She would scream if anyone came near her left arm, and she cried at night, begging for painkillers.
She was depressed and frustrated.
Her family was understandably distressed at her problems, especially because they had been told that the situation would gradually get better, and in fact it had got progressively worse.
A hydrocortisone injection failed to relieve Rose's shoulder pain, but with physiotherapy treatment the pain gradually receded, and it was possible to lever the arm gently away from her side.
Her trunk movements slowly became more controlled, so that Rose could begin to balance.
She learned to stand up from sitting in a chair, and within two years she was able to walk short distances, even outside, with very little help.
She was able to move safely from room to room in her house, and she could get up during the night to use her commode when necessary.
She managed to cook again, and her depression eased as she achieved a measure of independence and joined in the family's social activities  once more.
Throughout her recovery, Rose's husband and children supported and encouraged her efforts.
Sadly, Rose suffered a major setback one day, when she had a grand mal epileptic fit.
She had had a long treatment session, and then decided, possibly over-ambitiously, to visit her brother for tea, walking part of the way.
She had the fit in the car on the way home, and she had to be taken to hospital for treatment.
Following this, she retrogressed to the starting point of her rehabilitation, with severe spasticity in her arm and leg, and an obsessive fear of falling, even from her wheelchair.
She had occasional epileptic fits after the first, and they so frightened Rose and her family that everyone became over-protective of her.
Rose no longer wished to go out, nor could she tolerate being left on her own, so she became totally dependent on other people.
She stopped trying to move herself voluntarily, and relied on nurses to move her arm and leg for her, so that their task was to ensure that she was always correctly positioned in relation to her spasticity, after they had performed the normal nursing duties of bathing her and helping her on and off the commode.
When there was no nurse in attendance, for instance overnight, Sid would help Rose if she needed to move.
Rose's dependence led to a quick decline in her physical condition.
She became increasingly deformed as the spasticity twisted her body uncontrolledly.
Because she was not moving at all, she developed a weeping wound in her leg one day, and the circulation collapsed to the extent that she nearly had to have the leg amputated.
A special foot-pump used twelve hours a day saved the situation, and Rose subsequently had to use the pump for at least an hour a day to prevent a recurrence of the problem.
Most importantly, Rose had lost motivation to help herself and achieve progress, and no one around her could help restore it.
She was constantly depressed.
Physically, she was still capable of walking, but she would only walk with her physiotherapist, never with the nurses or her husband.
Her life was restricted to sitting in a chair, with her telephone, television, books and refreshments close to her right hand.
Her greatest frustration was being unable to run her family home, and she had lost confidence in her ability ever to do that again.
Her family remained supportive, despite the emotional load: they remained hopeful that Rose would one day regain the motivation to try to help herself, and therefore the people around her.
They knew that physically Rose could do much more than she was willing to try, so they kept searching for the key that would restore her will to live without being, unnecessarily, a burden on others.
Guy
Aged sixteen, Guy was riding a borrowed motorbike when he fell off and hit his head.
He was not wearing a crash helmet.
He was knocked unconscious immediately, so an ambulance was called.
His father was told about the accident, and he arrived at the scene quickly enough to accompany Guy to hospital in the ambulance.
At the hospital Guy's reflexes were all right, and he did not seem to have any brain damage, so the doctors told his father that he just had concussion.
They became worried later on when Guy's temperature went up dramatically, so he was transferred to a local major hospital.
A brain scan showed extensive bleeding around the brain, and the specialists concluded that Guy had been suffering from internal bleeding since his accident on the previous day.
He was treated as an emergency case, and given a tracheostomy.
He was put on a ventilator under sedation, and was given drugs through a drip to take down the bleeding and swelling in his brain.
Guy's parents asked if he would live, and were told that he would, but that the doctors would not know how much brain damage he might have suffered until he came out of the coma and regained consciousness.
After several days on the intensive care unit, Guy, still unconscious, was transferred back to the original hospital closer to his home.
Two and a half weeks after the accident, he began to regain consciousness.
When a nurse first saw him move around in his bed, she gave him a pencil and piece of paper: he wrote a note asking for his watch.
He was taken off the ventilator, although he still had the tracheostomy and a catheter for his urine.
He had a left hemiplegia, and was flaccid at first, although the flaccidity soon started changing to spasticity.
After a few weeks, he was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital, where he received physiotherapy treatment.
Although his left arm showed no sign of recovery, he began to stand and make steps, and his speech improved day by day.
After about eight weeks he was discharged home, although he was still confined to a wheelchair.
At this stage, Guy and his family felt abandoned by the medical profession.
He was given no follow-up treatment to continue the progress he had made in the rehabilitation hospital.
The neurosurgeon who had been in charge of Guy's case in the hospital would give them no help or advice, and neither did the doctors.
The family spent over six months trying to find out where Guy could receive specialist treatment.
The family doctor advised them to try a well-known rehabilitation unit, not realizing that it specialized in orthopaedic rather than neurological cases.
The treatment he received there made him increasingly spastic.
He joined in exercise classes to stretch and strengthen his muscles, and consequently became increasingly disabled.
His left Achilles tendon became badly shortened, making it difficult for him to put his foot to the floor, and he had a strong positive supporting reaction in his foot.
Therefore he walked very stiffly and awkwardly, swinging his leg out sideways in order to force it to go forwards.
He also had epilepsy, suffering three or four major fits per year.
After a spell at the rehabilitation centre, Guy's parents realized it was a mistake, and tried to have him transferred to a specialist stroke rehabilitation centre in London, even though this was a long way from home.
There was a long wait.
He was finally accepted for treatment about eighteen months after his accident.
Guy attended the specialist treatment centre at regular intervals, and he received treatment at home from a local physiotherapist who liaised with the specialists at the centre.
When he started treatment, the positive supporting reaction in his foot was difficult to desensitize because he had learned to walk using the abnormal reaction when he was in the orthopaedic rehabilitation centre.
His balance was still very poor.
He could not use his arm at all, by himself, and his shoulder was very painful.
He had very strong associated reactions in the arm whenever he moved at all.
In treatment, he was guided through intensive work for his shoulder girdle to release the spasticity.
The physiotherapists also worked to relieve his shoulder pain and realign the joint.
They helped him regain selective movements in his arm, and to control the grasp reflex in his hand.
Concentrated work was done for Guy's pelvis and foot, to improve his standing balance.
Then he worked on gaining better control of the movements in his left knee.
Guy gradually improved, until he had minimal problems with spasticity in his arm, so that his arm no longer interfered with normal activities such as dressing.
He still could not use the arm actively by himself, but it was no longer painful.
About four years after his accident, Guy learned to stand on his hemiplegic leg without his toes flexing automatically, so that he could hold his balance while he lifted his other leg off the floor.
His foot and leg movements improved immeasurably, and his walking gait became more normal as he learned to swing his leg in the right pattern.
Because of his accident, Guy missed the later stages of his school career.
However, he took evening classes in some subjects, and started part-time work about three and a half years after the accident.
He gradually took on full-time work in the same company, and gained three promotions within a year.
By the age of twenty-one he had a managerial post in charge of fifteen people.
Having been very active before the accident, Guy resumed sport as soon as he could.
He learned to play golf one-handed, although he could also use a two-handed grip sometimes if he controlled the left hand carefully with the right.
He played snooker one-handed, and swam.
He could ride a tricycle without difficulty, and was aiming to progress to a bicycle with stabilizers.
He could control his left arm on the handlebar when riding a push-bike, but he found he could not use an exercise bicycle because the effort involved automatically increased his spasticity beyond his control.
Apart from work and sport, Guy also led a full social life.
In returning to a full and active life, Guy was helped very greatly by his family.
Although his mother remained upset about the accident, and was naturally more protective of him, his father took the view that if Guy did not perceive himself as disabled, nobody else would, and this proved to be the  case.
Guy was always very close to his older sister, and after his accident she treated him consistently in the same way as she had before, which helped him to regain his normal social skills very quickly.
Always an easy-going person, Guy had no difficulty in making friends in any situation.
For his twenty-first birthday, five years after his accident, his parents threw a large party to celebrate his continuing enjoyment of life.
His only regret was that he could not drive, because of his epilepsy.
However, he took care to control it, monitoring his own drugs, and remained optimistic that this problem too would recede with time.
Esther
At the age of thirty-four, Esther was twenty-nine weeks pregnant with her fifth child when she developed toxaemia associated with high blood pressure.
She was admitted to hospital and the baby was induced because the doctors feared both Esther and the baby were in danger.
Although weak, the baby was basically healthy, but she had to be kept in intensive care for the first few weeks.
Esther was allowed home, although she had to return to the hospital every day to breast-feed the baby.
Both mother and baby appeared to be doing well, until, about six weeks after the birth, Esther suddenly felt ill.
She was visiting her mother before going on to the hospital to feed the baby.
Feeling that she could not move her left arm or leg, she sat down on the stairs.
She remained conscious, but became increasingly disorientated, losing all awareness of where she was or what was happening to her.
Her mother called Esther's husband over.
He asked Esther to stand up, but she could not, so he and Esther's father carried her onto the settee where she could rest.
The doctor came, and arranged for Esther to be re-admitted to the gynaecological ward of the hospital so that she could continue nursing the baby, if possible.
The doctor did not tell the family that Esther had probably had a stroke, for fear of alarming them.
In hospital Esther had tests including a CAT scan and an angiogram, and the doctors concluded that Esther had suffered a stroke from a thrombus.
They felt the probable  cause was the long period of high blood pressure she had experienced before and after the birth of her child.
Esther was treated with anti-coagulant drugs, and the doctors monitored her kidneys, which they feared might have been damaged as a complication of the toxaemia.
The effects of Esther's stroke were not obvious at first, which made the doctors wonder if she had suffered a second stroke when they found later that she had a very severe left hemiplegia.
Esther spent seven weeks in hospital, with her baby, although she needed help to look after her.
She had little memory of this period later on.
She was discharged from hospital and went home, but was confined to a wheelchair, as she could not walk.
She was unable to stand up, but could sit in a chair without losing her balance.
To help her recovery, she was referred to a specialist rehabilitation centre for younger patients.
She had intensive physiotherapy treatment every day on a one-to-one basis, and gradually recovered her balance, so that she could stand up and walk with some help.
Her spasticity was severe, but her rehabilitation helped her to control it.
She had no recovery in her arm at all.
After two months Esther was allowed home for weekend, so she was able to join in her normal family life, particularly celebrating the Sabbath.
The family were Orthodox Jews, so this was specially important for Esther.
She was determined to get better, and after seven months she was discharged from in-patient treatment at the rehabilitation unit.
She continued to attend the unit as an out-patient for more than six months, when the therapists felt they could not make any further progress.
The occupational therapist had asked Esther's husband to prepare a downstairs bathroom and toilet for Esther, as she thought she would never be able to go up and down stairs on her own.
She also thought Esther would need a hoist to get in and out of the bath.
Esther refused to think in these terms, and insisted that she would be able to manage in her home as it was.
She was very determined, and very soon after her return home she was managing the stairs, and later she was able to use the bath without a hoist.
As soon as she could, she resumed the normal pattern of her life, getting up at 7.30 a.m. to prepare breakfast for the older children and get them ready for school.
Then she would dress the youngest child.
At first, she only worked on the household duties, especially the cooking.
Once she had the confidence to walk outside, she would see the older children to the bus-stop and then perhaps go shopping or meet friends.
Esther's speech and understanding were not affected, but she was quite badly disabled.
Two years after the stroke, Esther still had very severe associated reactions in her left arm, which interfered with her activities: the arm would always be in her way and never where it was needed.
Her leg felt heavy and difficult to move.
She could walk, but had to hold onto things for support.
She was very afraid of taking weight through her left leg, and could only feel deep sensations on her left side, so that it was difficult for her to know where her arm and leg were in space.
She also had severe perceptual problems and found it hard to recognize the different parts of her body or to know where objects were in relation to herself.
Her left field of vision was impaired (technically hemianopia ), so that she had to turn her head and use her right eye in order to see anything even slightly to the left of her.
She sometimes felt depressed, and would ask her husband if he thought she would ever recover: he was always supportive.
He had been told from the start that recovery would happen, but it might take some years, so he felt their hopes were realistic.
Generally, Esther remained optimistic.
She felt she could still continue to improve, so she decided to have further specialist physiotherapy treatment privately, under her medical insurance scheme.
The treatment concentrated on reducing Esther's spasticity in her left side, and training her not to over-use her right side.
She did a lot of work in sitting at first, gaining the feeling of balancing onto her left side, and she was taught how to move her spine more normally.
As she was already walking, she did more work in standing than she otherwise would have, to promote the feeling of taking weight through her left leg while keeping her spasticity under control.
As she progressed, she began to learn how to correct her balance when she was displaced by the physiotherapist, so that her confidence in her balance on her left leg was increased.
She had regular treatment sessions for the next two years, and was still making progress.
Her left arm was now under control, staying loosely by her side as she used the other arm and  moved around.
She was even beginning to gain some active movement in it during the treatment sessions.
Her beautician noticed when her left hand began to stay relaxed while she manicured Esther's fingernails.
She could walk more normally, manage stairs and go out alone safely.
She ran her house as previously, looking after the five children and her husband.
She could go to the synagogue and to large shopping centres as before, without having to worry about coping with stairs or moving about in crowds.
Esther's biggest regret was the advice she received not to think of having any more children.
The doctors were adamant that the risk of a further stroke was too great to justify another pregnancy.
She felt her stroke was due to the fertility drugs she had taken before each pregnancy, rather than to the childbirth itself: for the fifth pregnancy she had received injections of the drugs for the first time.
However, Esther always remained positive in her outlook: she wanted to walk normally, as before, and to be able to use her left hand.
Above all, she wanted people not to think of her as disabled.
Her family treated her as before, and she was prepared to continue working hard at her rehabilitation so that she could feel normal again, and be accepted by other people as such.