

River versus Drain
I NEVER thought for one moment that my life would become bound up with rivers.
It all began when a woman threatened to tie herself to a willow tree.
I had just started working as a landscape architect for a water authority, and my duties were to involve planting trees around reservoirs and new office buildings.
I had never heard of river engineers until one morning a very harassed engineer rang to ask me to persuade the lady in question not to tie herself to the ancient pollard which he intended to fell.
Indeed, he asked me, as the authority's environmentalist, to suggest ways of calming the local community's very vocal outrage at what he was intending to do to their river.
The engineer explained his problem.
All he was attempting to do was to prevent the river from flooding these ungrateful people's houses.
For this, however, many trees would have to be removed, and the river would have to be deepened and straightened.
It would cease to be recognizable as the river which the local people enjoyed, but it would become a very efficient drain, so that their sitting-rooms would no longer be ruined periodically, and farmers with land adjacent to the river would be able to grow more and better crops to feed the very people who were complaining.
So the case was put: river versus drain.
This book is about that conflict of values, the efforts made in the last few years to come to terms with that conflict, and its implication for one of the major issues of our time — the reshaping of our farm policy, which, with the single aim of increased food production, has transformed the countryside over the last forty years in what is perhaps the greatest agricultural revolution since the settling of England began.
Seldom has the conflict over what a river means to different people been more dramatically highlighted than in the case of the river Stour at Flatford Mill.
Here John Constable painted The Haywain .
Reproduced in calendars, on birthday cards, and in coffee-table books, this painting has become almost a ritualized symbol of the reverence which English people have for their countryside.
I remember once dealing with a particularly brutal river scheme, and seeing hanging in the engineers' porta-cabin, which overlooked the now canalized river, a calendar showing The Haywain .
The connection was not made.
In 1984 the Anglian Water Authority applied for permission to carry out a land-drainage scheme on the Stour between Stratford St Mary and Flatford Mill, with the purpose of converting the riverside pasture to oil-seed rape.
Mr John Constable, the painter's great great grandson, protested in The Times : ‘Believe me, rape is what we're talking about.’
The water authority responded with its case: ‘We are up against a lot of pressure from landowners to do something about the flooding.’
A river is a symbol of changeless change.
Overnight, in a flash-flood, it will dramatically move its banks, depositing shoals and cutting new channels.
In recent decades, the Severn has been steadily undercutting the riverside churchyard at Newnham.
The skeletons of the village forefathers are regularly exposed and then claimed by the river, and now the church itself is threatened.
The local diocese has appealed to the water authority to do something about it; but something as elemental as the ever-moving Severn is beyond the resources of even the richest and most powerful water authority.
At Crowland in Lincolnshire stands a medieval bridge, stranded high and dry in the middle of the town.
The three streams which once ran beneath it have long since vanished, but, at the back of the town, the water still finds its way to the sea, as it has from the beginning of time.
William Wordsworth described the river Duddon as something which would always be recognized by succeeding generations:
I see what was, and is, and will abide
Still glides the stream and shall for ever glide.
Nowadays, however, we are capable of transforming rivers so that they become quite unrecognizable.
If, while waiting in the rush-hour queue at Sloane Square tube station, you chance to look up, you will see a large iron pipe.
It is, or was, the river Westbourne.
This is the ultimate in man's domination of a river, although many city rivers might just as well be piped.
The Rea in Birmingham and the Medlock in Manchester hurry down through their strait-jackets of steel and concrete, unnoticed by the passing crowds.
Wildlife of Rivers
The endurance of rivers, which is part of what makes them such a potent symbol in our culture, is also precisely the reason why they matter so much to ecologists and scientists.
In this country there is probably no river or wetland which is ‘natural’ in the sense that it has never been interfered with by man; but river systems have two major characteristics which have enabled their wildlife in all its original complexity to survive interference better than most other systems.
First, their continuous, linear nature provides plants and animals with an opportunity to move up and down them.
In the modern landscape, woods, ponds, and heaths, for example, are increasingly isolated within enormous fields of pasture or arable land; and the other major corridor for wildlife, the hedge system, has, of course , been cheaper and easier for farmers to remove than the river itself.
Second, because a river's nature is one of changeless change, forever on the move, the creatures which live in it have evolved strategies for surviving sudden floods and disruptions and alterations of the river's course.
Broken pieces of many water plants have the ability to root again; others have seeds which float or seeds which resist digestion in the stomachs of birds, and so can be transported upstream.
River insects develop wings in the last stage of their life cycle, and dragonflies are known to be able to fly many miles.
Indeed, some of our dragonflies regularly migrate across the North Sea.
In June 1900 the air over Antwerp ‘appeared black’ with swarms of four-spotted chaser dragonflies, as they headed towards England.
Fish instinctively fight their way upstream against the current, and many water birds and animals have the ability to travel long distances.
Other species are less mobile, and are there simply because a river has always been there.
In 1983 a hairy snail was discovered in the Thames marshes near Kew, where its ancestors had lived for the last 10,000 years.
It is believed to be the last living relic of the days when these islands were joined to Europe and the Thames was a tributary of the Rhine, where the same species of snail is still found.
Now, within two years of its discovery, the snail's survival is threatened by a Thames Water Authority scheme.
Of rather more popular appeal than hairy snails, perhaps, the dragonfly best represents the ancient life of the river bank, that point where land and water meet, where life began, and where waterside plants still provide a slipway up which dragonfly larvae climb to emerge in their full splendour every spring.
In the liassic rocks of Worcestershire and Gloucestershire fossil dragonflies have been found which are not very different from those still hawking along the streams which cut their way through those same rocks on their way down to the Severn estuary and the sea.
Over the millennia, creatures which live in the specialized conditions of rivers have evolved by adapting to these conditions.
A babbling upland brook is physically very different from a lazy lowland river, and there are subtle gradations all the way between.
These differences are further modified by the local geology, which affects the water chemistry, the local climate, and the particular conditions created by the dominant local plants.
Thus a river's wildlife is adapted to, and expresses, its particular local character and that of its different reaches with an almost infinite variety.
Dragonflies are a good example of this.
There are upland dragonflies and lowland dragonflies.
The Norfolk Hawker (Aeshna isosceles)is confined to the Norfolk Broads, while the Brilliant Emerald (Somatochlora metallica)is a speciality of Surrey, Sussex, and Hampshire.
The ‘Beautiful Damsel’(Agrion virgo)favours clear, gravel-bottomed streams, while the ‘Banded Damsel’(Agrion splendens), distinguished from the former by the blue-black bar on the male's wing, is abundant on muddy-bottomed, less acid waters.
Where they coexist, the former tends to prefer the gravel, while the latter chooses the clay reaches.
The damsels are among the great sights of the midsummer river bank, along which they flutter, enamelled with peacock blue and green; and it is entertaining to ‘read’ the physical conditions of a particular stream from the band on a damsel's wing.
A single rock in a stream provides at least four habitats.
Algae grow on surfaces which are always wet; the dry top supports lichens; mosses thrive on the wetted margins between the two; and many creatures hide in crevices under the rock.
On many upland streams a large boulder will often be the chosen perching spot of the dipper.
Further down a river, common reed is a feature of many watersides.
Thickets of fawn papery stems, tender green as they unfurl in the spring, have a specialized ecology all of their own.
Even quite small stands may support a pair of reed-buntings, while a larger reed-bed provides a home for the reed-warbler.
The latter is often a favourite host for the uninvited cuckoo.
Look closer into the reeds, and you will find a world within a world.
The twin-spotted wainscot moth lays its eggs in the bur reed, but the larvae later transfer to the common reed as they fatten up and need a thicker stem to tunnel into.
In the summer dusk the pale hatched moths float out over the riverside.
A specialized fly,Lipara lucens , also tunnels into the reed stems, creating noticeable swellings known as ‘cigar-galls’.
Once the fly has flown, the empty gall provides a winter home for two other reed specialists: a bee,Hylaeus pectoralis , and a wasp,Passaloecus corniger , whose eggs will hatch in the following spring.
Few species have adapted so closely to their particular rivers as caddisflies, stoneflies, and mayflies, which, in their turn, have been cunningly imitated for bait by generations of fishermen.
In the larval stages, caddisflies build themselves cases out of the materials of the river bed.
These provide them with camouflage and, depending on the speed of flow, either ballast or a means of transport.
The faster the stream, the heavier the material chosen; while those species occupying slow-flowing rivers or ditches construct a case of wood around themselves to help them float to fresh feeding grounds.
The nymphs, or first larval stages of mayflies, are also adapted to very particular conditions.
Some nymphs have specially shaped heads and legs, so that when facing the current, they are pushed against stones into which they fit, and which save them from being washed away — certainly a case of going with the elements!
The yellow may nymph is best adapted for rough boulders, while the marsh brown nymph fits against smooth stones, upon which its gill-like plates press down, thereby creating a vacuum.
While some species are streamlined for fast flows, others are burrowers and bottom-crawlers.
The claret dun nymph is at home in slow, peaty streams.
It is peat-coloured, and its gills both camouflage it by breaking up its outline and enable it to breathe in still water.
The blue-winged olive nymph lives among weeds such as water crowfoot.
It is neatly shaped to lodge in close-packed vegetation, from which it can be in close contact with the fast-flowing oxygenated water it requires.
The culmination of all this unseen evolution on the river bed is one of the great phenomena of the English countryside, once seen, never forgotten.
This is the day in the life of the mayfly.
Very punctually in mid-May, the nymphs will rise from the bed of the river and hatch through a final nymph stage known to fishermen as ‘duns’.
Then, when the air is still, the elegant adults, ‘the spinners’, float upwards in their thousands and perform their mating dance.
This is the sight which stays with even the casual observer.
The gauzy tides of swarming males, waiting for the females, rise and fall as if on invisible yo-yos.
Having mated, grey clouds of females glide to the water, lay their eggs, and die.
With all the poignancy of a Shakespeare sonnet, it is over in the space of a summer day, until next spring.
When I consider everything that grows
Holds in perfection but a little moment.
The life of a river has nothing to show more resonant of changeless change than the life cycle of the mayfly, a genus known even in the dry language of science as Ephemera .
Yet the return of the mayflies is no longer as inevitable as the return of May.
They are steadily declining in many rivers, and have vanished from others.
Pollution and the removal of riverside hedges have played their part; but above all, dredging and drainage have ironed out the varied bed conditions of gravel and silt to which the larvae of these and many other insects were so minutely adapted.
The otter, sliding up a river like a sleek cat and whistling to its mate under the moon, is truly king of the waters, and the presence of otters on a river system sets the final seal of well-being on its wildlife.
The otter has captured popular imagination ever since the classics of Henry Williamson and Gavin Maxwell.
It achieved tabloid status in April 1985, when it was on the front page of the Daily Mirror's conservation shock issue; and, as a symbol of wildlife under threat, it is a sure money-maker for such causes as the World Wildlife Fund.
The fact that people will give money to save the otter, a nocturnal animal whose presence is detected even by full-time otter survey teams only by its tracks and droppings, is the best answer I know to that mean-spirited and illogical argument: ‘What's the use of saving it, if I can't see it?’
It was enough simply to know that otters were out there somewhere.
Alas, no longer.
In 1977 leading conservationists produced a report showing that the otter had declined with disastrous suddenness.
Whereas otters were present, even common, throughout the country in the 1950s, they are now abundant only in the extreme north-west of Scotland, leaving core populations in Wales and the West Country, and a dwindling interbred group of individuals in East Anglia.
Hunting, disturbance, and pesticide residues had all played their part; but the major culprits were river boards and their successors which scoured the banks of undergrowth in which otters lay up during the day, and felled the mighty riverside trees, such as ash and sycamore, in whose buttress roots otters made their holts.
Since 1977 otter hunting has been illegal, and the ban on the pesticide dieldrin is starting to have a beneficial effect.
But the many miles of treeless river inhibits recolonization by otters, and even in the 1980s there have been cases of water authority workmen felling known otter holts.
The Cultural Heritage of Rivers
It is not only wildlife which is at stake.
Rivers represent a cultural heritage as well.
Through aeons of geological time, rivers, in the wake of glaciers, have helped shape the very structure of our landscape.
When man arrived, rivers shaped his history, and men, in turn, began to shape them.
From the time that the tribal Belgae and then the Romans invaded England, rivers dictated the positions of many towns and villages.
It is believed that the great bluestones of which Stonehenge is constructed were floated up the Wiltshire Avon.
Christianity came to England up a river, when St Augustine and his forty monks travelled to Canterbury up the Kentish Stour, ‘singing all the way’.
Rivers were also highways of terror.
The sleek hull of a Viking boat was specially designed to be shallow enough and narrow enough for use on navigable rivers, along which Norsemen brought fire and the sword.
Along the waterways was carried most of the stone required to build our medieval cathedrals.
When Whittlesey Mere was drained in the 1850s, a heap of dressed stone was found at the bottom of the lake, evidence of a medieval boating accident.
It is thought that the cargo was destined for Crowland Abbey.
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries the harnessing of water-power for mills and river navigation interlinked with a new system of canals laid the foundation for the Industrial Revolution.
Through all this change, rivers have continued to flow; but, for those who have eyes to see, the imprint of each generation remains, varying and concentrating the character of each stream which flows past our homes and our lives.
A good example of this is the water-mill.
The Romans introduced water-mills to England, and the ‘Domesday Book’ records as many as 5,624.
All but a hundred of these mill sites can still be accounted for.
Up and down rivers and brooks, the remains of some of these and many later water-mills can be seen.
In some cases, magnificent buildings, complete with all their machinery, still stand.
Elsewhere there are just clues to former occupancy: foundations, a silted mill-race, or the remnants of a weir, as described by Edward Thomas:
Only the idle foam
Of Water falling
Changelessly calling,
Where once men had a work place and a home.
All this interference with rivers by man, the building of mill-races and mill-ponds and, in some cases, quite major diversions of watercourses, did not destroy the essential character of rivers.
On the contrary, it added to it, and not just in terms of the quality and character of the landscape, but also from the point of view of the wildlife.
A tumbling weir creates the localized conditions of an upland brook wherever it crosses a silty lowland stream.
Here grow the willow moss and liverworts found again in abundance only towards the sources of a brook.
In the highly oxygenated water below a weir swim the little fish not known for nothing as the ‘miller's thumb’: the flattened head of the fish was often compared with the thumb of the miller, worn it was said from testing the flour.
Perhaps the loveliest of upland specialists associated with weirs and mill sites is the grey wagtail — grey in name, but not in appearance, with the flash of his canary-coloured chest.
The grey wagtail nests in ledges and crevices of rock upstream, and finds a similar home in the crumbling walls and vertical structures of watermills.
Edward Thomas may not have known that he was also making an ecological point when he pinned down so precisely the atmosphere and feel of these places:
The sun blazed while the thunder yet
Added a boom:
A wagtail flickered bright over
The mill-pond's gloom.
Some of the wildlife of the water-mill may owe its existence to a rather more conscious decision on the part of some long-dead miller.
Growing along old mill-races or near mill-ponds are some of the stoutest and hoariest of pollard willows, which are the glory of any river bank.
This is no accident.
The willow was put to many uses by millers.
An integral part of mill machinery was a simple spring known as the ‘miller's willow’.
In the most recent mills it was made of steel; but more commonly it was a piece of springy willow wood collected from a convenient pollard.
Willow was also used for eel traps, and the fact of a river being carefully directed to drive a water-wheel has always made water-mills very convenient places to catch eels.
The Luttrell Psalter of 1338 illustrates a watermill complete with eel traps which look very much as if they have been made out of pliant willow stems.
Many medieval millers paid their rent to the lord of the manor in eels; and when the water-mill in the centre of Stafford was pulled down after the last war, the laconic miller expressed as his only regret: ‘I shall miss the eels.’
More recently, eel traps have been built into the systems of weirs and sluices of water-mills.
Yet these structures, too, add variety and local character to rivers.
The joints in a timber lock-gate or the eroding mortar of a sluice often provide congenial conditions for gipsywort or skullcap, with its clear blue flowers.
Both these rather delicately proportioned plants have more difficulty competing with other vigorous vegetation on the open river bank than they do in the neat crevices which man has provided for them.
The structures themselves were often built of local materials.
Before the advent of railways, it was cheaper to do this than to import materials from far afield.
Later, bricks were commonly imported, but even these, including the splendid ‘blues’ of the industrial Midlands, added their individual stamp to river landscapes.
Nevertheless, it is surprising how often local builders simply took advantage of what was at hand.
In 1985 a land-drainage scheme was carried out on the river Erewash near Eastwood in Nottinghamshire.
This is the river which flows as a constant theme through the novels of D. H. Lawrence.
Just opposite the point where the brook which runs past Lawrence's old home joins the Erewash itself stands a mill sluice.
In the normal course of events this would have been ‘tidied up’— wiped out as part of the scheme and conveniently buried.
But in this case the enlightened engineer was concerned to do precisely the opposite, and as the digger pulled back the rubble, he exposed an area of wall which looked for a moment as if it was made entirely of shiny cream bones.
This turned out to be pottery waste, a surviving memorial to a now vanished china factory in the local town.
There it now stands, its cracks colonized by ferns and wormwood — nothing especially beautiful in itself, but a piece of history and natural history, with literary associations thrown in.
Builders in the wetlands did more than that however.
They built their homes out of the materials of the river bank itself.
Whereas in most parts of England, thatched roofs were made of locally available straw, in the lowlands, especially in East Anglia, the common reed was used — the same plant which provides a home for a whole hierarchy of warblers, moths, and bees.
And very good thatch it made.
It is still often known as Norfolk reed; and in contrast to ordinary straw thatch, which has a lifetime of thirty years at most, a well-laid thatch of Norfolk reed may last as long as eighty years.
In the wettest wetlands of all grows an even tougher thatching material, one of our most ancient natural crops: the giant saw sedge Cladium mariscus .
This, one of the dominant plants of the undrained Fens, can still be seen on the roofs of some of the houses between Ely and Newmarket.
In some cases this most durable, but increasingly unobtainable, material is used as a capping ridge to a thatch of Norfolk reed.
In other places, where even the Norfolk reed is scarce, the reed is used as a capping ridge to straw thatch.
The final flourish in this humanizing of the natural landscape is given by an individual, as the thatcher in Ronald Blythe's Akenfield explains: ‘We all have our own pattern; it is our signature you might say.
A thatcher can look at a roof and tell you who thatched it by the pattern.’
Elsewhere man has modified the landscape less consciously, by providing congenial conditions for the river water crowfoot.
The water crowfoots are a particularly lovely group of river plants.
To the layman they all look pretty similar: crisp emerald weed buoyed up in the stream and then, in July, a snow in summer of glistening white flowers, which spill over the water in a way that seems to spell out the brief abundance of midsummer.
The nine or so different forms and species to be found in England are all specialists.
The pond water crowfoot has broad-lobed leaves which float on the still surface, in addition to dissected underwater foliage.
At the other end of the scale are crowfoots of fast waters, whose only leaves are bunches of slender threads which run with the current — the ‘crow's feet’.
The river water crowfoot,Ranunculus fluitans , grows in gravel, and dies if it becomes too covered up by silt.
Studies made on the river Lugg in Herefordshire show that the rubbly remains of fords or bridges which collapsed long ago have created a gravelly river bed which encourages crowfoot.
The Lugg is in general a silty river, although it has natural riffles of gravel where the crowfoot also occurs.
Elsewhere, however, known historical fords or bridge sites can be picked out every high summer when the crowfoot blooms — literally, living history.
The same effects are visible in the River Wye in Hereford itself where the site of the early ford below the Bishop's Palace is picked out in white in July when the water crowfoot is in flower.
There is even a gap in the centre with no flowers where the material marking the ford was probably removed at a later date to allow passage for the boats, leaving a silty bottom to the river in that place unsuitable for the growth of water crowfoot.
Our predecessors' efforts to farm and drain the land can also be ‘read’, again in white and green, at a very different but particular moment of the year.
If you stand on a hill in winter when there is a thaw or look down from a motorway, especially in the Midlands, you can hardly miss the pattern of long parallel bands of snow, which are always the last to go from the hollows of the old ridge and furrow.
In summer, too, you can read the ridge and furrow in an even more attractive way, although this is possible only on those few fields which have not been ‘improved’ to an all-over green of fertilized rye-grass.
In such meadows there is a specialized flora for the damp furrow bottoms, subtly distinct from the flowers and grasses of the dry ridge crowns.
The bulbous buttercup (Ranunculus bulbosus)prefers the tops, while the creeping buttercup (R. repens)favours the hollows.
Ridge and furrow were formed any time between the early Middle Ages and the nineteenth century, as a result of ploughing up and down fields in parallel lines.
This is generally thought to have been done deliberately, to improve drainage in the days before clay and now plastic field drains.
In fields next to a river, the furrows are noticeably at right angles to the stream, although in some other places, where no obvious drainage benefit was gained, ridge and furrow seem to have been simply a by-product of the normal way of ploughing.
If you look carefully, you may see some ridge and furrow which lie in a reverse-S pattern, a result of the logistics facing the medieval ploughman, who had to manoeuvre eight oxen up and down a field.
The Tudor ploughman had better-bred and better-fed beasts; so he required fewer of them to pull a plough, and was able to drive a straighter furrow.
These are the monuments to generations of individual farmers ploughing and draining their fields.
When, in the seventeenth century, the first real drainage engineers arrived, equipped with a literally world-changing technology, they too left their monument, in the shape of an entirely new landscape: the Fens.
Despite their new-found power, however, they did not succeed in totally obliterating what had been before.
Meandering across the geometrical landscape of straight ditches and square fields which the new engineers and their successors created, the winding courses of the original pre-drainage creeks and rivers can be seen especially clearly from the air.
As they flowed on their — as it turned out — not so eternal journey from the hinterland of Ely and Cambridge to the Wash, these rivers deposited silt along their beds; and now, although the rivers vanished centuries ago, this silt stands out, a startling pale-fawn colour, as it snakes across the adjacent black peat of the Fens.
Thus you can still pick out with ease the route of the ancient Wellestream, up which, in the fourteenth century, came cargoes of cloth from the Low Countries and silks from Italy, not to mention news of the dawning Renaissance, bound for Cambridge and beyond.
What is even more astonishing is that you can see the Wellestream more easily with every passing year.
This is because the adjacent peat, as it is drained and dried out, wastes away by a process of oxidation on exposure to the atmosphere.
Hence the old silt river beds, known in the Fens as ‘roddons’, are rising steadily as ridges above the ever-falling peat.
They are landscape ghosts; but instead of fading away, they sharpen ever more clearly into focus.
Rivers have always been boundaries, as well as route-ways.
They dictate the shape of many land-holdings, parishes, counties, and even parts of the Welsh and Scottish borders, as is well known to the poor river engineer who has to negotiate with different landowners, not to mention councils, on opposing banks as he tries to promote his scheme.
With boundaries go hedges, and some of those still remaining have been part of the farmed landscape since Saxon, or possibly even earlier, times.
Boundary hedges tend to be the oldest hedges, and a number of these are found bordering brooks and streams.
Techniques developed by botanists and historians have shown that it is possible to assess the age of a hedge by the number of shrub species it contains.
So the hedges which most interest the historian are those which most fascinate the botanist.
To the layman they are also arguably the most beautiful, with all the tangled richness and variety of oak, ash, buckthorn, elder, and wild rose.
In general, a hedge will contain in a 30-yard length one shrub species for every century of its life.
This is not an immutable law, but the correlation has been sufficiently demonstrated to be a valuable guide.
These are the relationships which print the character on the landscape.
It is the same with the various damselflies in their clay and gravel streams, the watermill with its grey willows and grey wagtails, and the crowfoot crowning the ford and the curve in ridge and furrow.
This is what the Englishness of England is made of, and it is this sense of place and the particular which we are currently in danger of losing, just as we come to understand it more clearly.
It is far more important than any particular beetle or bird or ancient monument.
The long evolution of the natural system, further evolved by man's practical management, has given brooks and rivers individual characters as distinctive as their names, names which invest the Ordnance Survey map with an idiosyncratic quality ranging from poetry to comedy: the Windrush, the Swift, the Wagtail Brook, the Mad Brook, the Hell Brook, the Piddle, the Wriggle…
Take another look at The Haywain .
Constable was a miller's son, and probably knew all there was to know about mills such as Flatford.
He was concerned here above all to paint a working landscape, not just a decorative one; and the empty wain is fording the stream to collect more hay from the labourers in the distant field.
It was probably there for another reason too.
George Sturt, who wrote about his practical experience of running a wheelwright's shop at the end of last century, describes the constant problem of shrinkage of timber wheel stocks in high summer:
Men who used carts knew something about the advantage of a little moisture for tightening wheels.
Not for the horse's sake alone was it that carters would drive through a roadside pond, or choose to ford a stream rather than go over a bridge beside the ford.
the wheels were better for the wetting.
Sturt and others record how wagons for the Sussex clay country were designed with broad wheels, while those for downland chalk had narrow ones.
Taking individual orders from his customers, the wheelwright built each cart for the particular conditions of a particular farm.
This is taking a sense of the particular about as far as you can go: man evolving as harmoniously with his landscape as the mayfly nymph evolved in harmony with its stream.
No wonder farmers tell us that they are the creators and guardians of the English countryside.
Now, for the first time in the long history of settling our islands, the guardians have become the destroyers.
The landscape which generation after generation created is like a classroom blackboard at the end of a day, on which each lesson has been written without entirely erasing the previous one.
Medieval ridge and furrow are overlain by a grid of more recent hedgerows.
The winding Wellestream can be glimpsed through the level geometry of the Fens.
In the space of a generation, we have set about wiping the blackboard clean.
The Impact of River Management
Rivers and streams have been straightened and evened out as never before.
This work has been carried out by water authorities, internal drainage boards, and many councils, in part to reduce flooding of roads and houses, but largely to increase farm yields.
In the years between 1971 and 1980, an annual average of 207,217 acres (83,858 hectares) was estimated to have been drained, of which ‘new’ drainage of wetlands comprised around 20,000 acres per year.
One straightened stream begins to resemble another.
River organisms' ability to survive the disruption of floods was never evolved to withstand this kind of onslaught.
Repeated dredging has removed the weedy margins upon which dragonflies depend.
In the last twenty-five years, four dragonfly species have become extinct in England, while many others have shown a marked decline.
Reduction of such insect populations will in turn reduce the fish population, which depends on a diversified, rather than a straightened and uniform, channel.
With the loss of the fish, we can expect to lose the electric-blue flash of the kingfisher.
The dredgings are put in the bottoms of furrows or are used to fill in ponds.
With the virtual disappearance of the farm pond, frog populations in some parts of England declined drastically between the 1950s and the 1970s.
Many streams have been stripped of their ancient boundary trees, and the knock-on effect of the drainage schemes has been to encourage farmers to turn their farms into prairies.
Between 1946 and 1963, around 85,000 miles of hedges were grubbed out.
The lowering of water-levels to allow ploughing of damp pasture has removed the nesting habitat of many birds which we used to take for granted, such as snipe, lapwing, and redshank.
A survey of Oxfordshire in 1982 found only 15 breeding pairs of redshank, compared to 112 pairs in a comparable survey in 1939.
Studies have shown that the water-vole, ‘Ratty’ of The Wind in the Willows , has become scarce in many areas, due to intensive management of river banks.
Indeed, Ratty's emotional, if not his ecological, headquarters, the river Pang between Reading and Newbury, where Kenneth Grahame wrote his classic, has been subjected to a notoriously insensitive drainage scheme.
In some counties, such as Staffordshire, such a previously common wetland plant as reed has become a rare sight.
The remains of water-mills have been consistently removed; the weirs which hold up river levels have been dismantled; and mill-ponds and mill-races have been filled with the dredgings.
On the Worcestershire Stour, ten mill sites have been removed in as many years.
The ancient fords which hold up the water are dredged out, along with their water crowfoot.
In the late 1970s, the Anglo-Saxon ‘stretford’ of Stratford-upon-Avon was taken out.
The inexorable desiccation of the Fens, the Somerset Levels, and the Lancashire mosses is exposing remarkable artefacts of early man, long preserved in the wet peat.
But in the absence of an effective liaison between drainage men and archaeologists, there is a danger that such remarkable finds as the Bronze Age settlement built on a timber ‘island’ recently rescued at Flag Fen near Peterborough could be broken up by diggers or else left to crumble on exposure to the atmosphere.
Major wetlands are obvious victims of drainage.
Casualties since the War have included the river Idle washlands in Nottinghamshire and large parts of Romney Marsh, Otmoor, and the Lancashire mosses.
Major debates have been held since the late 1970s over the future of wetlands in Sussex, Somerset, Yorkshire, and East Anglia.
Wetlands under threat have included a variety of landscapes: swamps of tall reed or reed sweet-grass; marshes of rush and sedge, which sometimes develop into scrub of willow and bog myrtle; fens, whose lush vegetation is nourished by alkaline groundwater, and which range from open pools, often the remains of peat cutting, to grazed beds of meadowsweet and iris, grading in turn to the wet woodlands known as alder ‘carr’; mires, such as the mosses of the North-West, whose deep peatlands support sphagnum moss and heather, scattered with glades of birch, the favourite haunt of nightjars.
Finally, there are flowery haymeadows and damp pastures, intersected by dykes patrolled by dragonflies in summer and all submerged in winter by the silver flood, which draws in dark clouds of wildfowl and companies of wild white swans.
The destruction of such places in our time has been startling.
In 1983 the chief scientist of the Nature Conservancy Council, the Government's watchdog on conservation, produced a definitive report on the destruction of habitat in Great Britain since 1949.
Among the casualties wholly or partly attributable to drainage were 97 per cent of herb-rich haymeadows, 50 per cent of lowland fens, and 60 per cent of lowland raised mires, all lost in the space of a generation.
In the mid-1980s the Norfolk Broads were losing an average of 1,500 acres per year.
All this has happened because enormous sums of public money available for drainage schemes since the War have combined with a revolution in technology which we have not yet fully come to terms with.
I will always remember standing one early spring day near the river Severn, arguing with a drainage officer who had previously maintained watercourses now due to be reshaped as part of an expensive new scheme.
This man had as little sympathy for the environment as a pike might have kind feelings towards a minnow.
Yet the point which he rightly argued was that for the previous thirty years he had personally controlled the maintenance of the ditches and hedges of this parish, so why should he consider newfangled ideas about nature conservation being built into any proposed scheme now?
I looked at what he had created.
In spite of his indifference, it was exquisite: the ditch banks were creamy with cowslips and lilac with cuckoo flower.
Chiff-chaffs were arriving to nest in the spangled scrub of blackthorn.
There was a badger set under some old pear-trees.
I then asked him how he managed the place.
It turned out that he had a small dredger, an even smaller budget, and a very primitive brand of mowing machine.
With these he had efficiently kept water flowing through his ditches.
I lost the argument that day.
Within a week the big machines had moved in, and that corner of his parish could have been one of thousands of others in modern England — any place, anywhere.
The lesson was clear.
Of course, the countryside must continue to be a working landscape; but if most people's definition of a river as something more than just a drain is valid, then that broad definition must be consciously built into the brief of those who wield this mighty technology of the JCB, the Hymac, and the Swamp-dozer.
Only then can we guide the evolution of the countryside within legitimately broad terms of reference and continue the age-old process of civilizing the rivers.
And why not?
The big machines are only powered by the ratepayers' money, and that woman who threatened to tie herself to a willow tree represents thousands upon thousands of ratepayers who share her (and Constable's) convictions about the essential nature of a river.
Over the last half-dozen years there has been a quiet revolution in the water industry as this simple realization has dawned upon engineers, farmers, digger-drivers, and even the legislators in Westminster.
Of course, there are still places where the old-style canalizing approach to river management is being pushed through; and the conflict of values which underlies this whole issue raises a number of questions which are not easy to answer.
Nobody can seriously suggest that we turn back the clock entirely and return to the world of Constable's Haywain , where there was a good deal of misery and hunger amidst all that beauty.
We admire and cherish an environment which we also depend on for food.
We may reduce the dredging of rivers, but if we stop it altogether, floods will return to overwhelm us.
We are therefore committed to continue managing rivers, as we are to managing every square mile of the English countryside.
It is the way we do so which counts.
The fact that rivers are such a symbol of endurance and of changeless change is what makes their management a touchstone for the whole issue of our relationship with the natural world.
It is therefore a moving thought that the rivermen were among the first people in the modern countryside business to begin to stop and think a little harder about what they were actually doing.
To adapt the slogan ‘Put the Great back in Britain’, some of them have begun to put the river back into river management.
It remains to be seen whether at this eleventh hour for the English countryside, those other giants, the forestry and the agriculture industries, are also prepared to take seriously a wider frame of reference.
If they are, we will at last be able to see the countryside put back into countryside management.
Such an achievement depends upon two things for which the English have always had a special genius: a sense of place and a sense of compromise.
What river engineers have begun to do is to rediscover their roots, and these, as we shall see, go back a very long way.
The Fear of the Flood
Traditional Attitudes to Wetlands
In the beginning, the waters covered the earth.
The first thing you would notice about the landscape if you were to travel back in time was how wet it was.
In prehistoric times rivers and streams ran unbridled over their flood plains, and most low ground consisted of marshes, fens, and very wet woodland.
Well into modern times the major wetlands of England remained undrained: the Vale of York, the fens around the Humber, the Essex marshes, the Lancashire mosses, Romney Marsh, the Severn lowlands, the Somerset Levels, and, above all, the ‘Great Level’ of the Fens.
Surveying these now prosaically productive acres of beet and potato, it is as hard to imagine their undrained state as if one were trying to conjure up some fabulous landscape lost beyond recall.
Charles Kingsley, writing of the final destruction of the Fens, was perhaps the first to regret the loss of what must have been one of the finest natural systems in Europe.
He describes immense tracts of pale reed and dark-green alder stretching from Cambridge to Peterborough, from King's Lynn to the foot of the Lincolnshire wolds, where:
high overhead hung, motionless, hawk beyond hawk, buzzard beyond buzzard, kite beyond kite, as far as eye could see.
Far off, upon the silver mere, would rise a puff of smoke from a punt, invisible from its flatness and its white paint.
then down the wind came the boom of the great stanchion-gun; and after that sound another sound, louder as it neared; a cry as of all the bells of Cambridge, and all the hounds of Cottesmore; and overhead rushed and whirled the skein of terrified wild-fowl, screaming, piping, clacking, croaking, filling the air with the hoarse rattle of their wings, while clear above all sounded the wild whistle of the curlew, and the trumpet note of the great wild swan.
They are all gone now…
Ah, well, at least we shall have wheat and mutton instead, and no more typhus and ague; and, it is to be hoped, no more brandy-drinking and opium-eating; and children will live and not die.
There speaks the nineteenth century: all gone, but in a good cause.
It is only our more ambivalent age, engaged in the very last mopping-up of the great wet waste which challenged our ancestors, which has begun to question whether the price of progress has been too high.
We can see more clearly now that the ultimate end of such a process — the flood entirely tamed — is both impossible and undesirable.
The long, and still unfolding, history of land drainage contains much that is progress in the best sense: the combating of diseases and terrifying floods and the production of food to sustain a growing population.
But it is also a saga of human avarice and the abuse of power.
Quite apart from the major wetlands, every valley bottom below a certain contour line must have been soggy and at times impassable.
Quite how wet any particular locality once was can often be guessed through detective work involving an enjoyable study of plants, place-names, and local history.
At Henley-in-Arden in Warwickshire, two churches face each other across the little river Alne.
Their presence is explained in an appeal of 1548 to retain both churches: ‘The town of Henley is severed from the Parish Church with a brook which in winter so riseth that none may pass over it without danger of perishing.’
Near by, in the tell-tale peat, are stands of meadowsweet and sedge, the last remnants of Henley's ancient marsh, now happily salvaged as an oasis within a new housing estate.
In other places, canals have provided a damp lifeline for plants surviving from much earlier wetlands.
In the 1950s the redoubtable Eva Crackles, a Yorkshire teacher, was gathering grasses at the point where the Leven canal crosses the site of an ancient lake, now long vanished, but clearly just surviving when the canal was cut in 1802.
For there, just at the point where canal and lake site coincide, she found one of the few recorded colonies of the narrow small reed, tenaciously clinging to the mud.
Newport in Shropshire was ‘new’ in the twelfth century when it was granted a charter by Henry I, who required that it supply fish to the royal household from its medieval fish-pond.
This pond survived just long enough to be incorporated into the Shropshire Union Canal in 1833, complete with an unusual wealth of water plants, which have earned the canal basin the status of Site of Special Scientific Interest in 1986.
At Gailey in Staffordshire, an unusually rich flora emerged in gravel workings abandoned in the 1960s, relics from the fen from which the place took its name, which comes from the Anglo-Saxon ‘gagol leah’, the clearing in the gale, or bog myrtle, that aromatic wetland shrub which gives an extra tang to home-made gin.
Names on the map tell us a great deal about the ancient undrained landscape, and none is more telling than the presence on the Ordnance Survey Map of the lowlands of the word ‘moor’: Morton or Moortown; Sedgemoor; Otmoor; Moorgate, the gate in London's city wall which opened on to Moorfields, the marsh which William Dugdale, in his seventeenth-century classic on drainage, describes as a favourite resort of Londoners for skating.
The men of the Somerset Levels paid a tithe called ‘moor-penny’; their cattle suffered from a disease called ‘moor-evil’; and in every pond and damp corner you will still see the jerking movements of the moorhen.
The Oxford English Dictionary gives as its first meaning for ‘moor’‘uncultivated ground covered with heather’.
To most of us, reared on Wuthering Heights , that is what a moor means.
But to our ancestors, living when the hills were less thoroughly cleared and the lowlands were more universally wet, a moor was something more terrifying: a morass.
The word ‘mor’ first occurs in Saxon accounts of King Alfred hiding in his wetland fastness in Somerset, and most evocatively of all in our national epic poem Beowulf .
The hero, Beowulf, does battle with Grendel and Grendel's mother, two enormous monsters which haunt the swamps —‘moras’ in Anglo-Saxon — from which they emerge to wreak havoc before returning to a mere in the very heart of the fen: ‘The lake which they inhabit lies not many miles from here, overhung with groves of rime-crusted trees whose thick roots darken the water.’
Hostile Wetlands
This description, at the very start of our literature, sets the tone for accounts of wetlands, which through the ages have had a consistently bad press.
When in the eighth century the Saxon saint Guthlac penetrated the heart of the Fens to found Crowland Abbey, he was described by the monk Felix of Crowland as encountering demons in the wilderness, which ‘came with such immoderate noises and immense horror, that it seemed to him that all between heaven and earth resounded with their dreadful cries’.
They bound Guthlac ‘in all his limbs…and brought him to the black fen, and threw and sank him in the muddy waters’.
With the passage of time, demons are about the only form of unpleasantness not recorded in accounts of the wetlands.
William Lambarde, Elizabeth I's archivist, described Romney Marsh in 1576 as ‘evil in winter, grievous in summer and never good’.
In 1629 the Fens were vilified thus: ‘The Air nebulous, grosse and full of rotten harres; the water putred and muddy, yea full of loathsome vermine; the earth spuing, unfast and boggie.’
(‘Harres’ were noxious gases.)
Samuel Pepys, visiting his relations at Wisbech thirty-five years later, was equally unimpressed as he passed through ‘most sad fennes, all the way observing the sad life which the people of the place — which if they were born there, they do call the Breedlings of the place — do live, sometimes rowing from one spot to another and then wadeing’.
For travellers such places provided a multitude of hazards.
At best they involved a detour.
At worst there was the danger — horror of horrors!— of falling in.
The intrepid lady traveller Celia Fiennes had a near miss when her horse was nearly sucked into a dyke near Ely in 1698; and in the same year she took care to avoid Martin Mere in Lancashire, ‘that as the proverb sayes has parted many a man and his mare indeed’.
The fate awaiting someone pitched from his horse in such a place might be blood-poisoning, ‘being dreadfully venom'd by rolling in slake’, as William Hall put it in his nineteenth-century fen doggerel.
Worse still, one might be swallowed for ever in the morass.
Daniel Defoe wrote of Chat Moss, near Manchester, as ‘being too terrible to contemplate for it will bear neither man nor beast’.
Getting lost was another likelihood, unless, as at Longdon Marsh in Worcestershire, the traveller was able to pay a guide to show him across.
On the swampy willow scrub of the Wealdmoors in Shropshire, the local rector described in 1673 how ‘the inhabitants commonly hang'd bells about the necks of their cows that they might the more easily find them’.
Otmoor was notorious as a place in which to get lost, and verses celebrate how the curfew rung on winter nights from Charlton church guided travellers out of the intractable moor.
Fog, the one element which no drainer can ever quite banish from the marshes, still rolls out over Otmoor.
A farmer's wife giving evidence at the Otmoor M40 inquiry in 1983 described how she had once become completely lost in one of her own fields while counting sheep.
Daniel Defoe describes the Fens shrouded in fog, through which nothing could be seen ‘but now and then the lanthorn or cupola of Ely Minster’.
To further terrify lost, wandering travellers, igniting marsh gas created the alarming phenomena, still not fully understood by scientists, known as will-o'-the-wisps, jack-o'-lanterns, or corpse-candles.
‘Infect her beauty, /You fen-sucked fogs,’ inveighed Shakespeare's King Lear against his daughter.
Our ancestors associated wetlands with disease.
They had good reason.
As late as 1827, travellers were ‘fearful of entering the fens of Cambridgeshire lest the Marsh Miasma should shorten their lives’.
On the Somerset Levels, inundated by heavy floods in 1872 and 1873, a report described how ‘Ague set in early in the spring and is now very prevalent…among the poorer families who are badly fed and clothed.’
‘Ague’ was malaria, meaning literally ‘bad air’, the marshy miasma which, until the discovery of the malarial mosquito in 1880, was believed to be the main cause of the disease.
The mosquitoes which carry malaria breed far north into Europe, and although less virulent than some tropical species, they were still responsible for many deaths.
Malaria was endemic in the English wetlands.
‘As bad as an Essex Ague’ was a common expression; and in the 1870s the garrison at Tilbury Fort was changed every six months because of the prevalence of malaria.
The Thames marshes ensured that the ague was carried into the courts of kings, who were less resistant to it than the hardy fen men.
James I was declared by his contemporaries to have died of it, and his victim Sir Walter Ralegh, awaiting execution in the Tower, prayed that he would not be seized by a fit of ague on the scaffold, lest his enemies should proclaim that he had met his death shivering with fear.
The terror, if not the actuality, of the disease has survived into our own time.
In the early 1970s Strood District Council was spraying the dykes in the north Kent marshes with DDT as a precaution against malaria.
As towns grew larger, they began to pollute the adjacent marshes and valley bottoms, which in turn developed ominous reputations for disease.
Bubonic plague is not directly associated with water, but the rats which carried it arrived by boat at riverside wharves.
The Great Plague of London is said to have broken out in 1665 in a marshy district known as the Seven Dials, and it was especially prevalent along the old river Fleet.
In the nineteenth century the stagnant waters of cities were haunted by the shadow of cholera.
It is no accident that many slums were built on marshes: Mosside in Manchester, the Bogside in Londonderry, and much of the East End of London, where the suffix ‘ey’ to many of the place-names tell us that they were islands in Saxon times: Hackney, Stepney, and, most notorious of all, Bermondsey, where, in the 1850s, the river Neckinger, ‘the colour of strong green tea’, flowed round Jacob's Island, which was used by Dickens as a setting for Oliver Twist , and was described by him as ‘the filthiest, the strangest, the most extraordinary of the many localities that are hidden in London’.
Social reformers were not slow to describe the horrors of such places.
Friedrich Engels singled out the river Aire in Leeds and the Irk in Manchester for special mention: ‘In dry weather, a long string of the most disgusting, blackish-green slime pools are left standing on this bank, from the depth of which bubbles of miasmatic gas constantly arise and give forth a stench unendurable.’
A hundred years later George Orwell described the stagnant pools of the Ince flashes at Wigan as ‘covered with ice the colour of raw umber…nothing existed except smoke, shale, ice, mud, ashes and foul water.’
Add to this the limitations which wetlands impose on farming — short grazing seasons, foot-rot in sheep, suppression of root growth, in the damp soil, and the hazards of high water for cereal crops, not to mention the terror of a flood — and it is enough to make one want to rush out and drain all remaining wetlands on sight.
Certainly, it is easy to understand why drainage was regarded as a major manifestation of progress.
But there is another side to the story.
It is a curious fact that the poor benighted people who were unfortunate enough to live in the rural wetlands did not seem to share the prejudices of their visitors at all.
Celia Fiennes, in high disgust at finding ‘froggs and slow-worms and snailes in my roome’ when lodging in Ely, had the honesty to qualify her personal dislike for the place, which ‘must needs be very unhealthy,tho' the natives say much to the contrary which proceeds from custom and use’.
The Harvests of the Wetlands
It really was exasperating to observe how the natives seemed to like their marshes.
William Elstobb found the eighteenth-century fenmen content with ‘uncomfortable accommodations’; and Vancouver wrote of Burwell in 1794: ‘Any attempt in contemplation for the better drainage of this fen is considered hostile to the true interests of these deluded people.’
Back in 1646, one of the few articulate defenders of such deluded people maintained that those who would undertake drainage ‘have always vilified the Fens, and have misinformed many Parliament men, that all the Fens is a mere quagmire…of little or no value: but those which live in the Fens, and are neighbours to it, know the contrary.’
The anonymous author of The Anti-Projector proceeded to list the bounty of the fen.
There were horses, cattle, fodder, sheep, osiers, and reed; and ‘Lastly, we have many thousand cottagers, which live on our Fens, which must otherwise go a-begging.’
Such people knew how to make the watery wilderness yield up its riches.
Preeminent among the benefits was summer grazing.
The very word ‘Somerset’(Sumorsaetan)is Anglo-Saxon, possibly meaning ‘summer dwellers’, men who came down to graze the levels in summer-time.
It is thought that those who occupied the Malvern hill forts may have herded their cattle down the Worcestershire drove-ways to pasture them on Longdon Marsh in the summers before the Roman conquest.
Shortage of grass in high summer was a continual problem in the open-field system of the Middle Ages.
No such lack of lush pasture afflicted the Fens, especially in the silt belt, where medieval prosperity is commemorated by mighty churches and confirmed by historians' research into medieval and sixteenth-century tax returns.
It was the flood itself which often ensured the rich grazing.
The commons of the Isle of Axholme lay under water from around Martinmas (11 November) until May Day.
As the inhabitants were to inform the men who set out to drain these wetlands in the seventeenth century, this flood brought with it ‘a thick fatt water’.
After drainage had removed this regular winter flood, the people were left with ‘thin hungry starving water, which rendered the land incapable of supporting the large grazing herds which it had formerly sustained.
Even now, local farmers around Axholme regard the ‘warped land’ which was deliberately flooded with silt as the best land in the region.
Cobbett declared that the marshes of South Holderness in the East Riding, together with the Fens, were the richest land in England.
What cheeses must such land have produced!
A cheese resembling Camembert was the glory of Cottenham in Cambridgeshire, where records for cheese making go back to as early as 1280; and production ceased only in the mid-nineteenth century with the enclosure of the common fen.
Domestic geese, herded on the Fens and the marshes, kept the rest of the country supplied with quill-pens.
On the wetland commons of western France, geese are still kept, and furnish a nice line in duvets.
In the wettest and wildest parts of the marshes, fishing and fowling replaced more organized farming.
The terse Latin of a Cambridgeshire assize role records how, in the fourteenth century, a boy went out on stilts after birds' eggs and was drowned in the heart of the fen.
With the passage of time, such perilous subsistence gave way to more profitable wildfowling.
Birds were netted and exported to London.
A check-list that would make a modern bird-watcher salivate was served up on the Elizabethan menu: ‘the-food of heroes, fit for the palates of the great’, as Camden describes pewits, godwits, knot, and dotterel.
Fish were also exported.
Daniel Defoe saw fish transported live from the Fenland to London ‘in great butts fill'd with water in waggons as the carriers draw other goods’.
Islip eels from Otmoor supplied the Ship Inn at Greenwich.
Eels, speared through their gills on an eel stick, had long been standard rent in the Fens and Somerset Levels.
‘Ely’ itself means the district of eels.
The method of catching eels with a glaive or trident lasted just long enough in the Fens to be recorded on an early documentary film.
Many wild plants of the wetlands were also harvested.
Until the mid-nineteenth century, basket-makers were actively cutting willow at Beckley on Otmoor, a place which also sent water-lilies to Covent Garden.
Purple moor grass, which forms the pale-fawn undercarpet of the scattered birch woodlands of such wetlands as the Lancashire mosses and Hatfield Chase was popular for cattle bedding.
From Burwell Fen, sedge was sent out by boat for the purpose of drying malt, and Cambridge imported fen sedge as kindling.
Bedmakers in Cambridge colleges were issued with stout gloves to protect their hands from the sharp sedge as they lit the fires in undergraduates' rooms.
Clogs were made from alder, and reed was used for thatch.
Oak for building the ships of the British navy has always been famous as a resource essential for our national survival.
A commonly grown crop of the wetlands was almost as important.
Hemp, from which the word ‘hempenspun’, or ‘homespun’, originates, is a fibre crop still grown in Russia and the Third World.
In England it provided sails and cables for the fleet; and for this reason, legislation going back to the reign of Henry VIII required that a small proportion of land be set aside for its production.
This is a far cry from the laws which now pertain to this crop, more familiar today under its Latin name of Cannabis sativa .
It flourishes best in deep moist ground, and Michael Drayton described south Lincolnshire as ‘hempbearing Holland's Fen’.
On the Isle of Axholme, where little wool was produced, hemp was the basis for a spinning and weaving industry, which Provided a useful sideline for the average peasant, and a basic livelihood for the poor.
Peat was always a major wetland commodity.
Rights of turf cutting, known as ‘turbary’, existed in Somerset and the Fens in the Middle Ages.
Peat cutting became a major industry in the Lancashire mosses in the nineteenth century, and on maps of Wicken Fen and Hatfield Chase, you will find ‘Poor Piece’, which was where the local cottagers could cut peat for themselves, subject to regulations prescribing a limited season for peat cutting and insisting that a man may extract as much peat as he can, provided he does not employ assistance.
Unlimited plundering of timber was similarly controlled.
In 1337 a certain Robert Gyan was submitted to a brutal penance by the dean of Wells for carrying away ‘a great number of alder’ from Stan Moor in the Somerset Levels.
Thereafter he was allowed only six boatloads of brushwood a year, to be taken out under view of the bailiff.
Such rulings are a key to our understanding of the old wetland economy.
Long before our modern preoccupations with ecology, the men of the wetlands harvested the wealth of their so-called wilderness with a sophisticated understanding of the need not to over-exploit its resources.
Because of the hostile elements facing farmers in the wetlands, mutual cooperation was essential, both in sharing the upkeep of flood-banks and drains and in administering a system of checks and balances to ensure that each person got a fair deal out of the common pasture.
If overstocking took place, then everybody was the loser.
In 1242 Geoffrey de Langelegh was summoned by the abbot of Glastonbury to explain why he now had ‘one hundred and fifty goats and twenty oxen and cows beyond the number which he and his ancestors were wont always to have, to wit, sixteen oxen only’.
Annual ‘drifts’ were held, when cattle were rounded up, and excessive numbers were impounded and released only on payment of a fine.
By Tudor times the Fen commons were subject to sophisticated management, controlled by the parish order-makers, who in turn appointed field reeves and fen reeves.
These kept a close check on the taking in and pasturing of cattle by outsiders through a system of branding and regular drifts.
During the reign of Edward VI, a code of fen law was drawn up, which remained fully operative in the Lincolnshire fens until the eighteenth century.
Penalties were levied for putting diseased or unbranded cattle on to the fen, leaving animals unburied for more than three days, and allowing dogs to harass cattle on the moor.
No reed was to be mown for thatch before it had two years' growth.
No swans', cranes', or bitterns' eggs could be taken from the fen.
In the sixteenth century, Otmoor was similarly controlled by a moor court, upon which the local villages were represented by two ‘moor men’.
The fixing of dates was critical in preventing over-exploitation.
As early as 1534, a closed season for wildfowling, between May and August, was instigated in the Cambridgeshire fens.
All inhabitants of the manor of Epworth on the Isle of Axholme had the right to set bush nets and catch white fish on Wednesdays and Fridays.
Stocking on some fen commons took place no earlier than old May Day, to ensure against overgrazing.
Lammas land was pasture open to commoners from Lammas, or Loaf Mass, 1 August.
Lammas meadows still exist, as at Twyning near Bredon in Worcestershire and, more famous, North Meadow beside the Thames at Cricklade.
Such co-operative management existed even on some wetlands which were not commons.
On the Derwent Ings in Yorkshire, the subdivision of the land into small hay plots and the subsequent pasturing were administered by a court leet, which annually appointed ‘Ings Masters’, who still manage the pastures at East Cottingwith and Newton.
In the Wheldrake Ings account book for 1868–1934, it is specified that the meadows be mown on the dates appointed by the Ings masters, and that thereafter a carefully controlled number of cattle, branded with a W, may be pastured until the autumn, when they are taken off on ‘Ings Breaking Day’, a custom which is still observed.
The water, flooding over the pastures in winter and oozing up through the summer marshes, held the key to these balanced systems.
The black waters of the fen halted the plough, thereby limiting the expansion of economic growth which a fen parish could sustain.
Organized common grazing on wetland pastures blunted incentives to enlarge adjacent farms, and also prevented the selective breeding of livestock.
But technologies of drainage, refined with each succeeding century and reaching a climax in our own day, removed the subtle checks and limitations of the old wetland systems.
As the water ebbed away, so the spell was broken.
It is a mistake to be too naive about the old wetland commons.
They were open to abuse, and their system of controls did not always work.
Overstocking took place on the Somerset Levels in the Middle Ages, aggravated by the rights of some commoners to take in cattle from outside the Levels for a fee.
The Wallingfen court in the Vale of York set an upper limit for animals on the common in 1636 which was way above the actual carrying capacity of the land.
In the eighteenth century, Thomas Stone noted that West Fen in Lincolnshire was ‘perfectly white with sheep’.
It was no doubt grossly overstocked.
The damp conditions would exacerbate such a situation.
Before the Brue valley drainage in 1770, 10,000 sheep rotted in one year in the Somerset parish of Mark.
Nor were the commons some kind of pastoral socialist Utopia, open to all comers.
By the Middle Ages, Otmoor was already a restricted common, jealously guarded by the inhabitants of its ‘seven towns’.
Albert Pell, a fen landlord, wrote in the mid-nineteenth century: ‘The vulgar idea of the general public having rights of any kind on the waste or commonable land was never for a moment admitted.’
Under Cromwell, the truly radical Diggers demanded that all commons and wastes should be cultivated by the poor in communal ownership.
When they began to dig up waste land on St George's Hill in Surrey, they were driven off by local farmers, who almost certainly included small peasants angered at the usurpation of their common rights.
The agricultural improvements resulting from drainage did open up the possibility of betterment for the small man, as well as for the great landowners.
In the Middle Ages a degree of drainage which allowed the conversion of pasture to meadow provided livestock farmers with that most precious of commodities, winter fodder.
In 1606 the lord and his tenants co-operated to reclaim part of the moor at Cossington in the Somerset Levels.
In the 1830s the farmers of Burwell fen began to realize that they were missing out on the prosperity achieved through drainage by their neighbours at Swaffham.
Protagonists of seventeenth-century fen drainage pointed out that a fat ox was better than a well-grown eel, and a tame sheep more use than a wild duck.
Underlying local issues concerning the draining of the marshy commons was the national issue of the need for food.
Bad harvests between 1593 and 1597 were the prelude to the great fen drainage projects of the seventeenth century, at a time when England's growing population was increasingly concentrated in urban or rural industrial centres which were not self-sufficient.
The farming achievements of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries were also motivated by the need for more food.
By 1870 Europe was able to sustain a rapidly rising population, largely from its own resources: the agricultural revolution, including the critical part which drainage had played in it, had worked.
But back on the marshes and fens, who was really to profit from this continual process of ever more intensive cultivation?
Thomas Fuller, writing in 1655, had the answer: ‘Grant them drained, and so continuing; as now the great fishes therein prey on the less, so the wealthy men would devour the poorer sort of people…and rich men, to make room for themselves, would jostle the poor people out of their commons.’
For small farmers and commoners, drainage generally meant at best higher rents, at worst dispossession.
Those undertaking the drainage were quick to stake their claim to the best bits of land.
Thus James Bentham writes of the Fens: ‘The smallest spots, however, scattered or remote, which first showed themselves above the surrounding waters, were eagerly seized upon by these watchful discoverers, and claimed as part of their allotted reward.’
It was a similar story in Somerset in the same period, worsened by the fact that access to the moor along the old drove-ways was severed by the new drainage ditches.
An often quoted rhyme seems to sum it up:
They hang the man and flog the woman
Who steals the goose from off the Common;
But let the greater villain loose
Who steals the Common from the goose.
Not that the goose ever had much of a deal.
Live plucking was normal practice by the commoners, in order to ensure quills of the best quality.
The People of the Wetlands
Taming the flood necessitated taming the people of the flood-lands.
Outsiders, who generally initiated the drainage, were as unimpressed by the men of the marshes as they were by their stagnant swamps.
Camden described fenmen in 1586 as ‘rude, uncivil and envious to all others whom they call Upland Men; who stalking on high upon stilts apply their minds to grazing, fishing and fowling’.
Lieutenant Hammon, writing in 1635, went further: ‘I think they be halfe fish, halfe flesh, for they drinke like fishes and sleep like hogges.’
The people of Ely ‘have but a turfy scent and fenny posture about them, which smell I did not relish at all with any content’.
‘Fenmen, disgusting representations of ignorance and indecency!’ exclaimed the judge in the Littleport riots in 1816.
In the same period, Arthur Young, subsidized by the big landlords to promote agricultural improvement, put his finger on what must have been a general attitude, when he described cattle-stealers in the Lincolnshire fens: ‘So wild a country nurses up a race of people as wild as the fen, and thus the morals and eternal welfare of numbers are hazarded and ruined for want of an inclosure.’
They certainly were a rough lot.
Thomas Stone in 1794 described Deeping fen as a frequent resort of cattle-thieves.
Between the 1740s and the 1820s, Romney Marsh was openly terrorized by armed gangs of smugglers.
Richard Gough, in his ‘History of Myddle’ in Shropshire, written in 1700, describes how resentment aroused by increased rents for peat cutting following drainage improvements bubbled over into violence.
The agent of Sir Edward Kinaston approached a certain Clarke for rent, when he was ‘cutting peates on Haremeare Mosse…
But one of Clarke's sons with a turfe spade, which they call a peate iron,(a very keen thing,) struck Sir Edward's man on the head and cloave out his brains.
The bayliffe fled.’
In the 1860s the first policeman ever sent to the fen village of Wicken was killed when he tried to break up a Saturday night brawl.
His body was wheeled off in a peat barrow and cremated in the local brick kiln.
Ever since opposition to drainage in the seventeenth century, the men of the Cambridgeshire fens were known as ‘fen tigers’.
Their women folk must have been equally formidable.
In 1632 ‘a crowd of women and men, armed with scythes and pitchforks, uttered threatening words’ to anyone attempting to drive their cattle off Holme fen.
In 1539 Sir Richard Brereton decided to enclose and drain the Dogmore, a marshy common near Prees in Shropshire, which he had bought from the bishop of Lichfield.
The bishop was harangued by ‘fourtie wyfes of Prees’, one of whom ‘rudeley began to take his horse by the bridell whereat the horse sprang aside and put the Bysshop in danger of a fall’.
Twelve years later, Brereton again went to the Dogmore, to appease ‘great tumults of the Tennants ther gathered together’.
The local justice of the peace excused himself, saying he was ‘dysseasid of styche’.
The prospect of an armed mob, including that monstrous regiment of ‘wyfes’, must have been enough to bring on an immediate headache.
A riot in 1694 at Hatfield Chase in the Isle of Axholme is described by George Stovin, who was born the year after the events described: ‘Whilst the corn was growing, several men, women and children of Belton and among others the said Popplewell's wife encouraged by him — in a riotous manner pulled down and burnt and laid waste the thorns and destroyed the corn.’
The ‘thorns’ must refer to the new enclosure hedges planted on the commons.
In Hatfield Chase today, you can see a sign put up by a local farmer with a sense of humour.
It reads not ‘Beware of the Dog’, but ‘Beware of the Woman’.
Such tough independent people must have posed a threat to both central and local government.
Just as the Biesbosch on the Rhine delta was a centre for the Dutch underground opposition to Hitler, so the English wetlands have a long history as centres of resistance.
Dio Cassius describes the difficulties with which the Romans subdued the ancient Britons, who hid in the marshes ‘with their heads only out of the water!’
Alfred the Great led the resistance against the Danes from Athelney in the Somerset Levels; and although every schoolchild knows that William of Normandy conquered England in 1066, he did not succeed in subduing Ely and the surrounding fens until 1071, when Hereward the Wake submitted.
Marshes have always been easy to defend.
Romney Marsh was flooded as a defence against both Napoleon and Hitler, and Calais was lost in 1557 in part because the sluices were not opened in time to flood out the besiegers.
It would be a mistake to exaggerate the role of wetlands in national insurrections.
Nevertheless, three marshland villages in Essex led the way in the Peasants' Revolt of 1381; Sedgemoor will always be associated with Monmouth, s Rebellion; and agitations against fen drainage played a small, but significant, part in both the career of Oliver Cromwell and the origins of the English Revolution.
The place which seems above all to encapsulate the spirit of the Derwent Ings is Aughton church, standing alone in the marshlands, its churchyard lapped by floods each winter and haunted by the bubbling call of the curlew in spring.
On the church wall is carved the watery symbol of a newt.
Small boys in Yorkshire and Worcestershire, going out with their jam jars to collect newts and tiddlers, still talk of going out after ‘asks’.
The newt at Aughton is the emblem of Robert Aske, and it was from here that Aske set out in 1536 to lead the Pilgrimage of Grace against the religious reforms of Henry VIII.
Aske's main aim was a return of the smaller monasteries, but his appeal included requests to halt enclosure and drainage.
He typifies the marshman's feudal protest against central authority, together with his longing, not for a new order, but for a return of the old.
The wetlands are lost landscapes.
Just as they defy access, they defy organization by outsiders.
Even long-drained regions, such as Longdon Marsh in Worcestershire, are easy to pick out on the Ordnance Survey as ‘holes’ on the map.
Cul-de-sacs skirt warily down to them and then peter out.
Some, such as the Somerset Levels, Chat Moss, and Hatfield and Thorne Wastes, are visible from motorways, from which there seems to be no exit whereby they can be reached.
Approached more closely, they still challenge the intruder.
Otmoor and Hatfield Chase are both encircled by moats of ditches, crossed in the case of Hatfield by only one bridge.
If you do venture by car on to the edge of Otmoor, there is the feeling that you will be unable to turn around in the narrow space between the dykes, or may get stuck up to the axles in mud.
The single rough road across Simonswood Moss near Liverpool is barred at either end by the intimidating iron gates of the Knowsley estate.
Romney Marsh, which lacks a central inaccessible fastness, is crossed by a maze of switchback lanes which seem determined to throw off even the most diligent map-reader.
In Somerset, the old drove-ways still branch off the main routes into the moors, like spines on a stickleback.
These are truly the landscapes of the ‘No Through Road’.
Straddling boundaries, some wetlands still defy comprehensive administration.
Romney Marsh is shared by Kent and Sussex; what is left of the great moss system of the Mersey valley is carved up between Lancashire and Cheshire and the urban authorities of Manchester, Liverpool, and Warrington.
Hatfield and Thorne Wastes are bewilderingly divided among Nottinghamshire, Yorkshire, Lincolnshire, and South Humberside.
The inhabitants would probably not admit allegiance to any of these, and huge signs proclaim the Isle of Axholme — known locally as ‘The Isle’— as if it were an independent State.
If such is the character of these places now, what must they have been like when both men and livestock could only get around them by boat, and parishes such as Dogdyke in Lincolnshire had in the eighteenth century ‘not two houses communicable for whole winters round’.
For all their imperfections, the old wetland commons had a certain self-sufficiency and self-containment which provide a standard against which to judge the enthusiastic, never-satisfied ambitions of the agriculturalists and drainage men who set out to exploit them.
Traditional management of the marshes was tuned to the finest nuances of the local water-table.
Each wetland evolved a landscape character as individual as the spirit of its people was independent.
A few marshes in western France are still managed very strictly as commons.
To visit them is to gain an insight into what many of our own wetlands must have been like.
The Marais Communal of Curzon lies in the lap of low scrubby hills, like a green sea of stillness.
It is quite without the trees or hedges which enclose all the country around it.
Cattle, herded down to it along drove-ways used from time immemorial, slowly graze across its moist levels.
From the steady centre of this tranquillity flickers the occasional silver of snipe or redshank, like fish rising from the still heart of a pool.
The real beauty of such places is not their actual visual components, but the system which underlies them: the harmony between man and nature which they represent.
Andrew Motion's recent poem ‘Inland’ describes how a society, as much as an ecology, was overturned by drainage projects in the seventeenth-century fens.
In this extract, a fen villager watches the arrival by boat of the men who are going to change his life:
Sun flicked round the bay,
binding the outline of farms
to their reflections in grey
bands of light.
The marsh
always survives.
Always.
Cattle stirred in their shed,
uncoiling sweet  whisps 
of breath over my head;
fresh shadows spilt down
their flanks and spread
across water to flake
into shrinking fragments
over the strangers' wake.
Their boat put down
some men; one staked
its prow into our land,
waded towards us
over the grass, and
lifted one arm.
Our world
dried on his hand.
That world was one of many small men co-operating in order to survive.
In the battle to save West Sedgemoor and the Derwent Ings in the 1970s and 1980s, the large number of small landowners was to militate against the efficiency with which large-scale drainage schemes could be organized.
In 1794 Billingsley described the Somerset Levels as ‘destitute of gentlemen's houses’; and the 1580 muster returns for Holland in Lincolnshire lamented ‘the want of gentlemen here to inhabit.
Charlton-on-Otmoor means ‘town of the churls’.
A ‘churl’ was a free peasant (note the slur implied by present dictionary usage), and Charlton never had a resident squire, being dismissed in eighteenth-century diocesan returns as having ‘no family of note’.
The men of Charlton must have cherished their independence, especially when they looked at the fate of the neighbouring village of Noke, which, it was said, was lost by Lily, duchess of Marlborough, at cards.
Recent reports on current or just completed land-drainage schemes emphasize the trend whereby large farmers accrue the benefit much more commonly than small men.
The theory behind such schemes is that ambitious large farmers will set an example, which will encourage their small backward neighbours.
The latter are described in all current cost-benefit reports of the Ministry of Agriculture as ‘laggards’.
The assumptions behind this unfortunate word go back a long way.
In 1652 Dugdale described fenmen as a ‘lazy and beggarly people’.
Billingsley castigated the farmers of the Somerset Levels in the late eighteenth century thus:.
The possession of a cow or two, with a hog and a few geese, naturally exalts the peasant in his own conception, above his brethren in the same rank of society…
In sauntering after his cattle, he acquires a habit of indolence…and at length the sale of a half-fed cow or hog, furnishes the means of adding intemperance to idleness.
No doubt such people must have seemed slow-witted.
In order to counteract the effects of malaria, they were frequently doped with opium, which was sold over the counter in the village shop or grown in the fens (where Poppy Hill and Poppy Farm still exist as place-names).
Where Cannabis was grown as an important fibre crop in the Cambridgeshire fens, the workers in the hemp fields were known to become exceedingly drowsy.
Moreover, the isolation of the men of the wetlands led to inbreeding.
In 1870 the geologist de Rance commented on the number of idiots in the Lancashire Fylde, which resulted from ‘the dislike of the people to marry outside the district’.
The laggards were constantly encouraged to improve for their own good.
Arthur Young, as usual, has the last word.
Here he describes the wetlands of Lincolnshire: ‘Fens of water, mud, wildfowl, frogs and agues have been converted to rich pasture and arable worth from 20 shillings to 40 shillings an acre: health improved,morals corrected and the community enriched’.
The history of drainage since the sixteenth century has seen the decline of enforced co-operation in sharing a resource, in the face of individual private enterprise.
The big man has got bigger, and the small man smaller.
This thought brings us bang up to date.
The great agricultural revolution of our own times, in which drainage has played no small part, has accelerated the decline of the small farmer just as surely as it has imperilled the ecological system previously sustained by communal wetland management; and, at the last, it has begun to destroy the basic resources of the land, as ever deeper drainage has created mineral problems in the soil, wastage of peat, and an increasing dependence upon pumping.
Man's attempts to tame the flood have not always progressed smoothly.
There have been frequent and major set-backs; and it may be that we are now on the threshold of a new era, in which, for the first time, leaders in society will make a conscious decision to allow the flood-waters in some areas to rise again.
With all the themes previously outlined in mind, it is time to make a brief chronological survey of that process, which began in the mists of time, and has made inevitable the problems and conflicts described in the remaining chapters of this book.
We are witnessing only the latest episode in that long history, in which geography itself has been remade, and the landscape, now more than ever, is transformed not so much by the efforts of individuals, as by public policy and the stroke of a pen.
The Winning of the Waters
A History of the Fight against Flooding until the Post-War Era
TODAY, land-drainage operations are administered from tower blocks, with the aid of computers in the office and sophisticated machinery on the river bank.
It all seems a peculiarly modern phenomenon.
In fact, the technocrats of land drainage are heirs to one of the oldest forms of organized local government.
In 1252 the ‘jurats’ of Romney Marsh are recorded as having had the power to repair the sea-wall and to control the ditches ‘from time out of mind’.
Similarly, organized bodies of men walked the marshes of the Thames, setting out in the early morning mist to assess the repairs required, which were paid for by a charge known as ‘wallscot’ or ‘scottage’.
Those who escaped these earliest of water-rates could be deemed to have got off ‘scot free’.
In the ‘Domesday Book’, our first named drainage specialist makes his appearance.
He lived on the Somerset Levels, and he was called Girard Fossarius, Gerard of the Drain.
The people of the Middle Ages inherited sea-walls and drainage channels which had survived from the Roman occupation.
The Romans had gained expertise in flood alleviation and in irrigation projects from the Greeks and the Etruscans before them.
They industriously developed these skills throughout Europe, and were quick to export them to their colonies.
The emperor Hadrian is commemorated in Britain not only by the engineering achievement of his famous wall, but also by the Car dyke, a catch-water drain encircling the western edge of the Fens, linking the river Cam at Waterbeach with the Witham near Lincoln.
On the Medway estuary in Kent, raised banks built by the Romans to keep out the sea lasted substantially until the eighteenth century, and the extent of Roman reclamation appears to have been formidable.
The military and political decline of the Roman Empire coincided with a worsening of the climate, and both contributed to a rising of the swamps in the Dark Ages.
This must have reinforced the terror of such places, as portrayed in Beowulf and the chronicles relating to St Guthlac.
None the less, settlement persisted in some of the wetlands.
The priest Rumen, or Romanus, who was chaplain to King Oswy's wife in the seventh century, probably gave his name to Romney Marsh, large areas of which he owned and may have farmed.
Charters of 875 and 972 concerning Longdon Marsh in Worcestershire give a picture of clearing and enclosure among streams and marshes, including a duck pond ‘on ducan seathe’, traces of which still survive under the M50 motorway.
Piecemeal drainage and reclamation in the Cambridgeshire fens, carried out by Saxon farmers around Wisbech and Elm, have been traced through the detective work of archaeologists, using aerial photography and careful analysis of the evidence on the ground.
The Medieval Church
With the dawning of the Middle Ages, the driving force for reclamation of the marshes became the Church.
Many monasteries had settled for safety on secluded islands in the swamps.
By the sixth century, a colony of holy men had gathered at Glastonbury in the Somerset Levels.
As the confidence and prosperity of the monasteries increased, so did the enthusiasm with which the monks began to drain and develop the wetlands around them.
This was the pattern in wetlands all over the country until the Reformation.
It is hard to underestimate the impact of the monasteries, especially in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.
The monks of Furness reclaimed the coastal marshes of Walney, with embankments incorporating beach pebbles.
Cockersands Abbey drained and hedged part of the Lancashire Fylde.
The surviving network of ditches on the Monmouthshire Levels beside the Bristol Channel is essentially that dug by the Benedictines in the twelfth century.
In the thirteenth century the bishop of Durham instigated extensive drainage works along the northern shores of the Humber.
The monks of Meaux were active in the Hull valley, and those of Fountains on the Derwent Ings.
In 1180 the canons of St Thomas drained the flood-lands at Eccleshall in Staffordshire.
Battle Abbey actively reclaimed the Pevensey Levels in Sussex, and on Romney Marsh a lead was given by the priors of Christ Church, Canterbury, and by the archbishops themselves.
Just as the church at Aughton stands as a touchstone of the spirit of the Derwent Ings, so the little church of St Thomas a Becket at Fairfield represents all the romance and loneliness of Romney Marsh.
Prior to drainage work in the 1960s, Fairfield was regularly islanded by winter floods.
Sheep graze up to its walls, mellow with yellow lichen, and the reedy dykes which surround it are famous for their marsh frogs, whose operatic baritone can be heard a mile away on May nights.
The dedication of the church to St Thomas is no accident.
Becket may well have been closely involved in building the great walls of packed clay which still enclose the local ‘innings’, or sheep pastures.
They must have added considerably to the wealth of the See of Canterbury.
Near Fairfield you can still see the innings of St Thomas.
On a grander scale, the dog-toothed vault of Crowland Abbey arches like the jawbone of a mighty whale above the Lincolnshire fens, a monument to the riches which the monks harvested from the marsh.
In a few cases the wetlands proved too much for them.
The abbey of Otley on Otmoor was abandoned after three years, in 1141, as ‘fitter for an ark than a monastery’.
But in general, the abbeys and their abbots fattened up together.
Tithes of reed were reserved for the local priest on the Somerset Levels, and Chaucer's monk cast an entirely practical eye on the local birdlife: ‘he liked a swan best, and roasted whole.’
The holy men, whose heirs, such as the Carmelites on the Derwent Ings, now venerate God's wilderness which washes up to their walls, began to compete with each other as to who could plunder it the most.
In 1305 the abbot of Thorney in the Fens complained that the abbot of Peterborough ‘lately by night raised a dyke across the high road’, and so cut off the former's access to corn and pasture.
On the Somerset Levels, intermittent war was waged throughout the Middle Ages between successive abbots of Glastonbury and bishops of Wells.
They were forever breaking up each other 's fish-weirs and quarrelling over competing interests in pasture and peat cutting.
In 1278 the abbot's men destroyed a piggery belonging to the bishop in Godney Moor, and again in 1315.
In 1326 somebody set fire to the peat moor in the Brue valley, with the idea of burning Glastonbury Abbey.
The bishop followed up this preliminary scorching with a promise of eternal fire for the abbot of Glastonbury, upon whom he pronounced sentence of excommunication for the sin of damaging his property.
The Courts of Sewers
Such piecemeal, not to mention conflicting, management of the marshes was no way to organize and control the ever-threatening flood-waters; and from the mid-thirteenth century, the responsibility for land drainage and reclamation from the sea began to devolve upon successive ‘commissions of sewers’, which were answerable to central government.
A ‘sewer’ was a straight cut, the kind of geometrical channel beloved by modern engineers, and did not have the connotation of foul water which it has today.
The first commission of sewers was set up in Lincolnshire by Henry de Bathe in 1258.
Like fenland engineers 400 years later, de Bathe went for advice on procedure and administration to the heartland of organized land drainage, Romney Marsh.
The subsequent courts of sewers were steadily reinforced by successive legislation, culminating in 1532 in Henry VIII's Statute of Sewers, just at the moment when the power of the monastic lords of the levels was broken by the Reformation.
These courts were to survive, incredibly, until 1930.
With the growth of commissions of sewers in the Middle Ages, the role of the professional layman in such matters began to increase.
In 1390 a commission was appointed to inspect and repair flood-banks and dykes on the Thames marshes between Greenwich and Woolwich.
It included among its number the king's clerk of works, no less than Geoffrey Chaucer.
The last major drainage operation in the medieval period, however, was instigated by a churchman.
John Morton, later to become Henry VII's lord chancellor, familiar to every schoolchild for his tax levies of ‘Morton's Fork’, organized the construction of the channel still known as Morton's Leam, when he was bishop of Ely between 1478 and 1486.
This ambitious piece of engineering, extending for 12 miles between Peterborough and Wisbech, survives today, although the tower Morton built from which to watch over his work-force crumbled away in the early nineteenth century.
By the end of the Middle Ages, the marshes in Kent and Sussex had been sufficiently reclaimed to reveal an abiding characteristic of such operations: that in certain circumstances land drainage contains the seeds of its own destruction.
In the mid-fifteenth century, floods and silting doomed the old port of Pevensey; and further along the coast, on Romney Marsh, a series of catastrophic storms culminating in 1287 obliterated the towns of Old Winchelsea and Broomhill.
Although climatic deterioration in the later Middle Ages certainly worsened the situation, these disasters were not simply the haphazard expression of hostile Nature.
They were made inevitable by the meddling of man.
At Pevensey, reclamation of the adjacent estuary had reduced tidal scouring, which had previously kept the river mouth open.
In consequence, the water, unable to escape through the blocked outfall, flooded the land, and navigation up the river was also prevented.
Successive new channels cut in 1402 and 1455 failed to remedy the problem, and Pevensey Castle, which still rises dramatically above the marshes whose creation ensured its demise, was abandoned.
On Romney Marsh, silting of river mouths was worsened by the problem of peat shrinkage.
By the twelfth century, increasingly elaborate drainage schemes had led to contraction of the peat, thereby causing the land to drop ever lower in relation to the menacing waters of the English Channel.
When the banks finally broke, the sea captured both arms of the river Rother, and created the present estuary south of Rye.
This cat-and-mouse game between engineers and the elements was to become a major theme in the next great age of wetland reclamation, which began under the Tudors and reached its climax in the middle of the seventeenth century.
Following the dissolution of the monasteries in the 1530s, the flood-waters began to rise again, since there were no monks to man the sluices and dig the drains.
At least, this was the opinion of Dugdale, writing a hundred years later; but it should be remembered that he was one of a long line of propagandists for land drainage, and that, while localized deterioration must have taken place, there is also ample evidence of the activities of the courts of sewers and of individual enterprise by secular landlords.
In 1539 the gentry around Newhaven diverted the Sussex Ouse to improve the drainage of the estuarine marshland and to capture navigation and trade from their neighbours at Seaford.
During the reign of Elizabeth, the Wealdmoors in Shropshire were a battleground between rival landlords intent on drainage and enclosure.
In 1576 Thomas Cherrington complained in the Queen's Council of the Marches, that Thurston Woodcock, lord of Meason, had assembled a gang armed with long staffs and billhooks, and had forcibly ploughed and then enclosed a piece of his waste ground with a ditch.
Clearly Cherrington was not above such tactics either, for he seems to have destroyed the ditch.
In 1583 the Woodcocks were back ‘with divers... desperate and lewde persons’ who ‘in riotous manner dug... one myghty diche more like in truthe a defence to have kepte owte some forren enemyes than an inclosure to keepe in cattell’.
The Battle for the Fens
Towards the end of Elizabeth's reign, covetous eyes began to be cast on far grander prizes.
The new card in the pack was foreign technology.
In the reign of Henry VIII, Italian engineers had recovered Combe Marsh near Greenwich; and under Elizabeth, Plumstead and Erith marshes by the Thames were drained with the help of Dutch engineers and workmen.
In 1575 a certain Peter Morris of Dutch extraction obtained a licence from the queen to employ engines, or mills, for draining; and in 1589 Humphrey Bradley, who, despite his name, came from Bergen op Zoom in the Netherlands, presented a treatise to Elizabeth's chief minister, Lord Burghley.
It proposed nothing less than the reclamation for her kingdom of an area 70 miles long and 30 broad, equivalent to a whole new county, the ‘Great Level’ of the Fens.
Shrewdly, in view of the trouble such ambitions were to cause her successors, the queen turned Bradley down.
He went off to France, where, as Master of the Dykes for Henry IV, he supervised the draining of the great Poitevin marshes north of La Rochelle.
But before she died, Elizabeth I signed an Act of Parliament in 1600 ‘for the recovering of many hundred thousand Acres of marshes’.
The battle for the Fens was on.
The Stuart kings were forever short of money.
The career of James I was marked by ingenious methods of raising cash, by fair means or foul; and similar expropriation was to lead his heir, Charles I, to his downfall.
In such circumstances, the new engineering which could apparently transform wetland wastes into sources of valuable crops to be sold to a growing population, must have seemed like something for nothing, and therefore irresistible.
Francis Bacon advised King James to hold on to his royal wastes and hunting forests for exactly this potential; and, as if to confirm the good sense of such drainage enterprises, a series of bad winters between 1607 and 1613 created some of the worst floods in living memory.
In Somerset ‘the tops of trees and houses only appeared…as if , at the beginning of the world, townes had been built in the bottom of the sea’.
In the Fens, mothers abandoned their children ‘swimming in their beds, till good people, adventuring their lives, went up to the breast in the waters to fetch them out at the windows’.
For the flood to yield up its riches, two things were required: a competent engineer and plenty of capital.
To obtain the latter, there emerged a peculiarly modern group of businessmen who called themselves ‘undertakers’ or ‘adventurers’.
An undertaker was one who contracted to ‘undertake’ a drainage scheme; an ‘adventurer’was one who ‘adventured’his capital on such an undertaking.
The security of both was the promise of a large proportion of the land after the drainage operation had been successfully completed.
In 1605 Lord Chief Justice Popham, prosecutor of Guy Fawkes, Ralegh, and the Queen of Scots, ‘undertook’ to drain the fen at Upwell.
He has left behind him a flamboyant monument in Wellington church, Somerset, and the channel known as Popham's Eau in Cambridgeshire, which was abandoned at his death in 1607.
The judge's real memorial, however, is his reputation.
In 1606 James I received an anonymous letter accusing ‘covetous and bloodie Popham’ of ruining the poor people of the Fens.
The commoners, who had everything to lose from undertakings such as his, were firing an opening shot.
The wetlands and wastes of England were soon to be loud with their tumults.
In 1618 James made his first move in Somerset.
He decided to drain King's Sedgemoor, which the Crown had inherited entire at the dissolution of Glastonbury Abbey.
Three years later, in 1621, the king declared that he would himself undertake the drainage of the Fens for a recompense of 120,000 acres; and in that year, there arrived in England a Dutchman who was destined to become one of the greatest architects of the English landscape.
His name was Cornelius Vermuyden.
In 1625 the old king died, having achieved no effective drainage operations.
Vermuyden had been occupied with rebuilding the Thames flood defences at Dagenham, which, according to an inquiry of 1623, he left ‘in a worse condition than it was before’.
From this bad beginning, Vermuyden turned his attention to the great wetland system around Hatfield Chase, south of the Humber.
It was here that he made his name, carrying out the first really ambitious operation of its kind in the country, which was to be a blueprint for his ‘Great Design’ for the Fens.
It is also at Hatfield that we first get a clear glimpse of the tricky controversial personality of Cornelius Vermuyden.
The name ‘Trent’ comes from the Celtic word ‘Trisanton’meaning ‘trespasser’, which describes the wandering nature of the river.
The river Trent has always flooded, and nowhere more so than on the levels between where its own waters and those of the Yorkshire Aire flow out into the Humber.
Apart from the little Isle of Axholme, this basin must all have been a flooded fen roughly 8 miles wide by 12 miles long.
It remains one of the least known, and, despite much intensively farmed land, one of the wildest regions of lowland England.
At its heart lie two raised mires of deep peat, wildernesses of scattered birch, where adders sun themselves among the fern, and amber dragonflies haunt the peaty pools.
The larger mire, Thorne Waste, approached by surmounting the incongruous dereliction of Moor Ends Colliery, stretches out as far as the eye can see, an astonishing 6,000 acres of untamed wetland.
To its south lies the smaller Hatfield Moor, still quite large enough to get lost in.
Ruined cottages nestle among its birches, and miners, with guns over their shoulders, roam its maze of tracks on the look-out for duck and rabbit.
At dusk the air is filled with the eerie chuckle of nightjars.
In its very centre, accessible only by an earth track, is the ancient manor of Lindholme, which was, from the Middle Ages, a royal hunting-lodge.
It was from here that the Stuarts sized up the potential of the area for exploitation.
In 1626 Charles I signed an agreement with Vermuyden for the drainage of Hatfield Chase, for which the latter would be awarded one-third of the land drained.
Work started immediately, and within three years the scheme was completed.
The dykes he dug to create the farmland around Hatfield Moors can still be seen, harbouring the aquatic flora of the ancient fen: butter-yellow bladderwort and the feathery spires of mare's-tail.
In January 1629 the king knighted Vermuyden at Whitehall, and a month later he sold him his royal manor of Hatfield for £10,000 cash down and an annual interest of £195. 3s. 5d. and a red rose.
But matters had not gone as smoothly as all that.
Even the knighthood was not the honour it might seem, for James I had instigated the practice of charging for knighthoods, and Charles I had compounded his profit by fining those who had the temerity to refuse.
Furthermore, since the Crown had earlier inherited Hatfield subject to the maintenance of rights of common, it was not entirely the king's to either sell or drain.
This was something which the inhabitants were not going to overlook as lightly as Charles had done.
A lawsuit of April 1629 between Vermuyden and the commoners attests how the people of Torksey
came unto the workmen and beat and terrified them, threatening to kill them, if they would not leave their work, threw some of them in the river and kept them under water with long poles, and at several other times, upon the Knelling of a Bell, came to the said works in riotous and warlike manner, divided themselves into companies, to take the workmen and filled up the ditches and drains, made to carry away the water, burned up the working tools and other materials of the Relator and his workmen, and set up poles in the form of gallows, to terrifie the workmen and threatened to break their arms and legs, and beat and hurt many of them and made others flee away, whom they pursued to a town with such terror and threats, that they were forced to guard the town.
Reports in the previous year that a local man had been killed by the Dutch workforce make it clear that the battles over the digging of the ditches were far from one-sided.
Worse was to follow.
The inhabitants made it clear that their commons had been reduced to between half and a third of their former size.
While propagandists of drainage, such as Dugdale, admired the corn and the oil-seed rape which could now be sown on the drained land, they failed to appreciate that the people of Axholme already grew sufficient corn for their needs on the higher land.
What the people wanted on the fen was what they had already: grazing.
The ignorance with which the outsiders set about overturning a perfectly satisfactory agricultural economy at Axholme suggests parallels with the notorious ground-nut scheme instigated in East Africa in the late 1940s.
In addition, the villagers of the north-west of the region complained, with justification, that the engineering works had simply sent the water down to flood them out.
After much legal deliberation, the lord president of the Council of the North, the earl of Strafford, pronounced that Vermuyden must bear the cost of a major new channel, still called ‘Dutch River’, to rectify the situation.
The project ended in financial disaster, and Vermuyden was temporarily imprisoned for not paying his debts.
Catastrophic floods inundated the region in 1636 and again in 1697, exacerbated no doubt by deliberate sabotage by the commoners, but also caused by the insufficient capacity of the new channels and by peat shrinkage.
The people remained as uncontrollable as the waters, burning down the Dutch settlement at Sandtoft during the Civil War and again in 1688.
Peace did not really reign again at Hatfield Chase until well into the eighteenth century.
However, long before these disastrous developments, Vermuyden was wiping the mud of Hatfield off his boots and casting around for greener pastures.
From 1629 to 1632 he held leases in Malvern Chase, which included Longdon Marsh, and in 1632 he bought part of Charles I's share of King's Sedgemoor in Somerset.
But Vermuyden never achieved effective drainage in the West.
In 1636 he was accused by the king's agent for Somerset of fraud and duplicity, charges which were revived when he made another attempt to tackle the Somerset Levels in 1655.
The Somerset commoners succeeded in fighting off most attempts at drainage where their contemporaries in the eastern counties had failed.
After 1638 nearly two-thirds of the Somerset Levels were still unreclaimed, and even as late as 1769, the local drainage agent, Richard Locke, was stoned, and his effigy was burned ‘by the owners of geese’.
Old habits die hard in the wetlands.
In 1983 the descendants of these owners of geese were to burn the local conservationists in effigy.
The finest prize for the reclaimers remained the Great Level.
In 1630 Francis Russell, earl of Bedford, agreed to undertake the drainage of the fens in Cambridgeshire, Huntingdonshire, and parts of Norfolk and Lincolnshire.
In 1631 thirteen other business adventurers joined the earl, forming the Bedford Level Corporation and employing the services of Cornelius Vermuyden.
Thus was inaugurated a period of extensive engineering works, culminating in the construction of the Old Bedford river in 1637.
The adventurers then proceeded to bid for their profit.
There was a general outcry.
Many complained that the flooding was as bad as ever; others that Bedford had cheated them of their land.
In 1638 Charles I intervened, and, re-engaging Vermuyden, declared himself undertaker.
The king's ambitions were characteristically grandiose.
Not only did he require a grant of 57,000 acres of the drained land, but, according to Dugdale, he intended to transform the village of Manea into a town to be called Charlemont, which would command the new river system.
One can imagine the cloud-capped towers of Inigo Jones's elegant Baroque soaring above the Fens.
As it is, Manea (pronounced Mainy) remains a tiny hamlet in the Ouse washes, haunted by the ghost of what might have been.
Events were moving fast to overtake all such enterprises.
From his first arrival in the Fens, Vermuyden had been faced with the now familiar rioting.
A drinking song called ‘Powtes Complaint’—‘powte’ being a lamprey — circulated in the taverns:
Come, Brethren of the water, and let us all assemble,
To treat upon this matter, which makes us quake and tremble;
For we shall rue it, if't be true, that Fens be undertaken,
And where we feed in Fen and Reed, they'll feed both Beef and Bacon.
They'll sow both beans and oats, where never man yet thought it,
Where men did row in boats, ere undertakers bought it:
But, Ceres, thou, behold us now, let wild oats be their venture,
Oh let the frogs and miry bogs destroy where they do enter.
Away with boats and rudder, farewell both boots and skatches,
No need of one nor th'other, men now make better matches;
Stilt-makers all and tanners, shall complain of this disaster,
For they will make each muddy lake for Essex calves a pasture.
The feather'd fowls have wings, to fly to other nations;
But we have no such things, to help our transportations;
We must give place (oh grievous case) to horned beasts and cattle,
Except that we can all agree to drive them out by battle.
Battle was what they settled for.
The men of the Lincolnshire fens ‘fell upon the Adventurers, broke the sluices, laid waste their lands, threw down their fences... and forcibly retained possession of the land.
The northern fens were to remain the preserve of fishers and fowlers for another 150 years.
In Cambridgeshire, Sir Miles Sandys, an adventurer whose capital had been sorely overstretched by the drainage projects, wrote to his son that if ‘order not be taken, it will turn out to be a general rebellion in all the Fen towns’.’
General rebellion, indeed, but not only in the Fens.
In 1638 the commoners found a champion of their causes in a local farmer whose career was ultimately to lead him far beyond the battles of the wetlands.
In that year it was ‘commonly reported by the commoners…that Mr Cromwell of Ely had undertaken, they paying him a groat for every cow they had upon the common, to hold the drainers in suit for five years’.
They appointed Cromwell their advocate at the commission of sewers in Huntingdon, and he ensured that a clause concerning the commandeering of common land was included in the catalogue of complaints known as the Grand Remonstrance presented to the king in 1641.
The following year Civil War was declared, and drainage works fell into abeyance.
In 1649 the war was over and the king executed, but that summer a surprising turn of events took place in the Fens.
In May, Oliver Cromwell, erstwhile champion of the commoners, was named as one of the commissioners, together with the earl of Bedford, under a new Act for the Draining of the Great Level.
He was to send a major of his own regiment to suppress the commoners' riots; and in 1654 he issued an ordinance to protect Bedford and his works, himself receiving 200 acres of the drained land as a reward.
After intensive wrangling over terms and money, during which the adventurers declared that it was ‘not fitt to depend upon Sir Cornelius Vermuyden any longer’, the latter was re-engaged in 1650.
The following year, despite the midnight activities of ‘the meaner sort of Burwell’ and other villages, he completed the New Bedford, or Hundred Foot, river, parallel to the Old Bedford built fourteen years before.
The two massive channels run straight towards the Wash, enclosing a flood-land which still fills up in winter, as Vermuyden intended.
They are his greatest monument.
In 1653, after the remaining works had been completed by Dutch prisoners of war under Vermuyden's direction, a service of thanksgiving was held in Ely Cathedral; and in the same year Vermuyden was employed by his earlier adversary, the lord protector, on diplomatic missions to the Netherlands.
The fenmen and their fens were under control at last.
Samuel Fortrey celebrated the achievement in verse:
I sing floods muzzled and the Ocean tam'd
Luxurious rivers govern'd and reclam'd.
Streams curb'd with Dammes like Bridles, taught to obey,
And run as straight as if they saw their way.
New hands shall learn to work, forget to steal
New legs shall go to church, new knees shall kneel.
In the great struggle to extend cultivation to feed the growing cities, the peasantry had been defeated no less decisively than the Crown.
From this turning-point, enclosure and drainage were to shape both lives and landscape in the English countryside, right up to the present day.
In 1658 Cromwell died, by appropriate irony, hastened on his way by malaria, probably contracted during his campaigns in the bogs of Ireland.
About this time, Vermuyden vanished from public life, although it was not until 1677 that he died, full of years and riches, and was buried in St Margaret's, Westminster.
It is interesting to speculate on the possible reasons for his total obscurity during the intervening years of the Restoration.
He certainly made many enemies, and not only among the commoners.
In 1633 legal action was taken against him by his countrymen and co-adventurers at Hatfield Chase.
His earliest ally had been Sir Robert Heath, who had promoted Vermuyden's advancement at court, and had even managed to get him out of prison.
When Heath, a staunch Royalist, fled to France under the Commonwealth, Vermuyden appears to have expropriated Heath's share of a mine at Wirksworth, and Heath's son was still petitioning for his rightful property in 1652.
With the new regime in 1660, there must have been those who had old scores to settle.
They may also have been quick to point out that Vermuyden's ‘Great Design’ was already turning sour.
He had been lampooned by contemporary dramatists.
In Thomas Randolph's play The Muse's Looking Glass , a conversation takes place between an engineer named Banausus and a gentleman called Colax:
BANAUSUS.
I have a rare device to set Dutch windmills Upon New-market Heath, and Salisbury Plaine, To draine the Fens.
COLAX.
The Fens Sir are not there.
BANAUSUS.
But who knowes but they may be?
How true this still rings for modern consultants on the look-out for schemes for which no justification exists.
Vermuyden had faced remarkable difficulties, not least the age-old problem of clients who want the profit at the end of the day, but who are not prepared to lay out sufficient capital to achieve it.
Consequently, a linchpin of Vermuyden's scheme, a catch-dyke skirting the eastern edge of the fens, was abandoned, to be constructed only in the 1960s.
Such inadequacies were made far worse by something which Vermuyden could not have foreseen: peat shrinkage.
The people might be made to kneel, but the elements were not quite so easy to muzzle.
The very efficiency of any improvement speeded up the lowering of the land as the peat dried and ‘wasted’ through the activities of bacteria and fungi.
Today the surface of the peat fens lies only a few feet above or below sea-level.
Children playing in fen churchyards in the nineteenth century were able to reach down and touch the coffins exposed by the wasted peat.
As the peat shrank, the critical outfall of the river Ouse into the North Sea inevitably began to silt up.
By 1663 real problems were already apparent, and in 1673, four years before Vermuyden died, mighty floods inundated the Fens, forcing the inhabitants ‘to save themselves in boats’.
By 1700 the full extent of the disaster had become clear, and in 1713, the Denver sluice, the key to the whole system, was washed out to sea.
Not only in the Fens were the waters fighting back.
An ambitious reclamation scheme on the south coast also came to nothing around this time.
Between 1630 and 1646 Sir George Horsey had attempted to dam and drain the long tongue of water which still lies between Chesil Beach and the Dorset mainland.
Winter storms swiftly obliterated his expensive engineering structures.
New Technologies
Just when it looked as if the flood was winning again, technology came to the rescue.
In 1710 complaints were made in Norfolk about the cost of the new ‘whirligigs’; and soon, travellers to the eastern counties were noting the number of windmills dotting the landscape.
They were to become the crucial factor which saved the Fens from total inundation, and although not generally adopted in Somerset, they fast became a typical feature of such wetland landscapes as the Lancashire Fylde and the Hull valley.
The story of the wetlands in the eighteenth century is one of gradual development of new technologies, culminating at the end of the century in the discovery of steam as an even more efficient pumping force than windmills.
In 1692 Sir Thomas Fleetwood set out to drain Martin Mere in Lancashire, employing 2,000 men.
In 1755 storms destroyed the floodgates he had built, and renewed efforts to conquer the mere in the 1780s were crowned with permanent success only as a result of the use of steam-power in the following century.
Meanwhile, a less visible, but no less powerful, strategy for combating the waters was being devised.
Every farmer knows that engineers may lower the levels of rivers for all they are worth, but that, without a follow-up operation of underdrainage in each saturated field, the real rewards for agriculture will never be harvested.
Open ditches and such ancient techniques as ridge and furrow are of limited effect.
Upstream from Leamington Spa, the river Leam flows lazily among waterlilies and tall bulrushes.
Scraps of sedge and meadow rue still cling to its margins, the last remnants of a marsh which must once have inundated the whole valley floor.
It was here, in 1764, that a Warwickshire gentleman made a discovery of the greatest significance.
Mr Joseph Elkington of Princethorpe was faced with a problem.
His sheep were suffering from foot-rot, and however many ditches he dug, he could not get the water off his fields.
He was pondering his dilemma when a servant stopped by with an iron bar for making sheep hurdles.
Mr Elkington rammed it into the bottom of one of his ineffective ditches and, to his astonishment, water burst up like a geyser.
He had discovered a method of intercepting springs, and, using stone to seal his drains, he and others like him set about spreading the gospel of effective underdrainage.
Very soon farmers were using clay tiles, which, stamped with the word ‘drain’, were exempted in 1826 from the tax on other clay products.
The clay tile and its descendant, the plastic pipe, were to take their place alongside the plough and the axe as among the major agents in the settlement of England.
Eighteenth-Century ‘Improvements’
In 1795 Parliament voted that King George III award Elkington £1,000 to carry out a survey of his achievements.
It was in the reign of ‘Farmer George’ that drainage became more than ever in vogue, ‘improvement’being all the rage.
In the eighteenth century this word had two meanings, basically different faces of the same coin.
‘Capability Brown’, and later Repton were employed to ‘improve’ the beauties of the grounds around country houses.
It seems curious that for all those hard-riding, hard-drinking squires, the eternal search for a status symbol should have taken the form of building temples to nymphs and dryads.
None the less, the universality of this practice is attested by one wit who told Brown that he would like to die before him, so that he could have a look at heaven before Brown ‘improved’ it.
The other meaning of the word, still current in farming circles, is to intensify agricultural production.
This form of improvement no doubt helped to pay the fees of Brown and Repton, along with all the other bills.
Invoking a doctrine of the ‘spirit of place’, they felled ancient woodlands and drained the marshes.
Villages were razed to the ground, so that they did not disrupt the view from drawing-room windows, with the same enthusiasm with which the peasantry on the more distant corners of the estate were dispossessed of their wetland commons in the pursuit of productive farming.
The environmental contradictions implicit in all this activity scarcely occurred to anyone, of course.
Sir Joseph Banks, the greatest naturalist of the age, founder of Kew Gardens and botanist-companion to Captain Cook, first developed his boyhood passion for natural history in East, West, and Wildmoor fens, which washed up to the foot of the Lincolnshire wolds, and so to the very gates of Revesby Abbey, the Banks's family home.
In his old age, Banks presided over the destruction of these fens, supporting the drainage projects of John Rennie, according to The Farmer's Magazine of February 1807, against ‘a party of uninformed people, headed by a little parson and a magistrate’.
His portrait hangs in the place of honour in the Boston office of the Anglian Water Authority.
Another botanist, William Roscoe, founder of Liverpool botanic gardens and commemorated by the genus Roscoea beloved of alpine gardeners, actually bankrupted himself as a result of a drainage scheme.
In 1793 Roscoe began work on Trafford Moss, part of the mighty Chat Moss, 2,500 acres of sphagnum, sundew, and bog asphodel.
Roscoe's ambition was to drain the whole wetland, and to this end he organized ditching, marling, and importation from nearby Manchester of boatload upon boatload of human ordure, which was forked by hand on to the moss.
One of Roscoe's ideas was a windmill plough, whose sails would actually churn up the bog.
Unsurprisingly, in view of such projects, he was financially ruined, and his interest in Chat Moss was bought out by 1821.
No one was worse at making connections about the consequences of his actions than William Madocks who reclaimed the coastal marshes of the Traeth Mawr in North Wales.
His embankment across the Glaslyn estuary was completed in 1811 amidst much rejoicing and ox-roasting, only to collapse the following year.
After its final reconstruction, it was to bear the main road and railway out of Portmadoc, named in honour of its founder, who, with sublime inconsistency, passionately espoused the fashionable ideals of picturesque landscape.
The man who renamed a causeway across the front of the finest prospect of Snowdonia was actually given to carving breathless verses to the water sprites on the river cliffs at Dolgellau.
As he imposed his geometrical grid of drainage ditches across the newly filled-in estuary of the Traeth, it occurred to Madocks for a brief, but anxious, moment that the whole project resembled ‘Dutch gardening’; but in no time the poet Shelley arrived to help him with his endeavours, declaiming on the ‘poetry of engineering’.
Only one man could see the situation clearly: Thomas Love Peacock, who described the scenic effect of Madocks's project in his novel Headlong Hall : ‘The mountain frame remains unchanged, unchangeable: but the liquid mirror it enclosed is gone.’
Enclosure in the Napoleonic Era
What it felt like to be on the receiving end of such operations and the hammering which the landscape endured in those early years of the nineteenth century are painfully conveyed by another poet whose roots were in the East Midlands.
By the Napoleonic era, when war with France intensified the need for food production, enclosure of common land by Act of Parliament, which in 1750 had generally begun to replace enclosure by agreement, was at its height.
In 1809 an Act was passed for the enclosing of the parishes of Maxey and Helpston in Northamptonshire.
One aspect of the landscape revolution which this entailed appears to have been major drainage works, which drastically modified the stream between the two villages, to create what is now known as the Maxey Cut.
John Clare, in his poem ‘Remembrances’, describes the damage done to his parish by the axe of ‘spoiler and self-interest’:
O I never call to mind
Those pleasant names of places but I leave a sigh behind
While I see the little mouldiwarps hang sweeing to the wind
On the only aged willow that in all the field remains.
The ‘mouldiwarps’, or moles, are the bane of drainage men, since their tunnels play havoc with banks and channels; and even now, water authorities employ mole-catchers.
Clare continues:
Inclosure like a Buonaparte let not a thing remain
It levelled every bush and tree and levelled every hill
And hung the moles for traitors — though the brook is running still
It runs a naked stream and chill.
The solitary willow, the gutted brook: these were the things which Clare picked out as the climax of his catalogue of casualties in this, one of his finest poems.
How absolutely it chimes with our modern experience of loss of a sense of place.
In the mid-1980s, drainage contractors in the Midlands are still moving in on river valleys, starting with the stream itself and then clearing every adjacent hedge and copse as part of the same contract.
The only differences which Clare would notice are that machines have replaced axes, and that the moles are now gibbeted on barbed-wire fencing.
Clare's contemporaries in the wetlands had reason to be concerned more for their own survival than that of moles and willow trees.
In 1812 James Loch took over as Lord Stafford's agent at Trentham in Staffordshire.
He was later to become notorious as the scourge of Sutherland for his role in the highland clearances.
Rather nearer to his employer's family seat were the marshes of the Wealdmoors, just north of Telford and Wellington in Shropshire, which Loch set about draining with a will.
Loch's reputation in Shropshire does not appear to have been so contentious as it was in Scotland, and the landscape he created in the Wealdmoors is now level ploughland of peat interspersed with rectangular plantations of poplar.
In the Somerset Levels, the surviving nucleus of wetland commons were tackled between 1770 and 1800.
The period opened with the usual resistance from the inhabitants, who dug an open grave for William Fairchild, the surveyor of King's Sedgemoor, and announced ‘a reward of a hogshead of cider…to anyone who could catch him’.
Nevertheless, by 1800 a commoner was speaking with regret of the times when the undrained wastes had given him pasture, where ‘he could turn out his cow and pony, feed his flock of geese and keep his pig’.
Otmoor
North-east of Oxford lies Otmoor, four square miles of damp land cradled in a basin of low hills and watered by the river Ray.
It is ringed by villages known as the ‘seven towns’, which for centuries were sustained by the rights of common they enjoyed upon Otmoor's lush pastures.
In 1815 an Act for the enclosure of Otmoor was passed, at the instigation of Lord Abingdon and George, duke of Marlborough; and in 1829 the enclosure awards were complete.
Those smallholders who were not directly excluded by the awards lost their shares in the common indirectly, since they were unable to pay the prohibitive legal and fencing costs of securing their small allotments.
In 1829 and 1830 the river Ray, which had been subjected to massive engineering works in order to drain the newly enclosed moor, began to flood the land beyond Otmoor.
The farmers affected broke up the new flood-banks, and after being arrested initially, were released on the grounds that the enclosure commissioners had exceeded their powers in constructing the drainage works.
This was the signal for the general discontent to erupt into action.
The dispossessed commoners, invoking the battle-cry ‘Otmoor for Ever’, blackened their faces and went out on to the moor by night to destroy the commissioner's works.
On the night of 6 September 1830, more than 500 of them were out there breaking up bridges, hedges, and ditches.
The yeomanry arrived and carted forty-four rioters off to Oxford gaol.
By a fatal miscalculation, the guards had chosen the day of St Giles' fair.
An angry crowd attacked the troops, and rescued the prisoners, and their cattle were loosed again upon the common.
Only in 1835, after intermittent rioting, subsequently suppressed by the Coldstream Guards, did the magistrates cautiously suggest that unrest had ended, ‘Otmoor, being now it may be hoped in a state of permanent tranquillity’.
Vain hope.
In the 1970s and 1980s, Otmoor has been the controversial subject of vigorous campaigns fought against both a motorway and an extensive drainage scheme for the river Ray proposed by the Thames Water Authority.
The Victorian Age
None the less, the Otmoor riots mark the end of an era of open conflict on the wetlands.
As the Victorian age got under way, ever more ingenious technologies aided the steady advance of drainage.
The practice of ‘warping’, whereby tidal waters were made to flow back and deposit their rich silts over the land, was popular.
In 1839 John Rennie put forward proposals to reclaim the whole of the Wash, and to call the new land ‘Victoria County’.
Similar megalomaniac schemes were proposed in the 1960s, but were never carried through.
In 1837 George Stephenson, who had reason to detest the wetlands after his heroic battle to build a railway across Chat Moss, put forward an ambitious plan to reclaim the whole eastern side of Morecambe Bay by building a railway from Lancaster to Furness.
His plan came to nothing, but successive railway engineers were to divert and canalize many miles of river as a by-product of their endeavours.
On the credit side, as far as wetland habitat was concerned, where railways crossed valleys, they sometimes disrupted the drainage, creating small marshes which survive to this day.
A similar mixed result had attended the efforts of earlier canal engineers.
Thus James Brindley set out to drain Longdon Marsh in Worcestershire, and the duke of Bridgewater organized drainage of the northern part of Chat Moss as part of his canal building.
More often, however, navigation engineers were at odds with drainage men, especially when they were working on existing rivers.
To make most rivers navigable, the water level must be raised by building weirs; there is little doubt that the navigation structures built on the Leicestershire Soar in the 1770s worsened the local drainage, as did eighteenth- and nineteenth-century navigation works on the Thames and in Somerset.
In 1851, which, with symbolic appropriateness, was the year in which a hungry urban population exceeded for the first time the population of the countryside, drainage-minded landlords up from the shires were able to carry away a wealth of interesting ideas from the Great Exhibition.
Pipe-tile-making machines were on show as was a new centrifugal pump which ‘astonished the visitors’.
Within two years, Martin Mere, just south of the Fylde and Whittlesey Mere in the Fens, had been pumped dry.
By the late 1840s the English race of the great copper butterfly, which had retained its last stronghold around Whittlesey, had become extinct.
A symbol of the less controllable results of technology, the Holme Post, a cast-iron column believed by some to have come from the Crystal Palace, was sunk into the ground near Whittlesey, to measure peat shrinkage.
Its replacement marker indicates a thirteen-foot drop between the present ground level and that of the mid-nineteenth century.
Technology was to transform not only the actual level of the land, but also the fine details of the wetland landscapes.
Extracts from the account book of the Derwent Ings reveal the subtle alterations which took place in the space of two generations:
1867–8 Oct. 17th
Leather for the Clow.
Oct. 19th
Cheese and bread on Ings Breaking Day.
1887–8
Paid J Binns for moles catching £1. 18s. 0d.
1910–11
Taking one ton of cement to bridge.
1923
Half cwt barbed wire fifteen shillings.
A ‘clow’ was a flap-valve to stop flood-water rising back up the ditches at high tide.
Leather was no doubt obtained from cattle stocked on the Ings.
Nowadays such things are made of steel and rubber.
The 1850s and 1860s, especially after the Land Drainage Act of 1861, saw a steady increase in mopping-up operations.
In the 1860s Longdon Marsh in Worcestershire and the Baggy Moor in Shropshire were tackled, as were marshes in the Trent and Tame valleys in Staffordshire.
In the 1850s the ‘Bampton Polderland’ on the Thames just south of Kelmscott was drained by an entrepreneurial farmer, William Wood.
This still lovely riverine landscape must have been settling down from its major reshaping when William Morris bought Kelmscott Manor in 1871.
Morris was no stranger to the environmental impact of river works, as is shown by a confrontation recorded between him and the Thames Conservancy Board concerning riverside willows which they had felled near Hammersmith.
Morris resolved to complain to the board, which was composed largely of retired seamen.
Feeling increasingly nervous as his appointment drew near, Morris was ushered into a vast boardroom, where the door was flung open by ‘a giant of a man who looked as if he had been fed on rum all his life’:.
‘What the hell do you bloody chaps want?’ he roared.
‘What is your bloody business?’
Morris' shyness disappeared in a flash.
‘We've come to ask you savage bloody chaps why the hell you have cut down a pleasant grove of willows.’
The Twentieth Century
Despite the decline in agriculture at the end of the century, the tree felling and river clearing continued apace.
In the Great War, river clearance was seen as employment for prisoners, and in the 1920s as a way of relieving unemployment generally.
In 1922 the chief drainage engineer for the Ministry of Agriculture reflected thus upon the constructive uses to which he had put the heroes home from the trenches:
The real value of the results actually achieved has been a most gratifying surprise to everyone concerned, and it is easy, after the event, to reflect wisely upon the fact that a large percentage of the men must have served a long and painful apprenticeship, whilst on Military Service, to the art of transforming swamps into ‘better 'oles’.
To supplement the armies of the unemployed, new machines were becoming available.
In 1920 the ‘Buckeye’ Ditcher, a bizarre-looking contraption of wheels and pulleys imported from America, arrived at the railway station at St Neots, and was escorted to Croxton Park, where a public demonstration of its capabilities was attended with considerable excitement.
Primitive drag-lines were soon adopted by the richer drainage boards.
None the less, the situation from a drainage point of view was far from satisfactory.
Agriculture had been in steady decline since the 1870s, and after a brief post-war boom was to sink back into it again in the 1930s.
Two centuries after the ‘blowing’ of the Denver sluice in 1713, the whole security of the south level of the Fens depended solely upon the security of the restored sluice.
In 1919 there was little to distinguish the ‘summer grounds’ of large areas of the Somerset Levels from their saturated state a hundred years earlier.
To compound the problem, administrative chaos reigned.
There was everywhere ‘a chaos of Authorities and an absence of authority’.
In 1922 Sidney Webb wrote that the lords of the level of Romney Marsh, who had inspired the founding of the courts of sewers in 1258, still remained unreformed themselves, an ancient relic of pre-statutory local government.
The levying of ‘scots’ on Romney Marsh was discontinued only in 1932, after seven centuries of enforcement.
Outworn institutions were to stagger on until, in some cases, the outworn machines and sluices which they maintained also collapsed.
In 1940 the old Burwell drainage commission finally accepted voluntary dissolution when its ancient pump engine collapsed beyond repair.
In 1929 the Somerset drainage commission went out of existence at the height of a great flood.
The Land Drainage Act of 1918 had made an attempt to simplify the administration of land drainage, but in the late 1920s it was clear that confusion still prevailed.
In 1927 the Bledisloe Commission submitted a report which was to form the basis of the 1930 Land Drainage Act, the ground rules of which have dominated land drainage to the present day.
Catchment boards were set up, which in 1948 became river boards, and in 1964 river authorities.
In 1974 these were incorporated into the water authorities.
The still-vexed issue which the 1930 act attempted to resolve was who was to pay for drainage.
The courts of sewers, which were abolished in 1930, had always insisted on the principle: no benefit, no rates.
The new proposals extended the rating for all works on what is now known as ‘main river’— the larger watercourses — to the total catchment area.
Internal drainage districts (which maintained smaller streams and ditches, especially in the lowlands) were to be funded from within their own areas.
The lowlands thus required two sources of income for drainage: one to maintain the main river system, and the second for the back ditches.
The householders who lived above the valley bottoms were not happy about paying two sets of rates, needless to say, especially when the towns on the tops of the hills found themselves subsidizing drainage benefits for lowland farmers.
The argument put forward by the lowlanders, that they were being flooded out by water sent down to them by those living higher up the hill, was naturally resisted by the latter.
In 1933, following a typical dispute over this issue, Alban Dobson of the Ministry of Agriculture sent a letter to the clerk of the Medway Catchment Board in Maidstone, dictating where the critical cut-off point should lie.
This letter, based on expediency and written in a hurry, without any of the proper backing of parliamentary statute, has continued to dictate the terms whereby millions of pounds of public money are spent on land drainage, right up until the mid-1980s.
The ministry fixed a cut-off point of eight feet above the known flood-level in all valleys except tidal areas, where five feet was the magic measurement.
This has become known as ‘the Medway Letter Line’.
All householders living below the line were to be charged a local drainage rate, and this line still dictates the area of jurisdiction of internal drainage boards, whose annual expenditure is considerable and influence on the environment profound.
In addition, the Medway Letter Line is the basis for calculating the cost benefit of all schemes carried out on rivers by water authorities and other organizations.
As a method for calculating benefit and consequent eligibility for grant, the eight-foot line is, to say the least, haphazard.
The concept of ‘known’ flood-level is still vague, and was even vaguer in 1933.
The Medway Letter Line was meant to include ‘unknown’ floods, as well as recorded ones, and as information on flooding has become more sophisticated, it can now be seen to have overstated the benefit area by attempting to be on the safe side.
In some places the eight-foot line runs along halfway up a hill, and if a valley floor is narrow, it can significantly double the supposed area of benefit.
In other places, the line falls below areas which can be said to benefit from improvement.
On top of this, the 1930 Land Drainage Act bequeathed a messy and misleading system of raising drainage rates for main-river schemes by precept levied on county and borough councils.
The 1930 Act also opened the way for a new wave of river clearance.
In 1954 a paper given at the Institution of Civil Engineers extolling such actions did pause to admit the existence of a peculiarly modern problem:
So much tree clearance work was done during the first ten years of the existence of Catchment Boards that it is now difficult to get a complete picture of the derelict state of the rivers before the passing of the Land Drainage Act in 1930.
Unfortunately some of this work was done without a proper appreciation of the fact that the presence of tree growth, and the shade it gave, prevented or at least discouraged the growth of water weeds, the existence of which could form an even greater obstruction than much of the tree growth.
The relatively uncontrolled use of herbicides in the 1950s and 1960s was temporarily to solve that problem.
Landowners by the river Soar in Leicestershire confirm the virtual disappearance of bulrush and water-lilies on the river due to spraying in that period.
The new catchment boards' first decade of river clearance was followed by the outbreak of war, during which Parliament empowered the boards to carry out even more extensive work at the request of county war agricultural executive committees.
Government offered a 50 per cent grant for such work, which remained in force after the War.
In 1951 the Heneage Report recommended that the length of ‘main river’ to be cleared by river boards be trebled, thus extending their jurisdiction to over 12,000 miles of river.
For those who have eyes to see, the legacy of all this activity, rigorously maintained, and in some cases extended by water authorities in the 1970s and 1980s, is a river system in the lowlands of England and Wales which is profoundly impoverished.
If the traveller looks out of his car or train window or takes a walk along his local brook and bears in mind what a river should look like, he cannot fail to notice, in many places, mile upon mile of treeless river bank, often devoid of even a decent margin of bulrush.
A survey of the middle reaches of the river Idle in Nottinghamshire in 1980 discovered two clumps of marginal plants and three trees over five miles of river.
In the late 1930s the Sussex Rother was subjected to total clearance at Bodiam.
The scars remain.
The Staffordshire Blithe, whose lower reaches escaped the axe and are therefore witness to how exquisite a properly managed river can be, was picked out for special mention in the Journal of Agriculture for 1927.
Its upper reaches remain bare, and are eroding rapidly.
Floods and War
This policy of river clearance was originally supported by two fundamental considerations.
When war broke out in 1939, the combination of a depressed agriculture at home and a convenient empire abroad had ensured that around 70 per cent of the nation's food was imported from overseas.
Hitler's U-boat campaign, the memory of which still haunts decision-makers in the English countryside, nearly succeeded in blockading our coast.
Despite rationing and a vigorous ‘Dig for Victory’— not to mention ‘Drain for Victory’— campaign, the people of Britain were in danger of starving.
Supplies of food ran sufficiently low to pose a threat as serious as invasion.
It was with this in mind that a unanimous Parliament supported not a conspiracy of Tory landowners, but Attlee's postwar Labour Government in passing the 1947 Agriculture Act, which laid the foundations for the great agricultural revolution of our times.
By 1973, when Britain entered the Common Market under the shadow of increasing anxiety to improve our balance of payments, Attlee's policy of farm protection had been extended by a massive subsidy of capital grants, tax concessions, and price supports; and the impact on the landscape, including the river systems, was really beginning to bite.
Significantly, the same Parliament which passed the 1947 Agriculture Act also brought into being the 1947 Town and Country Planning Act, thus creating the planning system which, to this day, regulates all aspects of British life except agriculture and forestry, which remain exempt.
In the black winter of early 1947, something else happened which was to provide a general justification for the next forty years of dredging and river clearance.
On the night of 16 March, waters from melting snow began to burst the flood-banks in the Fens.
Wentworth-Day, who lived through it all, describes the experience:
Throughout the black night came the dull thunder of the bursting banks, the village alarm of ‘she've blowed’.
The river is always feminine.
In a thousand remote little farmhouses and cottages, islanded beneath wind-shriven willows or leaning poplars, the racing floods covered the black fields, overflowed the straight dykes…and leaping upon those lonely homes with all the relentless force of wind and gales, burst open the doors, shattered the ground floor windows…and rushed gurgling and swirling up the narrow staircase.
In the freezing cold and pitch dark, families were driven to clinging to the roof.
In the south level 37,000 acres went under water, and the chief engineer of the Great Ouse catchment board considered it the worst fen flood since the time of Vermuyden.
Disasters of this sort were confined to neither traditionally flooded land nor the winter months.
In August 1952 the innocent-looking East and West Lyn rivers swept down into the Devon resort of Lynmouth, obliterating houses and removing all trace of the Beach Hotel, which was carried out to sea.
Thirty-three people were drowned, and the main street was transformed overnight into a dramatically boulder-strewn river bed.
This flood, in a narrow valley, exacerbated, it was thought, by trees blocking the bridges upstream, was different in kind from the inundation of large areas of low-lying land in East Anglia.
It helped set in motion renewed enthusiasm for tree clearance in upland catchment areas as yet another aspect of the land drainage solution.
The following February, floods again struck the east coast, from Northumberland to Kent.
The casualty list was 307, and the devastation immense.
On Canvey Island alone, 11,000 people were rendered homeless.
Coronation Day, in June 1953, was a memorably wet day.
While the symbols of civilization processed with full panoply of State through the streets of London, out on the eastern marshes the North Sea nudged at the coastal defences which had been hastily shored up after the calamity just four months before.
Our era was ushered in with a reminder that the flood remained not entirely tamed.
The twist in the story of river and wetland management in our own times was to be one in which drainage men were faced with a new army; an army which, unlike that of the commoners who had opposed their predecessors, was to grow stronger with every passing year.
It was to come from an unexpected quarter: the environmentalists.
Just as the drainers had previously arrived as outsiders on the wetland commons, so the conservationists were to wade into the wetland issue, often importing their perspectives from outside.
All this was foreshadowed at the height of the war and in the heart of the Fens by the testimonies of two passionate and knowledgeable countrymen, one a bird-watcher, the other a farmer.
Their conflicting attitudes to Adventurers' Fen, which the one painted and the other drained, are both completely understandable in human terms.
In 1942 Eric Ennion wrote Adventurers Fen , celebrating its birdlife and the haunting beauty of its landscape.
His celebration was also a requiem.
He wrote:
It is more than a year since the red and white surveyors' poles glinted above the reeds, blazing a trail for the draglines that were soon to follow.
They came, each with a gaunt arm cutting the gentle skyline, clanking and threatening, laying their tracks as they rumbled along…
In a few short weeks the scoops had torn a channel twenty feet wide from end to end, ripping the backbone out of Adventurers' Fen…
When all was dry, men set the fen on fire.
Spurts of flame began to flicker here and there and presently leapt up to redden the fringes of the great smoke cloud which hung above them....
Reed beds, sedges and sallows vanished in a whirl of flying ashes amid the crackle and the roar.
I went down afterwards.
There was a single gull wheeling over the black land and a wild duck trying to hide in two inches of water at the bottom of a drain.
A couple of tractors stood waiting to begin.
Alan Bloom, who had helped implement the scene described by Ennion, and was unusual in being both a practical man and a writer, published The Farm in the Fen in 1944.
He conveys with a sure sense of atmosphere and detail the satisfaction of getting a job done, the feeling of being within a tradition of a long line of settlers of the land, and the sheer hard work which that entails: from persuading recalcitrant committees to support his endeavours to the literally back-breaking labour of dragging obstinate lumps of bog oak out of the peat to facilitate ploughing.
One morning, Bloom records, after ‘a particularly bitter struggle with an oak’, a Cambridge student came wheeling his bicycle up the drove-way.
The young academic coolly eyed the embattled farmer and, commenting upon the destruction wrought upon the fen, looked forward to its return to wilderness after the war, so that it could act as a buffer for the nature reserve of Wicken Fen against the farmed land:
Against the farmed land, be damned, I thought, and let drive with all the most forceful arguments I could lay my tongue to.
But I might have spared myself.
When I had finished I could see that it had made not the slightest impression.
We were in opposite camps, and he could no more appreciate my line of reasoning than I could see his point of view, and finally we parted.
This conflict of values in which neither side has an absolute monopoly of truth has rumbled on, becoming louder and louder in the English countryside.
In the latest episode, rivers and wetlands have often been the field of battle.
The story of this conflict forms the subject-matter of the remaining chapters of this book.
The Wasting of the Waters
The Real Cost of Orthodox River Management
IN 1977 the Ministry of Agriculture estimated that 6.4 million acres (12.6 million hectares) of agricultural land in England and Wales needed drainage.
This, approximately one-fifth of the nation's farmland, was expected to keep engineers in the newly formed water authorities fully occupied until well into the next century.
In 1980–1, a fairly typical year, the grant from the Ministry of Agriculture for land-drainage schemes, including some urban work, amounted to about £30.5 million, of which £23.7 million was allocated to the water authorities, while the rest went to internal drainage boards and local authorities.2 In that year it is estimated that the water authorities spent around £40 million on capital drainage schemes for agriculture.
In addition, all water authorities spent large sums on routine river maintenance on farmland; and still more money was spent by the Ministry of Agriculture in contributing between 30 and 70 per cent of the cost of farmers held drainage, designed to pick up the benefits of lowering the water level, a result of river engineering schemes.
In the winter of 1984–5 the Government announced a cut in the annual grant for land drainage from £60 million to a projected average of £30 million, and stipulated that the emphasis should now be on urban flood protection, rather than improvement for agriculture.
None the less, large sums of public money are still being spent on drainage, much of it to improve farmland.
In the financial year 1986–7, the Severn-Trent Water Authority spent £14.2 million on land drainage, of which £7.6 million consisted of river maintenance work for the benefit of agriculture.
(Even so, it was still carrying out less than a fifth as many maintenance dredging programmes as the North-West and Thames Water Authorities.)
Of Severn-Trent's three large capital schemes in 1986–7, two were almost entirely agricultural.
In the same year, most of the county councils within the Severn-Trent region were carrying out some agricultural land-drainage work, and private farmers, even without drainage grants, were bringing in dredging machinery on rivers, to get water off their land.
Agricultural Reasons for Drainage
Much of this expenditure, which has taken such a toll, on both the exchequer and the environment, has been based on a simple assumption which is deeply embedded in agricultural thinking: that excess water is the enemy of good husbandry and must be driven off the land.
In those places where stock is kept out in winter, undrained grassland is unusable during floods, and in summer is susceptible to trampling by animals, and so supports less stock than drained pasture.
In addition, damp conditions encourage husk in cattle and fluke in sheep.
For the cereal farmer, wet land is late land, since waterlogging keeps the ground cold and holds back germination.
Saturated soil lacks air, without which plant roots die, helpful micro-organisms are checked, and the soil loses its structure.
Roots of wheat which have been stunted by excessive water in spring will be less able to withstand a summer drought.
Actual flooding can be disastrous.
Depending on the time of a flood, root crops can be completely destroyed if submerged for more than twenty-four hours.
Agricultural Over-Production
The real problems which undrained land presents to farmers have justified drainage during periods when we have been short of food.
What is now questionable is the national need to produce a maximum, perfect crop on every piece of English farmland.
The process whereby rivers have been straightened and lowered to allow all riverside land to be more intensively cropped for grass and grain has often been expensive in terms of both wasted investment and loss of landscape.
The environmental cost has been the destruction of wetlands and the general erosion of the rural landscape, whereby hedges, woods, and ponds have been removed.
The habitats which have been hardest hit by the post-war agricultural revolution are on land which was always regarded as the most marginal: the barest hilltops, the steepest hillsides, and the wettest valley bottoms.
The reason why these had survived so long was because they required the most money spent on them — in the case of valley bottoms, to pay for initial drainage and then to maintain it — to make them yield their full potential of arable and pasture.
Now, with the massive harvests of the 1980s, when the superabundant corn bows its head along the banks of our chastened, canalized rivers, many of those who set out to tame the flood have succeeded beyond their wildest dreams.
All over Europe there lingers the sweet smell of excess.
In the south of the Continent, piles of surplus peaches and tomatoes are bulldozed, and cauliflowers are mixed with cod-liver oil before being buried.
In the north, agricultural officials no longer discuss whether the harvest was adequate, only how the latest addition to the grain mountain can be stored.
In 1985, as reported in The Times , the cost of simply storing the United Kingdom's cereal surplus amounted to around £111 million.
That same year, the agriculture commissioner for the Common Market revealed a new solution for reducing the butter mountain: feeding it back to the cows.
Such is the latest outcome of forty years of enthusiastic and single-minded agriculture, of which an equally enthusiastic drainage policy has been an essential part, that conservationists are now questioning the aims of intensive river management on its own terms of hard-headed economics and efficiency.
The wetlands, long regarded as wastes by generations of farmers, have been replaced by a harvest which fits the dictionary definition of ‘waste’ in every sense.
Our annual surplus of grain is roughly equivalent to the annual yield of the Cambridgeshire fens, won from the flood by Cornelius Vermuyden 300 years ago.
Intensive cultivation and continued drainage of the Fens further accelerates the degradation of the land, which is increasingly subject to peat wastage through oxidation and windblow.
Recently there have been determined efforts to reduce our food surpluses, but we are only starting to learn that river and land management require careful thought before instant expenditure of money.
The drain-all, strip-out approach to land has been adopted by insurance firms investing in agriculture precisely because it requires no more thought than it takes to fill in a form for the subsidy.
The practical reason why it is wise in the long term to give much more careful thought to river and wetland management is that drainage can contain, profoundly, the seeds of its own destruction.
Physical Destruction from River Engineering
The real cost of river mismanagement can begin with engineering works on the watercourse itself.
As many of the old river managers learned from first-hand experience of tinkering with their rivers, it is ultimately far more productive to work with a river than against it.
It is the nature of rivers that they refuse to stay straight.
‘It's always twisted,’ said a seasoned riverman of the Shropshire Rea, ‘and it always will.’
Cage a river in cement and iron, and it will struggle to break out like a wild beast.
Major straightening of the Mississippi in the 1930s, largely for navigation purposes, is still creating problems for its present-day managers over hundreds of miles.
Attempts to straighten out the Lang Lang river in Australia between 1920 and 1923 caused a series of cuts into the bank, which progressed rapidly upstream and destroyed seven bridges.
But it is not necessary to look so far afield or so long ago for examples of rivers which have refused to obey the dictates of engineers.
In 1864 the river Ystwyth in Wales was straightened to run parallel to a railway track.
In 1969 it was back again on its wandering course, and was engineered cheaply back into line by dredging out the gravel shoals which were causing it to wander.
However, this did not turn out to be such a cheap solution in the long run, since it set up conditions of even greater instability, necessitating repeated operations every two years.5 Major work on the river Taff and the river Usk in South Wales, carried out in the early 1980s, has precipitated extensive and unforeseen repair bills.
Those who win money on the horses at Kirkby Lonsdale races in Cumbria can quickly sober up if they wander down from the racecourse to see how their rates have been spent on the adjacent reaches of the river Lune, where the recently cemented banks are dramatically caving in, and attempts at bank protection appear to have made matters worse.
The river Trannon is a fast Welsh mountain stream, which flows down towards the Severn in Powys.
In 1978–9 a short reach near the village of Trefeglwys was given a thorough canalizing treatment.
Trees were cleared from the banks, and raised flood-banks were built out of the dredged material alongside the stream course.
Almost immediately it became clear that the river was kicking back at the abuse it was receiving.
In the winter of 1979–80 the Trannon careered off on a course of its own.
Fencing, which had been set well back from the bank, now dangled over the gulf created by the all-swallowing river.
As more and more stone-filled gabions were built in to reduce the erosion which the scheme had set in train, it became apparent that Pandora's box had been opened, and that what might have worked as a piece of traditional river canalization in the cohesive sediments found downstream had proved a recipe for disaster when applied in the unstable gravels of this upland brook.
At one point, the original river bank, shored up by wire and stone, remained the only still point, actually down the centre of the fast-moving Trannon, so that it was a job to guess whether the buckling gabions had belonged originally to the left or to the right.
Seven years later, remedial works were still being carried out; the raised flood-banks set far too close to the watercourse were being eroded away; the stability of the downstream bridge was threatened; and the real cost to the public purse of what was a relatively small scheme originally has yet to be clearly counted.
In 1982 the Institute of Hydrology carried out trials on the Trannon, and in 1986 was able to come up with a number of constructive lessons to be learned from this sorry story.
Relatively cheap methods of testing local ground conditions which have been researched by geomorphologists can act as useful warnings to engineers as to whether they are risking the kind of problems which now make the Trannon scheme, with hindsight, a questionable one to have undertaken in the first place.
Working with nature is clearly practical, as well as ecologically sound.
In 1985 dredgers were busily raking up gravel from the shoals in the river to put into more gabions for bank reinforcement beside the Trannon.
As part of the normal processes of a river, the stones in these shoals are neatly sorted and graded by the flowing water into an overlapping fish-scale pattern known as ‘armouring’, which makes them relatively stable.
By dredging up gravel, therefore, river managers were actually de-stabilizing the river bed, thereby contributing to the erosion which they were supposedly trying to prevent.
Riverside trees, whose roots increase the tensional strength of the bank material, are the best protection against erosion, especially if they are well established and are properly maintained.
They also reduce land loss, since it is estimated that channels with 50 per cent tree and shrub cover on both banks require only approximately half the width for a given volume of bankfull flood-water speeding through the channel, compared to treeless brooks which erode out into the adjacent fields.
If trees are felled in the hope of gaining extra land, a river is likely to move out to take that land, and on certain types of river a great deal more besides.
One has only to stand on the bridge over the Trannon at Trefeglwys and look upstream to see the stable narrow river coursing elegantly between its magnificent borders of ash and sycamore, and compare this with the immediate downstream reach, which wanders amidst a waste of gravel.
Nitrates
Additional benefits of tree-lined streams, in reducing the effects of nitrates and phosphates in the water and in shading out the choking growth of summer weed in a river bed, which may otherwise necessitate further expensive dredging, have been recognized by Dutch and German scientists for over a decade.
The only green thing about many of our English rivers nowadays is profuse algal growth in the water, which results from an excess of fertilizer leaching off arable fields straight into the stream.
Traditional drainage has accelerated this problem in two ways: by promoting farming methods which require high levels of fertilizer, and by stripping out the buffer of vegetation between the riverside and the fields.
It is not uncommon for tractors to slide into a stream as they attempt to cultivate every last scrap of land beside a watercourse.
This approach has led to overexploitation of stream systems.
Until 1986, the steeply graded banks of one river in arable country were regularly sprayed with the approved chemical 2-4-D amine, in order to reduce the nettles, which were less good at holding the banks than slow-growing grasses, but for which perfect conditions had been established by abundant nitrogen leaching off the fields.
As is so often the case in operations which go wrong, over-heavy management went hand in hand with a haphazard lack of supervision.
The spraying boat, affectionately known as the ‘Black Pig’, would set off on its regular journey up the river without any adjustment on the spraying nozzle.
Consequently, once the motor was started, the spray was meted out indiscriminately to riverside walls, fishermen, lovers on the bank, and nettles alike.
It is estimated that for every pound a farmer spends on fertilizer on his fields, he can expect the rain to wash away a good fifty pence-worth.
But the real cost of such waste is not only monetary.
Water is extracted for drinking purposes from many of our lowland rivers, and high nitrate levels in drinking-water can lead to illness in bottle-fed babies.
Thus, while land-drainage departments promote agricultural intensification, other departments in the same water authority have to spend more public money in expensive plant to treat the water, in order to comply with EEC regulations on nitrate levels.
Further expense to the water authority in cleaning up river pollution caused by silage effluent is yet another consequence of high-gear monocultural farming, encouraged by land drainage.
Peat Shrinkage from Drainage
So much for the rivers themselves.
Enthusiastic attempts to drain wetlands throughout the 1970s and early 1980s have in many cases failed to produce the high-quality farmland which was the object of these expensive exercises.
It has now become increasingly clear that one of the real harvests of wetland drainage can be the physical ruin of the land.
The most familiar example of such degradation is peat wastage.
Peat wastes as a result of shrinkage, oxidation, and bacterial action, all triggered by the drying effect of drainage upon peat.
A ten-year trial by the Ministry of Agriculture, started in 1980 on the Norfolk peat marshes near Acle, is indicating a fall in ground level of an inch each year.
The level of the peat fenland in Cambridgeshire has fallen by up to 4.6 metres in many places since Vermuyden's initial scheme was completed in the 1650s.
The Holme Post, recording a drop of 3.9 metres since 1850, presents an unrealistically optimistic picture of the problem, since it now stands in a damp nature reserve.
More convincing estimates of wastage can be made by assessing the height at which roads and even some wartime pillboxes stand proudly above the adjacent level of the fens.
As the peat wastes, drainage of the land deteriorates, and so the drains are deepened, thus triggering further wastage.
The lowest deposits of peat are also the most acid and so least valuable to the farmer.
The Fens now resemble a gigantic and very profitable grow-bag.
Like a grow-bag, however, they cannot go on producing their rich harvests of vegetable crops such as celery and carrots for ever, since once the peat has all wasted away, poor acid subsoils, especially clays, are often all that remain beneath.
It is estimated that by the first decade of next century, only 20 per cent of the peat soils now present on the 561 square kilometres marked by the soil map of the Ely district will remain.
Once the peat has gone in such places, some land may be insufficiently fertile even for growing potatoes, and the very best land in the country will have been reduced to mineral soils of only average quality.
Such downgraded land will still have to be pumped and embanked, since it will have dropped even further below sea-level, a situation worsened both by the fact that, due to the tilt of the land, eastern England is steadily falling in relation to the level of the North Sea, and by a possible rise in sea-level due to the greenhouse effect.
Erosion
Land drainage has also accelerated wind erosion, not only in the East Anglian fens, but also on the fine sands and silts of Lancashire, the Dee estuary, the Nottinghamshire carrs, and the Vale of York.
In such places, ditches, which have a critical job to do in carrying away flood-water, are often filled up to the top with loose soil, following a ‘blow’.
Water erosion, whereby rain washes the topsoil off hillsides, is becoming an increasing problem in the United Kingdom, worsened by high-gear agriculture and drainage.
It is especially serious on land bearing winter cereals, since the resulting ploughland can be exposed to the elements from October to April.
Hedges and ditches, especially those separating a ridge crest from a valley side or channelling water safely along a valley floor, are often in critical positions to stop runoff.
Once they are removed, all that soil, like the fertilizer, has to go somewhere, and, often as not, it ends up in the watercourse, silting up the stream bed, eroding banks, and worsening flooding.
Thus drainage schemes, carried out for the express purpose of intensifying agriculture, converting land from grass to cereals, and ‘rationalizing’ hedge and ditch systems, may create further drainage problems in their turn.
When the machines move in a second time to desilt the river bed, they will of course send the silt further down the river for yet more diggers to tackle downstream.
Flooding, affecting whole villages, as a result of soil runoff has taken place in Shepton Beauchamp in Somerset and Ashford-in-the-Water in Derbyshire.
In 1983 Lewes District Council spent £12,000 to alleviate the effects of soil erosion on a housing estate.
Acid Sulphate Problems from Drainage
On low-lying land, drainage can create another major problem, one associated with acid sulphate soils.
In ditches and damp springs, you may sometimes notice that the water is discoloured to a strong shade of orange.
This is caused by ‘iron ochre’, a generic term used to describe the iron-derived material which blocks drains.
Iron sulphides occur naturally in the form of mineral iron pyrites, derived from rock slate or else found in peat and marine deposits.
As drainage exposes these sulphides to oxygen, they oxidize, producing sulphuric acid and ferrous sulphate, which flows towards the drains.
As a result of the increasing acidity, certain acidophilic soil bacteria are then released, which promote further acidification.
Two problems arise for the farmer: first, ferrous iron creates an iron pan, blocking soil fissures and root channels, and, worst of all, sealing pipes and drains; second, the acidity of the soil reduces crop yields, especially of cereals.
The treatment for both problems is expensive, and has to be repeated constantly, thus rendering the initial investment in drainage quite worthless in some cases, and at other times leading to a downgrading of the agricultural classification of the land.
The cost of liming acid soils is phenomenal, as is the continual jetting and rodding of clogged pipes.
Some land at the south-west edge of the Fens has recently been downgraded from grade 1 to grade 3 because of its acidity and the presence of bog oaks which have been exposed by wastage.
Acidity and ochre formation, triggered by the lowering of the water-table, are not confined to traditional wetlands.
They are well known in the Weald of Kent and Sussex and around Poole harbour; and one land-drainage contractor was of the opinion in 1986 that in his own county, Northamptonshire, there was scarcely a parish without areas which were effectively undrainable due to ochre.
Flocculation Problems from Drainage
Coastal marshes, the controversial targets of environmentally destructive drainage proposals throughout the 1970s and 1980s, are also proving in many places to be simply undrainable, since, after five to ten years, soil can be subject to a process whereby the chemical bonding in the clay structure breaks down.
This is known as ‘flocculation’, and is especially problematic on drained estuarine soils with high salinity.
With increased drainage and ploughing, drain-pipes become clogged with clay and silt, and surface ponding creates ever more difficult conditions for farming, and even the death of cereal crops.
This has been a major problem in Kent, Essex, Suffolk, and Norfolk, and most notoriously at Halvergate, where there have also been acidity problems, causing some farmers to have to jet their drains every year.
In 1986 Farmers' Weekly described the difficulties now overtaking land on the Isle of Grain in north Kent, where permanent pasture was drained and ploughed in the 1960s and early 1970s.
For a while, profits on this grade 1 land came rolling in, but ten years after the initial drainage, the worst areas required re-draining, and even high-pressure jetting of clogged drains was futile against the deflocculated clay slurry.
The soil surface resembled ‘thick Windsor soup’.
One solution increasingly adopted by farmers has been to return the land to grass again.
But the new grassland is less environmentally interesting than the previous permanent pasture, and the money wasted on the whole ten-year cycle of grass-grain-grass has been very considerable.
Professional Fees
The way in which professions operate within the construction industry also tends to favour expensive engineering schemes on rivers, rather than small-scale operations.
In the public sector, it is inevitable that certain engineers will promote as much work as possible, in order to keep their empires afloat.
An expensive all-concrete, all-dredge, work-from-both-sides approach may in certain cases have much to recommend it to a few of the more old-fashioned river managers, especially since the cutting of straight ditches involves minimum initial design and subsequent supervision, combined with maximum actual earth-moving and construction works on the ground.
The salaries and career prospects of in-house engineers are linked to performance aims, which can encourage over-design of schemes.
The fees of consulting engineers from outside, not to mention consulting environmentalists such as landscape architects, are generally based on a percentage of the total construction contract.
The larger the job on the ground, the greater the professional fee to be made out of it.
In fairness, it must be said that the professions have worked out a number of checks and balances to this system, and a common alternative to a percentage fee, hourly rates, can work out as an even more expensive open cheque drawn on the public purse.
In addition, one of the duties of a water authority engineer controlling an outside contract is to tie consultants to a tight brief, which specifies the minimum work required to achieve the necessary flood reduction, while at the same time protecting the environment.
None the less, the subtly corruptive potential of a percentage fee system, especially in our enterprise culture, is not hard to imagine.
Perhaps the most startling case of a professional fee system which taxes both the public purse and the environment is that by which land-agents charge for their services on land-drainage schemes.
Land-agents are employed to act for the landowner in negotiating compensation for disturbance created by the working space needed for engineering operations, which may sterilize crucial areas of corn or pasture for a season or more.
The landowner's agent may also act for him in negotiations with conservationists and engineers to secure the parcels of riverside land required for habitat protection and enhancement.
Although some remarkably conservation-conscious agents exist, it is generally true to say that land-agents have played, and continue to play, a significant role in hastening the destruction of the English landscape by intensive agriculture.
Farmers, while including all gradations of responsiveness within their ranks, do in many cases have a deep feeling for the land which they see every day, and which in many cases was shaped by their fathers and grandfathers, and which they would like to pass on to their children.
Land-agents and estate agents passing through at the brief moment of negotiation are likely to be more exclusively dominated by the money motive.
Most people who negotiate for habitat in the countryside will bear witness that their hearts sink when an agent is involved.
Time and again a landowner, the man who actually has the most to lose since it is his land, is willing to donate corners of his fields for ponds or tree planting, as his contribution to the environmental compromise of a land-drainage scheme; but then a letter from his agent arrives, demanding that these corners be heavily compensated or even bought by the water authority, as payment for the concessions made.
A typical compensation sum demanded by an agent for a half-acre corner of land given for a pond or tree planting might be £750, taking the market value of grade 2 land in the Midlands in 1986.
Considerable hidden costs in time taken by authority estates and environmental staff over negotiation could be added to this bill.
Riverside lands on which attempts at habitat creation by engineers and environmentalists have been abandoned are more often than not those where the demands of agents have thwarted such proposals.
One look at the fee scale by which agents are paid quickly explains why this situation exists.
The scale set by the Inland Revenue and the law for agents dealing with public authorities is known as Ryde's Scale, and was amended in 1984 by the ‘Revised Annex to Ryde's Scale’.
The fee charged by the agent is, naturally enough, directly proportional to the compensation he gleans from the public authority on behalf of his client.
Thus, at figures current in 1986, if the cheque received by the landowner for compensation is up to £100, the cheque sent to his agent will be £85.
If the landowner's compensation amounts to £200, or even just tips over to £101, then his agent will notch up to £170.
Consequently, at the bottom of the scale, the agent may collect more money than his client in compensation.
The public, as ratepayers, should realize that not only is all compensation paid out of the land-drainage budget, but that the fees of the landowner's agent are also financed entirely out of the public purse of the water authority or other public body carrying out the scheme.
Therefore, in those cases where land-agents levy heavy penalties for such things as tree planting (which no engineer or environmentalist would attempt to force upon farmers in places where they would interfere with necessary practical farming), the real cost to the public, which is, after all, financing land-drainage schemes in order to improve the productivity of landowners' fields, is in both money and loss of landscape quality.
Unsupervised River Maintenance
The possession of large machines by those responsible for managing rivers can sometimes lead to a situation where the tail wags the dog, and the results can be damaging to both the environment and the economy.
In real life, a degree of flexibility is inevitable for the river managers, despite the essential submission of their work programmes to environmentalists well before the diggers arrive on the river bank.
Farmers change their minds about access to a river at the last minute, according to the vagaries of the harvest.
Altering weather conditions can accelerate or slow down dredging programmes, and the engineer for a direct works section must also keep his construction plant and men employed in order to make them viable.
When something goes wrong, the slogan ‘Have machine, will travel’ has a depressing ring of truth, especially disastrous in the winter season, since it is no good excavating a channel in midwinter if the ecologists working with the engineers on a scheme have not had the opportunity during the previous summer growing season to identify the existing aquatic habitat affected.
Such problems of inadequate pre-planning arise most commonly in river maintenance work, which is indeed the Cinderella of land drainage.
All engineering on rivers in England and Wales falls into one or other of two categories: capital schemes and maintenance schemes.
At first glance the distinction seems clear.
Capital schemes, which are partially funded by grants from the Ministry of Agriculture, make substantial drainage improvements; whereas maintenance schemes, paid for by rating precepts, aim at stopping floods from getting worse, by removing blockages such as fallen trees and shoals.
However, since maintenance schemes often involve dredging and considerable tree removal, their impact on river habitat makes nonsense of the long-cherished claim by some river engineers that river maintenance is too minor an affair to concern environmentalists.
The distinction between capital and maintenance schemes can sometimes amount to little more than an administrative technicality, and as grants for capital schemes are reduced, there is a possibility that old-style capital works will be slipped by under the banner of maintenance.
In the financial year 1984–5 the North-West Water Authority carried out capital-works dredging on 21 miles of river in its care.
In the same year, under a maintenance budget, it carried out full-scale dredging on 279 miles of river.
That same year, the total length of river dredged under capital schemes by water authorities in England and Wales amounted to an estimated 223 miles, as opposed to 1,165 miles of maintenance dredging.
This trend presents anxieties to environmentalists since maintenance schemes have traditionally escaped not only all cost-benefit assessment, but also, in many cases, the careful integration of conservation principles.
In the remoter corners of water authority empires, which have had little more than a decade in which to professionalize themselves since their formation in 1974, gangs of river maintenance staff inherited from the far less environmentally accountable river boards have guarded their independence from interference by senior central management within their own organizations.
In 1954 the Ministry of Agriculture's chief drainage engineer gave a paper on land drainage to the Institute of Civil Engineers.
As reported in the proceedings of the institute, this was followed by some comments on river maintenance which might have been made only yesterday.:
Engineers naturally preferred spectacular schemes so, being human, they tended to concentrate on new and important works, leaving maintenance to the foreman…
If the foreman saw a tree in a channel, or a shoal forming, he did not worry whether it was doing any harm or not; he played safe and had it out.
Consequently, unless carried out carefully and under constant supervision, maintenance tended to cost more than it should.
Not only have such unsupervised activities been questionable in terms of economics, they have also had a profound effect on the river environment.
Pressure from conservationists, so often accused of adding a burden of unrealistic expense and inefficiency to practical operations in the countryside, has frequently provided the impetus for more efficient supervision of these roaming river-maintenance gangs.
In the past, and sometimes even in the present, bad environmental management of rivers has been only a part and a symptom of bad man-management.
If you cast a shrewd eye around the countryside in March, you cannot fail to notice that spring is heralded not only by splashes of yellow celandines and pale primroses in the hedge-banks, but also by gleaming yellow diggers, hastily working their way up the watercourses to use up their allocated budget before the financial year ends on 1 April.
Cost Benefits
Such are some of the real costs of taming the flood in our times: damage to the environment, over-production of food, and a decline in some places of the agricultural quality of the land.
It would be desirable under such circumstances if the Ministry of Agriculture could be persuaded to produce a proper definition of farming practice which takes into account the interests of good, long-term husbandry.
Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, controversy has raged over cost-benefit studies carried out by water authorities to justify large land-drainage schemes.
Conservationists have levelled a series of criticisms at the basic ground rules of these cost-benefit studies.
These criticisms have often been the crux of the public case against land drainage.
Environmentalists have complained that in contrast to road-building programmes, for example, no attempt has been made to assess the cost of intangible environmental losses to the community, as against financial benefits to the farmer; that calculations of benefit have assumed unrealistic yields and excessively speedy rates of take-up by farmers; that there is a reluctance to design low-level flood protection, even when farmers are getting by with an arable crop in most years; that the inevitable patching of eroding banks as a river reacts to the engineering constraints put upon it is never allowed for in the costs; and that the benefits anticipated from a drainage schemes are based on what are known as ‘farm-gate prices’ received by farmers for their crops.
These prices are unrealistically high because of both the protection which agriculture enjoys and further hidden subsidies.
Thus the lack of balance which strikes anyone looking at a thoroughly drained, treeless landscape is reflected in a lack of honest balancing in the books and ledgers which lie behind that landscape.
Lastly, the opponents of drainage schemes have long complained about the secrecy with which the Ministry of Agriculture and the water authorities have shrouded their calculations, together with their almost universal resistance to public inquiries, which are now a normal part of the process of consultation preceding road and reservoir schemes.
The argument for secrecy has rested on claims that it is unreasonable to reveal landowners' financial affairs, but such discretion seems unjust when large amounts of public money are being handed out for the benefit of these landowners, and when the financial data central to the justification of schemes need not involve revelation of every last penny of landowners' private accounts.
For a long time, the secrecy maintained by protagonists of drainage has given the impression that they have something to hide.
In 1985, however, the Ministry of Agriculture took a first step towards meeting environmentalists' objections, with a new ‘Guidance for Drainage Authorities’ on investment appraisal.
Environmental intangibles have been built into the cost-benefit analysis in the same way as they are for road schemes.
The ministry accepted that farm-gate prices were a misleading basis for calculating cost benefits, but the new methods they came up with did not fully adjust the calculations accordingly, especially in the case of cereals.
On the point of secrecy, some information was at last released, but with insufficient hard financial data for opponents of schemes to interpret it clearly.