

Left : Hardy' earliest known work, ‘Domicilium [BL Ashley 3345], probably written between the ages of 15 and 20, describes his birthplace at Bockhampton.
[Dr J. Gibson]
Introduction
Thomas Hardy was born on 2 June 1840 in Bockhampton, about three miles from the county town of Dorchester, in an isolated cottage built by his great-grandfather.
This area of Dorset had been the home of his family for generations, and he grew up surrounded by aunts, uncles, cousins, and grandparents.
His father, also called Thomas, was a stonemason, builder and enthusiastic amateur musician.
His mother, Jemima, was a more forceful character, hard-working and ambitious for her four children, but possibly over-protective of their interests and too demanding of their talents.
The personalities of his parents, the warmth of family life, and the surrounding heath and woodland had a deep and lasting influence on Hardy.
Looking back on these years, he remembered lying in the sun, his face covered with a straw hat: ‘Other boys were always talking of when they would be men; he did not want at all to be a man, or to possess things, but to remain as he was, in the same spot, and to know no more people than he already knew.’
Yet his horizons were quickly widened to include the nearby town of Dorchester where he attended day school, and where at the age of 16 he was apprenticed to a local architect, despite his academic interests.
There, he and his fellow students ‘often gave more time to books than drawing’, and his life became an attractive combination of early-morning reading, architectural work in the day, and evenings playing the violin with his father at festivities in and around Bockhampton.
Amongst other things, it made him acutely aware of the contrast between life in a small town ‘which had advanced to railways and telegraphs and daily London papers’ and ‘a world of shepherds and ploughmen…where modern improvements were still regarded as wonders’.
Hardy's decision, in 1862, to further his career in London must have come as a surprise to his family and employer — perhaps even to himself since he set out with a return ticket in his pocket.
Although it is impossible to think of him as a Londoner, this move began a lifelong association with the capital to which he returned every year for a few months, even after he had given up all thoughts of making it his permanent home.
He was fortunate in finding a good post — as a draughtsman of Gothic work — and in the company of congenial colleagues set about enjoying the experiences London had to offer in the 1860s.
His letters home to Mary, his elder sister and childhood companion, are full of the excitement of sight-seeing excursions, evenings at the theatre and opera, thrice weekly visits to  the International Exhibition at Kensington, soirées at the Architectural Association (in a borrowed frock coat), and his employer's splendid new offices at Adelphi Terrace, not far from the National Gallery.
Right:Hardy's sketch of the view across Westminster, April 1863.
[Dorset County Museum]
Below:Emma in 1870.
[Dorset County Museum]
Yet London, with all its opportunities, proved disappointing.
On his 25th birthday he noted in his diary, ‘Not very cheerful.
Feel as if I had lived a long time and done very little.
Walked about by moonlight in the evening.
Wondered what woman, if any, I should be thinking about in five years' time.’
Hardy lacked the social confidence to make his way in professional circles, and also the formal education that would have enabled him to follow Horace Moule, his close friend from Dorchester days, to university and a career in the church.
Exhausted by long   hours of study at night, and finding it impossible to publish any of the poems he had been writing in his spare time, his health and spirits began to suffer.
His early relationships with women seem to have been unsatisfactory and disappointing, and faced with the knowledge that his reading in philosophy and contemporary scientific thought was eroding his Christian faith, he began to feel lonely and isolated.
It seems likely that the note of sadness which pervades much of his work had its origins in this period, when in the words of his most recent biographer, Michael Millgate, ‘he was being pulled in so many directions by conflicting needs, ambitions and emotions’.
In 1867 he accepted a timely invitation to return to his former employer, and in the reassuring familiarity of his parents' home in  Bockhampton he was able to assess his career, temporarily rededicating himself to architecture while continuing to hope for success as a writer, if not of poetry, of popular novels.
This was the situation in 1870 when he became involved in the restoration of St Juliot's Church, near Boscastle in Cornwall.
Florence in the garden at Max Gate.
[Dorset County Museum]
His meeting with, and courtship of, Emma Lavinia Gifford, sister-in-law of the rector of St Juliot, as fictionalised in A Pair of Blue Eyes and recalled in his autobiographical notes, was idyllically, almost ecstatically, happy.
Susceptible as Hardy was to intense emotional experience — one of his earliest memories was of being moved to tears by his father playing the violin — and to pretty girls, Emma's attraction for him must also have rested in the circumstances of their meeting in a wild and beautiful setting, and in their mutual loneliness.
Their wedding day, as described by Emma in her recollections, was ‘a perfect September day — 17th, 1874 — not a brilliant sunshine, but wearing a soft, sunny luminousness; just as it should be’.
Yet, tragically, the marriage which had promised so much became empty and joyless in later years.
Irked by the very qualities which had once so attracted him — her girlishness and inconsequential chatter — Hardy gradually excluded Emma from his professional life at a time when his fame as a novelist was steadily growing, and, from about 1890, frankly looked outside his marriage for companionship.
Visitors to Max Gate bore witness to Emma's tiresome behaviour and to the barely disguised tensions in the house, but few perhaps realised the extent of her isolation.
Friends such as Edward Clodd, who expected Hardy to be relieved by her death in 1912, found instead that he was overcome with remorse for neglecting one whom he had once loved so well.
By this time Hardy was in his seventies, a distinguished and much honoured man of letters, who despite living quietly at Dorchester was nevertheless very much part of the contemporary literary establishment.
His marriage in 1914 to Florence Emily Dugdale, his companion and secretary for many years, and 40 years his junior, brought a much needed order and peace to his later years.
The steady stream of visitors to Max Gate continued, with many sightseers anxious for a glimpse of the great man, but also more welcome guests, including a deputation from the Society of Authors on his 80th birthday, and the Prince of Wales in 1923.
Most remarked, like T. E. Lawrence, on Hardy's apparent serenity at this time, his gentle humour and obvious efforts to be a considerate — if determinedly self-effacing — host.
He was still working hard: writing poetry, correcting proofs, and with Florence compiling an autobiographical statement which was published posthumously in two volumes as The Early Life of Thomas Hardy and The later years of Thomas Hardy .
As late as November 1927 he was revising poems for inclusion in Winter Words , the book with which he intended to mark his 90th birthday, but on 11 December, as Professor Millgate writes, ‘he found himself, for the first time in his life, quite unable to work’.
Hardy died peacefully a month later on 11 January 1928.
The Max Gate visitors' book.
In June 1926 the Balliol Players, a group of Oxford undergraduates, delighted Hardy by performing a Greek play in the garden.
In July Virginia Woolf, with her husband Leonard, paid the long-awaited visit which she describes so vividly in her diary.
William Bellows, who was taken by Edmund Gosse to meet Hardy in June 1927, reported Florence as saying: ‘My husband used to write in this when sketching out the plots of his novels.
He tore out the early pages and gave me the rest of it and we use it now for our visitors' signatures.‘
The architect
One of Hardy's unexecuted church designs, showing the influence of High Victorianism, and apparent similarities to the new church at Fawley, Berkshire — the original home of his paternal grandmother, and the inspiration for Marygreen in Jude the Obscure .
[Dorset County Museum]
Hardy's architectural career began in 1856, with his apprenticeship to John Hicks, a specialist in church restoration.
It was an exciting time for the profession.
The Gothic revival, with the complementary pre-Raphaelite movement in literature and painting, was then reaching its height; new materials were coming into use, and church restoration was being undertaken widely throughout the country.
Between 1862 and 1867 Hardy worked in London for the ecclesiastical architect A. W. Blomfield, but returned to his old employer in Dorchester in July 1867.
On Hicks's death in 1869 the business was taken over by G. R. Crickmay of Weymouth and, with the exception of a few weeks in 1870 spent in London with John Raphael Brandon, architect of the Catholic Apostolic Church in Gordon Square, Hardy worked intermittently with Crickmay in Dorchester and Weymouth until 1872.
His last professional appointment was in London once more, between Easter and August 1872, as assistant to T. Roger Smith, later Professor of Architecture at University College London, on designs for the London School Board.
A glimpse of the apprentice practising the basic technique of architectural drawing comes in A Laodicean (1881), singled out by Hardy himself as having some biographical significance.
By means of a strip of lead called a leaden tape, which he pressed around and into the fillets and hollows with his finger and thumb, he transferred the exact contour of each moulding to his drawing…
It was a painstaking process, which ensured that he spent many hours in churchyards as a young man.
In London, however, his scope widened to include the study of important contemporary texts.
Careful analysis of the surviving notebook by C. J. P. Beatty, the authority on Hardy's architectural career, has shown that windows, doors, mouldings, buttresses, capitals and motifs on page after page are copied from works such as W. Eden Nesfield's Specimens of Mediaeval Architecture and Owen Jones's The Grammar of Ornament .
Reproducing these features encouraged skill in draughtsmanship: it also drew Hardy's attention to the abundance of detail and sheer exuberance of Gothic style, characterised by Ruskin as ‘fancifulness, love of variety, love of richness’.
Although Hardy went to London with high ambitions, he found that winning prizes — the silver medal of the [Royal]Institute of British Architects, and the   William Tite prize for a country house design in 1863 — did not in itself ensure advancement.
On the whole he seems to have found this an unrewarding period professionally as well as personally, which drove him, like George Somerset in A Laodicean , to indulge in ‘an old enthusiasm for poetical literature’.
His first publication, a humorous but unsophisticated story entitled ‘How I built myself a house’, published in Chambers's Journal in March 1865, was originally written for the amusement of colleagues during afternoons which appear to have been all too idle.
The poem ‘The heiress and the architect’, written at this time but not published until 1898, is, however, a much harsher symbolic treatment of the architect-client relationship.
Ironically, the most successful and varied stage of Hardy's architectural career came under Crickmay between 1869 and 1872, despite the fact that by this time he was working on a freelance basis while writing his first novels.
Initially he was responsible for continuing the restorations begun by Hicks, including Turnworth Church — entirely rebuilt except for the tower — and St Juliot.
Later, however he was introduced to new areas of work.
Notebook drawings of details of schools in the Weymouth area, designs for houses on the Greenhill estate in Weymouth, sections of railway buildings and specifications for iron girders all date from this period, anticipating the debate between architecture and engineering in A Laodicean .
Left:Hardy's architectural notebook, p 12.
[Dorset County Museum]
Below:W. Eden Nesfield Specimens of Mediaeval Architecture (London, 1862), pl.63.
Hardy copied details from several plates into his architectural notebook.
[BL 1731. b.27]
Hardy abandoned his architectural career in 1872 but it was by no means the end of his interest in the subject.
He came to regret the destruction for which he had been responsible in the name of church restoration under the unenlightened rules prevailing at the time, and in 1881 he joined the recently formed Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings, for which he worked quietly but assiduously into old age.
In 1885 he designed Max Gate, the house which was to be his home for the rest of his life, followed, in 1893, by Talbothays for his brother Henry.
Also in 1893 he undertook the restoration of St Peter's Church, West Knighton, the only restoration for which he had sole responsibility, at a time when he was writing Jude the Obscure .
He published an important essay on church  restoration in 1906, and notes on the importance of English cottages in 1927.
In 1920 he was made a Fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects.
But most important of all, as Edmund Blunden observed, ‘The training he had undergone meant an additional quickness and rightness in his observation as a general habit, which was so valuable a resource in his novels and his other writings; the singularities and visible strange histories of ancient buildings impressed on him, still young, the analogous unexpectedness and incongruity of the fabric of human affairs.’
Max Gate.
Towers had a fascination for Hardy, and having designed many in his professional days which were never built, he saw to it that Max Gate had not one, but two.
[Dr J. Gibson]
The novelist
It was purely for ‘practical reasons’, as he wrote many years later, that Hardy abandoned his fruitless attempts to publish poetry in favour of writing fiction, for which there was a lively demand throughout the 19th century.
In July 1868 — barely a year after leaving Blomfield's office — his first novel, ‘The poor man and the lady’, was submitted to Macmillan, a firm which prided itself on the quality of its fiction list.
It failed to find a publisher either in Macmillan or elsewhere, but Hardy was given a great deal of largely conflicting and unsettling advice at a time when he was ‘feeling his way to a method’.
His next effort,Desperate Remedies described in Early Life as the ‘unfortunate consequence’ of recommendations to ‘write a story with a plot’, is a melodramatic tale in the Wilkie Collins tradition which Macmillan was quick to reject as having too much action, chiefly of an undesirable nature.
It was eventually published anonymously in 1871 by William Tinsley, a specialist in novels for the circulating libraries.
The reviews were not entirely dismissive, but Hardy remembered only the harsh comments in the Spectator , read ‘as he sat on a stile leading to the eweleaze he had to cross on his way home to Bockhampton.
The bitterness of that moment was never forgotten; at the time he wished that he were dead.’
As a result,Under the Greenwood Tree (1872) was written in response to those critics, notably Alexander Macmillan himself, who had commended his earlier treatment of rustic scenes and characters.
The story of a village choir which forms the basis of the novel was Hardy's recreation of tales of the experiences of his father and grandfather as church musicians shortly before his own birth, and as such it is clearly drawn from his deepest and happiest memories.
Although Tinsley, who had purchased the copyright for £30, reported that sales were slow, the critics were charmed by this perfectly constructed story, finding it ‘full of humour and keen observation, and with the genuine air of the country breathing throughout it…
’ Its success gave Hardy the confidence to revive the manuscript of A Pair of Blue Eyes , put aside after the failure of Desperate Remedies , and embark on his first attempt at a serial, the form in which many 19th century novels originally appeared.
The necessity to provide enough material to fill 20 or so pages of Tinsley's Magazine each month exerted its own pressure, forcing him to fall back on recent autobiographical and architectural experiences, but appropriately when the novel appeared in book-form in May 1873 to favourable reviews it was the first to bear  his name on the title-page.
Far From the Madding Crowd brought this period of literary apprenticeship to a triumphant close.
Invited by Leslie Stephen to contribute a serial to the prestigious Cornhill Magazine , Hardy suggested a pastoral story in which ‘the chief characters would probably be a young woman-farmer, a shepherd, and a sergeant of cavalry’.
Stephen's editorial guidance, a period of sustained creativity at Bockhampton ‘within a walk of the district in which the incidents are supposed to occur’, and a sense of ease with the subject, combined to produce a work of remarkable richness and vitality.
The countryside, here called Wessex for the first time, village community life, the joyousness of seasonal festivities, the importance of music — all familiar from Under the Greenwood Tree — are integrated into a more complex story than any Hardy had yet attempted.
Inevitably, writing for the Cornhill gave him a first experience of the restrictions imposed on authors by the readers of quality magazines, but for the time being he was happy to compromise in the interests of his career.
So successful was he in this that offers flowed in from publishers and editors on both sides of the Atlantic.
Now financially secure, he and Emma married and set out for France, their first holiday abroad.
Hardy's first letter to Macmillan.
25 July 1868.
Even after the success of Far From the Madding Crowd Hardy was reluctant to be regarded solely as a writer of rural stories.
Its successor,The Hand of Ethelberta (1876), a comic satire on fashionable London society, was a deliberate attempt to write the kind of fiction which he felt the clients of circulating libraries expected.
To this end he also began a series of literary notebooks in which references to events, books and people from a variety of sources were assembled for future use.
Yet, as he himself admitted, these conscious efforts to conduct the career of popular novelist in a business-like manner were never entirely happy:
He perceived that he was ‘up against’ the position of having to carry on his life not as an emotion, but as a scientific game; that he was committed by circumstances to novel writing as a regular trade, as much as he had formerly been to architecture; and that hence he would, he deemed, have to look for material in manners — in ordinary social and fashionable life as the other novelists did.
Yet he took no interest in manners, but in the substance of life only.
As this extract from Early Life suggests, difficulties were also caused by the quantity   of work he was called upon to undertake.
He was increasingly besieged with requests for new novels and short stories, and troubled by demands for interviews and comments on his work.
Moreover, the surviving letters of this period bear witness to the extent of his involvement in the production and marketing of his books, from suggesting as ‘a desirable novelty’ a sketch-map frontispiece for The Return of the Native (1878), to initiating the publication of Wessex Tales , a collected     edition of some of the short stories.
Of necessity, he became accustomed to writing for serialisation, and familiar with the sequence of publication essential in order to protect an author's interests at home and abroad in the days before an international copyright agreement.
At the same time he never quite made sufficient allowance for the sensibilities of his magazine readers, as interpreted by the editors of those magazines, and had to suffer the artistic indignity of seeing his manuscripts bowdlerized with irritating regularity.
It was against this background that he fell seriously ill in 1881 during the writing of A Laodicean , and after ten years of moving between London and small Dorset towns such as Swanage and Sturminster Newton came to see the solution to all his problems in a final return to Dorchester.
Desperate Remedies (1871).
Hardy had to pay £75 towards the cost of printing a first edition of 500 copies.
Michael Mail, second violinist with the Mellstock Quire, from an illustrated edition of Under the Greenwood Tree published by Tinsley for the Christmas market in 1875.
In the Preface to the Wessex edition Hardy described how the music books of the choir were handwritten, hymns and psalms at the front, dances and ballads at the back ‘till sacred and secular met together in the middle, often with bizarre effect’.
The danger of too close an association between church and dance music is the subject of the humorous short story ‘Absent-mindedness in a parish choir’.
Below:Far From the Madding Crowd (1874).
Illustrations were an important feature of magazine serials, and Hardy was particularly delighted with Helen Paterson's drawings for Far From the Madding Crowd .
The shearing supper, already described so vividly in the text, was an especially successful choice of subject.
Bathsheba stands framed and illuminated by lamplight in the window as Gabriel, outside with the men, accompanies her singing on the flute, and Boldwood, to her left within the room, hums the bass line.
Hardy was always sensitive to the sound of voices, but the taciturn Gabriel's motif is his flute.
Right:The Trumpet Major (1880).
The cover, showing the mill which is the setting for much of the story, was designed by Hardy.
The novels which followed this decision are the fulfilment of Hardy's career as a novelist.
In them he is no longer fighting against his instinctive understanding of the region, traditions and spirit of his home country, but embracing it as a source of inspiration, and eventually using it as a touchstone against which the characters   and even life itself are to be judged.
This new sense of topographical security left him free to explore theories about art, the novel in particular, and see his writing as more than ‘mere journeywork’.
For the first time the fictional works were complemented by a series of important essays: ‘The Dorsetshire labourer’(1883), ‘The profitable reading of fiction’(1888), ‘Candour in English fiction’(1890), ‘The science of fiction’(1891).
The Mayor of Casterbridge (1886) and the The Woodlanders (1887) marked first his literary return to Wessex and then his growing conviction that fiction should not conceal what he saw as the essential tragedy of the human condition.
As he noted just before finishing The Woodlanders , ‘The ‘simply natural’ is interesting no longer.
The much decried, mad, late-Turner rendering is now necessary to create my interest.
The exact truth as to material fact ceases to be of importance in art — it is a student's style — the style of a period when the mind is serene and unawakened to the tragical mysteries of life.’
Receipt for The Woodlanders , 9 May 1887.
Despite many previous approaches to Macmillan, this was the first of Hardy's novels to be published by the firm.
He was paid a total of £600 for the serial, and a royalty of 7 s per copy on the book-form edition.
The year 1887 was a good one for Hardy: he and Emma paid a long-awaited visit to Italy which left him ‘much illuminated’, and returned to find that The  Woodlanders , with its intensely magical evocation of ‘one of those sequestered spots outside the gates of the world’, had become a popular success.
Both experiences help to account for the confidence and vigour with which Tess of the d'Urbervilles was written.
The novel probably began to take shape during the autumn of 1888, although it was not published until 1891.
During that time he sought inspiration and enrichment of the texture of the story in the surrounding countryside, in the paintings of Turner (‘What he paints chiefly is light as modified by objects ’) and Romney (‘I am struck by the red glow of [his]backgrounds, and his red flesh shades’), in the faces of women he met at dinner parties or saw by       chance in a passing omnibus.
The first part of the manuscript, under an early title ‘Too late beloved’, was rejected as unsuitable by Tillotson and Son — with whom a fee of a thousand guineas had already been agreed — by Murray and by Macmillan, before it was accepted in a revised form for serialisation in The Graphic .
The serial, and later the book edition in which some of the original text had been restored, provoked a furious reaction.
For Hardy, who had written in a letter to Thomas Macquoid, ‘I am glad you like Tess — though I have not been able to put on paper all that she is, or was, to me’, it was ‘the beginning of the end of his career as a novelist’.
Below:Tess of the d'Urbervilles .
Overleaf : The Wessex edition of the novels and poems was published in 1912–31 by Macmillan.
The map of Wessex included in each volume was prepared from a drawing supplied by Hardy.
From:Wessex Tales .
Left:W. Hatherell's illustration to one of Hardy's most successful short stories, ‘The Fiddler of the Reels’.
From:Scribner's Magazine , May, 1893.
Below:Programme for The Trumpet Major , adapted by A.H.
Evans.
([Dorchester, 1908]).
This was the first of a series of amateur performances of adaptations of Hardy's novels by the Dorchester Debating and Dramatic Society.
Hardy took a keen interest in their production, although, with two exceptions, the plays themselves were not his work.
Letter to Edmund Gosse, 10 November 1895.
Hardy's most eloquent defence of Jude the Obscure is to be found in a series of letters to his friend Edmund Gosse, who had reviewed the novel in St. James's Gazette on 8 May 1895.
Jude the Obscure was serialised in Harper's New Monthly Magazine between December 1894 and November 1895, the first part under the title The Simpletons , but subsequently as Hearts Insurgent .
Although Hardy came to declare that no book of his had ever contained less of himself, it is difficult not to see in Jude a symbolic statement of all that he had found most disappointing in his life and in the human condition in general.
The critics were quick to recognise the anguish in the writing, but dismissed it as ‘hopeless pessimism’ or ‘a shameful nightmare which one only wishes to forget as quickly and as completely as possible’.
He defended himself vigorously in a series of letters, protesting — in this case to the journalist William Archer — that ‘The very last charges I expected them to bring against a book concerned merely with the doom of hereditary temperament & unsuitable mating in marriage were that it was an attack on marriage in general, that it was immoral, & that characters who recant their opinions & come to a sad end were puppets invented to express my personal views in their talk.’
Amongst all the abuse, he especially valued a letter from Swinburne, a fellow-sufferer at the hands of critics, in which he praised the novel as beautiful and terrible in its pathos.
The public also liked the book, and by December 1895 Hardy was able to report that ‘Jude is going very well’.
Nevertheless, this was his last novel.
With the exception of a few short magazine contributions and the revision of the serial The Pursuit of the Well-Beloved for publication in book form, it brought to an end a career in prose fiction which had seen the publication of 14 novels and some 40 stories, and earned Hardy a place among the greatest 19th-century novelists.
Wessex Poems (1898), p 19.
Hardy's short but effective poem ‘She at his funeral’, accompanying illustration.
The poet
Hardy always stressed that the publication of his first collection of poems in 1898 marked a return to his original love, poetry.
As time went by the relief and pleasure at resuming a form of expression that ‘seems to fit my thoughts better as I grow older, as it did when I was young also’ became more obvious.
In 1904 he wrote to the poet and critic Arthur Symons: ‘I have, however, of late years, lapsed so deeply into my early weakness for verse, & have found the condensed expression that it affords so much more consonant to my natural way of thinking & feeling that I have almost forgotten the prose effusions for the time.’
By 1915 he was advising one commentator ‘to treat my verse…as my essential writings, & my prose as my accidental ’.
His second reputation as one of the 20th century's most important poets was achieved gradually over 30 years and nearly a thousand poems.
Wessex Poems , with its idiosyncratic drawings, introduced him to a startled public as a poetic writer of great originality and — in ‘Neutral tones’, ‘Friends beyond’, ‘I look into my glass’ for example— a potential master of the lyric form.
Some of the poems had been written during the 1860s, others were of more recent date, but the overall impression — which so disturbed contemporary readers — of austerity, metrical irregularity and verbal roughness, reminiscent of an oral tradition, can now be seen, in the words of another poet, David Wright, ‘as a beginning of the end of Victorian poetry’.
Poems of the Past and the Present (1901, dated 1902) was more warmly received, partly because some of the Boer War poems — distinguished in one commentator's eyes for dwelling ‘not on the glory, but on the piteousness of the struggle’— were already familiar through the newspapers.
But there were still those who suggested that its ‘clumsy’ diction and experimental forms were not poetry at all.
For such critics Hardy traced an essential parallel with the irregularity of Gothic architecture in which he had been trained, and noted ‘There is latent music in the sincere utterance of deep emotion, however expressed, which fills the place of the actual word-music in rhythmic phraseology on thinner emotive subjects, or on subjects with next to none at all.’
Hardy's ‘The darkling thrush’ from this collection is one of his most frequently anthologised poems.
Its echoes of Keats and Shelley, the image of a desolate landscape with its tracery of ‘tangled bine-stems’ against the winter sky, its deceptively simple vocabulary, and carefully   controlled metre are characteristic of much of his finest work.
By 1902 Hardy was working on a project which owed its inspiration to boyhood memories of local stories and traditions of Napoleonic times, but had first presented itself as a literary theme in about 1875.
The subject had been explored in The Trumpet-Major and stories such as‘The melancholy hussar of the German legion’ but it now began to take shape as a verse drama of epic proportions in which the historical story of Napoleon's rise and fall was set against a reflective commentary on man's ‘place in the universe’.
The three volumes of The Dynasts , published in 1904 (printed 1903), 1906 and 1908, were of the greatest importance to Hardy personally and to his career.
The power and scope of the work, its technical variety and virtuosity, confirmed his pre-eminent position amongst the writers of the day, bringing a succession of honours which culminated in the Order of Merit, and, his particular favourite, the Freedom of Dorchester in 1910.
The Dynasts .
The ‘Chorus of the Years’ from Part Third, Act 6 was described by Hardy in a letter to Edward Clodd as being the ‘most original’page in the book.
‘Though, of course, he added, ‘a thing may be original without being good.’
Today, however, Hardy is chiefly valued for the lyric poems of extraordinary beauty and versatility to be found in the six volumes of verse published between 1909 and 1928:Time's Laughingstocks (1909),Satires of Circumstance (1914),Moments of Vision (1917),Late Lyrics and Earlier (1922),Human Shows (1925) and the posthumous Winter Words .
Many of the poems in these collections were originally written for publication in magazines or newspapers amidst the increasingly time-consuming business of managing his literary property.
That they are the work of his old age is significant, and was important to Hardy, who frequently associated himself with Verdi or the writers of ancient Greece who continued to produce of their best late in life.
His familiar way of observing things from a distance while highlighting a small detail — described in a different context by Hardy himself when he wrote, ‘If I were a painter, I would paint a picture of a room as viewed by a mouse from a chink under the skirting’, and by the modern poet and critic Tom Paulin when he talks of Hardy wearing his imagination like a miner's lamp — was now enriched by the workings of memory and the passage of time on the original observation.
This facility ‘for burying an emotion in my heart or brain for forty years, and exhuming it at the end of that time as fresh as when interred’, as he described it, lies behind many of his most successful lyrics.
Inevitably, an awareness of time passing led Hardy's thoughts to death in  many poems, particularly those written in memory of family, friends, literary colleagues, and even household pets.
Nothing could have prepared him, however, for the complex welter of emotions which followed Emma's death in 1912 after years of virtual estrangement.
They found their literary expression in a series of haunting elegies generally considered to contain some of the finest love poetry in the English language.
The earliest of these —‘Your last drive’, ‘The walk’, ‘The going’— published in Satires of Circumstance are full of his initial sense of loss and grief.
‘The Abbey Mason’.
From:Harper's Monthly Magazine (New York), December, 1912.
A visit to Gloucester Cathedral in 1911 inspired Hardy to write this fine poem about the anonymous creator of the perpendicular style of Gothic architecture.
Later, after a deliberately nostalgic and painful visit to St Juliot in March 1913, he was able to look back at their early days together in ‘At Castle Boterel’, ‘Beeny Cliff’, ‘The phantom horsewoman’, and eventually to come to terms, however imperfectly, with his memories.
In July 1914 while preparing the volume for publication, he confided to his close friend Florence Henniker: ‘Some of them I rather shrink from printing — those I wrote just after Emma died, when I looked back at her as she had originally been, & when I felt miserable lest I had not treated her considerately in her latter life.
However I shall publish them as the only amends I can make, if it were so.’
In fact, with the exception of a few critics such as Lytton Strachey who noticed ‘the melancholy of regretful recollection, of bitter speculation, of immortal longings unsatisfied’, the poems of 1912–13 attracted little attention.
Most reviewers were distracted by the ‘satires’ of the title, written earlier and in a very different mood, which Hardy came to regret as injuring ‘the others that I cared most about’.
In 1918, shortly after publication of Moments of Vision , he wrote to John Galsworthy,
I suppose English critics will always work on the old lines, and try to get behind the book to quiz the author…instead of seeing that he is almost irresponsible, that it is the result of haphazard circumstances, and that the writer rubs his eyes and wonders how this and that got into his pages as much as the reviewer does.
This collection, often inadequately reviewed at the time, but now seen as the heart of his poetic achievement, contains poems described by Hardy himself as ‘possibly among the best I have written’.
‘During wind and rain’, in which memories of the past are set against present reality through contrasting images and metres, is   one of the greatest of them; but ‘The oxen’, inspired by his nostalgia for the traditions of Christianity, is perhaps the most popular.
Although so many of these poems were retrospective, their remarkable range of subjects suggests an imagination intensely alive to the ordinary timeless details of life.
A flash of sunlight, burning logs, an old psalm tune, fallen leaves, are part of his remembered world; as are ballads, songs and dance rhythms, the sound of water sliding down window panes, or slapping against holes in the river bank.
‘Nothing’, as Edmund Blunden noted, ‘seems to have caught his eye or any of his five or more senses without being for ever ready to serve his vision.’
‘A Reconsideration’.
Yet Hardy always insisted that these memories were only impressions, ‘moments of vision’ which added up to nothing more than ‘diverse readings’on the road to a ‘true philosophy of life’.
Throughout his career he remained sensitive to criticism which suggested that his view of the world was consistently, unrelievedly and unjustifiably pessimistic, especially after the war which he had found profoundly depressing.
Much against Florence's advice,Late Lyrics and Earlier opened with an Apology in which he expressed surprise that ‘in these disordered years of our prematurely afflicted century’ critics should still find fault with his ‘frank exploration of reality’.
Hardy firmly believed that it was his duty to face up to the unpleasant aspects of life, if by so doing he could show sympathy with his fellow man and, perhaps, after all, offer hope for improvement in the future.
For himself, however, as he wrote on the occasion of his 86th birthday in a poem published as ‘He never expected much’,
Well, World, you have kept faith with me,
Kept faith with me;
Upon the whole you have proved to be
Much as you said you were.
Hardy's death was mourned as the passing of English literature's ‘most eminent figure’ in newspapers all over the world.
His heart was buried in his first wife's grave in Stinsford churchyard, beneath the tombstone he had himself designed to accommodate both their names.
His ashes, however, were laid to rest with great pomp and solemnity in Poet's Corner in Westminster Abbey, a handful of Dorset earth   sprinkled on the casket.
It now seems a sad compromise, arrived at by friends who wanted to see him appropriately honoured, but it is one perhaps which he would have understood.
After the funeral, Florence confided to Marie Stopes, ‘I feel with you that the end was premature.
I had hoped for more happy years.’
Her own life, from then until her death in 1937, was empty and unhappy; the luxuries like a flat in London, foreign holidays and a car, which Hardy's death made possible, did little to compensate for her loneliness.
The two volumes of her so-called biography were received unenthusiastically by reviewers who could not know the extent to which it was Hardy's own attempt to sum up his views on lifelong preoccupations such as the nature of art, life, and man's cruelty to man and the other animals.
Meanwhile, his literary reputation continued to grow as later generations came to appreciate and reassess the immense significance of his contribution to English literature.
Not only was he one of the very rare examples of a writer who produced great work in more than one genre, but in a career which spanned nearly 60 years, his talent had developed from traditional Victorian fiction to innovative 20th century poetry.
Today, his novels — always popular with the reading public — are more widely known than ever, thanks to the fact that their plots, originally written for serialisation, have translated into highly successful films.
At the same time they have gained in critical stature as successions of scholars and students around the world have failed to exhaust their interest.
His poetry, however, has always had a special importance for other poets, and it was W. H. Auden who expressed the feelings of many when he wrote in 1940 on the centenary of Hardy's birth,
Hardy was my poetical father and if I seldom read him now, it is, perhaps because our relationship is so assured as no longer to need being made conscious.
He is dead, the world he knew has died too, and we have other roads to build, but his humility before nature, his sympathy for the suffering and the blind, and his sense of proportion are as necessary now as they ever were.