

INTRODUCTION
It was not so long ago that British Democracy was synonymous with liberty and freedom.
The ‘Westminster model’ of government was envied by Europeans, rebuilding after the Second World War, and studied by conscientious foreign politicians, engaged in the planning of new nations.
The United States proudly acknowledged the dependence of its founders upon the principles of the ‘glorious revolution’, and continued to express profound regard for the tolerance and fair-mindedness of its erstwhile colonial master.
Newly independent nations enlisted the aid of British constitutional lawyers and sought with them to translate the special qualities of ‘the Mother of Parliaments’ into their local legal vernacular.
If a country enacted a bill of rights, then it was likely to be acknowledged as a written but inadequate consolation for the absence of that commitment to liberty which appeared to seep unconsciously and effortlessly through the British system of government.
The nation has always been aware of its pre-eminent position, and proud of a moral ascendancy in the political sphere which has been sustained for centuries.
As early as 1752, David Hume noted that ‘the plan of liberty is settled, its happy effects are proved by experience,[and]a long tract of time has given it stability’(Hume, 1906: 203).
Britain still maintained ‘her station as guardian of the general liberties of Europe and patron of mankind’(Hume, 1906: 76).
To Macaulay, the ‘highest eulogy which [could]be pronounced on the revolution of 1688 [was]this, that it was our last revolution’.
In all ‘honest and reflecting minds’, there was ‘a conviction, daily strengthened by experience, that the name of effecting every improvement which the constitution requires may be found within the constitution itself’(Macaulay, 1861: ii.
669).
Dicey described how, when ‘Voltaire came to England — and Voltaire represented the feeling of his age — his predominant sentiment clearly was that he had passed out of the realm of despotism to a land where the laws might be harsh, but where men were ruled by law and not by caprice’(Dicey, 1959: 189–90).
From Complacency To Concern
Confidence in this traditional system of government was enhanced by its absorption of democratic reform in the nineteenth century and by its survival through two world wars in the first half of the twentieth.
Textbooks catering for the upsurge in legal education in the 1950s and 1960s sought to capture in print the mysterious unwritten secrets of a constitution which had emerged into the democratic world without appearing to have changed at all.
Incongruities and  idiosyncrasies were seen as strengths not as weaknesses, as indicators of a capacity for quiet change rather than as evidence of a tendency towards obfuscation.
Even less complacent works shared common assumptions about the essential good qualities of the British approach: pragmatic legislation, a benevolent executive, and a general culture of tolerance and forbearance.
So although Attlee's cabinet of the post-war years was instrumental in promoting and drafting the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, few thought it necessary or desirable that this guarantee of freedom should become part of English law.
In this era of consensus, there was general agreement within the kingdom that the British constitution was ‘the envy of the world’.
Times have changed.
Such an assertion today would be greeted with incredulity and disbelief.
The omnipotence of the British Prime Minister, unparalleled in any other liberal democracy, is undreamt of by an American President or West German Chancellor — and undesired by any of their peoples.
Britain has an unenviable reputation as one of the most consistent transgressors against human rights in the Council of Europe.
The manic international campaign to prevent publication of Peter Wright's Spycatcher advertised to the world an obsession with secrecy that seemed better suited to the other side of the Iron Curtain.
Earlier, this obsession had been carried to absurd lengths with the determined pursuit of Sarah Tisdall and Clive Ponting.
Whilst other nations wrestle with the complex problems of a modern democracy, the questions of press ownership, the funding of political parties, wire-tapping, privacy, freedom of information, the control of the security services, and so on, Britain has been content either to stand aside altogether or to legislate for continuing trust and deference.
A special report on censorship in the UK by the New York Times magazine in March 1989 was headed simply, ‘Thatcher puts a lid on’.
Puzzlement outside the country has been matched by even greater anxiety within it.
The old certainty is gone.
Labour has committed itself to a wide range of civil-liberties legislation and constitutional reform when it returns to government, to counter what its Deputy Leader, Mr Hattersley, has described as the vulnerability of traditional freedoms to the dual threat of ‘legal restriction and a cynical partnership between Government and private enterprise’.
Many of its leading members have spoken in favour of some measure of electoral reform.
Others have called for the enactment of a bill of rights.
The tercentenary of the first Bill, passed in 1688, has provided a stimulus for some earnest reflection.
Macmillan published a book, edited by Richard Holme and Michael Elliott, simply entitled 1688–1988:Time for a New Constitution .
One of its editors describes modern Britain as ‘a constitutional shambles’.
A group of academics and intellectuals has gathered together under the title Charter 88 to campaign for a written constitution to rectify the ‘implausibility’ of the country's current protection of liberty and freedom.
The journal Samizdat started the same year and has followed a similar line.
Under the banner of ‘Liberty’, the National Council for Civil Liberties launched, in January 1989, a counter-offensive to ten years of sustained attacks on individual freedom, detailed in Peter Thornton's book,Decade of Decline: Civil Liberties in the Thatcher Years .
The internationally respected journal Index on Censorship devoted the whole of its September 1988 issue to the question of liberty in Britain, because, as its opening article entitled ‘Why Britain?’ put it, ‘if freedom is diminished in the United Kingdom, where historically it has deep roots, it is potentially diminished everywhere’.
Even the Sunday Telegraph has castigated Mrs Thatcher for the ‘almost messianic bigotry and enthusiasm’ with which she has ‘trampled on genuine ideals with deep roots in our national history’and ‘enjoyed doing so’.
In less emotive terms, the Daily Telegraph has devoted a page to what it called the ‘cracks in the image of justice’ which are being identified —‘and not only by predictable critics’.
The Economist has called for a bill of rights as a bulwark against what Lord Hailsham once described as an ‘elective dictatorship’.
Conservative back-benchers like Richard Shepherd and Jonathan Aitken have voiced their concern at many of the Government's anti-libertarian actions; and Enoch Powell has written of ‘this atmosphere of near-hysteria in which, with general applause, Parliament gets to trample upon the rights and freedoms which it has nurtured and protected through its long history’.
The Constitutional Context
One might well ask what has happened to transform the public mood from complacency to crisis in so short a time.
The answer, in institutional terms, is almost nothing at all— and this is precisely the problem.
The constitutional framework set in place after the ‘Glorious Revolution’ was, rightly, one of the wonders of its age.
The monarch was head of the executive branch, in fact as well as in theory.
Law emerged from a partnership between the Crown's ministry and Parliament.
Neither slavishly followed the views of the other.
The end-product was interpreted and enforced by judges who were independent of both the legislature and the executive and whose jobs were guaranteed regardless of how inconvenient they proved to be.
Blackstone thought it ‘highly necessary for preserving the balance of the constitution that the executive power should be a branch, though not the whole, of the legislature.
The total union of them…would be productive of tyranny’(Blackstone, 1830: 153–4).
It was this element of genuine separation of powers that appealed to Blackstone.
It also strongly influenced the European and American theorists of the following century.
This is the formal arrangement that pertains to this day.
Under this cover of tradition and past glory, however, the executive has bustled through informally to seize almost total power.
The royal drift to impotence began almost immediately after the Whig victory over James II.
The Hanoverians of the early eighteenth century diluted their grip on power both by their frequent absences from executive meetings and by their occasional lack of command of the nation's language when they did attend.
By the third decade of that century, the idea of a prime minister had emerged and in its first physical manifestation it took the imposing form of Sir Robert Walpole.
For another 130 years, and in particular in the period 1830–70, a succession of prime ministers and cabinets wrestled to impose their will on parliaments that were riven by faction and driven by independence of view.
It may have been an aristocratic èlite, but it was also unruly, unpredictable, and extremely difficult to manage.
The change came with parliamentary reform in the nineteenth century and the emergence of large disciplined political parties in the 1860s and 1870s.
In 1988 Lord Scarman perceptively observed that the momentum created by the democratization of Parliament was a major factor behind the marked increase in executive power at this time.
Certainly Disraeli and Gladstone thrived on the electoral reform of the 1860s and quickly learned how to discipline their followers and manage them so as to translate the wishes of the executive into votes in the House.
They were more akin to the machine politicians we know today than to the noble coalition builders and power-brokers who preceded them.
The result of this historical trend is a Parliament that for most of the time now exists to do the executive's bidding.
Unlike America or France, the Government is defined by reference to its ability to command majority support in the lower House.
This quickly reverses itself into cabinet control.
The payroll vote (those members of the Government who sit in the two Houses), back-bench ambition, and the vigilance of the Whips' Office ensure that executive will invariably prevails.
The House of Lords may be an irritant, but its powers are restricted by the Parliament Acts.
In any event, a Conservative Cabinet can always rely on its ‘backwoodsmen’ to get it out of trouble if its more usual supporters amongst the Peers show an inclination to reject an executive decision.
Thus, in May 1988, one of the highest turn-outs of Lords this century saw the Government home on the introduction of a flat-rate poll tax, a measure which had caused great concern amongst regular attendants.
In July 1988 the Lords voted by 120 to 94 to reject the imposition of charges for eye tests.
The Government's response was to call on its country support and put the matter before the Lords again.
This time, they won by 257 to 207 votes.
It was once again one of the highest turn-outs of the century.
The Government controls Parliament's time and it is therefore able to limit debate where its proposals are proving controversial or where a rational examination of them is turning out to be embarrassing.
One device for curtailing debate and the detailed examination of a bill is the so-called ‘guillotine’ motion.
The Government's official secrets legislation in 1989 was guillotined after only two days in committee in the lower House.
Discussion on the Prevention of Terrorism Bill 1989 was also arbitrarily curtailed.
The control of Parliament is perhaps even better illustrated by the fact that few pieces of legislation have been lost in the Commons in the ten years since Mrs Thatcher became prime minister — the Shops Bill comes to mind, but there is talk of its reintroduction in a future session.
A whole series of laws bears the personal imprint of the Prime Minister — the abolition of the Greater London Council, the poll tax, identity cards for football supporters, to name but a few.
All that unpopularity in the country or in the Commons manages to achieve is a revolt by a handful of predictable Tory rebels, a few careful speeches about the need to present policy better, and a vague anxiety about the results of an election not due to be held for years.
The real power struggle is behind the scenes, in the informal advisory bodies with access to Secretaries of State, in the Cabinet committees, in the meetings of Ministers with their powerful back-benchers, and in the informal cabals that focus energies on future policy.
A bill before the House signals the end of the real battle and the start of a squabble over detail.
It is the tiresome but essential task of window-dressing.
The lack of any real constraints on the executive branch has led to a crisis of overgovernability, in which executive proposals quickly become law via a quiescent Parliament without sufficient consultation, scrutiny, or debate and without any possibility of subsequent judicial challenge.
Yet it is worth pausing at this point to remind ourselves that throughout her years in office, the Prime Minister has not created any new constitutional structures from which she and her Cabinet have been able to benefit.
The two major attempts at reform in the ten years before Mrs Thatcher, the reform of the House of Lords in 1969 and Scottish and Welsh devolution in 1978, were both conspicuous failures.
Few institutional changes have occurred since 1979.
The structure of government has stood still, but about it all has changed.
Because of this failure to develop, the great debate about liberty and the control of power in the technological age, which we see in other Western nations, is passing the country by, almost unnoticed.
The result is that, in international terms, where once it was the paradigm, Britain is now little more than a jaded footnote.
Pride in the nation's system of government, once shared by all, has degenerated into complacency about its superiority, believed only by the few who exercise the near despotic powers that its outmoded forms have given them.
Mrs Thatcher has merely utilized to the full the scope for untrammelled power latent in the British Constitution but obscured by the hesitancy and scruples of previous, consensus-based, political leaders.
Her great good fortune has been an electoral system that has given her power on a minority vote.
Her great success has lain in her willingness to use the vagueness and flexibility of the Constitution to her own ends.
In so doing, she has both accelerated a process of institutional decline that was well in place before she arrived, and, by the extent of her unchallenged success, signalled the need for new forms and structures.
Mrs Thatcher's greatest service to the nation may yet be the institutional reforms that take place on her departure.
The Influence Of Dicey
It is, perhaps, unsurprising that individual liberty should be one of the chief casualties of a system of government that rests so much power in the executive branch.
A major contribution to the growth of state power has also been the ineffective protection traditionally provided for political freedom by the British Constitution.
Historically, the principal safeguard was the doctrine of the rule of law, first given widespread currency in A. V. Dicey's extraordinarily influential Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution , the first edition of which appeared in 1885.
For Dicey, the rule of law involved three propositions.
First, it meant that ‘no man [was]punishable or [could]be made to suffer in body or goods except for a distinct breach of law established in the ordinary legal manner before the ordinary courts of the land’.
Secondly, it also meant ‘not only that no man [was]above the law, but (what is a different thing) that here every man, whatever be his rank or condition,[was]subject to the ordinary law of the realm and amenable to the jurisdiction of the ordinary tribunals’.
Thirdly, it involved saying that ‘the general principles of the constitution (as for example the right to personal liberty, or the right of public meeting) are with us as the result of judicial decisions determining the rights of private persons in particular cases brought before the courts’.
What this entailed for civil liberties may be gleaned by looking at the way in which Dicey dealt with traditional freedoms in the body of his work.
‘The right to personal freedom’ was secured in England by ‘the strict maintenance of the principle that no man [could]be arrested or imprisoned except in due course of law…under some warrant or authority’.
Freedom of expression was treated in the same way: ‘Any man may…say or write whatever he likes, subject to the risk of, it may be, severe punishment if he publishes any statement (either by word of mouth, in writing or in print) which he is not legally entitled to make’.
Finally, there was freedom of assembly:
[I]t can hardly be said that our constitution knows of such a thing as any specific right of public meeting….
The right of assembling is nothing more than a result of the view taken by the courts as to individual liberty of person and individual liberty of speech.
There is no special law allowing A, B, and C to meet together in the open air or elsewhere for a lawful purpose, but the right of A to go where he pleases so that he does not commit a trespass, and to say what he likes to B so that his talk is not libellous or seditious, the right of B to do the like, and the existence of the same rights of C, D, E, and F and so on ad infinitum , lead to the consequence that A, B, C, D and a thousand or ten thousand other persons, may (as a general rule) meet together in any place where otherwise they each have a right to be for a lawful purpose and in a lawful manner.
There was ‘in the English constitution an absence of those declarations or definitions of rights so dear to foreign constitutionalists’, but this was a strength rather than a weakness; whereas ‘general rights guaranteed by the constitution may be, and in foreign countries, constantly are, suspended’, the English emphasis on specific remedies protected by legislation and the courts meant that ‘the suspension of the constitution, as far as such a thing can be conceived possible, would mean with us nothing less than a revolution’.
These ideas of political liberty have lain behind traditional British attitudes to rights and freedoms ever since Dicey first conceived of them.
But as a theoretical basis for the protection of these rights and freedoms, such ideas are woefully inadequate.
In the first place the guarantee afforded liberty in Dicey's scheme is a negative rather than a positive one.
Freedom is not something that can be asserted in opposition to law; it is the residue of conduct permitted in the sense that no statute or common-law rule prohibits it.
Undoubtedly, there was such a reservoir of unregulated behaviour in Dicey's day.
His unspoken premise was that such a space for freedom would always continue to exist; he saw Parliament and the courts as guardians of liberty.
Accordingly, nothing in his framework was designed to stand up for liberty where the legislature saw fit to intervene with new restrictive laws, or where the courts contrived to discover or develop them; Dicey simply assumed that this would not occur.
Yet, as we shall see, this has been by far the most prevalent trend in terms of legislation, at least since the start of the 1970s.
And, as we shall also see, the courts have not been adverse to developing the common law to like restrictive effect.
The Dicey approach has no answer to this.
The residue of liberty just gets smaller and smaller, until eventually, in some areas, it is extinguished altogether, with freedom becoming no more than the power to do that which an official has decided for the time being not to prohibit.
The British approach of refusing to assert positive rights gives freedom no weapons with which to retaliate.
The point is nicely illustrated by an important case arising out of the miners' strike of 1984–85.
Virtually all the members of the South Wales Area of the NUM had obeyed the strike call when it had gone out in 1984.
By November, however, a small number of them had returned to work.
The practice developed of ferrying this minority of strike-breakers to their collieries in NCB vehicles, protected all the way by large numbers of police officers.
Pickets were unable to communicate with the strike-breakers as they were whisked by — peaceful persuasion was not possible.
Demonstrators also began to gather outside the pit gates.
Sometimes there were several hundreds of them.
They shouted and roared as those whom they saw as traitors sped by.
The language used was often abusive and insulting.
An official described this conduct as ‘symbolic and ‘ritualistic’ and merely a gesture’.
The question arose as to whether this behaviour was unlawful.
Scott J. scoured the common law for the right restrictive formula — but without success.
There was no assault because, cocooned within their vehicles and surrounded by the police, the working miners had no genuine fear of immediate physical violence, as required by that tort.
For the same reason, there was no obstruction of the highway — the miners were getting from home to colliery far more quickly than normal, thanks to the chauffeur and the VIP escort.
Nor was there the tort of interference with contract — work was being done (theoretically at least) just as the NCB wanted.
Dicey's theory, therefore, seemed to favour the demonstrators.
At this point, however, the judge played an elegant legal game.
He turned to private nuisance, a tort which he admitted was ‘strictly concerned with, and [could]be regarded as confined to activity which unduly interferes with the use or enjoyment of land’.
This should have made it irrelevant to the case before him.
The miners owned neither the buses nor the land over which they travelled.
However, this was how the judge saw it:
[T]here is no reason why the law should not protect on a similar basis the enjoyment of other rights.
All citizens have the right to use the public highway.
Suppose an individual were persistently to follow another on a public highway, making rude gestures or remarks in order to annoy or vex.
If continuance of such conduct were threatened no one can doubt that a civil court would, at the suit of the victim, restrain by an injunction the continuance of the conduct.
The tort might be described as a species of private nuisance, namely unreasonable interference with the victim's rights to use the highway.
But the label for the tort does not, in my view, matter.
The demonstrators were therefore in the wrong and the union could properly be held responsible for their actions.
In the absence of earlier cases to rely upon, the judge simply invented a new tort, and granted an injunction compelling the union to call off the pickets.
Dicey allowed that legislation and the common law could restrict liberty.
But now we see that even the absence of law is no guarantee against the possibility of retrospective regulation.
Freedom retreats in the face of laws that are constantly emerging, evolving, and accumulating — but very rarely disappearing.
They originate not only in Parliament but also in the courts.
The residual nature of liberty means that it can never fight back.
This case highlights a second weakness of Dicey's approach, namely his assumption that individual liberty can be adequately protected by the decisions of English judges.
The ‘law of the constitution’ was ‘not the source but the consequence of the rights of individuals, as defined and enforced by the courts’.
It was the judges' commitment to freedom that was the main guarantee against despotism.
It is true that the potential is clearly there: judges retain the independence they won after the ‘Glorious Revolution’; members of the senior judiciary may only be removed by the Queen on an address presented by both Houses of Parliament.
There is, however, some potential for abuse in the system, with senior appointments being made by the Prime Minister.
Other writers have emphasized the narrow social strata from which judges are drawn and have questioned the degree to which they are able to relate to ordinary people and to stand up against the powerful and the rich.
These are familiar criticisms.
But our concern in this book is more with the civil-liberties record of the judges as reflected in the cases they have decided.
It is not a salutary one.
The courts have invented new laws, as in the new liabilities to restrain picketing during the miners' strike.
They have also rediscovered long-forgotten old ones, such as the Home Secretary's prerogative to do whatever is ‘reasonably necessary to preserve the peace of the realm’, which in the case in question meant supplying plastic bullets and CS gas to the police without consultation with Parliament and against the wishes of local police committees (see Chapter 4).
The existing common law on breach of the peace has been continuously expanded so that it now adds greatly to the non-statutory powers of the police to restrict peaceful assembly (see Chapter 4).
The courts have identified the interests of the state with the interests of the government of the day (see the Ponting case and the law on secrecy detailed in Chapter 5).
They have accepted that Government can avoid scrutiny of its conduct by calling to its aid a concept, ‘national security’, the definition of which the judges are content to leave to the executive (see the GCHQ case in Chapter 5).
Their willingness to grant ex-parte and interlocutory injunctions has meant that liberties are sometimes extinguished without proper adjudication, and on other occasions that their vindication has been crucially delayed (see the Zircon affair and the Spycatcher litigation in Chapter 5).
There are, of course, exceptions: the various judgments by Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson and Lord Bridge's dissent in Spycatcher ; the ultimate failure of the Government in that case; and Glidewell J.'s first-instance decision in the GCHQ case.
But these are deviations and dissents rather than the mainstream that Dicey would have expected.
Our leading civil-liberties cases are still those old authorities with which he was familiar,Entick v. Cawington and Beatty v. Gillbanks .
The breakthroughs in administrative law that have occurred since the war have concerned issues like the marketing of milk, the dismissal of a chief constable, and the allocation of foreign compensation.
Civil-liberties litigation has been dismally deferential to authority.
As we see when we examine the Spycatcher cases, in the area of civil liberties the courts seem to have come to regard themselves as the partners of the executive, tackling difficult problems together, rather than as a separate, autonomous, and sometimes necessarily antagonistic branch of government.
This is a long way from Dicey's reliance on them as the guardians of our rights.
The European Convention On Human Rights
There has been one dramatic innovation since the days of Dicey, though he would not have approved of its European focus and its impact on British law is confusingly oblique.
The European Convention on Human Rights was signed at Rome in 1950 and was ratified by the United Kingdom in 1951.
It came into force for those states which had ratified it in 1953.
The inspiration for the Convention came from the wide principles declared in the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948.
It was a direct result of the move towards greater political co-operation in Western Europe which had led to the creation of the Council of Europe in 1949.
The overriding influence was, of course, the Second World War, with its terrible suffering and sacrifice of human life.
The Convention set down certain human rights and created a political and judicial procedure to secure their protection.
The European Commission of Human Rights was created to receive complaints of abuses from states and (where the country concerned had agreed to such a procedure) from individuals.
The Commission's job is to make a preliminary decision on the admissibility of the complaint.
An individual, for example, is required to have exhausted all local remedies.
If the Commission thinks the case admissible and worth proceeding with, it sees if it can achieve a friendly settlement.
If this is not possible, the case may then be referred to the European Court of Human Rights, whose decision on the matter will be binding on the nation concerned.
The vast majority of cases begin as applications by individuals against their own states.
A glance at the provisions of the Convention makes interesting reading.
The assertion of rights is its starting-point.
‘Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and his correspondence’(Article 8); ‘everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion’(Article 9); ‘everyone has the right to freedom of expression’(Article 10); ‘everyone has the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and to freedom of association with others’(Article 11).
These rights are then made subject to exceptions, and these can be very broad.
Rather typical are those to be found in Article 10:
The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing the disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
Two things are clear from this very brief summary of the content of the Convention.
First, its approach is completely different to that which pertains in the United Kingdom.
The British emphasis, as we have seen, is on liberty as the residue, the bit left over after the law has had its say.
The European method is exactly the reverse: the right exists unless it has been abridged by a law which, moreover, has to be specifically justified.
It is just the sort of Continental charter that was despised by Dicey.
This structural contradiction may explain, though it does not excuse, why Britain has been brought to book so frequently by the European judges.
The Court has had occasion to condemn our laws on contempt of court, on prisoners' rights, on terrorism, on telephone-tapping, on birching (in the Isle of Man), on homosexuality (in Northern Ireland), on detention, and on freedom of association.
We look at some of these cases in more detail in the chapters that follow.
In recent years, the Court's decisions have invariably been the impetus behind that small ration of liberalization that has been forced upon Mrs Thatcher.
Secondly, the wording of the Convention is vague and decisions in individual cases may very largely depend on the preferences of the individual judges involved.
The Sunday Times case which overruled the House of Lords on contempt was decided by 11 votes to 9.
The rejection of Britain's seven-day detention period for terrorist suspects was by 12 votes to 7 (see Chapter 7).
The inevitably open texture of such a document leaves a great degree of discretion in the hands of the judiciary.
This is an important consideration which bears directly on the current debate as to whether the Convention should be incorporated into British law and made directly enforceable within the jurisdiction.
At the moment, the Convention is not part of Britain's domestic law.
Litigants may not argue on its basis before a local judge, but they may take their cases to the European Commission after they have exhausted all locally available remedies.
Incorporation into domestic law to rectify this anomalous situation would have the attractive consequence of reversing the current bias against freedom inherent in the residual approach now applied.
If it were enacted in isolation, however, and if, in particular, there were no new constitutional settlement to underpin it, it is hard to see how problems with parliamentary sovereignty could be avoided.
The dogmatic resistance to entrenchment would raise its arid and pedantic head.
We discuss this in more detail in our concluding chapter.
But, more importantly perhaps, the question of incorporation, particularly of such an open-textured document, inevitably raises difficult questions about the commitment of the British judiciary to the fundamental freedoms that such a charter would be asking them to defend.
As has already been suggested, their record does not inspire confidence.
Even where legislation has been phrased in the European manner, like section 10 of the Contempt of Court Act, the courts have nevertheless contrived to let pro-executive exceptions swallow the supposed rule (see the Guardian Newspaper case, Chapter 5).
This general question is one to which we also return, in Chapter 8.
Conclusion
The various issues raised here will receive closer attention as we work our way in greater detail through the law.
The criticisms that we make derive strength from an analysis of other jurisdictions with similar common-law backgrounds and the same liberal democratic traditions as the United Kingdom.
Australia, Canada, the Republic of Ireland, and the United States have nothing like the same concentration of unqualified power at the centre of government as this country has.
As we shall see in subsequent chapters, the approach they have taken to fundamental freedoms has on a number of important occasions been radically different and altogether more liberal than has been the case here.
These are the nations with which Britain should be compared and by reference to which her laws should be judged.
The existence of totalitarian states elsewhere in the world should be a source of anxiety for us all, rather than an excuse for falling standards at home.
Professor Dworkin (1988: 7–8) has summed up present attitudes to liberty in his trenchant piece in Index on Censorship :
[T]his government's challenge to freedom has nothing to do with totalitarian despotism.
It shows a more mundane but still corrupting insensitivity to liberty, a failure to grasp its force and place in modern democratic ideals….
Thatcher's government places liberty at a much lower level, it makes freedom just another preference, just something that some people want a great deal more than most people do, just something else to be balanced out with an eye to majority opinion and the next election…
Thatcherism makes intellectual liberty just another commodity, to be enjoyed when there is no particular political or commercial or administrative price to be paid for it, but abandoned, with no evident grief, when the price begins to rise.
That is not despotism.
But it cheapens liberty and diminishes the nation.
Dworkin concludes that liberty ‘is ill in Britain’.
In this introduction we have diagnosed some of the causes of its illness and, in the substantive chapters that follow, we will draw attention to its various unpleasant symptoms.
THE EXTENSION OF POLICE POWERS
THE police have been in the front line of Thatcherism.
Their diligent enforcement of the Government's industrial laws has helped to transform the role of the trade unions; their role as guarantors of public order has led them into bitter conflict with pickets and demonstrators.
Their struggles on the streets of Britain during the riots of 1981 restored the public peace at a time when it looked as though the ‘thin blue line’ was all that stood between turmoil and a still nascent Thatcherite revolution.
The police have also taken on the football hooligans, the hippies, and the criminal gangs.
Apart from this industrial, political, and mob violence, however, there has been the ongoing pressure of the seemingly inexorably high level of ‘ordinary’ crime, the control of which has been high on the agenda for ten years.
With a government that appears consciously to thrive on discord, and which has no policy on crime other than the obviousness of its being evil, the central role of the police has been inevitable.
To advocates of the ‘resolute approach’, crime is simply a choice to do wrong; it is never the squalid last gasp of the outsider.
The job of the police is to protect the purity of this image.
The Policing Context
For all these valuable services, the police have been well rewarded.
Their numbers have jumped over the years.
Between May 1979, when the Conservatives came into office, and January 1988 their strength in England and Wales had risen from 109,998 to 122,131, an increase of 11 per cent.
In the London metropolitan area growth was in the order of 23.5 per cent, from 22,225 to 27,449.
At the end of 1988 the Home Secretary promised an additional 1,230 officers for 1989/90.
The Metropolitan Police are expected to cost £1,082.391 million in 1989/90 — an increase of over 50 per cent in real terms since 1977/8.
Officer remuneration has enjoyed an even more meteoric rise.
At the start of 1988, the maximum basic pay for a constable was £13,938; for a superintendent £25,650; and for a chief constable £46,914.
This does not include overtime pay, or the free accommodation, or rent allowance in lieu, to which officers are entitled.
Constables with the Metropolitan Police can expect, on top of these extras, further sums of £945 (London weighting) and £1,011 (London allowance).
On top of all this, the police received, during the autumn of 1988, an average pay rise of 8.5 per cent, well above the rate of inflation at the time.
During the 1980s the police found themselves embroiled in a number of controversies.
Whilst driving through London, Stephen Waldorf was shot several times and severely injured by officers who confused him with another person whom they said they were seeking to capture.
In September 1985 Mrs Dorothy Croce was shot and paralysed after the police had entered her home in search of her son.
Mrs Cynthia Jarrett died during a police search of her home in October 1985, as did a five-year-old boy, John Shorthouse, when a police gun went off accidentally during a search of his home.
In 1987 the number of people shot dead in Britain by the police using firearms was five.
The deaths in police custody of a number of detainees over the years have also been controversial.
Allegations have been made that successful convictions in a number of key murder trials have been dependent upon confession evidence which has been improperly obtained during police interrogation.
The cases of the Birmingham Six and the Guildford Four are only the best known in what is a disturbingly long list.
Allegations about racial harassment simmer away in the background, unhelped by the tiny number of non-whites in police forces up and down the country.
Following a serious and unprovoked attack on a number of youths in Holloway, the Police Complaints Authority castigated the ‘shameful’ silence of a large number of constables and criticized the ‘moral failure’of sections of the service (Police Complaints Authority, 1988: 12).
In August 1988 a number of police officers joined forces to pursue a person whom it was alleged had been driving recklessly.
Quite by chance, and unknown to the police, the incident was filmed and broadcast later on national television news.
The victim was charged with obstruction, and the passenger travelling with him was charged with assault.
The driver was eventually sentenced to six months in prison for reckless driving.
A police investigation has led to charges of assault against five officers.
Criticism has not always been related to specific cases.
Various reports critical of CID standards have been issued.
As reported in the press, an internal inquiry in 1989 into one police force recommended a radical rehaul in the way the force dealt with local crime.
As reported, the authors found ‘disturbing’ the fact that half of the sample CID investigations they examined were lacking in some details or were actually unsatisfactory’.
Most of the difficulties lay in ‘deep-seated Force problems’.
Shortly afterwards, in the same year, a report by MPs criticized the appointments procedure for some senior officers as ‘ramshackle…haphazard and amateurish in the extreme’.
It recommended a radical change in approach (Home Affairs Committee, 1989).
A long-term irritant to the police has been the ongoing allegation that some officers have been closely connected with freemasonry.
This has recently been the subject of judicial review proceedings.
A police constable caused great concern with his assertions, made for the first time some years ago, that some Kent police officers were offering inducements to prisoners to make false admissions to offences, and to confess to crimes that they had not committed, so that the force could then add to the number of crimes they had ‘detected’, and thereby improve their crime clear-up statistics.
After a three-year investigation involving the Police Complaints Authority, it was announced that a number of police officers were to be admonished or advised about their conduct and were to face disciplinary charges.
The Authority was less successful in its attempt to ensure that disciplinary proceedings were brought against a detective superintendent, whose early retirement from the Metropolitan Police in 1989 meant that he avoided questions about his links with drug smuggling and criminal gangs, queries that had arisen after a World in Action television programme which had made serious allegations about corruption in the London police.
It is against this background that we examine the nature of police power more than ten years into the premiership of Mrs Thatcher and scrutinize the degree to which the individual is protected from the abuse of that power.
The subject of police powers is of course an enormous one raising many diverse issues.
In this chapter we are concerned with key aspects of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, an Act based to some extent on the report of a Royal Commission under the chairmanship of Sir Cyril Philips.
When may the police arrest a suspected citizen?
What rights do citizens have in custody?
Here we are concerned in particular with the right to silence and the right of access to a solicitor.
In concentrating on these issues, we are reminded of the comments made by a distinguished Scottish judge in 1954.
He said that ‘In the eyes of every ordinary citizen the venue [i.e. the police station]is a sinister one.
When he stands alone in such a place confronted by several police officers, usually some of high rank, the dice are loaded against him, especially as he knows there is no one to corroborate him as to what exactly occurred during the interrogation, how it was conducted and how long it lasted’.
Police Powers Of Arrest
1.
The scope of the power In 1979 there were 1.4 million arrests in England and Wales.
The powers underpinning this huge number of detentions were many and varied — but there were some bewildering inconsistencies.
A citizen could be arrested without a warrant under the Deer Act 1963, the Town Gardens Protection Act 1863, or the Public Stores Act 1875 for ‘obliterating marks denoting that property in stores is HM property’, but he or she could not be directly apprehended for an indecent assault on a woman.
An important general rule was in an Act passed in 1967, which allowed arrest without a warrant for murder or for any other crime for which the jail sentence could be five years or more, but this was merely in addition to the motley of other provisions.
Sir Cyril Philips's Commission observed that there was a ‘lack of clarity and an uneasy and confused mixture of common law and statutory powers of arrest, the latter having grown piecemeal and without any consistent rationale’.
The task of the police was made ‘more difficult because of the complexity of the law’, and it was ‘scarcely surprising if the citizen [was]uncertain of his rights’(Philips, 1981: 41,42).
The Royal Commission was anxious to produce order from this chaos in the fairest way possible.
To this effect, it suggested that as a general rule the police should be able to arrest an individual without a warrant if the crime which was suspected was one for which the individual could be jailed rather than simply fined.
This carried the law further than the 1967 Act because any term of imprisonment (rather than five years minimum) was now to be enough.
To meet objections to this, the Commission added that an individual should only be held where, quite apart from being for an ‘arrestable offence’, the arrest was also ‘necessary’.
Philips emphasized this idea of ‘necessity’ as an extra qualification on police power.
It had various elements: detention upon arrest should only continue if the person was unwilling to identify himself or herself; or if there was a likelihood that he or she would not turn up at court; or if there was a need to prevent the continuation or repetition of the offence; or if the arrest was essential to protect the arrested person or other persons or property or to secure evidence by questioning or other means.
Thus the Commission saw these two vital controls on police power: the arrest had to be for an imprisonable offence and it had also, in addition to this, to be ‘necessary’.
For their Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 the Government has fastidiously chosen from the menu of options offered by Philips only those dishes that it thought the most palatable.
The real taste is disguised by the grandiose wording that accompanies them.
The marginal note to section 24 refers to ‘arrest without warrant for arrestable offences’, an apparent tautology which will be explained later.
It defines as ‘arrestable offences’ murder, treason, and other crimes imprisonable for five years or more.
This seems to be a restatement of the old law and a rejection of Philips.
All is not as it would appear, however.
A number of modifications to this general rule lurk in the background.
First, a variety of offences are deemed arrestable despite the fact that they do not fit into this general rule.
Most of these are unexceptional.
They cover a variety of sexual offences and crimes against property and customs and excise legislation.
The Government could not resist adding offences under the Official Secrets Acts 1911 and 1920.
This caught the notorious (and now repealed) section 2 for which the punishment was a maximum of two years.
Why it should have been possible to arrest without warrant for this ridiculous crime was not clear.
Secondly, conspiring or attempting to commit or inciting, aiding, abetting, counselling, or procuring the commission of any arrestable offence is in itself arrestable.
Thirdly, a later section grandly describes itself as engaged in the ‘[r]epeal of statutory powers of arrest without warrant or order’.
Clearly, removal of the old laws should be part and parcel of reform.
In fact, the Act does not repeal all of them.
There are preserved powers of arrest in relation to, among others, the Military Lands Act 1892, the Emergency Powers Act 1920, the Public Order Act 1936 (and now 1986), the Bail Act 1976, and the Prevention of Terrorism Act.
The common-law power of arrest for breach of the peace remains untouched.
Many of the powers of arrest enjoyed by the police in relation to civil liberties are, therefore, untrammelled by the restrictions introduced in the 1984 law.
These qualifications to section 24 dilute the meaning of ‘arrestable offence’.
Section 25 relegates it to the margins of police practice.
The section could have been summarized in the sidenote as ‘arrest for non-arrestable offences’, but the draftsman did not dare to risk such Kafkaesque accuracy.
Rather than ignore Philips's cherished necessity principle, the Government turned it on its head.
The Act provides that where ‘a constable has reasonable grounds for suspecting that any offence which is not an arrestable offence has been committed or attempted, or is being committed or attempted, he may arrest the relevant person if it appears to him that service of a summons is impracticable or inappropriate because any of the general arrest conditions is satisfied’.
There are five of these general arrest conditions:(a) the name of the person is not known to the police officer and he or she cannot ‘readily ascertain’ it.
(b) A name is provided, but the police officer has ‘reasonable grounds for doubting’ that it is genuine.
(c) A ‘satisfactory address’ is not provided or, if one is supplied, the constable has ‘reasonable ground for doubting’it.
(d) There are ‘reasonable grounds for believing’ the arrest to be necessary to prevent physical injury to somebody, the loss of or damage to property, an offence against public decency, or an unlawful obstruction of the highway.
(e) There are ‘reasonable grounds for believing’ that the arrest is ‘necessary to protect a child or other vulnerable person’.
All this is very much wider than anything envisaged by Philips.
The outcome is a power which transforms the nature of the relationship between the police and the public.
All crimes, no matter how trivial, no matter how minor, now expose the citizen to the risk of arrest without warrant and detention, with all the sordid and humiliating consequences that often attach to these upsetting experiences.
How vulnerable is the exotically named individual, or anyone who happens to have no identification documents with him or her?
Consider too the vulnerability of the homeless person with no fixed abode.
By allowing the arbitrary arrest of such people, the Act explicitly recognizes that personal freedom in Britain depends in large measure on economic and material well-being.
In one extraordinary case in July 1988, the reason the officer gave for doubting the name and address of the person arrested was that ‘suspects usually gave false names and addresses’.
Unsurprisingly, the Divisional Court did not think this was enough.
In another case, two police officers spotted a man cycling without his hands on the handlebars.
They shouted from their car telling him to cycle properly.
He ignored them.
They then drew alongside him and told him again to put his hands on the handlebars.
This time he did as he was told, but, when the police had driven off, he raised two fingers in their direction.
They spotted him, came back, stopped his cycle, and demanded to know his name and address.
When he refused to give this information, he was arrested ‘for failing to give his name and address’.
A struggle ensued, during which many blows were struck.
In later proceedings, the validity of this arrest was upheld.
The Divisional Court thought the matter ‘a storm in a teacup which thereafter became unfortunately somewhat more serious’.
It agreed with the police that he had been arrested for cycling without due care and attention and that this had been sufficiently communicated to him.
It seems clear, however, that it would be possible in other similar circumstances for a police officer to detain such a person for what he or she did after the offence rather than for the crime itself.
In such circumstances, it would be possible to employ section 25 to punish for insolence rather than illegality.
The open-ended nature of the section is an invitation to the police to abuse their discretion in response to which there are no effective safeguards.
It is difficult to see how the courts can scrupulously review the reasonableness of police discretion where the case comes up so long after the event when the wording in the Act is so very wide in the first place.
The overriding criterion — that the service of a summons is impracticable or inappropriate — does not even have to be based on objective grounds; it is enough that it should appear to be so to the constable making the arrest.
From being an additional safeguard for those already arrested, the necessity principle becomes, in the hands of the Home Office, the basis of a separate and quite independent set of criteria justifying arrests that would otherwise have been unlawful.
Instead of protecting detainees, therefore, it simply adds to their number.
It is an audacious transformation, managed by a confident government, and a reminder to Royal Commissions of the impotence of their prestige.
2.
The grounds for arrest It is one thing to identify the crimes for which an arrest is now possible; it is another to say when such arrests may lawfully take place.
Here we have to distinguish between the police and ordinary mortals.
Any one of us may arrest a person who is, or who is reasonably suspected to be, in the act of committing an ‘arrestable’ offence.
Any one of us may also apprehend an individual whom we know to be, or whom we have reasonable grounds for suspecting to be, guilty of such an offence as long as it has been committed.
However, the ordinary member of the public cannot go around arresting cyclists and homeless persons and so on under section 25.
That is the preserve of the police.
They have the same powers as the ordinary citizen — and more.
If a constable reasonably suspects that an arrestable offence has been committed, he or she may detain anyone whom he or she reasonably suspects to be guilty of it.
Furthermore, the constable may also arrest someone whom he or she suspects to be about to, or who is actually about to, commit an arrestable offence.
The key constraint here, of course, is this notion of ‘reasonable suspicion’.
In the early days, the higher courts provided some fairly clear ideas on what this involved.
In one case in 1944, Scott LJ stated that the ‘British principle of personal freedom, that every man should be presumed innocent until he is proved guilty, applies also to the police function of arrest — in a very modified degree, it is true, but at least to the extent of requiring them to be observant, receptive and open-minded and to notice any relevant circumstance which points either way, either to innocence or to guilt’.
The court pointed out that reasonable suspicion did not require the police ‘to have anything like a prima facie case for conviction’.
They had, however, the ‘duty of making such inquiry as the circumstances of the case ought to indicate to a sensible man is, without difficulty, presently practicable’.
In the case itself, a man was arrested for having soap flakes (a rationed article) with him as he cycled home.
The police did not get his name and address or make enquiries at his workplace to check out his story before they arrested him.
Their hunch was held not to amount to a reasonable suspicion.
In a leading case in 1969, Lord Devlin agreed that reasonable suspicion could be based on information that would not generally be admissible in court.
On the facts before it, which concerned a death from a lorry shedding its load, the court held that the police were wrong to arrest for manslaughter the person whom they thought had been driving the truck: there was a wide gap between a suspicion that somebody was driving a truck, and a suspicion that they were driving it recklessly.
These cases show that the courts took a fairly hard line when it came to police discretion in this area.
There are a couple more cases of recent vintage, but this is not an issue which the higher courts confront very often.
It takes money, determination, and patience to launch a false imprisonment action; most detainees are happy simply to be out of the police station.
A magistrates' or crown court will rarely second-guess a constable and it in turn will only very occasionally be overruled on this issue further up the judicial ladder.
Hence there is a paucity of case-law.
In any event, the courts now seem to take a softer line on police practice so far as this can be discerned from the undiscussed elements in cases that reach the law reports for other reasons.
In one good example in June 1988, a company was burgled some time after an employee was sacked.
The police suspected that it was an inside job and promptly arrested the dismissed worker, for no reason other than that she might have borne a grudge against her erstwhile employer.
After nearly four hours of questioning, she was released.
The court accepted that these facts amounted to a reasonable suspicion.
There was no need to pursue the matter any further prior to arrest.
The fact that other courses of enquiry were open to the police officer did not affect the reasonableness of his suspicion and the lawfulness of the detention.
In a 1984 case, jewellery was stolen from a house in which the defendant was a temporary lodger.
Shortly afterwards, some of the jewellery was sold to a shop in Portsmouth.
More than four months later, the victim of the crime recognized her jewellery in the shop window and told the police.
The jeweller's description of the person from whom he had bought the valuables was thought by the victim to resemble her former lodger.
The police then went to the new home of the former lodger, entered it, and arrested her.
They had no warrant.
It is difficult to avoid the feeling that the evidence against the arrested person was distinctly shaky — but all the judges thought it enough to justify a reasonable suspicion.
But it is not only the concept of reasonable suspicion that has been diluted by police practice and judicial endorsement.
It does not follow that because a police officer reasonably suspects a person of having committed an arrestable offence, that the person should for that reason alone be arrested.
Detention of a person presumed to be innocent is a serious matter.
In the past something more than this suspicion was required.
The position used to be quite clear and is well summed up in what Scott LJ had to say in the wartime case concerning the soap flakes:
The duty of the police when they arrest without warrant is, no doubt, to be quick to see the possibility of crime, but equally they ought to be anxious to avoid mistaking the innocent for the guilty…
They may have to act on the spur of the moment and have no time to reflect and be bound, therefore, to arrest to prevent escape; but where there is no danger of the person who has ex hypothesi aroused their suspicion that he probably is an ‘offender’ attempting to escape, they should make all presently practicable enquiries from persons present or immediately accessible who are likely to be able to answer their enquiries forthwith.
The whole emphasis here is on arrest to prevent escape.
Later in the same judgment, Scott LJ referred to the appropriateness of delaying arrest where ‘there [was]no probability…of the suspected person running away’.
Lord Devlin expanded on this in the lorry accident case in 1969:
It is indeed desirable as a general rule that an arrest should not be made until the case is complete .
But if arrest before that were forbidden, it could seriously hamper the police.
To give power to arrest on reasonable suspicion does not mean that it is always or even ordinarily to be exercised.
It means that there is an executive discretion.
In the exercise of it many factors have to be considered besides the strength of the case.
The possibility of escape, the prevention of further crime and the obstruction of police inquiries are examples of those factors with which all judges who have had to grant or refuse bail are familiar.
(Emphasis added)
The Royal Commission also thought that the purpose of an arrest could be to prevent the destruction of evidence, or the warning of accomplices or the repetition of the crime, or any interference with witnesses.
Unlike Scott LJ and Lord Devlin, it did not stop there.
The Commission went on to say that detention could also be used ‘to dispel or confirm…reasonable suspicion by questioning the suspect or seeking further material evidence with his assistance’.
This had ‘not always been the law or practice, but now seemed ‘to be well established’.
The development of the law along these lines is recent and confirmation of it by an august Commission is ominous.
The earlier cases do not make any reference to the possibility of arresting someone for the sole purpose of questioning him or her with a view to obtaining a confession.
As recently as 1978, the Court of Appeal was emphatic that ‘police officers can only arrest for offences’.
There was no power ‘to arrest anyone so that they can make inquiries about him’.
Despite this, arrest for questioning has quickly become an attractive option for the police.
Research done for Philips testifies to the importance that the police now attach to interrogation of suspects and the procuring of confessions from the guilty.
From being a peripheral aspect of police practice, unrecognized in the courts and rarely adverted to as a ground for arrest, detention followed by interrogation has become a central pivot in the battle against crime.
Quite imperceptibly, arrest has moved from a position at the end of the investigative process to a new niche right at the start.
It is the beginning of the search for a confession rather than the conclusion of a well-managed police operation.
The House of Lords has upheld and indeed encouraged the development of this trend, in an important case in 1984,Mohammed-Holgate v. Duke .
This is the case concerning the burglary of jewellery which we have already encountered.
Mrs Mohammed-Holgate was the temporary lodger whom the police arrested when, many months after the burglary, the original owner of the valuables thought that she recognized her from the description given by the shop owner of the person from whom she had bought the jewellery.
After her arrest, Mrs Mohammed-Holgate was detained for six hours.
She was then released on police bail.
No charges were brought against her.
In subsequent proceedings for false imprisonment, it was admitted that the sole reason for arresting her was the constable's opinion that ‘police inquiries were more likely to be fruitful in clearing up the case if Mrs. Mohammed-Holgate were compelled to go to the police station to be questioned there’.
The circuit judge translated this as implying that the ‘greater stress and pressure’ of an arrest made a confession more likely.
She was awarded £1,000 damages.
The House of Lords overturned the decision.
The lower judge was castigated by Lord Diplock for having used ‘emotive phraseology’.
In the exercise of his power of arrest, it was perfectly proper for the constable to have taken into account that ‘there was a greater likelihood…that Mrs Mohammed-Holgate would respond truthfully to questions about her connection with or knowledge of the burglary, if she were questioned under arrest at the police station, than if, without arresting her, questions were put to her…at her own home from which she could peremptorily order [him]to depart at any moment’.
This drift towards investigation through interrogation is altogether clearer when one looks at the provisions on detention which are to be found in the Police and Criminal Evidence Act.
Detention In Police Custody
There was a benign vagueness to the law on detention before the 1984 Act.
The police were required to bring the detained person before a magistrates' court ‘as soon as practicable’ after arrest.
After twenty-four hours, the presumption was that the detainee had to be released: it was only if the offence ‘appeared to be a serious one that police bail could be postponed.
These important phrases were not defined anywhere in the law.
In reality, police practice drifted benevolently in the uncertainty.
Three-quarters of all suspects were dealt with within six hours; 95 per cent emerged from custody within a day.
A Metropolitan Police study conducted during a three-month period in 1979 found that 0.4 per cent of detainees were held for seventy-two hours or more.
The judges, for their part, came increasingly to regard the law as embodying a legal limit of forty-eight hours, after which any detainee had to be brought before a court.
A trilogy of cases in 1979 and 1980 reflected this development of a clearer rule.
By 1984, it had crystallized into a firm time control on the police power to detain without charge.
A weakness in this scheme was that the original limit of twenty-four hours — applicable to all except serious crimes — seemed to have been forgotten.
The Royal Commission sought to rectify this by returning to the twenty-four hour yardstick as the general rule.
It recognized that a longer period of detention might also be required in a ‘small minority’ of cases concerned with ‘grave offences’.
There could be a need to check forensic evidence, for example, or to prevent a suspect absconding, or to travel to a far-away police station where the investigation was being conducted, and any of these could take more than a day.
Significantly, the Commission did not suggest that such longer periods of detention could ever be justified by the desire to continue questioning or by the need further to interrogate.
As a safeguard, they recommended that a magistrates' court should be required to sanction any detention after twenty-four hours and that the suspect should be legally represented at this stage, so that his or her point of view could be put across.
The Government followed few of these suggestions when it came to the enactment of its Police and Criminal Evidence Act.
Nor was it happy with the imprecision of the old days.
To solve crimes, the police needed more time — not on the beat, but in their own cells.
More time they were certainly given.
The police now have up to ninety-six hours, i.e. four days and nights, to detain people without charge.
Nowhere is this said directly.
The greatly increased power which flows from the Act is enshrouded in a mist of complicated statutory provisions.
It is protected from public scrutiny by the technicality of its jargon.
Words rarely mean what they seem to say.
Grandiose guarantees of freedom are liable to be contradicted in a couple of discreet subparagraphs, loitering at the end of a page.
Safeguards offered to detainees turn out to be more apparent than real.
Their world is filled with authority figures, some their interrogators, others — custody officers, review officers, superintendents — their statute-designated friends.
It is a bureaucracy of incarceration beyond the dreams of the bleakest writer.
An arrested person has to be ‘taken to a police station by a constable as soon as practicable after the arrest’.
Later, we read that ‘nothing…shall prevent a constable delaying taking a person who has been arrested to a police station if the presence of that person elsewhere is necessary in order to carry out such investigations as it is reasonable to carry out immediately’.
This is important because time begins to run only on arrival at a police station; there is no bar on preliminary questioning before detention proper commences.
Thus, in the case of Parchment, the police committed what would have been a number of breaches of the rules had the accused been in the police station, but, simply because the supposed infractions had taken place before his arrival, the crown court held that nothing wrongful had occurred.
Once at the station, the suspect meets the ‘custody officer’, a person at least of the rank of sergeant and somebody who is unconnected with the case.
He or she is the ‘fairy godmother’ of the force, the suspect's friend, and the person the Act expects will stand up to his or her (often more senior) colleagues if there is anything amiss: a dramatic invitation to insubordinated heroics.
The first job of the officer is to ‘determine whether he has before him sufficient evidence to charge that person with the offence for which he was arrested’.
If there is not the evidence, ‘the person arrested shall be released’.
Then comes the expected, ‘unless the custody officer has reasonable grounds for believing that his detention without being charged is necessary to secure or preserve evidence relating to an offence for which he is under arrest or to obtain such evidence by questioning him ’[emphasis added].
If there is no release, then after six hours' detention, in steps the ‘review officer’, at least of inspector rank, again unconnected with the investigation, who now determines whether there is sufficient evidence to charge.
If not, the suspect is to be let go, unless, once again, detention is ‘necessary to secure or preserve evidence relating to an offence or to obtain such evidence by questioning ’[emphasis added].
The same event takes place after fifteen hours and thereafter at nine-hourly intervals.
Each time, the review officer asks ‘is there the evidence?’; each time he or she is permitted to say that it may be obtained by further questioning.
All these reviews may be postponed if the police decide that they are ‘not practicable’.
The suspect, or the solicitor dealing with the case on his or her behalf (subject to availability), may make representations to the review officer about the continuing detention — but the officer may refuse to hear these if he or she decides that the suspect is ‘unfit…by reason of his condition or behaviour’.
This procedure takes us through to the end of the first day.
Section 41 clearly states that ‘a person shall not be kept in police detention for more than 24 hours without being charged’.
But this turns out to be subject to‘the following provisions of [the]section and to sections 42 and 43’.
In reality, a superintendent or above may authorize detention for up to thirty-six hours.
Representations may be made, but, as before, the police can decide that the detained person's behaviour makes him or her unfit to communicate them.
There are a number of supposed controls on this power.
The offence must be a ‘serious arrestable’ one; the investigation must be being ‘conducted diligently and expeditiously’; and there must be a need to secure or preserve evidence or ‘to obtain such evidence by questioning him ’[emphasis added].
How real are these safeguards?
First, we have ‘serious arrestable offence’.
This sounds pretty grave and terrible.
In fact, a close examination of a section tucked away right at the end of the Act reveals that it is very vague.
The formula includes the obvious, such as murder, rape, kidnapping, and so on.
But it also covers all arrestable offences which have (or are likely to have or are intended to have) certain consequences like, among other things, ‘serious harm to the security of the State or to public order’, ‘serious interference with the administration of justice’, ‘substantial financial gain to any person’, and ‘serious financial loss to any person’.
These words are not defined in the Act.
A crime, therefore, is not in itself a ‘serious arrestable’ one.
There is no conclusive schedule of offences to which the police and the suspect can refer.
This goes much further than the recommendations of the Royal Commission.
Everything depends on what is meant by ‘financial gain’, ‘financial loss’, ‘security of the State’, and so on.
The ‘gain’ and ‘loss’provisions bring all thefts potentially within the definition.
The courts usually allow the Government to define national security in whatever way it pleases.
‘Serious harm to public order’ is also a vague phrase undefined in the Act.
The police do not need to know that such an offence is involved.
All the superintendent must have are reasonable grounds for believing that an offence is a serious arrestable one; this safeguard, therefore, is obviated where the police think one of these vague and undefined consequences might occur.
The second safeguard is even less commendable.
This is the requirement that the investigation be conducted diligently and expeditiously — hardly worth putting in the statute, easily reduced to an empty formula, and unlikely significantly to assist the suspect.
Finally, the twenty-four hours of detention do not have to have produced one jot of evidence to justify their continuation; it is enough that the police want to obtain such evidence by further questioning.
The desire to persist in interrogation is a valid reason for keeping a suspect in custody for thirty-six hours and indeed beyond.
For the police may apply to a magistrates' court which can issue a ‘warrant of further detention’ if it reasonably believes this course of action to be justified.
The effect of such a warrant is to keep the suspect incarcerated for up to another thirty-six hours.
The criteria that determine the court's decision are much the same as those employed earlier by the superintendent.
There are the same imponderables about ‘serious arrestable’ offences.
In particular, it is enough for the police to maintain that ‘detention without charge is necessary…to obtain evidence by questioning’.
Once again, there is no requirement that any evidence than that which grounded the original ‘reasonable suspicion’ should actually exist — and we have already seen that this formula is sometimes rather loosely interpreted at the arrest stage.
If the police have still not got what they want, there is a final option open to them.
Before the seventy-two hours are up, they can go back to the court and apply for an extension of the warrant of further detention by up to another thirty-six hours.
The criteria are the same as before, so the desire to pursue still further the questioning of the suspect may be enough to justify the court's sanction for this additional detention.
The suspect must appear and may be legally represented at the various hearings before the magistrates, though the utility of this safeguard is reduced by the breadth of the statutory language justifying continued incarceration.
A heavy burden is placed on the magistrates to protect individual liberty from the abuse of police power.
Much may thus depend on how seriously they rise to the challenge.
In London, in 1986, 101 warrants of further detention were sought; 100 were granted.
In 1987, the Metropolitan Police asked for 66, and got 57.
Much also hinges on how willing the police are to push their powers to the limit.
The information available so far is slight.
In each of 1986 and 1987, a little less than a couple of dozen suspects would seem to have been detained long into the fourth day in the London area (Metropolitan Police Commissioner, 1987, 1988).
A Home Office Research Study published in 1989 found that in the 111 cases in the survey which the police judged to involve serious arrestable offences, the suspect was detained over twenty-four and under thirty-six hours in 44 of them.
Warrants of further detention were sought in 14 cases, with 3 such warrants being refused by magistrates (Brown, 1989).
But whatever the current practice, the potential breadth of the provisions is clear.
Their overall effect is to permit detention for up to ninety-six hours, a far cry from the limit of twenty-four hours suggested by section 41, and to allow it notwithstanding that its primary purpose is nothing more than the questioning and interrogation of the suspect.
We have come a long way since the idealism of Lord Devlin — and that was only twenty years ago.
Questioning Of Suspects
The right to silence
One important omission from the 1984 Act is the right to silence.
In the last century, the form of the right was that the police were not to ask any questions of a detained person.
It was up to them to prove their case.
The ‘best maxim’ for a constable, according to Lord Brampton's preface to Vincent's Police Code in 1882, was:
‘keep your eyes and your ears open, and your mouth shut.’
By silent watchfulness you will hear all you ought to hear.
Never act unfairly to a prisoner by coaxing him by word or conduct to divulge anything.
If you do, you will assuredly be severely handled at the trial and it is not unlikely your evidence will be disbelieved.
Out of this rather extreme position developed a more moderate line, involving the notion of a caution, first formalized in the Judges' Rules in 1912, and finding expression today in the Code of Practice for the Detention, Treatment and Questioning of Persons by Police Officers (Home Office, 1985c).
Arrested persons must be cautioned in the following terms: ‘You do not have to say anything unless you wish to do so, but what you say may be given in evidence.’
Refusing to speak is an exercise of the right to silence.
It is a ‘right’ to the extent that, at the trial, the prosecution may not comment at all on the accused's failure to answer questions and the judge may refer to it, but not adversely: the point is that in no circumstances should silence be used against an accused person.
What is the purpose of this rule?
It is part of a broader privilege against self-incrimination.
The Royal Commission explained it in the following way:
In the accusatorial system of trial the prosecution sets out its case first.
It is not enough to say merely ‘I accuse.’
The prosecution must prove that the defendant is guilty of a specific offence.
If it appears that the prosecution has failed to prove an essential element of the offence, or if its evidence has been discredited in cross-examination, there is no case to answer and the defence does not respond.
There is no need for it to do so.
To require it to rebut unspecific and unsubstantiated allegations, to respond to a mere accusation, would reverse the onus of proof at trial and would require the defendant to prove the negative, that he is not guilty.
Accordingly, ‘it is the duty of the prosecution to prove the prisoner's guilt’, which is, in Lord Sankey's words, the ‘golden thread’ running through English criminal justice.
The second element in the right of silence is that no one should be compelled to betray himself.
It is not only that those extreme means of attempting to extort confessions, for example the rack and thumbscrew, which have sometimes disfigured the system of criminal justice in this country, are abhorrent to any civilised society, but that they and other less awful, though not necessarily less potent, means of applying pressure to an accused person to speak do not necessarily produce speech or the truth.
This is reflected in the rule that statements by the accused to be admissible must have been made voluntarily.
(Philips, 1981: 80, 81)
The American Supreme Court has long been a proponent of the rule:
Our system of criminal justice demands that the government seeking to punish an individual produce the evidence by its own independent labours, rather than by the cruel, simple expedient of compelling it from his own mouth.
It is quite clear that this thread of non-incrimination is at variance with the recent emphasis on obtaining confession evidence.
Silent detainees reduce the effectiveness of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act.
They deprive officers of the interrogation that is often the sole or main purpose behind an individual's detention.
Surprisingly, there were very few who argued, during the passage of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act, for the removal of the right to silence.
On the contrary, its continued existence was soon recognized by lawyers to be a vital counterbalance to the new powers the police had secured.
Certain aspects of its exercise had, however, attracted criticism in the past.
In 1972 the Criminal Law Revision Committee had been particularly exercised by the fear that silent suspects could ‘ambush’ the prosecution with evidence at their trial which they did not mention during questioning and which the police now had no time independently to verify.
They had proposed a new rule to the effect that, if during an interrogation, a suspect omitted to mention some fact which would exculpate him or her, but kept this back until the trial, the court or jury could infer that the evidence was untrue (Criminal Law Revision Committee, 1972).
This proposal would have involved a different, immensely complicated, and, for suspects, terrifying new caution which could easily fatally have undermined the whole rule.
It was very controversial and was never acted upon by government.
The Royal Commission rejected the proposal for a number of reasons, and it was not to the fore of government thinking when the Police and Criminal Evidence Bill was being drafted.
In recent years, however, a dramatic change in emphasis has begun slowly to come about.
The whole momentum of the 1984 Act, with its emphasis on detention, interrogation, and confessions, has made the right to silence more vulnerable than ever to allegations that it is out of date, too favourable to criminals, and anachronistic.
The logic of the Act makes it appear an eccentric indulgence rather than a guarantee of fair procedures.
In late 1988 the right was rendered well-nigh obsolete in Northern Ireland, by changes that were introduced without any consultation — we shall examine this further in Chapter 7.
In the same year, the Home Secretary set up an internal committee to examine how the right to silence might best be modified in England and Wales.
At the time of writing, its report is still awaited, but it seems certain that legislation will shortly be introduced to end or sharply to modify the present law.
If this does occur, then the Act will be seen to have been part of a ‘softening-up’ exercise, creating the conditions within which abolition of the right is capable of being presented as an inevitable rationalization, without actually tackling it directly.
This is all the more so because other provisions in the Act, as they have been interpreted in the courts, amount to what is effectively an indirect attack on the ‘right to silence.
These concern in particular access to legal advice and the admissibility of confession evidence, and we shall now examine each of these in turn.
Legal representation of suspects
The law sets out a variety of safeguards to ensure that suspects are not unfairly or harshly treated when they are detained for questioning.
Many of the relevant rules appear in a Code of Practice which was circulated to the police when the Act came into force.
It covers issues like the treatment of the suspect in custody, the conditions of his or her detention, the form of interviews, the provision of rest periods, and so on.
The most important safeguard is probably the entitlement to legal advice; this is also the one that may be most inconvenient for the police.
An American Supreme Court judge once said that any ‘lawyer worth his salt will tell the suspect in no uncertain terms to make no statement to the police under any circumstances’.
Lawyers can usually be relied upon to tell detainees of their rights in a way that suggests that some of them might actually be useful.
Their conversations with suspects are likely to be more intelligible than the form-filling friendliness of any number of custody officers.
But although the Act affects to recognize that lawyers are a ‘good thing’ it proceeds to undermine their utility in a number of important respects.
First, there is the illusory general rule, with which, after looking at detention, we are now familiar.
It is in section 58(1), which declares in ringing terms that a person arrested and held in custody in a police station or other premises shall be entitled, if he so requests, to consult a solicitor privately at any time’.
The ‘if he so requests’ bit is a clever nuance which undermines the rest.
The Royal Commission thought that the police should be under a duty to inform detainees.
This obligation to inform now appears not in the Act but in the Code of Practice, which suggests not only that suspects should be told of their rights but also of ‘the fact that they need not be exercised immediately’.
Section 58(1) is subject to a number of later subsections.
The detainee making a request ‘must be permitted to consult a solicitor as soon as is practicable except to the extent that delay is permitted by this section’.
An officer of the rank of superintendent or above may delay access where the detainee is suspected of a serious arrestable offence and where the officer reasonably believes that one of the following will result from allowing such access:
(a)
Interference with or harm to evidence connected with a serious arrestable offence.
(b)
Interference with or physical injury to other persons.
(c)
The  alerting of other persons suspected of having committed such an offence but not yet arrested for it.
(d)
The hindering of the recovery of any property obtained as a result of such an offence.
Access can only be denied for a maximum period of thirty-six hours.
These provisions are wider than what was proposed by the Royal Commission.
The concept of a ‘serious arrestable offence’ is, as we have seen, particularly vague.
A broad interpretation of what it means would greatly expand the number of crimes for which access to legal advice could be delayed.
A further debilitating gloss on section 58(1) is tucked away in the inner recesses of the police codes.
It applies where access to a lawyer cannot be delayed, either because the offence is not a serious arrestable one or because none of the conditions for a temporary denial of access exist.
The lawyer may have been notified, but the Act does not prohibit questioning before arrival.
The Code allows it, where the suspect consents, or where a senior officer reasonably believes that delaying interrogation will involve an immediate risk of harm to persons or serious loss of, or damage to, property’ or ‘cause unreasonable delay to the processes of investigation’.
This latter phrase is ominously open-ended.
It must be frustrating to arrive at a police station after a hectic drive, only to find that ‘the processes of investigation’ necessitated a quick confession from the client.
So far we have referred exclusively to the rules.
Our presumption has been that the police adhere to them.
Certainly there are these useful exceptions and loopholes which entitle an officer to deny access.
We may disapprove — but it is clearly within the law.
What happens where the police flout the rules, for example by breaching the code or by denying a solicitor in a trivial case or by refusing access on grounds which are manifestly outside the statute and the code?
There is no tort or crime, as there would be if the police were to beat up the suspect or wrongly apprehend him or her in the first place.
The detainee can make a formal complaint after release, but this offers little solace to the aggrieved individual.
The issue becomes especially important where, as a result of questioning, and without the benefit of the correct conditions or the advice from the solicitor, access to whom has been wrongly denied, the suspect makes a damaging confession which the police later try to rely upon at the trial in order to secure a conviction.
Do the courts ignore the police malpractice and allow the jury to hear evidence of this confession, thereby, of course, greatly increasing the chances of a guilty verdict?
Or do they say that, because the police behaved badly, the confession is, as a result, unreliable or unfair and it should not therefore be entered in evidence?
The Act did not provide a clear answer to this crucial question and it depended very much on the courts.
The most important case, drawing together several decisions in the lower courts, is the Court of Appeal decision R. v. Samuel .
The police suspected that Samuel had been involved in a serious armed robbery at a building society in Birmingham.
A cashier thought she recognized him as the man who had done it.
On the basis of this suspicion he was arrested.
A search of his house revealed evidence that was, to put it mildly, incriminating: two face masks, a building society pass book hidden under the carpet, lots of property from some other burglaries, and photographs of Samuel kissing bundles of banknotes.
Samuel admitted to the burglaries but not to the robbery.
The police were anxious to charge him with this as well.
He had said that he did not want a solicitor when he first arrived at the police station, at 2 p.m.
At 8.30 p.m. he asked for his lawyer.
The superintendent refused access, recording that it was a serious arrestable offence and that there was a ‘likelihood of other suspects to be arrested being inadvertently warned’.
He was kept in overnight and questioned in more detail.
At 11 a.m. the following day his mother was told of his detention.
She managed to get the services of a highly respected Birmingham solicitor, a Mr Warner, but the police still refused to let him near his client.
‘At 4.30 p.m.
Samuel was charged with the burglaries, but questioning about the armed robbery went on.
Mr Warner was still refused access.
A new police questioner was drafted in.
Samuel now faced three officers across the table; a detective inspector, a sergeant, and a detective, whereas before he had faced only two.
At about 5.30 p.m., over twenty-seven hours into his detention and after four extended bouts of questioning, he confessed to the robbery.
At 6.20 p.m. he was charged.
At 7.25 p.m. he finally got to see his solicitor.
The Court of Appeal was scathing in its condemnation of this sequence of events.
A suspect should always be able to see a solicitor after being charged, as Samuel was here at 4.30 p.m., with burglary.
Access should only be denied before charge in very rare circumstances.
Mistrust of a solicitor had to be based on tangible fact, and could not simply reflect a suspicion of the profession in general.
Here, Samuel's mother knew all about where he was, and she could have tipped off any alleged accomplices long before the solicitor got a chance to do so inadvertently.
In any event, ‘a highly respected and very experienced professional lawyer [was]unlikely to be hoodwinked by a 24-year-old’.
Denying access because the solicitor might advise his client to keep quiet was ‘wholly unsustainable’.
The court found the idea of Mr Warner unconsciously communicating coded messages to Samuel's fellow criminals quite ridiculous.
The judges then went on to get through to the hub of the whole matter:
The more sinister side to the decision is, of course, this.
The police had, over a period exceeding 24 hours, interviewed this young man four times without obtaining a confession from him in respect of the robbery.
Time was running out for them.
It was a Thursday evening.
Thirty-six hours from the relevant time would expire in the early hours of the morning; then access to a solicitor would have to be permitted.
On the following day the appellant would have to be taken before the magistrates' court: section 46.
As he had already been interviewed four times and been in police custody for over 24 hours, the expectation would be that a solicitor might well consider that, at least for that evening, enough was enough and that he ought to advise his client not to answer further questions….
Regrettably we have come to the conclusion that whoever made the decision to refuse Mr Warner access at 4.45 pm was very probably motivated by a desire to have one last chance of interviewing the appellant in the absence of a solicitor.
The Court therefore excluded the confession wrongly obtained by the police and went on to quash Samuel's conviction for armed robbery.
After R. v. Samuel the police underwent a painful education, as a series of people charged with serious crimes on the basis of admissions went free because they had been wrongly denied access to a solicitor.
In January 1988 Leeds crown court excluded statements by the accused with the result that he was acquitted of the murder of a police sergeant and the attempted murder of a constable.
In Manchester crown court a confession to two murders was disallowed because of improper denial of access; another man later pleaded guilty to the same charges.
This shows up the reason for this tough line which, unfortunately, is no longer the stance that the Court of Appeal now unequivocally adopts.
A notable judicial absentee in the Samuel case was the Lord Chief Justice, Lord Lane.
In a case in May 1988, a youth called Alladice confessed to armed robbery after the police had denied his request for a solicitor.
He was sentenced to eight years in youth custody.
Lord Lane accepted that the refusal to allow Alladice a lawyer was quite improper and a clear breach of section 58.
It did not follow from this that the confession should therefore be excluded, however.
This is where the case departed from the spirit of Samuel.
The Chief Justice said that exclusion depended on all the circumstances: here the interview was conducted with propriety and the solicitor would have added nothing to the knowledge the detainee already had about his rights.
The whole procedure, therefore, had been quite fair.
On this basis, Lord Lane allowed in the confession and upheld Alladice's conviction.
It is easy to see that there is potential here for an undermining of Samuel.
Section 58 is not quite as absolutely critical as that case had suggested.
Of course, Alladice can occupy his time in custody by lodging any number of formal complaints.
One can imagine how severe the reprimand will be for the officer whose disregard of the rules has been decorated with a successful conviction.
Apart from qualifying the scope of Samuel, Alladice is important also for the interesting observations made by Lord Lane about legal advice and the right to silence.
He said:
The result [of legal advice]is that in many cases a detainee who would otherwise have answered proper questioning by the police will be advised to remain silent.
Weeks later at his trial such a person not infrequently produces an explanation of, or a defence to, the charge the truthfulness of which the police have had no chance to check.
Despite the fact that the explanation or defence could, if true, have been disclosed at the outset and despite the advantage which the defendant has gained by these tactics, no comment may be made to the jury to that effect.
The jury may in some cases put two and two together, but it seems to us that the effect of section 58 is such that the balance of fairness between prosecution and defence cannot be maintained unless proper comment is permitted on the defendant's silence in such circumstances.
It is high time that such comment should be permitted together with the necessary alteration to the words of the caution.
Abolition of the right to silence has been rejected by Parliament on a number of occasions, most recently when the Police and Criminal Evidence Act was enacted.
It is a matter for elected representatives.
Now Lord Lane has used the forum of a court of law in order to make his contribution to this political debate.
More to the point, he has modified the right by taking a less than severe attitude to breaches of section 58.
This point was made even clearer in a later case involving the Chief Justice, in which he stated that a ‘breach of the Act or the Code did not mean that any statement made by a defendant after such breach would necessarily by ruled out.
Every case had to be determined on its own particular facts’.
Certainly there have been cases after Alladice , including the one in which these remarks were made, where infraction of the rules has led to the resultant evidence being declared inadmissible.
The clear and simple message contained in the Samuel case has, however, been diluted.
Since Alladice , the Divisional Court has accepted that access by a solicitor's clerk to a detained person may be refused if the police believe that the clerk is ‘not capable of providing advice, whether because of his appearance, age, his mental capacity or because of the police knowledge of him’.
The police may form a view on capacity, but not, the Court insists, on quality.
It is a line that will be difficult to draw in the adversarial atmosphere of the police station.
The Haldane Society was reported in October 1988 to have claimed that the police had devised ‘techniques and procedures’ to bypass or avoid the safeguards in the Police and Criminal Evidence Act.
After their brief scare in Samuel , it would appear that the police are now as protected as ever.
Conclusion: Police Accountability
The crux of recent difficulties in relation to the police lies in the ambiguity of our attitude to them.
One view has it that they are the trusted preservers of law and order, men and women who do a difficult job very well and who deserve to be respected and admired throughout the communities which they protect.
The other approach is less accommodating.
It sees the police as powerful agents, people who are discriminatory in their exercise of might, and whose every action needs to be checked and controlled at every turn.
Which of these views prevails today?
The first is the traditional perception, the second the one that is gaining ground fast.
Each new piece of police excess, each reported example of police harassment, each fresh scandal adds to the number of its converts.
The Conservative Government under Mrs Thatcher tried in its Police and Criminal Evidence Act to steer a middle ground between these rival views.
The result is, as we have seen, a difficult and sometimes contradictory compromise.
On the one hand, Parliament did not trust the police enough to give them the power they wanted and then let them get on with it.
The Act is a mass of technical paperwork and restriction.
Each power is hedged about with qualifications and bureaucratic safeguards.
On the other hand, the police are left largely to themselves when it comes to making sure that the Act is actually followed.
Thus, ‘reasonable suspicion’, undefined and left to the discretion of the individual constable, is the key to many of their lavish powers.
Detention is supervised by a custody officer who turns out on closer inspection to be a police officer with a different name.
Senior officers have an exclusive say for thirty-six hours and thereafter an influential say before magistrates on how long a suspect should be kept in custody.
Countless other powers depend upon note-taking and the keeping of records, all of which matters are inevitably in the hands of the police themselves.
External controls are secondary to this primary emphasis on self-policing.
Police liaison consultative committees have been established in each of the London boroughs, though the majority party in five of the boroughs has refused to nominate representatives to their local groups.
As we have seen the magistrates have an important role to play in overseeing the extension of detention beyond thirty-six hours.
A potentially more important source of external control by the judiciary lies in the ability of the courts to exclude evidence obtained by sharp police practice.
So far as confession evidence is concerned, the old law emphasized that, to be capable of being entered in evidence, a confession had to be obtained ‘voluntarily’.
This meant that it could not be used if it was the result of a ‘fear of prejudice or hope of advantage, exercised or held out by a person in authority’ or if it was occasioned by ‘oppression’.
In the early 1970s the courts applied this test with extreme rigour.
Gradually, during the decade, they began to relax it so as to admit more and more controversial confessions.
This mirrored the increased emphasis on confession evidence within the police forces around the country.
Public concern came to a head in the Maxwell Confait case, in which the reliability of confession evidence obtained from a mentally handicapped defendant became a particular source of anxiety (Fisher, 1977).
In the Police and Criminal Evidence Act, the old idea of voluntariness, with its preoccupation with the mental state of the suspect, was dropped and replaced by a broader rule.
A confession will now be excluded if it is the result of ‘oppression ’ or if it is the consequence of ‘anything said or done which was likely, in the circumstances existing at the time, to render [it]unreliable ’(emphasis added).
Once the issue is validly raised, the prosecution has the burden of disproving it beyond reasonable doubt.
The word ‘oppression’ is defined to include ‘torture, inhuman or degrading treatment, and the use or threat of violence (whether or not amounting to torture)’.
But crucially, although oppressive confessions may be ruled out, the Act goes on to provide that the fact ‘that a confession is wholly or partly excluded…shall not affect the admissibility in evidence of any facts discovered as a result of the confession’.
To take a wild hypothetical instance, the police could torture a suspect into revealing the location of stolen goods and then use the fact that his fingerprints are on them at his trial.
In such circumstances, it is not such a blow to have lost the confession.
So far as evidence other than confessions is concerned, there is again no guarantee that unlawful police action will be punished by refusing to admit into court the evidence against an accused that their wrongdoing has secured.
Indeed, the old common law was not in the least interested in how the police got their evidence; all that mattered was its probative value.
The European Court of Human Rights has left this general question to be dealt with by local law, and the matter is, therefore, one for the discretion of British trial judges.
Pressure from Lord Scarman and others in the House of Lords forced a change on the Government when it was enacting the Police and Criminal Evidence Act.
The position now is that in any proceedings, ‘the court may refuse to allow evidence…if it appears to the court that, having regard to all the circumstances, including the circumstances in which the evidence was obtained, the admission of the evidence would have such an adverse effect on the fairness of the proceedings that the court ought not to admit it’(section 78).
It remains to be seen how this will operate in practice.
In a recent case, the police posed as ordinary civilians in order to trap a shop owner, licensed to sell liquor by the case only, into selling them a few cans of lager and a bottle of wine.
At his trial for this offence, he sought the exclusion of the evidence thereby obtained on the ground that he had been the victim of an entrapment.
The Divisional Court said that this did not matter and was not caught by section 78, which the judges stressed was concerned with no more than the narrow question of the effect of the police practice on the fairness of the proceedings in court.
The police could have adopted a different stratagem but it would have been ‘more time-consuming and difficult’ than this ‘simple procedure’.
The Scottish courts have been stricter than the English judges in this area, and the Americans exclude all evidence obtained in unlawful searches, subject to a ‘good faith’ exception developed in recent years.
The weakness of these controls throws the spotlight on the Police Complaints Authority composed of lay persons.
The complaints must be made to the police themselves in the first instance and all subsequent investigations are undertaken by police officers.
Unsurprisingly, this hybrid procedure has caused problems.
A number of prosecutions of constables arising out of the disorders at Wapping at January 1987 collapsed on account of delay.
Others, such as those into an assault on youths in Holloway and into the ‘crime-fixing’ charges against Kent police, almost failed on account of a lack of sufficient police co-operation.
The Authority handled 5,566 cases in 1987 and 5,516 in 1988 (Police Complaints Authority, 1988; 1989).
In each year, less than 800 of these cases led to any form of criminal or disciplinary action, and the vast majority of even this small number involved nothing more severe than ‘advice or admonishment’— 651 of the 766 cases in 1987, for example.
Yet even this relatively innocuous, and to some extent ‘in-house’, Authority has incurred the wrath of the police.
An overwhelming vote of no confidence in it it was passed at the annual Police Federation conference in 1989, with one member being reported in the press as having described the Authority as ‘hell-bent on depriving police officers of their civil rights’.
The previous year, the newspapers reported one memorable description of the Authority as a ‘group of self-opinionated middle-class wallies playing Sherlock Holmes’.
Members of the Police Federation have admitted that ‘anything short of total independence will fail to stifle the cry from outside the service that we are still judging our own’.
How the Federation's members would respond to this is uncertain.
One can only speculate about how a genuinely independent and effective complaints authority would be received.
In this as in other areas, the fundamental error in our approach to policing is revealed: we do not trust the police so we build safeguards into the way they exercise their power.
However, we have enough faith to allow them to police those very safeguards which mistrust has impelled us to impose.
It is a curious paradox, that we should half mistrust the police in this way.
The result is a muddle in which police efficiency and individual liberty are two certain losers.
THE INTERCEPTION OF COMMUNICATIONS
THE interception of communications gives rise to something of a dilemma for a democratic society.
As Lord Diplock pointed out in 1981, on the one hand it constitutes ‘a major invasion of privacy’, while on the other it is an important weapon available to the police and the security services, whose business it is to maintain law and order and protect national security.
What this suggests then is that although it may be necessary to tolerate the practice, it should be conducted only in exceptional and highly controlled circumstances under which there is adequate scrutiny and review by institutions independent of the executive branch of government.
The purpose of this chapter is to highlight the profound failure of British law and practice in this regard, concentrating mainly on telephone-tapping rather than on other forms of interception.
We begin by tracing the position before 1985, when state agents were able to indulge in the practice of telephone-tapping without any direct legal authority.
We then consider the judicial response to these arrangements before examining the Interception of Communications Act 1985, passed as a result of a decision of the European Court of Human Rights that British practice violated Article 8 of the Convention.
The Position before 1985
As might be expected, only a limited amount of information about the practice of telephone-tapping is made available to the public.
The major sources of information about what happened before 1985 are two Home Office reports.
The first is the Birkett Report of 1957 and the second is a White Paper published by the Home Office in 1980, updating the account given twenty-three years earlier.
Access to information was otherwise protected by the Official Secrets Act 1911, section 2, and is perhaps now even more tightly controlled by the Official Secrets Act 1989.
Until 1969 the Post Office was a department of government and at the time the telephone network was part of the Post Office.
So there was no question but that section 2 of the 1911 Act applied to make it unlawful for any person to communicate information without authorization.
Since 1969 many changes have taken place.
The telephone network is now under the control and direction of British Telecom which has become a privatized monopoly.
Nevertheless, by the Telecommunications Act 1984, section 2 was extended to BT employees (that is to say, private sector employees) and it is now an offence under the Official Secrets Act 1989 for Crown servants (which could be extended to cover BT employees engaged in this work) to disclose various types of information relating to telephone-tapping.
These measures have not, of course, stopped information other than official information from being made public.
Duncan Campbell and other journalists have been able to reveal intimate details of the workings of the system, as has Cathy Massiter, a former MI5 employee who ‘went public’ in a Channel 4 television programme.
She was not prosecuted (though clearly she could have been) under section 2 of the Official Secrets Act 1911, possibly because the Government had just had its nose bloodied by a jury in the Clive Ponting trial, a case we deal with in Chapter 5.
1.
The procedures for interception According to the official version of events, interceptions were made before 1985 only on the authority of a warrant issued by the Home Secretary, the Secretary of State for Scotland, the Foreign Secretary, or the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, with each warrant naming only one person and one number.
So far as the grounds for issuing such warrants were concerned, these were first for the detection of serious crime, and, secondly, for safeguarding the security of the state.
So far as serious crime was concerned, three conditions had to be satisfied: the crime had to be really serious; the normal methods of investigation had to have been tried and failed; and there had to be good reason to believe that the interception would result in a conviction (Birkett, 1957).
The vague term ‘really serious crime’ was defined to mean an offence which carried the possibility of a three-year sentence for conviction on a first offence, or one in which large numbers of people were involved.
In 1982 this definition was extended (without parliamentary approval) to cover lesser offences where the financial rewards of success were very great.
As so defined, this ground for interception was wide enough to cover just about anything, from murder to breach of the peace.
So far as the security of the state was concerned, two principles were stated to govern the granting of warrants.
First, there had to be a major subversive or espionage activity that was likely to injure the national interest, and secondly the material likely to be obtained by the interception had to be of direct use in compiling the information necessary for the security services to carry out the tasks laid upon them by the state.
The security services not being statutory agencies with statutory duties, their tasks were defined by the executive, without any parliamentary scrutiny.
As so defined by the Home Secretary (Sir David Maxwell-Fyfe) these tasks were set out in 1952 as follows:
The Security Service is part of the Defence forces of the country.
Its task is the Defence of the Realm as a whole, from external and internal dangers arising from attempts at espionage and sabotage, or from actions of persons and organizations whether directed from within or without the country, which may be judged to be subversive of the State.
According to the official version of events, interceptions were made only on the authority of a warrant issued by the appropriate Secretary of State under his own hand.
A number of safeguards were said to be in force, the first being that all applications had to be made in writing.
Secondly, applications had to be made direct to the appropriate Secretary of State who, if not available, had to sign at the earliest possible opportunity (though they could be issued initially by a civil servant).
Thirdly, it was claimed that no general warrants were issued.
Birkett reported that on occasion a single warrant had been issued to cover a number of names, a practice which the committee criticized as being ‘undesirable’.
According to the White Paper, these criticisms were heeded, it being explained that ‘As a general rule, each warrant names only one person and one address or telephone number’(Home Office, 1980a).
Fourthly, a limit was imposed on the duration of each warrant.
Until 1957 they were of unlimited duration.
Thereafter, warrants were issued for only two months, though they could be renewed for one month at a time in the case of those issued to the police, and six months at a time in the case of those issued to the security services.
Fifthly, regular reviews were made of outstanding warrants to see whether their continued operation was justified.
Indeed, a quota was said to be imposed on the number of warrants which the Home Office would permit the police at any one time in order to ensure that the need for existing warrants was carefully scrutinized.
There was, however, no quota on the number of warrants issued to the security services.
Finally, in 1980 a senior judge was appointed to conduct a continuous independent check to ensure that interceptions were being conducted in accordance with the established procedures, with a duty to report to the Prime Minister.
2.
Interception in practice So warrants could be issued only on very limited grounds: either for major subversive or espionage activities, or for the detection of really serious crime.
Yet although attempts were made to assure the British public that telephone-tapping was conducted in the most exceptional and in the most highly controlled circumstances, it was suspected by some that the practice was very different.
Indeed, it is difficult to justify many of the cases where tapping is strongly suspected on the ground that it was necessary for the detection of really serious crime or to deal with major subversion, even allowing for the very wide definition of subversion announced by Lord Harris of Greenwich in 1975 when he said that
‘Subversive activities are generally regarded as those which threaten the safety or well-being of the State and which are intended to undermine or overthrow Parliamentary democracy by political, industrial or violent means’.
The following episodes are recent examples of allegations which have been made.
If these can be confirmed and if the tappings were done with the authority of a Home Office warrant, it suggests that the guidelines were being interpreted with a remarkable degree of latitude.
(a) Questions surfaced about the tapping of the telephones of the Canadian High Commission at the time of the proposed repatriation of the Canadian Constitution.
(b) Greenpeace, the environmental group, planned in September 1983 to row across the Thames, climb Big Ben, and unfurl a banner at the top.
They arranged the protest at short notice over the phone and arrived at the river to find police everywhere.
(c) The El Salvador Human Rights Campaign discovered at 1 o'clock one day that Henry Kissinger was due to pay a flying visit to London.
At 3 o'clock they decided to organize a picket by phone.
At 5 o'clock they turned up to find the police waiting for them.
(d) Joan Ruddock, then chairperson of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, heard her telephone conversation being played back to her at the end of a call.
She called in a neighbour to witness what happened (Labour Research, 1984).
CND in fact appears to be an established target for surveillance.
The following story has been told on more than one occasion:
Tim and Bridie Wallis live near Molesworth and object to the Government's nuclear defence policy.
They have a perfect right to object to it.
As the Home Secretary has said several times, there is nothing illegal about that.
On 31 January, someone dialled the Wallis's home number.
After obtaining first the engaged tone and then the unobtainable tone — that would not happen now after privatisation — the caller was finally connected to an answerphone which said: ‘This is Tim and Bridie Wallis's number.
We are out at the moment.
Please leave your name, address and phone number and we will ring you back’.
Asked to leave his address on the answerphone?
He rang the Wallis's number twice more during a period of five days and each time got the answerphone.
The voice on the answerphone was described as male, with an Americanised accent.
The caller did not know Tim Wallis well, but knew that he spoke with an American accent.
He therefore assumed that it was Tim's voice on the machine.
The Wallises report that the telephone regularly rings once or twice and then stops before they can answer it.
(e) The independent inquiry established by NCCL on Civil Liberties and the Miners' Dispute referred in its interim report to a number of complaints which it received about tapping of telephones and the interception of mail.
The inquiry reported that the evidence which they had received to date did not prove conclusively that such activities had taken place, but ‘in some instances circumstantial evidence in support of the complaint has been very strong’(NCCL, 1984).
On the question of the miners' strike, one study refers to an episode in South Wales where the owner of a bus company was phoned by strikers who wanted to be taken to Derbyshire.
The owner was rung up minutes later by the Derbyshire police asking how many pickets he was bringing.
The same study reports pickets laying traps for tappers by directing them to wrong venues (Coulter, Miller, and Walker, 1984: 46) Although telephone-tapping during the miners' strike was relatively well publicized, it is allegedly by no means a new phenomenon in the policing of industrial disputes.
Allegations of tapping of strikers and their leaders include claims that, during the General Strike in 1926, Ernest Bevin, then leader of the Transport and General Workers' Union, had his telephone tapped (Post Office Engineering Union, 1980: 15).
It has been alleged by the director of a management investigation company that telephones in Transport House, then the headquarters of the Labour Party and still the headquarters of the TGWU, were tapped for long periods during 1972, a time of union opposition to the Industrial Relations Act 1971.
One journalist has written that during the Grunwick dispute of the late 1970s a tap was attached to the telephone used by the strike committee in the Brent Trades' Council offices in Willesden Lane.
Finally in this context, it has been alleged that ‘ISTC offices at Rotherham were almost certainly tapped during the…steel strike [of 1980].
To test their belief, two officials organised a fictitious picket, by phone, for the next morning.
When they arrived they found the police already there' (Labour Research, 1984).
If the tapping of telephones of trade unionists in industrial disputes is difficult to justify, even less justifiable is the evidence of the routine and systematic interception of telephones of a few key union leaders.
Allegations of such activity were brought to light by Cathy Massiter, a retired MI5 official, and another unnamed former MI5 clerk.
In a Channel 4 television programme it was alleged that whenever a major dispute comes up, it would immediately become an area for investigation.
But it was also claimed that in the late 1970s certain telephones were tapped irrespective of any industrial dispute.
Mr McGahey, a prominent communist and mineworkers' leader, was subjected to extensive surveillance, including the tapping of his home telephone.
The phone of another leading miners' union official was also allegedly tapped in the late 1970s, as was the phone of a shop steward at the Ford plant at Dagenham.
A particularly disturbing feature of the latter case was that instructions were allegedly given ‘to listen out particularly for any reference to the Ford union's bottom line in the pay negotiations.
It was considered of vital importance to obtain the union's private position’.
The source of this allegation continued by saying that this was ‘economic information from within a legally constituted trade union organisation which the Security Service and the government had no right to know’.
As reported, the information was sought at the request of the Department of Employment.
These allegations led the Government to ask Lord Bridge of Harwich — the judicial monitor who replaced Lord Diplock in 1982 — to examine whether MI5 had acted in breach of procedures.
His appointment by the Prime Minister was announced on 1 March 1985 by the Home Secretary in the following terms:
In the light of recent allegations…the Prime Minister has asked Lord Bridge to examine the relevant papers to determine whether authorisations since May 1979 have named the individuals in question and, if so, whether those authorisations have been sought and given in accordance with the procedures and criteria in the Birkett report of 1957 and the White Paper of April 1980.
According to Mr Gerald Kaufman Lord Bridge was able to complete his inquiry in five days, after which he was able to report that allegations of improperly authorized interceptions were without foundation.
He reported to the Prime Minister that he was ‘satisfied, after full examination of all the relevant documents, that no warrant for interception has been issued in contravention of the appropriate criteria’.
Unfortunately, however, the inquiry did little for public confidence in the independent judicial monitor.
For the Labour Party, Mr Kaufman said that the report was ‘an insult and an outrage’, while Mr David Steel for the Liberals is reported as having claimed that the report was ‘totally inadequate’, and that ‘The secret state is out of control and democracy is threatened.’
More significantly, in a letter to The Times , Mr Roy Jenkins, a former Home Secretary, wrote:
On the narrowest criteria Lord Bridge appears cosily to exonerate us all [i.e. previous Home Secretaries].
I do not however believe that he exonerates himself.
A judge of status and quality ought not in my view to have agreed to conduct such an enquiry within the limitations of time and scope imposed by the prime Minister.
He has made himself appear a poodle of the executive.‘
Mr Jenkins continued by trusting that in future ‘Lord Bridge will not be asked to pronounce on matters where the interests of authority and of liberty mingle uncomfortably.
He no longer carries independent authority in this field.’
Legal Challenges to the Old Regime
It is surprising that such major intrusions by the state into the private lives of the people should take place without any clear legal authority.
It is perhaps unsurprising that the matter should have been challenged in the courts, given that it was an affront to the requirements of even the most basic conception of the rule of law.
It was, however, only fairly recently that the first challenge occurred with Mr Malone attacking the practice on a number of grounds.
His failure before the English courts led him directly to Strasburg where he successfully claimed that his rights guaranteed by the European Convention on Human Rights had been violated.
Malone was not, however, the only challenger to these procedures in the English courts.
Prominent members of CND tried a different strategy, but they too were unsuccessful.
We now turn to consider these cases, before examining in the next section the legislation passed to implement the judgment of the European Court in Malone .
1.
The Malone case In the English courts, Mr Malone, whose telephone had been tapped with the authority of a warrant, sought a declaration that the tapping was unlawful, as violating his rights of property, privacy, and confidentiality.
So far as property rights were concerned the Vice-Chancellor held that words being transmitted by electrical impulses could not in themselves be the subject-matter of property rights.
So far as privacy was concerned, Malone accepted that there was no general right to privacy in English law, but argued that there was a particular right of privacy, namely the right to hold a telephone conversation in one's home without molestation.
The attempt to construct such a right was built upon a number of different grounds, perhaps the most important being the analogy with the Fourth Amendment to the US Constitution which protects people from unreasonable search and seizure, the analogy being drawn presumably because the Fourth Amendment is based upon English common law, particularly Entick v. Carrington , where it was held that as a general rule search warrants may only be issued under the authority of a statute.
In the US it has been held that the Fourth Amendment governs not only the seizure of tangible items, but extends also to the recording of oral statements.
In rejecting the view that Entick v. Carrington could thus form the basis of an action in privacy Sir Robert Megarry said:
The reason why a search of premises which is not authorised by law is illegal is that it involves the tort of trespass to those premises: and any trespass, whether to land or goods or the person, that is made without legal authority is prima facie illegal.
Telephone tapping by the Post Office, on the other hand, involves no act of trespass.
The subscriber speaks into his telephone, and the process of tapping appears to be carried out by Post Office officials making recordings, with Post Office apparatus on Post Office premises, of the electrical impulses on Post Office wires provided by Post Office electricity.
There is no question of there being any trespass…
The confidentiality claim met the same fate as the other arguments.
This is the action in the famous Argyll v. Argyll , which concerned the possible disclosure of intimate marital secrets.
In Malone , Sir Robert Megarry held that an action for breach of confidence does not lie where a person utters confidential information which is overheard by a third party.
It is to be noted that this proposition appears to have been doubted by the Court of Appeal subsequently in Francome v. Mirror Group Newspapers Ltd , where Sir Robert's remarks were distinguished as relating to a case involving the detection of crime.
The court in Malone also held, however, that even if an action in confidence does apply to telephone conversations, in this case the circumstances would be governed by Gartside v. Outram , where it was held that ‘there is no confidence in the disclosure of an iniquity’, observations subsequently explained by Lord Denning as merely an instance of just cause or excuse for breaking a confidence.
Lord Denning explained that ‘There are some things which may be required to be disclosed in the public interest, in which event no confidence can be prayed in aid to keep them secret.’
This was applied and extended by Sir Robert to safeguard the arrangements for telephone-tapping, even though when a tap is placed there may be no iniquity but only the suspicion of iniquity; and that entire conversations may be recorded and listened to ‘when much of the conversations may be highly confidential and untainted by any iniquity’.
The willingness to bend the rules to authorize a major invasion of civil liberties contrasts sharply with the Spycatcher case.
There, as we shall see, the judges wriggled furiously to avoid applying the principles outlined above in order to restrain the press from revealing the very serious iniquities disclosed by Mr Peter Wright, which included not only the bugging of embassies but also a conspiracy to assassinate the Egyptian President.
2.
The European Convention on Human Rights With the challenge to the extra-legal procedures having failed in the English courts, the matter was referred to Strasburg where it was argued that the British practice violated Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights which provides that everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home, and his correspondence.
This is qualified by paragraph (2) which provides that there shall be no interference by public authorities with the exercise of this right ‘except such as is in accordance with law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others’.
Malone had argued on the basis of the Convention before Sir Robert Megarry.
He, however, rightly concluded that the Convention does not give rise to any enforceable rights under English law, but only a direct right in relation to the procedures established by the Convention.
Thereupon Malone exercised his right of direct access under the Convention, with the first question for the European Court being whether the administrative arrangements in Britain (which restrict privacy) were ‘in accordance with law’.
At first sight, it seems arguable that the restrictions would meet this requirement following Megarry's decision that no unlawful acts were committed.
The Court held, however, that the phrase ‘in accordance with law’ means that the law ‘must be sufficiently clear in its terms to give citizens an adequate indication as to the circumstances in which and the conditions on which public authorities are empowered to resort to this secret and potentially dangerous interference with the right to respect for private life and correspondence.
The British Government stumbled at this hurdle, and in fact failed simply because domestic law did not regulate the circumstances in which the power could be exercised with sufficient clarity.
The next question under the Convention was to determine what kind of legal regime would be acceptable under Article 8(2), assuming of course that it could meet the requirement of being ‘in accordance with law’.
And here lay the disappointment in the Court's decision.
Having held that British practice was not in accordance with law, the judges found it unnecessary to address the question what would be regarded as acceptable limits on the right to privacy.
So the British Government was required to introduce legislation to regulate the circumstances in which the power to tap may be used, but no guidance was given as to what should be the content of the legislation.
It is quite possible that the legislation enacted to give effect to the decision (the Interception of Communications Act 1985) will be the subject of another application under the Convention.
In the meantime the only guidance as to what would constitute an acceptable limit on Article 8(1) rights is the rather equivocal decision in the Klass case which concerned the operation of surveillance procedures in the German Federal Republic where legislation authorized telephone-tapping and other surveillance techniques if a number of conditions were satisfied.
The first of these conditions (which in some respects contrast sharply with the regulation in Britain before 1985) was that there had to be factual grounds to suspect a person of having committed a crime contrary to the security of the state.
Quite apart from this, the legislation required that the gathering of evidence by other means would be unlikely to succeed, or would be considerably more difficult; a warrant would apply to only one suspect, so that there were no general warrants; the warrants would remain in force for three months and thereafter had to be renewed; and the person concerned generally had to be notified as soon as possible after the surveillance ended that he or she had been the target of such surveillance.
The application would be made by the Head of the Security Services to either the Minister of the Interior or the Minister of Defence.
Unlike applications for interception in other criminal cases there was no procedure for judicial authorization in the case of security applications.
Although there was no judicial scrutiny in the case of security surveillance, there was a form of quasi-judicial scrutiny, as well as parliamentary scrutiny.
A body known as the G10 Commission had the authority to decide, either ex officio or on application by a person believing himself or herself to be under surveillance, ‘on both the legality of and the necessity for the [surveillance]measures’.
In addition the competent Minister was obliged to report to a parliamentary Board at least once every six months and to the G10 Commission, in the latter case with an account of the measures he or she had ordered.
Nevertheless it was argued that these procedures violated Article 8 of the Convention on two grounds, one because people were not always notified after the surveillance, the other because there was no judicial supervision of the procedures.
Both arguments failed with the Court responding to the first by holding that the existing notification procedures were enough, there being no need for mandatory notification in all cases:
The activity or danger against which a particular series of surveillance measures is directed may continue for years, even decades, after the suspension of those measures.
Subsequent notification to each individual affected by a suspended measure might well jeopardise the long-term purpose that originally prompted the surveillance.
Furthermore…such notification might serve to reveal the working methods and fields of operation of the intelligence services and even possibly to identify their agents.
As to the second argument, the Court accepted that in principle it was desirable to entrust supervisory control to a judge, concluding that the rule of law implies that executive interference with individual rights should be subject to effective control which should normally be the judges on the ground that this offers the best guarantee of independence, impartiality, and proper procedures.
Here, however, the Court held that the absence of judicial review and the provision of political control did not exceed the limits of what was permissible.
3.
CND and judicial review At about the same time that legislation was introduced to tackle the problems raised by the Malone decision, the Massiter revelations led to a second attempt to challenge the pre-1985 procedures in the domestic courts, this time on different grounds from those which had failed before Sir Robert Megarry.
Mr John Cox was a prominent member of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND).
He was also an active member of the Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB).
As a result of the public statements made by Cathy Massiter, it became known that Mr Cox had been the subject of a Home Secretary's warrant to intercept his telephone calls.
According to Massiter:
from 1981 until December 1983 she had the task of investigating ‘Communist and other forms of subversive influence and activity in the peace movement, including in particular the C.N.D.’ She describes the collection of information and the keeping of files about persons classified as subversive.
During the late 1960s to the mid-1970s she says CND was classified as subversive because it was a ‘Communist dominated organisation’.
In the late 1970s, since its leadership was no longer dominated by members of the Communist Party, it was no longer regarded as subversive, but merely as a ‘Communist penetrated organisation’.
Nevertheless, she says, investigation of CND and its leaders increased, and at the end she spent virtually all her time on it.
She describes various sources and methods of acquiring information other than interception.
When Mr Heseltine became Defence Secretary in January 1983 a briefing paper on CND had to be provided for him.
Such briefing on security topics was a matter of routine when a new minister took office.
In March 1983 Mr Heseltine set up a special unit, Defence Secretariat 19 (DS19), to combat CND propaganda on unilateral disarmament.
Miss Massiter says DS 19 requested information about any subversive political affiliations of CND's leaders.
MI5 provided non-classified information, but none from secret or classified sources.
In an affidavit, which is worth quoting at length— if only because information of this kind is so rare from the pen of a security officer — Massiter stated:
In or about February 1983, I received a message via my branch director that the deputy Director-General of MI5 was prepared to consider favourably an application from me for a telephone intercept on a member of the Communist Party within C.N.D. John Cox, a Vice-President of C.N.D., was selected since he was well known as a member of the Communist Party and had been involved in C.N.D. practically since its inception.
Also, he lived in Wales and therefore would need to be in frequent telephone contact with C.N.D. headquarters.
However, we had absolutely no evidence, as required by the guidelines, that he was concerned in any criminal activity or that he was engaged in a major subversive or espionage activity which was likely to injure the national interest.
On the contrary, nothing from our coverage of the Communist party and its Peace Committee gave us grounds to suspect that they were manipulating C.N.D.
My application for a warrant to monitor Mr. Cox's telephone communications was made in April 1983.
It simply stated that Mr. Cox was a long term member of the Communist Party and prominent in C.N.D. and that it was desired to investigate his activities to ascertain whether the Communist Party was manipulating C.N.D. in a clandestine way.
In August 1983 the Home Secretary signed the warrant.
It was renewed after one month and was still in force when I left in December 1983.
Judging by our previous experience, I do not think that the Home Secretary would have refused to renew it thereafter.
Pursuant to the warrant, an intercept was placed on Mr. Cox's telephone in or about August 1983 and I saw the products of the intercept in the form of transcripts of recorded telephone conversations.
As Mr. Cox lived in Wales there was a fair amount of telephone communication between him and C.N.D. headquarters.
He would routinely be in contact with the office and with, for example, Bruce Kent and Joan Ruddock.
Accordingly, without intercepting their telephone communications we obtained a fair amount of information about their attitudes on quite a wide range of topics that were concerning C.N.D. at the time.
As to Mr. Cox himself, we obtained very little information that we did not already have, although perhaps a bit more detailed.
My own assessment before we had the check would have been that he worked within C.N.D. because he was a committed C.N.D. member rather than working in C.N.D. in order to further the interests of the Communist Party.
Certainly nothing that I recall seeing as a result of the intercept ever contradicted that assessment.
On establishing that the warrant had been issued, Mr Cox and two other prominent members of CND (Joan Ruddock and Bruce Kent) sought judicial review of the Home Secretary's decision to issue the warrant.
Cox argued that the interception had been unlawful because it did not meet the published criteria regulating such interceptions.
Although the criteria did not have the status of legal rules, Cox argued nevertheless that he had a legitimate expectation that the Home Secretary would follow them when deciding whether the applicant's telephone would be intercepted.
But before these matters could be considered the court had to address an argument for the Crown which, if it had succeeded, would have brought an immediate end to the matter.
This was the contention that the court ought not to entertain the action ‘because to do so would be detrimental to national security’, the defence referring to the long-established practice of Secretaries of State not to disclose or discuss the existence of a warrant.
In his affidavit Sir Brian Cubbon, Permanent Under-Secretary of State at the Home Office, explained the policy in the following terms:
To disclose whether or not a warrant has been issued in a particular case could establish means whereby those involved in serious crimes or espionage or subversion could learn the extent to which their activities had come to notice or — perhaps more damaging — could in some cases confirm whether their activities had come to notice at all.
The revelation of such information could jeopardize sensitive investigations essential to the nation's security, could place at risk the lives of those who had come forward with their suspicions to the police and could undermine the efforts of the police to prevent or detect serious crime.
It is equally important that the practice of not confirming or denying the existence of a warrant is maintained consistently.
Successive Secretaries of State have stated that only by the unvarying observance of this practice is it possible to ensure that in no circumstances is anything said or not said which, by comparison with what was said on a different occasion, might imply that a warrant had or had not been issued.
In the view of successive Secretaries of State it is essential in the interests of national security and of any other grounds for which a warrant may be issued that no such inference should ever be capable of being drawn.
This is by no means the first time that national security has been raised as a defence in legal proceedings against the Crown.
Indeed, the Crown has generally done rather well in such cases.
In a well-known dictum, Lord Parker of Waddington said in a case in 1916: ‘Those who are responsible for the national security must be the sole judges of what the national security requires.
It would be obviously undesirable that such matters should be made the subject of evidence in a Court of law or otherwise discussed in public.’
This was adopted by the House of Lords in the GCHQ case, where Lord Diplock said that ‘National security is the responsibility of the executive government; what action is needed to protect its interests is…a matter upon which those upon whom the responsibility rests, and not the courts of justice, must have the last word.’
As we shall see in Chapter 5, the defence in fact proved conclusive in the GCHQ case itself.
Ruddock , however, differed from any of the cases which had gone before in the sense that the issue ‘has usually been whether the admitted act or decision was justified on grounds of national security’.
Where there was evidence to show that such a decision had been taken for reasons of national security, this would be accepted to ‘preclude judicial investigation of [the]particular…grievance’.
Here, however, ‘no admission is made as to the existence of a warrant, so national security is not raised to justify an undisputed act.
It is raised to preclude the court from considering the application at all.’
To his great credit, but contrary to the trend of recent decision-making, Taylor J. was unable to ‘accept that the court should never inquire into a complaint against a minister if he says his policy is to maintain silence in the interests of national security’.
He continued by asserting:
there could occur a case where the issue raised was so sensitive and the revelations necessarily following its decision so damaging to national security that the court might have to take special measures (for example sitting in camera or prohibiting the mention of names).
Conceivably (although I would reserve the point) in an extreme case the court might have to decline to try the issues.
But in all such cases, cogent evidence of potential damage to national security flowing from the trial of the issues would have to be adduced, whether in open court or in camera, to justify any modification of the court's normal procedure.
Totally to oust the court's supervisory jurisdiction in a field where ex hypothesi the citizen can have no right to be consulted is a draconian and dangerous step indeed.
Evidence to justify the court's declining to decide a case (if such a course is ever justified) would need to be very strong and specific.
In this case there was no such evidence with the result that the court did not decline to hear the case.
This, however, did not conclude the matter in the applicants' favour for they then had to show that the warrant to intercept (which Taylor J. accepted was issued) was not granted in accordance with the established criteria.
This they failed to do.
Taylor J. held first that the Home Secretary did not knowingly flout the criteria, and secondly that he did not act unreasonably in granting the warrant.
So far as the latter issue was concerned, to succeed the applicant had to show that the decision was ‘so outrageous in its defiance of logic or of accepted moral standards that no sensible person who had applied his mind to the question to be decided could have arrived at it’.
In holding that the decision to issue a warrant was not ‘so outrageous in its defiance of logic’, Taylor J. said:
In view of the evidence as to the history of CND, in its period of ‘Communist domination’ followed by its period of ‘Communist penetration’, vigilance was clearly required.
The criteria placed a duty on the security service to keep up to date its information covering subversion…
The applicant John Cox was involved at the highest level in both CND and the Communist Party of Great Britain, both in the period of Communist domination’ and in the late 1970s when CND was growing.
The applicant's case depends on the evidence and opinions of Miss Massiter…
Against it is the evidence of Sir Brian Cubbon and his judgment that the criteria were always honoured.
The unanswered question, of course, is why is it a matter simply of judicial notice that the Communist Party of the 1980s is subversive?
The New Statutory Framework
With the failure of the Ruddock action, our attention now reverts to the legislation which the Government was compelled to introduce to meet the demands of the European Court of Human Rights in the Malone judgment.
In fact the legislation — the Interception of Communications Act 1985 — was on the statute book while the Ruddock case was being decided.
The legislation gave the Government generally and the Home Office in particular an opportunity to bare its liberal soul.
Indeed, the Home Secretary, Mr Leon Brittan, took great pride in the fact that, unlike any of its predecessors, the Conservative Government had provided for the first time a clear and comprehensive statutory framework for the interception of communications.
More importantly, he claimed, the Government had introduced a new offence of unauthorized interception.
More importantly still, it had provided for the first time an ‘effective’ means of redress for those wishing to complain that interception has been improperly authorized.
This, however, seems rather sanguine.
A more cynical assessment would be that the Interception of Communications Act 1985 is a crude example of political management.
It appears to give legal authority for an apparently open-ended power to intercept and it fails to constrain that power by an adequate framework of judicial or parliamentary scrutiny.
More troubling is that, as such, the Act provided the model for the Security Service Act which was enacted in 1989.
I. The grounds for interception The Interception of Communications Act had a promising start.
In 1957 the Birkett Committee recommended that unauthorized tapping should be a criminal offence.
Some twenty-eight years later that proposal was finally implemented.
Section 1 of the Act provides that it is an offence for a person intentionally to intercept a postal communication or a telecommunication.
Conviction could lead to a fine or imprisonment of up to two years, or both.
But here the progress ends.
Section 2 authorizes warrants to be issued by the Home Secretary for the purposes of interception and provides that a warrant shall not be issued unless the Home Secretary considers that it is necessary:(a) in the interests of national security;(b) for the purpose of preventing or detecting serious crime; or (c) for the purpose of safeguarding the economic well-being of the United Kingdom.
The most troubling of these measures is the first, which is presumably for the benefit of the security services.
The statute — which authorizes interception on grounds of national security without defining what is meant by national security — is clearly much wider than the old Home Office guidelines — which authorized warrants on the narrower grounds of ‘major subversive or espionage activity’.
To the extent that the Home Secretary suggested that the Act did not involve any extension of the Government's powers, this could be only because in practice the guidelines were being exceeded for, as has been pointed out subsequently, the phrase ‘national security’ is not confined to major subversion or espionage (Lloyd, 1987).
An attempt was made in Parliament to restrict the power to intercept for security reasons to cases where this was necessary for the defence of the realm or to prevent subversion, terrorism, or espionage — still wider than the guidelines but much closer to their spirit than the statute.
The Opposition contended that the words ‘in the interests of national security’ were too vague and too wide and conferred too much discretion on the Home Office and the security services.
The amendment failed, being opposed not just by the Government but surprisingly also by the SDP spokesman, Mr Robert MacLennan, who said that ‘senior Ministers who have the duty to authorise interception of communications must have a very wide — in many cases, almost unlimited — discretion’.
For the Home Office this apparent extension of power was justified on four grounds.
First, the term ‘national security is no stranger to us’ and was used often in statutes without being defined or restricted as to its meaning, with Parliament always accepting that ‘decisions about questions of national security must be for Ministers’.
Secondly, and most remarkably in view of Birkett and the 1980 White Paper, the phrase was appropriate ‘because it properly reflects the way in which interception has been authorised by successive governments of the Left and Right’, and it emphasizes the important point that the Act provides for no extension of existing practices.
Thirdly, it was argued that the use of the phrase ‘national security’ was ‘especially appropriate’because of the parallel with the European Convention on Human Rights which this measure was designed to implement.
The fourth argument was that the amendment would have left the Government with inadequate powers.
In the view of the Minister, ‘There is obviously more to preserving the nation's security than safeguarding against subversion, terrorism and espionage.’
In particular, ‘Interception may be necessary to protect our national security at international level to provide secret intelligence in the foreign and defence areas.
Undoubtedly, the acquisition of such intelligence may sometimes be essential in the interests of national security.
Without it, the Government's ability to safeguard the country's vital interests would be undermined.’
In fact, since the legislation was introduced warrants have been issued for unspecified reasons of national security but unrelated to subversion, terrorism, and espionage (Lloyd, 1987).
But although the first ground for the granting of warrants is, as drafted, the most troubling, the second (for preventing or detecting serious crime) is also a cause for concern.
In contrast to the administrative procedures operating before 1986, the Act authorizes warrants to be granted for preventing as well as detecting crime, thereby compromising the important question of principle identified by Dicey that ‘preventive measures are inconsistent with the pervading principle of English law, that men are to be interfered with or punished, not because they may or will break the law, but only when they have committed some definite assignable legal offence’(Dicey, 1959: 249).
That is a principle which is now honoured in the breach, most notably in the power extended to police officers to issue instructions to prevent an apprehended breach of the peace, a power which apparently is subject to very little effective judicial scrutiny or control.
This does not, of course, necessarily justify further departures from principle, nor indeed does it justify a departure quite as significant as that contained in the 1985 Act.
Of crucial importance in determining the power to intercept in criminal cases is the definition of ‘serious crime’.
And here we find that the term is widely rather than narrowly defined to include an offence which carries a sentence of three years or more on first conviction; or involves the use of violence; or results in substantial financial gain; or involves conduct by a large number of people in pursuit of a common purpose.
In other words a serious crime amounts to anything from murder to obstruction of the highway, the latter being committed where large numbers of people gather to march and demonstrate.
The effect of the Act then is to give the police the legal power to intercept where there is the possibility that a public order offence might be committed.
As it is possible that such an offence will be committed on any march or demonstration, the Act gives the power to tap any organization engaged in such activity.
2.
Safeguards against abuse?
Despite criticisms voiced by the Post Office Engineering Union (1980) it is still the case that warrants are to be issued under the hand of the Home Secretary rather than a judge, there apparently being no concern that a major invasion of privacy can take place by executive act without the need for any judicial approval or authorization, as is required in other democracies.
Indeed in urgent cases (a term not defined), the warrant may be issued under the hand of an official in the Home Office.
But before this is done the Home Secretary must expressly authorize the granting of the warrant which must be endorsed with a statement of that fact.
Presumably this is intended as a safeguard: if the Home Secretary is not in his office, he must be contacted by telephone if necessary to give his consent.
But this is hardly an effective safeguard: how much serious consideration can be given by a Minister absent from his office, engaged in pressing matters of state?
In view of the sheer volume of interception warrants, and in view of the sheer volume of the Home Secretary's other duties, it seems unlikely that his personal involvement can seriously be seen as an effective means of control.
As a result effective safeguards must be found in the statutory restrictions on the grant of warrants.
But these leave much to be desired — on three major grounds.
The first relates to the extraordinarily wide scope of the warrants.
Under the Act those executing a warrant are required (not empowered) to intercept all communications sent to or from one or more addresses specified in the warrant where the address in question is likely to be used for the transmission of communications to or from one particular person specified or described in the warrant.
To illustrate the dangers of this measure, suppose that the Government took the view that membership of the Communist Party presented a threat to national security and that leading members of the party — including those holding positions in trade unions — were to be kept under surveillance.
This would enable all telephone calls in and out of their homes to be intercepted.
It would also enable all telephone calls in and out of their workplaces to be intercepted.
As a result the legislation will authorize (and may indeed require) the interception of all the telephone calls to and from trade union head offices, as well as those of many other radical protest organizations.
The second area for concern relates to the duration of warrants.
Although it is true that warrants must be for a fixed period and may not be open-ended, the period in question is a relatively long one and may exceed the purposes for which the warrant is initially granted.
Take an absurd example.
Suppose a warrant is granted to tap the telephones of an organization which is planning a march or demonstration.
Under the statute, such a warrant may be granted on the spurious ground that the police suspect that public order offences may be committed by large numbers of people.
Yet the warrant will be granted for two months — which may well include a period of time running after the demonstration in question has taken place.
In other words, the period of fixed duration allows snooping of an unauthorized nature.
But what is more troubling than the initial rigid fixed term is the fact that warrants may be renewed for longer periods still.
It is true that warrants to the police in criminal investigations may be renewed only for one month.
But it is also true that warrants to the security services may be renewed for six months at a time.
Apart from the fact that the fixed periods are unreasonably long, they are unreasonably arbitrary and rigid.
Much less unacceptable would be a shorter warrant period, which should be the maximum duration possible, rather than the standard period in every case.
In other words, the Home Secretary would have a discretion to exercise from case to case, with the result that the duration of each warrant would vary, subject to a statutory maximum period.
The third area of concern relates to the adequacy of the remaining safeguards introduced by the Act.
Two measures specifically are introduced as legal requirements.
First, under section 6, when granting a warrant, the Home Secretary must make arrangements for the purpose of securing that:(a) the extent to which the material is disclosed;(b) the number of persons to whom the material is disclosed;(c) the extent to which the material is copied; and (d) the number of copies made of any material is limited in each case to the minimum that is necessary.
The second statutory safeguard is that copies of any intercepted material must be destroyed as soon as they are no longer required.
But that is all: the Act fails to incorporate other safeguards said to be embodied in the pre-statutory warrant procedures.
Far less does it make any attempt to improve these procedures to meet their critics.
In particular, the statute does not incorporate the review procedures whereby the Home Secretary reviewed police warrants every month and security warrants every six months.
But more significant omissions relate to the removal of the qualification for granting warrants which were claimed to operate under the pre-statutory arrangements.
For security warrants, there had to be evidence of major subversive or espionage activity.
For police warrants, normal methods of investigation must have been tried and failed and there must have been good reason to believe that interception would result in a conviction.
None of these very significant substantive safeguards has been formally retained.
3.
The Tribunal and the Commissioner Apart from the administrative safeguards referred to above, the Act introduces a remedy by way of a right of complaint to a quasi-judicial Tribunal.
It may be noted, however, that the Tribunal (all lawyers) is appointed by the Prime Minister (nominally the Queen) for fixed periods of five years.
Although the members of the Tribunal may be reappointed by the Prime Minister for a further five-year period, under the Act they thus have no security of tenure, long recognized as the hallmark of judicial independence.
Quite apart from this, the Tribunal has no real powers.
Thus it has no power to determine whether unauthorized interceptions are taking place.
Such claims may only be investigated by the police and prosecuted in the normal way.
But if the police or the security services are perpetrating the illegal acts there may be little incentive for them to deal with such complaints seriously.
The Tribunal is thus limited to determining whether a warrant to intercept has been properly issued under the Act, that is to say, that there are adequate grounds for the issuing of a warrant and that the statutory procedures have been complied with.
But even this is not as extensive as it appears at first sight for, in conducting an investigation on a complaint, the Tribunal must apply ‘the principles applicable by a court on an application for judicial review’.
This means that the Tribunal has to ask whether the Minister acted reasonably in exercising his discretion to grant a warrant.
That discretion would not be exercised reasonably if no reasonable Minister could conclude that the issuing of the warrant was necessary in the interests of national security or for the prevention or detection of crime.
The application of the principles of judicial review vary according to the circumstances.
As the Ruddock case has shown, the standard of review employed in national security cases is set so high that it is possible that the Tribunal could be compelled to refrain from interfering with discretionary decisions taken for this reason.
Much the same is true of the discretionary powers of the police.
Although the courts do not refuse in principle to review the exercise of police discretionary powers, they do nevertheless exercise a great deal of caution and restraint to such a degree that it is difficult to see how in practice the principles of judicial review are capable of being used to challenge decisions to issue warrants where these are considered to be necessary for the prevention or detection of crime.
The point is nicely illustrated by one case where the Central Electricity Generating Board unsuccessfully sought a court order to require the Chief Constable of Devon and Cornwall to compel his officers to remove or assist the Board in removing people obstructing a survey site.
The Court of Appeal made it clear that the Chief Constable had authority to intervene, but it declined to compel him to do so.
Lord Denning cited his own judgment in an earlier case where he said:
it is for the Commissioner of Police, or the chief constable, as the case may be, to decide in any particular case whether enquiries should be pursued, or whether an arrest should be made, or a prosecution brought.
It must be for him to decide on the disposition of his force and the concentration of his resources on any particular crime or area.
No court can or should give him direction on such a matter.
He can also make policy decisions and give effect to them, as, for instance, was often done when prosecutions were not brought for attempted suicide.
But there are some policy decisions with which, I think, the courts in a case can, if necessary, interfere.
He continued by saying that ‘the decision of the chief constable not to intervene in this case was a policy decision with which…the courts should not interfere’.
So the Act provides for the appointment by the Prime Minister of a Tribunal with very limited powers to regulate the way in which Ministers use the very extensive powers given to them under the Act.
It is not clear whether it is the limited powers of the Tribunal or the wide powers of the Government which led to none of the first sixty-eight complaints to the Tribunal being upheld.
One of the first complaints was made by three members of CND who were told on 7 July 1986 by the Tribunal ‘that after careful investigation it was satisfied no contravention of the [statutory]criteria had occurred’.
In addition to the Tribunal, however, the 1985 Act makes provision for the appointment of a Commissioner to supervise the use of the new statutory powers.
This in effect gives statutory force to the judicial monitoring procedure which was introduced in 1980.
Under the Act, the Commissioner is also appointed by the Prime Minister, and it is required that the person appointed should hold or have held a high judicial office.
Like the members of the Tribunal, there is no provision for security of tenure for the Commissioner, it being provided only that he ‘shall hold office in accordance with the terms of his appointment’.
Specifically, the Commissioner has three functions:(a) to keep under review the carrying out by the Home Secretary of the functions conferred upon him or her by the Act;(b) to keep under review the adequacy of any arrangements made for the purposes of restricting the use and distribution of the intercepted material;(c) to give the Tribunal all such assistance as the Tribunal may require for the purpose of enabling it to carry out its statutory functions.
In fulfilling these three functions, two duties are imposed upon the Commissioner.
First, where it appears that there has been a breach of the statutory provisions, he or she must make a report to this effect to the Prime Minister.
Secondly, the Commissioner must make an annual report to the Prime Minister about his or her activities in the year in question.
The annual report is to be published.
This is a major advance on the pre-existing system of judicial monitoring where the Government agreed only to the publication of the first but not the succeeding reports of the monitor.
Nevertheless, the significance of this development ought not to be exaggerated.
There is no duty on the Prime Minister to publish any interim reports highlighting specific abuses.
Also, although the annual report is to be published, the Prime Minister may exclude from publication any matter in an annual report if it appears to the Prime Minister that publication would be prejudicial to national security, the prevention or detection of crime, or the economic well-being of the country.
In a very real sense the concept of a Commissioner is open to criticism.
The Commissioner is appointed by the Prime Minister on terms determined by the Prime Minister, and reports to the Prime Minister who has the power to censor his or her report for the purposes of publication.
These arrangements for review of the procedures were strongly condemned by the Opposition which argued that the monitoring function should be undertaken by a Select Committee of the House of Commons which would ‘oversee the work of any person responsible for, or making use of, the interception of communications’.
So far as the Commissioner is concerned there was a fear that the Prime Minister's power of censorship could lead to an ‘extremely thin’ annual report being laid before Parliament, with little opportunity for informed debate.
As a result there were other, more fundamental problems.
Speaking for the Opposition, Mr Clive Soley said:
let us assume that a full report, with virtually nothing excluded, is laid before the House.
It is then available for us to read, and we may be able to arrange a debate.
Let us assume that we persuade the Government of the day to allow one day of prime Government time for that debate.
That is one day's debate on an extremely serious matter, compared to what could be done by a Select Committee over many weeks of sitting, bringing evidence before it, questioning people involved, looking at the matter in depth.
Which system protects the democratic rights best?
The answer is clear.
It is the Select Committee system, which can report to the House, after which a full debate can take place.
In other words, we would have the best rather than the worst of both worlds.
Mr Soley was correct at least in his prediction that the published parts of the Commissioner's reports would be very thin.
The published part of the first report amounted to only twelve pages (Lloyd, 1987)(with an appendix of one page giving details of the number of warrants issued by the Home Office and the Scottish
Office, but with no information about the numbers issued by the Foreign Office or the Northern Ireland Office), and the second being a mere five pages (with an appendix of one page), yet priced at £1.90 (Lloyd, 1988).
The reports of the Commissioner provide some information about the number of warrants in force albeit that they are incomplete.
In 1987 the Home Secretary was responsible for 223 telecommunications warrants and 71 letters warrants.
The Scottish Secretary was responsible for 29 and 1 respectively.
In the first two reports of the Commissioner, he drew attention to a few technical problems, such as wrong numbers being intercepted, and he did make recommendations as to how the procedures should be modified, describing these as being of ‘no great importance’.
For the most part, however, the procedures were given a clean bill of health, with the Commissioner examining warrants drawn at random , but also examining all new warrants issued on grounds of subversion.
In conducting this exercise the Commissioner has explained that he has adopted the wide test of subversion formulated by Lord Harris in 1975 and that his duty ‘is to look at each case individually and say whether the Home Secretary could reasonably take the view that the warrant was necessary in the interests of national security’(Lloyd, 1987).
‘Applying that test, and bearing in mind that there are persons on the fringes of subversion that may make it difficult to draw the line’, the Commissioner has been satisfied that the Home Secretaries' warrants have always been justified.
In his second report, the Commissioner wrote that the confidential part of his report discussed individual warrants which called for comment and also some examples of recent operations.
But he also pointed out that if this information could be included in the published part of the report, it would do much to reassure members of the public who feel uneasy about interception.
The Commissioner also accepted assurances by the five Secretaries of State involved that they never issue warrants without a careful review of the papers and a proper consideration of the matters which they are required to consider and take into account under the Act.
Nevertheless, it is still open to question whether these arrangements are an adequate substitute for parliamentary scrutiny.
Certainly the Home Office was unable to come up with a convincing case against such scrutiny by a House which is ‘elected to protect the democratic rights of [the]people’.
Mr David Waddington, the responsible Minister, lamented that ‘parliamentary accountability is an easy cause always to espouse’.
But this resistance is weakened in the present context by allegations of misuse of power by the security services.
Whatever the merits of the arguments against Mr Soley's proposal for a Select Committee in place of the Commissioner, they are much less convincing when applied to the more modest proposal put forward at the time by the SDP that there could be a Select Committee confining itself to the Commissioner's report ‘so that in turn it would report and give some reality to parliamentary accountability’.
4.
The exclusion of the courts It has been argued so far that the methods of control and accountability introduced by the 1985 Act leave much to be desired.
The statute has provided for the creation of a Tribunal with very little power.
It has also given legal effect to the judicial monitoring procedure, but there is no accountability of the Commissioner to Parliament despite the concern about this type of procedure which was raised in public after the Massiter affair.
Apart from these weaknesses, the Government has seen fit to deny an additional safeguard which might have been presumed to operate.
This is judicial scrutiny and the power of the courts to regulate telephone-tapping and to deal with illegal or improper conduct.
Yet judicial scrutiny has been expressly excluded: first by denying the courts the power to question decisions of the Tribunal, and secondly and more importantly by denying the courts the power to refuse to admit evidence obtained as a result of illegal or improper interceptions. (a)The exclusive jurisdiction of the Tribunal It is a general principle of English law that the decisions of inferior tribunals (such as social security appeal tribunals, industrial tribunals, or immigration appeal tribunals) should be the subject of appeal to the higher courts.
Exceptionally the statutes creating these bodies may omit to provide for an appeal in which case the decisions of the tribunals in question may be the subject of review by the High Court, and if the decisions reveal an error of law they may be quashed by what is known as an order of certiorari .
More exceptionally still, Parliament may endeavour to prevent judicial review and may wish the decisions of the tribunal to be final and beyond the supervisory jurisdiction of the ordinary courts.
As a result, Parliament may insert what is known as an exclusion or privative clause to achieve this result.
An example of such a clause is the following which was found in the Foreign Compensation Act 1950, a statute setting up a body known as the Foreign Compensation Commission: ‘The determination by the commission of any application made to them under this Act shall not be called in question in any court of law.’
There is some justification for such clauses, despite questions about their constitutional propriety.
If Parliament wishes to create a specialist body to adjudicate in a given field, it makes little sense to have the decisions of that body reviewed by courts which have no such expertise.
On the other hand, however, such clauses are not without danger.
They would not enable the courts to interfere where there clearly has been a breach of procedural fairness; and they would permit the inferior tribunals to exceed the limited powers which Parliament has conferred upon them.
It is important to note that for a variety of reasons clauses of this kind have been heavily criticized.
They have been attacked by Parliament, with the Tribunals and Inquiries Act 1971 providing that:
As respects England and Wales or Northern Ireland, any provision in an Act passed before 1st August 1958 that any order or determination shall not be called into question in any court, or any provision in such an Act which by similar words excludes any of the powers of the High Court, shall not have effect so as to prevent the removal of the proceedings into the High Court by order of certiorari or to prejudice the powers of the High Court to make orders of mandamus.
They have also been attacked by the courts, with the result that it is difficult to see what practical effect such clauses might be thought to have.
The leading case is Anisminic Ltd v. Foreign Compensation Commission , where the House of Lords held that the effect of an exclusion clause is only to prevent errors of law by a tribunal which are within its jurisdiction: the clause would not prevent the review of decisions outside jurisdiction.
It thus becomes crucial to determine what errors fall outside jurisdiction.
Here the answer is just about any error the superior courts wish.
In Anisminic , Lord Reid gave the following examples:
It may have given its decision in bad faith.
It may have made a decision which it had no power to make.
It may have failed in the course of the inquiry to comply with the requirements of natural justice.
It may in perfect good faith have misconstrued the provisions giving it power to act so that it failed to deal with the question remitted to it and decided some question which was not remitted to it.
It may have refused to take into account something which it was required to take into account.
Or it may have based its decision on some matter which, under the provisions setting it up, it had no right to take into account.
I do not intend this list to be exhaustive.
But if it decides a question remitted to it for decision without committing any of these errors it is as much entitled to decide that question wrongly as it is to decide it rightly.
It is difficult to see what errors are left to make!
In fact, since Anisminic the courts have gone one step further and now presume that any error of law by an administrative tribunal is subject to review by the higher courts, even where there is an exclusion clause purporting to prevent such review.
The presumption is rebuttable.
Yet despite this trend away from leaving sole jurisdiction with administrative tribunals, the Interception of Communications Act 1985 not only contains an exclusion clause to prevent review of the decisions of the Tribunal, but it contains one of unprecedented scope.
Section 7 provides simply that ‘The decisions of the Tribunal (including any decisions as to their jurisdiction) shall not be subject to appeal or liable to be questioned in any court.’
The Government has thus done what no government before has done — it has given an inferior tribunal the power to determine the extent of its own jurisdiction.
As Lord Wilberforce said in Anisminic : ‘Although, in theory perhaps, it may be possible for Parliament to set up a tribunal which has full and autonomous powers to fix its own area of operation, that has, so far, not been done in this country.’
It has now.
As a result there can be no review of the decisions of the Tribunal, regardless of the merits and substance of the decision and regardless of the procedure by which it is reached.
It is true of course that the device could potentially backfire: having equipped this Tribunal with so much power, it might begin to use it and impose demands on the executive which exceed those which the courts would demand.
The Government would be powerless, having denied itself the right of access to the ordinary courts in such an eventuality.
It will, however, be no surprise to learn that the Government is protected against that risk.
The law of contempt does not apply to reinforce the decisions of administrative tribunals.
As a result there is no remedy available to an aggrieved party if a tribunal's decision is not complied with — unless the statute should expressly create such a remedy.
This was not done in the 1985 Act — with the result that it would be open to the Government not to comply with an order if it takes the view that the Tribunal's decision clearly exceeds its powers under the statute.
It is to be noted further that the Act, no doubt inadvertently, facilitates such behaviour by providing that the Tribunal shall give reasons for its decisions only to the Prime Minister.
(b)The admissibility of illegally obtained evidence As we discussed in Chapter 2, one way of controlling the activities of the police and of ensuring that they do not act unlawfully is to prevent the admissibility of evidence which is obtained by illegal means.
Such an approach was adopted by the US Supreme Court in the famous case,Mapp v. Ohio , where it was held that to admit evidence obtained by means of an illegal search would make the constitutional guarantees against such arbitrary conduct worthless.
A less absolute position now operates in the United States, as Mapp v. Ohio has been revised and qualified.
A less absolute position is also adopted in Australia and in Scotland (Ewing and Finnie, 1988: 99–102) where the courts have a discretion to admit illegally obtained evidence.
In exercising this discretion the courts will balance the public interest in the prosecution of crime against the interest of the accused in securing a fair trial.
The more serious the violation by the police and the less serious the charge the more likely it is that the evidence will be inadmissible, though there are occasions in Scotland where crucial evidence has been struck out in serious cases which include murder.
In England and Wales the position is now governed by the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, section 78, the terms of which we encountered in the previous chapter.
Although it is unclear precisely what the section actually means, at least on one view it does permit the courts to refuse to admit police evidence which has been obtained illegally.
Yet in sharp contrast to this development, the 1985 Act provides expressly that evidence which tends to suggest that illegal tapping has taken place is not to be admitted in court.
Thus section 9 provides that in any proceedings before a court no evidence shall be adduced and no question in cross-examination shall be asked which tends to suggest that an interception has taken place without a warrant — that is, illegally.
This exclusion does not apply to a prosecution for a breach of section 1.
There is then no effective sanction against illegal tapping.
The fruits of such conduct cannot be excluded.
The only remedy lies in prosecution at the instance of the police.
But, as already suggested, if it is the police who are doing the tapping what is the prospect of effective steps to stop it?
More significantly, if questions may not even be asked in open court about illegal tapping, how is the victim to find out about it in order to bring it to the attention of the police?
It would of course be possible for a British Telecom engineer to disclose such information to the targets of the tapping.
But, as civil servants have discovered in the past, prosecution under the Official Secrets Act may be brought even where the civil servant (or the engineer in this case) is exposing improper or even illegal conduct by the executive.
But, in any event, there is no compelling reason to justify section 9.
In Canada illegally obtained wire-tapping evidence can be excluded just as any other illegally obtained evidence may be excluded.
There is no reason why the same should not be the position here.
Conclusion
The practice of telephone-tapping in Britain is a symptom of the deep-rooted problems facing civil liberties in this country.
Until the decision of the European Court in the Malone case this major invasion of privacy was conducted without any legal authority.
Indeed the decision in Malone is an indication of the extent to which the British courts are willing to tolerate major invasions of civil liberties without any express authority vested in state agents.
The rather weak response of Sir Robert Megarry stands in sharp contrast to the decision in Kennedy v. Ireland , where the High Court of Ireland was faced with a much more difficult question, also in the context of telephone-tapping.
In Malone , the Court was asked to recognize a limited common-law right to privacy whereas in Kennedy the Court was asked to take the much bolder step and apply in this sensitive area an implied constitutional right to privacy which was not to be found in the Constitution.
This it was willing to do, for although ‘not specifically guaranteed by the Constitution, the right of privacy is one of the fundamental personal rights of the citizen which flows from the…democratic nature of the State’.
The Court continued by asserting that the nature of the right to privacy must be such as to ensure the dignity and freedom of an individual in the type of society envisaged by the constitution, namely, ‘a sovereign, independent and democratic society’.
In a strong judgment the Court also claimed that the ‘dignity and freedom of an individual in a democratic society cannot be ensured if his communications of a private nature, be they written or telephonic, are deliberately, consciously and unjustifiably intruded upon and interfered with’.
It is true that in Britain the matter is now regulated by statute and to that extent it has been flushed into the open.
Yet the statute authorizes interception on wider grounds than those previously acknowledged and fails to provide some of the safeguards against abuse which were claimed to operate under the old administrative regime.
But clearly the most significant feature of the Act is the reluctance on the part of the executive to subject the process to any satisfactory scrutiny or control.
The torch of accountability shining from this statute is one which has failed to ignite.
This is demonstrated most clearly in the lengths to which the courts have been excluded from the process, even though they have been only rarely a threat to the Thatcher Government.
Thus, so far as the Tribunal is concerned, Parliament accepted a privative clause of a kind which is unprecedented in modern English law, purporting to do what no Parliament has done before — it has given an administrative tribunal the power to determine its own jurisdiction.
This is despite the fact that the Tribunal is appointed by the Government; that it has no real powers; and that it is under a duty not to give published reasons for any decision it makes.
Yet the exclusion of the courts is not confined to the question of judicial review of the Tribunal, with section 9 precluding any indirect judicial monitoring of unauthorized interceptions.
The effect of section 9 is that the Crown cannot rely directly on wire-tapping evidence in legal proceedings, but may use only the fruits of the interception.
More significantly, perhaps, it also means that no attempt may be made in the course of a prosecution to determine that in their investigations the authorities have committed one or more criminal offences.
Even the most naïve of British people must be left to suspect that the reason for this is that unauthorized tapping may continue despite section 1.
If it does, there is no institution which can intervene to regulate the practice except the police.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY AND PUBLIC ORDER
WE now turn our attention to the law on peaceful processions and public assemblies.
A noticeable change in the nature of protest has occurred in recent years.
In the 1970s the police were often concerned with the need to keep apart two rival groups, each of which had gathered together for a demonstration in the same place and at the same time.
Typically, the National Front would announce an intention to meet in or march through a racially sensitive area, and the Socialist Workers Party would then declare their determination to demonstrate against fascism at the same time.
It was, for example, a National Front meeting in Southall Town Hall on St George's Day 1979 that sparked off the clashes between police and members of the local community during which Mr Blair Peach was fatally injured (NCCL, 1980).
Such confrontation has been less frequent in the last ten years, probably because of the decline in popular support for extreme right-wing groups.
Instead, where disorder has occurred, it has more often been between the police and a faction or factions within the demonstration itself.
The clearest example of this is in the area of industrial protest, where alleged disorder on the picket line has been a routine justification for robust police action.
It also occurs in the context of political protest.
Meetings called to complain about Salman Rushdie's Satanic Verses and marches organized to oppose student loans, for example, have both occasioned violent encounters with the police.
This type of disorder raises difficult questions about when and how the police should respond which are different in kind from those of the previous decade.
Allegations of over-reaction by the authorities are, as we shall see, a common feature of modern protest.
This makes the accountability of the police as important here as it was in our earlier discussion of their general powers.
In this chapter, we shall look first at the laws that were available to the authorities in the years before Mrs Thatcher's Government came into office in 1979.
Then we shall examine how these laws were utilized to deal with large-scale public protest during the 1980s.
The two most important episodes in public order policing during this period were the CND campaign against cruise missiles in the first half of the decade, and the miners' strike during 1984/5; we will examine each of these in turn.
The miners' strike will give us an opportunity to discuss the militarization of the police, one of the most noticeable as well as one of the most controversial trends of recent years.
Having looked at these particular protests, we will then turn our attention to the Public Order Act 1986, and examine why the Government thought the Act to be necessary.
A recurrent theme in this area is how broad the law has always been, and how much the discretion of the authorities has been what has really mattered.
In this context, we shall assess how the Act has added to police power and what effect it has had when it has been used in tandem with the pre-existing law.
We shall conclude with an examination of the controversy over the use of Stonehenge as a site of pilgrimage during the summer solstice.
This ongoing conflict serves as a useful example of the interrelationship of the various legislative and common-law powers.
It also neatly illustrates the vulnerability of dissenting groups to the battery of laws which, as we shall see, is always available to the authorities.
The Legal Position in 1979
In our Introduction we examined the eccentric way in which this country has traditionally approached questions of liberty.
The great British bluff on freedom is nowhere more clearly exposed than in relation to freedom of assembly.
There is not and never has been a ‘right’ to demonstrate.
A citizen on a march, or on a picket, or at a public meeting, has never been able to respond to the repressive exercise of authority by calling in aid a legally enforceable right to do that which is impugned.
All such a person can say, quoting Dicey, is that he or she is free to do that which no law prohibits.
Historically, it is true, the freedom did have some content.
In Beatty v. Gillbanks , the Salvation Army was stopped from marching because of fears that it would incite a disorderly rabble, loosely organized as a so-called ‘skeleton army’, to acts of violence against it.
This preventive action was castigated by the judges on the Queen's Bench.
The Salvationists associated together ‘for a purpose which cannot be said to be otherwise than lawful and laudable, or at all events cannot be called unlawful’.
What disturbances there had been or might be were or would be caused entirely by ‘a body of persons opposed to the religious views of…the Salvation Army’.
To prevent the procession amounted to saying ‘that a man may be punished for acting lawfully if he knows that his so doing may induce another man to act unlawfully — a proposition without any authority whatever to support it’.
Yet despite this decision — always regarded as a classic illustration of the common-law presumption in favour of freedom of assembly — the law has developed to the point where we can say with reasonable assurance that the residue of which Dicey was so proud has narrowed to the point of extinction.
There may be a freedom to protest — but it exists only to the extent that it is permitted by the police.
1.
The Public Order Act 1936 This was reasonably clear even by 1979.
Both legislation and common law played a part.
As regards the first of these, the most important statute was the Public Order Act 1936.
Section 3 was concerned with public processions (stationary assemblies were not covered by the Act).
In the first instance, the section permitted a chief officer of police who reasonably apprehended that a procession ‘may occasion serious public disorder’ to impose such conditions ‘as appear[ed] to him necessary for the preservation of public order’.
If it was felt that these conditions would be insufficient to prevent ‘serious public disorder’, then the chief officer could apply for a banning order — from the Home Secretary in London, or from the local council in any other part of the country.
Such an order would be for up to three months and would have to be a ban on all or any class of processions in a given area.
The idea behind this imposition of blanket bans was to prevent the temptation to discriminate against particular marches.
In June 1937, a six-week ban on all political processions in a part of the East End of London was imposed.
Over the years, however, such dramatic action proved to be the exception rather than the rule.
Until 1980 the power to ban was employed sparingly.
If a peaceful march threatened to attract an antagonistic rival mob, then the standard police procedure was to allow the march to go ahead, with as much protection as was necessary.
This was regardless of the unpopularity or obnoxiousness of the views that were being expressed — and protected.
This was the basis upon which many National Front marches proceeded during the 1970s.
The spirit of Beatty v. Gillbanks was alive and reasonably well.
Apart from these preventive powers, section 5 of the 1936 Act also contained an important statutory offence which for fifty years was one of the central tools in the control of political assembly and public nonconformity.
This section had its origins in police efforts in the 1930s to deal both with left-wing demonstrators and with Sir Oswald Mosley's Fascists.
Over the years, it became the standard public order offence.
As amended in 1965, it covered any person who in any public place or at any public meeting used threatening, abusive, or insulting words or behaviour or distributed or displayed any writing, sign, or other visible representation which was threatening, abusive, or insulting.
None of these actions was criminal in itself.
The conduct had also to be intended to provoke a breach of the peace or to have been of such a nature as to have been likely to have occasioned such a breach.
As we shall see presently, ‘breach of the peace’ is a notoriously imprecise notion.
Flexible attitudes to its definition, facilitated by the summary nature of the proceedings, led to some curious prosecutions under this provision.
A leading textbook noted:
the convictions of (1) the person who took off his clothes in one of the fountains in Trafalgar Square;(2) the persons who shouted ‘Remember Biafra’ during the two minutes' silence at the 1969 Remembrance Day ceremony in Whitehall; and (3) the person who painted the word ‘Jews’in two foot high letters on the garden wall of a house occupied by a Jewish family, the father of whom had been a prisoner at Dachau.
(Bailey, Harris and Jones, 1985: 153–4)
Miaowing at a police dog brought the wrath of the section upon one tactlessly witty accused, though his conviction was quashed on appeal.
The section took as its task the prevention of disorder.
To the extent that freedom of expression figured at all, it was no more than as an implicit principle sitting silently in the gaps between the words.
Not unnaturally, therefore, it was often squeezed.
Peaceful demonstrators were vulnerable if their espousal of an unpopular cause moved to violence a hostile crowd or those who saw the message as threatening or insulting.
Anti-apartheid demonstrators were prosecuted for invading court number 2 at Wimbledon during a match involving the South African, Cliff Drysdale; the House of Lords ultimately decided that the meaning of ‘insulting’ was properly a matter for the magistrates (who had acquitted in this case) and allowed the defendant's appeal against the Divisional Court's decision that the conduct had been insulting.
In 1968 a man handed out to US servicemen leaflets which opposed the war in Vietnam and invited them to consider deserting.
For this, he was convicted of distributing insulting material whereby a breach of the peace was likely to be occasioned.
When Pat Arrowsmith gave out similar anti-war material to British troops, this time related to Northern Ireland, the justices before whom she appeared acquitted her because they did not think the publication to be ‘insulting’.
(When Ms Arrowsmith returned to her pacifist work, she was again arrested, but this time prosecuted and convicted under the more severe Incitement to Disaffection Act 1934.
Her eighteen-month jail sentence was reduced on appeal — but not before she had been in prison for six months.)
In one leading case from 1963, a Fascist leader was convicted under the section for making a speech at a public meeting which deliberately provoked to fury the Jews, the members of CND, and the communists who had come to Trafalgar Square with the express intention of stopping the meeting.
The appeal court took the view that a speaker must take the audience as he or she finds it — this contradicted Beatty v. Gillbanks and revived all the fears about ‘mob rule’ which had been to the forefront of the judges' minds in that case.
2.
Breach of the peace and police powers of arrest These two sections in the Public Order Act were not all that were available to the authorities before 1979.
A third power was also of critical importance.
Throughout the century, there has lurked in the undergrowth of the common law a judge-made weapon of great flexibility and force which has never been defined with any great precision or examined closely by either House of Parliament.
Lord Diplock accurately described the relevant legal rule in the following passage:
every citizen in whose presence a breach of the peace is being, or reasonably appears to be about to be, committed has the right to take reasonable steps to make the person who is breaking or threatening to break the peace refrain from doing so…
Whereas the ordinary person has a choice whether or not to act, the police officer, in view of his or her status, has a positive obligation to take action.
Failure to obey any instructions he or she might issue in this context may amount to the statutory offence of obstruction of a police officer in the execution of his duty, for which the sentence can be either imprisonment or a substantial fine.
This power is still available to the police today and three questions arise in relation to it: first, what is the meaning of breach of the peace?; secondly, when may the police act?; and thirdly, what may they do?
Given that it is the crucial phrase, it is perhaps surprising that the definition of breach of the peace has always been vague.
As we have seen, section 5 of the Public Order Act 1936, which contained the formula, was used by the police to prosecute all sorts of odd and eccentric types of conduct.
A fairly narrow meaning has been ascribed to it by the Court of Appeal:
we cannot accept that there can be a breach of the peace unless there has been an act done or threatened to be done which either actually harms a person, or in his presence his property, or is likely to cause such harm, or which puts someone in fear of such harm being done.
At one level, this definition is rather broad; it refers to threatened acts and the likelihood (rather than the actuality) of damage to person or property.
It does, however, link the law to the idea of harm and this is valuable in so far as it reduces the risk that boisterous behaviour, or other non-violent activity, can by itself amount to a breach of the peace.
Whether it has always been strictly adhered to by magistrates and the police is, of course, another matter.
Earlier cases had tended to defer to the judgment of the police officer on the spot without setting out an objective definition to which he or she was required to adhere.
In a Court of Appeal decision, reported in the same volume as the case from which the passage above is taken, Lord Denning thought that there was a breach of the peace ‘whenever a person who is lawfully carrying out his work is unlawfully and physically prevented by another from doing it’.
This would include many forms of peaceful protest, including sit-ins, certain public meetings, and even some pickets.
His fellow judges disagreed with Lord Denning and his opinions probably do not reflect the law, though the emergence of such views from a source so eminent as Lord Denning demonstrates clearly the common law's culture of uncertainty, within which repressive rules can emerge without embarrassment.
It is obvious that, if harm is occurring, the police should act to stop it.
So much is clear from Lord Diplock's speech.
The authorities do not have to wait for it to happen, however.
If a police officer reasonably anticipates a breach of the peace, he or she is required to do whatever is thought necessary to prevent its occurrence.
This may involve interference with otherwise lawful conduct.
The threat of criminal sanction hangs over those who refute the constable's perception of events.
This is potentially a wide-ranging power.
In theory, the police are controlled by the requirement that their suspicions about the future be reasonable, i.e. based on objective facts.
The courts are supposed to be vigilant on behalf of the citizen, and mindful of the liberty to go about one's lawful business.
Their job is to check the factual basis behind the police suspicion and the real likelihood of the breach of the peace ostensibly anticipated.
In this way, the individual is supposed to be protected against any over-zealous use of this powerful and vague discretion.
There is no doubt that the courts are rhetorically committed to such a role.
The practice of the police, and the case-law surrounding it, tell a different story.
In reality, it is this power, rather than any other provision, that has been vital to the police in their control over the years of pickets, protesters, and political demonstrators.
Three cases, two from that other period of great division, the 1930s, set the tone for the law as it stood in 1979.
The first is Thomas v. Sawkins , where a public meeting was called in Glamorgan to protest against the Incitement to Disaffection Bill then before Parliament and to call for the dismissal of the Chief Constable of the county.
The organizers hired the local library for the occasion and decided, on account of tension at previous gatherings, that they did not want any police officers present.
Despite this stipulation, two policemen — sitting in the front row — were among the 600 present.
They refused to leave on request and attempts to eject them failed on account of the sudden arrival of reinforcements from the local station.
In subsequent criminal proceedings, the High Court held that the police had a power to enter and remain on private property, against the wishes of the occupier, if they reasonably apprehended either that the commission of an offence was ‘imminent or likely’ or that any breach of the peace was likely to occur.
The justices in the court below had been right to conclude that the police had ‘reasonable grounds for believing that, if they were not present at the meeting, there would be seditious speeches and other incitements to violence and breaches of the peace would occur’.
Beyond this bland assertion, there was no further scrutiny of the way in which the police had acted.
No evidence emerged to justify the apprehension of the authorities, but this did not trouble the court.
It went ‘without saying’ that the rule was devoted ‘not to the interests of the police, but to the protection and welfare of the public’.
Our second decision concerned Mrs Kate Duncan who, as a member of the National Unemployed Workers' Movement, wanted to give a speech outside an unemployment training centre.
A number of people gathered to hear her.
Worried staff at the centre called in the police, who instructed Mrs Duncan to make her speech not in front of the centre but rather in an unobtrusive site on another street 175 yards away.
She refused and was promptly arrested.
In due course, she was charged with and convicted of obstruction of a police constable in the execution of his duty.
Her appeal to the Divisional Court was rejected.
The judges thought that the police anticipation of a breach of the peace was reasonable because there had been a ‘disturbance’ after a similar meeting addressed by Mrs Duncan — fourteen months before.
The Lord Chief Justice, Lord Hewart, was able to turn Dicey's complacency to useful account:
There have been moments during the argument in this case when it appeared to be suggested that the court had to do with a grave case involving what is called the right of public meeting.
I say ‘called’ because English Law does not recognise any special right of public meeting either for political or other purposes.
The right of assembly, as Professor Dicey puts it, is nothing more than a view taken by the court of the individual liberty of the subject.
If I thought that the present case raised the question which has been held in suspense by more than one writer on constitutional law — namely, whether an assembly can properly be held to be unlawful merely because the holding of it is expected to give rise to a breach of the peace on the part of persons opposed to those who are holding the meeting — I should wish to hear much more argument before I expressed an opinion.
This case, however, does not even touch that important question.
Our third decision dates from 1960 and concerns an industrial dispute at a printers' works in London.
The police decided to allow only two pickets at each of the two entrances to the works.
Mr Piddington disagreed with this decision.
He felt that this number was not enough to communicate with workers entering and leaving the premises (usually at the same time) or with transport workers as and when they delivered goods to the place.
So, with the brave words, ‘I'm going there and you can't stop me; I know my rights’, he attempted to join one of the pairs of pickets.
He was arrested and, although there was no blockage of the highway, disorder, or violence, he was later charged with obstruction of a police officer in the execution of his duty.
The police argued that they had reasonably apprehended that a breach of the peace might occur if there had been more than two pickets at each entrance.
The Divisional Court, presided over by the Lord Chief Justice, Lord Parker, emphasized that there had to be a ‘real possibility’ of a breach of the peace, but went on to find that just such a situation of menace existed here: eighteen people ‘milling about’when there were only eight people in the works created a ‘real danger of something more than mere picketing’.
The authorities, therefore, were entitled to act as they did.
The exact number to be allowed was entirely a matter for the constable who ‘must be left to take such steps as on the evidence before him he thinks are proper’.
The police are thus empowered arbitrarily to limit numbers and to form cordons to allow lorries and workers through to work.
The requirement that there be a real possibility of a breach of the peace before they act is rarely subject to close judicial scrutiny.
This power, ostensibly the exercise of discretion by an individual constable, has in practice hardened into a set of rules for the management of industrial disputes.
The emergence of these rules out of a common law which denies their existence has the added consequence, attractive to those who make them, that they are not subject to parliamentary or to adequate judicial control.
They are the invisible force of the criminal law.
Policing the Peace Movement
Although the three powers we have just outlined were the principal measures available to the police to prevent or to control public assemblies, it would be a mistake to think that they were the only ones.
The police could also rely on the statutory offence of obstruction of the highway, and the common-law offence of public nuisance.
The civil law, mainly through the torts of trespass and private nuisance, also had a role to play.
The practical consequence of the range of laws we have described was that, by 1979, the freedom to engage in peaceful protest in this country was traditionally dependent not on the law but rather on the benevolent exercise of discretion by those in power.
In the first half of the 1980s, two events more than any others tested the malleability and breadth of the law that was available to the authorities.
These were first the CND campaign against cruise missiles and secondly the miners' strike.
1.
CND: the first phase Opposition to nuclear weapons has proved to be an enduring source of popular protest in Britain in the 1980s.
The origins of this popular movement lie in the first wave of pressure for disarmament, which began with the emergence of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND) in 1958 and ended in 1964, with its decline in the face of the new Labour Government's failure to rid itself of nuclear weapons.
Resistance focused initially on nuclear testing and the existence of American bases on British soil, but it quickly broadened to encompass unilateral nuclear disarmament in general and a rejection of the Polaris missiles favoured by the then Conservative Government in particular.
The period was marked by mass demonstrations, of which the Aldermaston marches were the most successful as well as the best remembered, and by more direct forms of action such as well-planned and highly publicized sorties against selected US rocket bases situated in Britain.
This latter tactic was favoured by the Committee of One Hundred, a radical CND faction led by the 89-year-old philosopher, Bertrand Russell.
After some initial successes, the authorities cracked down on the protesters.
A sit-down in Trafalgar Square on 17 September 1961 resulted in the arrest of more than 1,300 people; nearly a third of the organizing committee (including Russell) had already been detained, two weeks before the event.
A further 850 protesters were arrested when the police moved against simultaneous actions at a US air base at Wethersfield and six other locations.
Six members of the Committee of One Hundred, who had planned to enter the air base and immobilize it by sitting in front of its planes, were charged with conspiracy to commit offences under section 1 of the Official Secrets Act 1911.
Jail sentences of eighteen months each were meted out to five of them, with the sixth (the only woman) receiving twelve months.
The House of Lords afterwards unanimously upheld these convictions.
Their Lordships agreed that the plan to immobilize the base was a purpose ‘prejudicial to the safety or interests of the State’ as required by the words of the section.
The case was noteworthy for the fact that a section hitherto thought to be aimed only at espionage had been employed against peaceful protesters.
Their Lordships also upheld the trial judge's refusal to allow the defendants to put any evidence before the jury about why they believed that nuclear weapons, rather than their own actions, were ‘prejudicial to the safety…of the State’.
The majority of the law lords seemed to regard the interests of the state as coterminous with the interests of the government of the day; executive-minded comments to that effect have lingered on in the textbooks ever since, an unwanted legal legacy from this period of popular protest.
2.
CND: the second phase The second great phase of CND activity occurred, of course, in the first half of the 1980s.
The turmoil of those years seems now, in this new era of superpower co-operation, to be very far away.
Shortly after the Soviet Union's invasion of Afghanistan at the end of 1979, the Western alliance decided to deploy new intermediate range nuclear missiles in Europe.
These weapons, called cruise and Pershing, were to be land-based and many of the cruise missiles were to be sited in the United Kingdom.
The idea was to demonstrate the solidarity of the NATO alliance with a view to ensuring that negotiations with the Eastern bloc would be from a position of strength.
The policy was enthusiastically adopted by the new American President, Ronald Reagan, and by Mrs Thatcher, who had assumed office some months before his election.
Her Government also decided to expand Britain's own nuclear capacity by purchasing missiles for Trident submarines from the Americans.
These policies soon proved extremely controversial.
NATO strategists talked of the need for a ‘flexible response’ and of the possibility of a ‘limited’nuclear war; translated into the ordinary language of British voters, this seemed to many to amount to a willingness to contemplate nuclear war restricted to European soil.
The words of one American ex-Admiral were frequently quoted: ‘We fought World War One in Europe.
We fought World War Two in Europe.
And, if you dummies let us, we'll fight World War Three in Europe’(Hinton, 1989: 183–4).
Tension was exacerbated by the cold-war rhetoric which both President Reagan and Mrs Thatcher consciously adopted, with the former referring to the ‘Evil Empire’ in Eastern Europe and the latter revelling in the ‘Iron Maiden’label which the Russians themselves had affixed to her.
The Government's ill-considered attempt to prepare the populace for civil defence in the face of nuclear attack, in the pamphlet Protect and Survive , provoked  derision and added to the level of anxiety.
Fears about a ‘nuclear winter’ destroying half the globe after a nuclear strike made Whitehall's advice about staying indoors seem curiously dated, and NATO's talk of limited war a dangerous self-delusion.
The Alliance's 1979 decision gave 1983 as the planned deployment year for cruise and Pershing.
This gave the protest movements plenty of time to galvanize support.
CND emerged once more as the focal point of popular dissent.
Under the astute leadership of its general secretary, Bruce Kent, it made room for the various local and single-issue groups that were mushrooming around the country.
At its height, the organization claimed 90,000 national members and 250,000 additional supporters organized at local level.
As in the first phase of its activity, it sought to rely on a mix of massive public protest with occasional more direct forms of action.
In October 1980, 70,000 people were estimated to have packed into Trafalgar Square for CND's first public demonstration of its strength.
A rally in Hyde Park on 6 June 1982 drew a crowd which the police estimated at 115,000 (the Department of the Environment banned the playing of music at the demonstration).
Its march through London on 22 October 1983 was ‘probably the largest in British history, with the possible exception of the women's suffrage rally of 1909’(Hinton, 1989: 183).
During the autumn of that year, more than five million people took to the streets of Europe in support of the cause of European disarmament.
One year missing from this litany of successful street protest is 1981.
CND had planned a number of marches in London for that summer but they were affected by a ban on all public processions (other than those traditionally held) in the Metropolitan Police District which was imposed for a twenty-eight-day period by the Metropolitan Police Commissioner, with the consent of the Home Secretary, under section 3 of the Public Order Act 1936.
CND's challenge to the legality of this banning order emphasized its breadth (786 square miles) and its near-absolute nature, but neither the High Court nor the Court of Appeal were willing to overturn the Commissioner's opinion about the risk of an outbreak of serious public disorder.
This was despite the fact that one member of the Court of Appeal, Sir Denys Buckley, thought the reasons for the order to be ‘meagre’.
All the judges emphasized that the danger of disorder came not from the CND marchers but rather from the fact that ‘[h]ooligans and others might attack the police who were doing their duty in escorting a peaceful procession’(Lord Denning).
As Ackner LJ put it, the marchers might become a ‘target for their viciousness’.
The judgment of the Commissioner on this and the other issues was not to be gainsaid.
Apart from marches, CND fuelled their anti-cruise campaigns with demonstrations around the bases that were scheduled to take the new missiles.
At Easter 1983, a crowd the police estimated at 40,000 linked hands to form a human chain that ran from the air base at Greenham Common to Aldermaston and the Royal Ordnance Factory at Burghfield in Berkshire.
During the same weekend, 1,500 demonstrators gathered at the Royal Navy Polaris submarine base at Faslane on the Clyde.
Two months later, there were 752 arrests when 3,000 demonstrators participated in a four-day attempted blockade of the Upper Heyford base in protest at the F1-11 nuclear bombers located there.
Direct action did not always take place under the aegis of CND.
Peace camps were formed around some of the RAF air bases which it was thought would house the new cruise missiles.
The most famous of these was the first, at Greenham Common.
Organized exclusively by women, it quickly became a symbol not only of peace but also of the values of the women's movement.
On 12 December 1982, 30,000 women linked hands to ‘Embrace the Base’.
They adorned the perimeter fence with pictures, flowers, and messages of peace.
Further peaceful actions followed at other bases, and these were more directly sponsored by CND.
Unlike in the early 1960s, section 1 of the Official Secrets Act was not employed against the protesters at any point during this period though clearly it could have been.
3.
The peace movement and the criminal law None of these protests proved of any avail.
Buoyed by an election victory in which the Opposition's commitment to unilateral nuclear disarmament had appeared a vote loser, the Government proceeded to deploy cruise on schedule in 1983.
Plans for Trident continued apace.
Weakened by internal conflict, CND was unable to mount an effective large-scale protest when the first cruise missiles finally arrived.
In 1984 the focus of the peace movement shifted to Cruisewatch, a ‘highly effective network of people organised to track and harass deployment exercises from the Greenham base’(Hinton, 1989: 193).
Efforts were also made to launch private prosecutions against Mrs Thatcher for the alleged crime of threatening to kill under section 16 of the Offences Against the Person Act 1861.
In 1985 CND made the proposed new cruise missile base at Molesworth in Cambridgeshire the target for their Easter protests.
Three marches starting in Leicester, Stevenage, and Cambridge on Good Friday converged on Molesworth on Easter Sunday.
The police responded by erecting road-blocks limiting access to the area.
They issued passes to local inhabitants and representatives of the media.
The Times reported that ‘the police decided by late evening that enough vehicles had arrived to prevent any further cars approaching the base.
Even press passes issued by Cambridge police did not allow access closer than about three miles from the base.’
The legality of these road-blocks was not tested in court; the police claimed to be relying both on the Road Traffic Act and on the breach of the peace power as it had been developed during the miners' strike (see below).
Yet it is hard to see what violence the police foresaw as direct and immediate.
The weekend of protest was very peaceful.
Ten arrests were made on Easter Saturday, with eight of those detained being charged and bailed on condition that they did not come within 15 miles of the Molesworth base.
In 1985 a new form of protest reached its height.
Centred in East Anglia, the Snowball Campaign involved a symbolic cutting of the perimeter fence at air-force bases around the country.
The idea was that the number of people engaged in this activity would increase dramatically with every action, thereby demonstrating the depth of feeling against nuclear weapons.
The movement attracted widespread support from peace campaigners.
Over the weekend of 21/22 September 1985, for example, 60 protesters were arrested for wire-cutting at Molesworth and a further 55 were arrested or reported for the same action at RAF Sculthorpe.
CND claimed that sixteen air bases were affected by a co-ordinated action over the two days.
The authorities responded to this new aggravation in two ways.
First, new by-laws were promulgated.
At Greenham Common, for example, it was declared a criminal offence to ‘enter, pass through or over or remain in or over’ the area of the base.
At Fylingdales, to ‘remain in’ the area of the air base ‘after having been directed to leave’by an official was designated a breach of by-law 3(k).
In due course, these new laws were applied against the protesters who appeared to be on strong ground when challenging their convictions, since, in their haste to bring these laws into operation, the drafters had apparently acted ultra vires .
Section 14 of the Military Lands Act 1892 set out the general enabling power, but then went on to provide ‘that no bylaws promulgated under this section shall authorise the Secretary of State to take away or prejudicially affect any right of common’.
The Divisional Court found that the by-laws did in fact adversely impinge upon just such rights.
Yet in giving the judgment of the Divisional Court, Schiemann J. contrived to avoid the conclusion that the by-laws were as a result void and the convictions made under them of no effect.
He observed that the protesters did not enjoy the rights of common that had been affected, and on this basis he decided to modify the by-laws so that they could continue to apply to all the world except the commoners themselves.
As the protesters were not commoners, the by-laws would apply to them.
This judicial tinkering was justified because the court was ‘sure that the altered decision represent[ed] that which the decision-maker would have enacted had he appreciated the limitation on his powers’.
It was ‘abundantly clear that the byelaw maker, if he had appreciated the limitation on his powers, would both at Greenham Common and at Fylingdales nevertheless have gone on to make the bylaws in such a way that the proviso to section 14(1) was given effect but all the world save commoners would still have been within their ambit’.
The Court made no reference to any presumption that the criminal law should be construed strictly in favour of a defendant.
The by-laws were lawful not because of what they said but rather because of what they would have said if they had been drafted lawfully.
The second tactic employed by the authorities related specifically to the Snowball campaign and involved dealing with the symbolic fence-cutting as the offence of criminal damage.
This led to a vast number of prosecutions, usually in the magistrates' court, because the authorities were quite careful about alleging that less damage had occurred than would give the protesters the option of having a jury trial, something for which most of them would have very happily volunteered.
The protesters argued that they had a ‘lawful excuse’ for what they did.
A partial definition of this phrase appears in section 5 of the Criminal Damage Act 1971.
Such an excuse exists if an accused ‘damaged…the property in question…in order to protect property belonging to himself or another…and at the time of the act…alleged to constitute the offence he believed —(i) that the property…was in immediate need of protection; and (ii) that the means of protection adopted…were…reasonable having regard to all the circumstances’.
A later subsection was emphatic that it was ‘immaterial whether a belief [was]justified or not if it [was]honestly held’.
The way this defence was used can be seen from the following submission, made by a defendant charged with the possession of a hacksaw blade with intent to do criminal damage to the perimeter fence of the US naval base at Brawdy:
[T]he purpose of the United States base was to monitor the movements of Soviet submarines; in the event of hostilities breaking out, the base would be the subject of a nuclear strike, with resulting devastation in the area, including to the property of the applicant, her friends and neighbours.
Her property was some forty miles from the base.
Alternatively, the Soviets might select the site at Brawdy as a target for a sudden nuclear strike in order to demonstrate that they were able to protect their submarines in the Atlantic and so maintain the nuclear threat which the presence of such posed to the United States.
If enough people cut the perimeter wire, the Americans might conclude that the safety and integrity of their base could not be securely maintained.
Consequently, they might remove the base, thereby removing the reason for a nuclear attack.
One of the purposes behind the action was, therefore, the protection of property, and it was motivated by a belief in the immediate need to act.
Since the good faith and honesty of the protesters were admitted by all concerned, this seemed to bring them within the statutory defence regardless of whether their beliefs were reasonable or whether they were universally held.
This defence caused some difficulty for the Court of Appeal when two cases raised it in quick succession in the summer and autumn of 1988.
The judges responded by saying that the ‘purpose’ of the accused was something which could be defined objectively.
On the facts before them, and contrary to what the defendants actually maintained, their purpose did not include the desire to protect property as required by the section.
This reasoning fails to meet the logical objection, identified some years earlier by Lord Devlin, that a ‘purpose must exist in the mind.
It cannot exist anywhere else.’
A leading commentator on the criminal law, Professor J. C. Smith, has drawn attention to a situation where a farmer shoots dead an alsatian dog.
He may have acted in this way because the dog was worrying sheep, or because he wanted to annoy the dog's owner, or simply because he despises all alsatians.
We cannot tell which it was by merely looking at the facts; we have to ask what his purpose actually was.
Professor Smith thought the reasoning employed in the CND cases to be ‘indefensible’.
It made a ‘mockery of the oft-proclaimed principle that statutes are to be construed in favour of the defendant’.
In the second case, the Court of Appeal is reported as having concluded that there was no evidence of ‘a need of protection from immediate danger’.
The statute requires, however, not a threat of immediate danger, but rather an immediate need to act to protect.
The two are not the same.
Suppose that a slate falls from our roof, leaving the attic exposed.
The weather forecast is good and rain is not expected for the next few days.
Notwithstanding this, we have an immediate need to protect our property from the moment the slate falls.
No one would say that the need only becomes immediate when rain is imminent; the need is immediate from the start because rain is certain to fall some time.
The protesters were equally convinced of their belief in the inevitability of nuclear war; this gave rise to their honest perception of what was immediately needed to protect their property.
The court does not appear to have dealt directly with this argument.
Yet this was not the only aspect of this and the other case to cause concern.
Another point relates to the fact that, in the first case, the jury acquitted the defendants of one charge and convicted them of Both charges arose out of the same facts.
The only issue before the court concerned the defence of lawful excuse.
This meant that the jury must have accepted the defence in relation to one charge but not in relation to the other.
This may have been a just compromise, but it was clearly illogical.
The normal rule in such circumstances is for the convictions to be set aside: ‘no reasonable jury who had applied their mind properly to the facts in the case could have arrived at the conclusion, and once one assumes that they are an unreasonable jury, or they could not have reasonably come to the conclusion, then the convictions cannot stand.’
The Court of Appeal, however, thought the acquittals wrong and declared that it was not going to ‘compound the error’ by quashing the convictions.
Professor Smith has remarked that ‘an acquittal is an acquittal’ and the ‘Court was bound to assume that [the jury was]right’.
It had no jurisdiction to undermine the jury verdict in this way.
Policing the Miners' Strike
The miners' strike which lasted from March 1984 to March 1985 was not the only example of industrial conflict in Britain in the past two decades, but it was easily the longest and the most violent.
Though to some extent exaggerated by the press, the disorder that surrounded it was far greater than anything occasioned by earlier industrial confrontations at locations such as Saltley, Grunwick, and Warrington.
The police worked over fourteen million hours' overtime, at an estimated cost of £140 million (Wallington, 1985: 152).
In England and Wales, 1,392 police officers were injured, 85 of them seriously.
In Scotland, 94 officers were injured, though only one was detained in hospital.
Official figures are not available on the number of pickets injured, but there were at least a couple of fatalities and it is the opinion of some observers that, in the major conflicts of the dispute, casualties amongst the pickets greatly exceeded those of the police (Wallington, 1985: 149).
The failure of the strikers to achieve their aims was the result of a variety of factors, but to the fore amongst these was the way in which the police and the law were employed against them.
1.
New policing strategies The commitment of large numbers of police officers to the task of keeping the pits open made it impossible for the National Union of Mineworkers to achieve a total shut-down in domestic coal production.
Police determination to control the volume and the effect of picketing made movement around the country and demonstrations at collieries extremely difficult; ‘much secondary picketing was prevented from taking place, effectively or at all, by police action rather than the intervention of the civil courts, and it is this factor that is at the heart of complaints that the police broke the strike, or were used to break it’(Wallington, 1985: 148).
When the pickets tried to prevent the importation of coal into the country, or its movement into major steelworks like Port Talbot and Ravenscraig, they once more found lines of constables in their way.
The miners' strike was a platform for the exercise of new police tactics to deal with disorder.
These had gradually developed in the preceding ten years, and were displayed on British streets on a consistent basis for the first time during this dispute.
The first tactic related to the national co-ordination of policing strategy.
Police forces in this country are local forces accountable to local police authorities, except in London where the police authority is the Home Secretary.
Britain does not have a national police force under the control and direction of a central government department, any such notion having been rejected by the Royal Commission on the Police in 1962.
Nevertheless, with the acquiescence of successive Home Secretaries, but without the support of Parliament, we have seen a growing centralization of police conduct in recent years.
This is based upon the National Reporting Centre which operates from Scotland Yard.
Set up in 1972, the NRC is not a permanent body and is only activated in times of crisis — as during the miners' strike, from which two developments of particular importance emerged.
The first is that the NRC co-ordinates strategy and the deployment of officers on a national basis in consultation with the Home Office, which may well have keen political interests in the matter to hand.
Secondly, in the co-ordination of this strategy, it is believed that the NRC gives policing orders to local forces, thereby overruling the operational discretion of these local forces.
This is a far cry from the procedures under the Police Act 1964, where mutual aid may be provided by one force to another, but only after a request from the latter.
A second feature of public order policing highlighted by the miners' strike was the use of èlite groups of police officers within each police force.
These groups are trained for a more aggressive role in crowd control, and represent a significant move away from the traditional approach to public order policing which was based on containment and the use of minimum force.
The modern origin of this approach is the Special Patrol Group (SPG) which was formed in London in 1965 to act as a mobile anti-crime group to help local police forces to deal with the rising rate of urban crime.
The SPG was, however, highly controversial and widely criticized for its behaviour at demonstrations in particular.
Indeed, in 1981, Lord Scarman expressed concern about ‘too inward-looking and self-conscious an esprit de corps developing in the Group’.
Nevertheless, the SPG still exists, albeit reorganized and with a new name (the Territorial Support Group).
Moreover, similar groups exist in the provinces, often bearing different names.
In Manchester, for example, a permanent Tactical Aid Group of seventy-four specially trained officers was set up in 1976.
Like the SPG, the TAGs have the reputation for robust policing at demonstrations.
In addition to these èlite groups, in both London and the provinces there exist Police Support Units of ordinary police officers who have had riot training and who may be pulled off normal duties to help with demonstrations and assemblies.
It is these PSUs which are now placed at the disposal of the NRC.
During the miners' strike, for example it appears that the NRC could deploy some 13,000 police officers in a total of 416 PSUs.
But the miners' strike did not only reveal that èlite groups of police officers were operating to some extent under national co-ordination and control.
Both the NRC and the SPG and its equivalents had been known about for some time.
More sensational was the information produced inadvertently about the Public Order Manual of Tactical Options and Related Matters, a document prepared by the Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO).
The techniques referred to in the revised manual appear to have been developed particularly after the inner-city riots of 1981.
The contents are secret and have been seen in their entirety by very few officers below the rank of Assistant Chief Constable.
(Even the Shadow Home Secretary has been denied access.)
Parts of the contents of the manual only came to light as a result of criminal trials following an incident at Orgreave during the strike, at which some of the techniques were implemented for the first time.
Defence barristers for people charged with riot asked police officers in court to justify their behaviour at Orgreave — the details of which had appeared on television screens across the country.
One of the police officers responded by referring to the ‘new manual’, parts of which were then read out in court.
The techniques it deals with appear to have been imported from Hong Kong.
There are references to long-shield formations, short-shield units, and horses.
The first are designed to present a formidable appearance in front of a crowd; the second are sent into a crowd to disperse and/or incapacitate people with truncheons; and the third are used to create a fear and scatter effect.
Not all of the manual has been disclosed or published, and it has been suggested that the unpublished parts cover the use of plastic bullets, CS gas, and other anti-crowd techniques (Northam, 1985).
Yet, as might be gathered from the secret nature of the procedures, none of this has any formal parliamentary approval, and there is no formal parliamentary accountability or scrutiny of these rather sinister developments.
So we see the emergence without any express authority of an ad hoc national police force, co-ordinating the use of highly trained riot police and operating aggressive and uncompromising new tactics.
The practical reality of modern police organization and its response bears absolutely no relation to the rather quaint legal structure within which the police are supposed to be contained.
This is not to deny that the opportunity has been made available to question these developments or to call a halt to them.
In R. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte Northumbria Police Authority , the police authority sought judicial review to compel the Home Secretary to withdraw a circular issuing plastic bullets and CS gas to local police forces.
The authority was opposed to the use of the equipment by its force and was ‘very concerned that such weapons should not be used to quell public demonstrations or riots because of the likelihood of serious personal injury or death thereby resulting to individuals’.
The application failed in the Court of Appeal.
There were two grounds.
First, it was unsuccessful on the correct interpretation of the relevant statute, the Police Act 1964.
This was surprising in view of the fact that, under this Act, it is the local authorities who are empowered to provide and maintain such buildings, vehicles, apparatus, and equipment as may be required for the police purposes of their area.
The Court of Appeal, however, upheld the Home Office argument that the local authorities did not have exclusive power in this respect.
Remarkably, the Court relied on section 41, which is concerned mainly with the provision by the Home Office of such things as police colleges and forensic science laboratories.
To say that this was creative statutory interpretation would be a gross understatement.
Yet this was not the only source of Home Office power to supply the hardware which the local police authority did not want to have.
The Court of Appeal also declared that the Crown had ‘a prerogative power to keep the peace’.
This power devolved to the Home Secretary who was entitled to ‘do all that [was]reasonably necessary to preserve the peace of the realm’.
This prerogative was exercisable in times of quiet as well as of emergency and it was in no way fettered or reduced by the enactment of legislation like the Police Act.
The power comes as something of a surprise.
The judges extrapolated it from the fact that constables hold office under the Crown and are sworn to keep the peace.
It does not feature in the textbooks on the subject (apart from a sentence in one book about which the judges made an immense fuss).
The cases relied upon were fairly eccentric, one a hitherto uncited judgment dating from 1855 and the other an obscure decision about the taxation of police stations in 1883.
Nourse LJ thought it worth mentioning Lord Blackburn's comment, based on Blackstone, that ‘the sheriff also was bound to raise the hue and cry, and call out the posse comitatus of the county whenever it was necessary for any police purposes; in so doing he was acting for the Crown’.
The fact that almost nobody had heard of this prerogative turned out to one of the judges to be a point in its favour:
I have already expressed the view that the scarcity of references in the books to the prerogative of keeping the peace within the realm does not disprove that it exists.
Rather it may point to an unspoken assumption that it does.
The supposed dogma that no new prerogatives may be created hardly matters when there are endless old ones such as this waiting to be discovered.
The problem now, of course, is to determine just how far it extends.
If there is no restriction on CS gas or plastic bullets (and by November 1987, twenty forces had been issued with plastic bullets), there is presumably no restriction on water cannon and live ammunition.
And all with the seal of judicial approval without any formal power granted by Parliament.
It is curious how easily we allow liberty to be eroded.
2.
The expanding frontiers of the law The Northumbria case shows just how flexible the law can be.
The success of the policing operation during the miners' strike was not due to new laws passed by Parliament to give the authorities greater powers.
No state of emergency was ever called.
Instead, the police relied upon the wide range of old laws that were already in place.
The scale of their utilization of traditional law was remarkable, both in the exploitation of the rules of criminal procedure and in the development of the pre-existing substantive law.
On the procedural side, 9,808 people were arrested in connection with the strike in England and Wales, but nearly one in five of these were not charged with any offence.
Of those who did eventually end up in court, the acquittal rate by March 1985 was 24 per cent(Wallington, 1985: 150).
In Scotland, 1,483 people were arrested and charged, but as many as 33 per cent of these were not proceeded against by the Procurator-fiscal.
In Strathclyde alone, nearly three out of every five cases were not pursued to court, a statistic which provides ‘considerable support for the view that a policy of mass arrests was pursued by the police in that area’(Wallington, 1985: 150).
Most of the charges in both jurisdictions were relatively minor.
The overwhelming majority of Scottish cases related to one of four offences: conduct likely or intended to cause a breach of the peace, obstruction of a police officer in the execution of his or her duty, criminal damage or breach of bail conditions (Wallington, 1985: 150).
The same four offences were prominent south of the border, though there the police revealed a propensity for more serious charges, including, by the end of the strike, 509 of unlawful assembly and 139 of riot.
(Many of these prosecutions were later to collapse.)
The authorities in England and Wales also brought over 600 charges under the Conspiracy and Protection of Property Act 1875 for ‘watching and besetting’ premises, including the homes of working miners; this was the first significant use of this section in living memory.
When cases came to court, the police often dropped charges in return for binding-over orders, issued under an even more ancient statute, the Justices of the Peace Act 1361.
This did not require proof of any wrongdoing and involved the defendant undertaking, on pain of a financial penalty, either to keep the peace or to be of good behaviour, depending on how the matter was treated by the magistrates.
During the strike, there were allegations that the police used binding-over orders in cases which they knew could never result in convictions but in which they wanted to avail themselves of the opportunity for the imposition of bail conditions which they knew such a charge would give them (Christian, 1985: 133).
Conditions on the granting of bail may be imposed by the magistrates' court on defendants against whom charges are pending.
During the strike, the police found them to be a useful device with which to restrict the freedom of movement of pickets.
This was so, despite the fact that many of the charges were minor and could not result in terms of imprisonment, and regardless of how the cases turned out if indeed they were ever proceeded with.
The conditions typically restricted the defendant to peaceful picketing at his or her usual place of employment, but they could be wider than this, embracing curfews and residency requirements such as the stipulation on one occasion that a defendant reside in Wick (Wallington, 1985: 156).
The effect of this policy has been described by one writer in the following terms:
The blanket imposition of bail conditions on striking miners had dramatic effects both on the individual concerned and on the ability of the N.U.M. to mount effective pickets.
A number of miners went to prison for breach of bail conditions….
At Mansfield a 20 year-old miner went to prison even though unconvicted of any offence for alleged breach of bail conditions.
Yet on both occasions he had been in the vicinity of his own pit; unsurprisingly because his house was only fifty yards from it.
His 17 year-old brother who was not a miner was also sent to prison after the police claimed that he would ‘support his brother’ if released.
Nearly two weeks later the police admitted that this was not sufficient reason for refusing bail.
Both brothers had never been in any kind of trouble before.
Their treatment caused three hundred miners to demonstrate spontaneously outside Lincoln Prison for their release.
Women too were imprisoned for breach of bail conditions.
One woman from Ollerton was imprisoned in Risley Remand Centre after joining a picket line in breach of a bail condition prohibiting her from doing so.
The conditional bail had been granted after she had been arrested for shouting ‘scab’ at working miners.
(Christian, 1985: 129)
Magistrates became so familiar with this procedure that, in some courts, the ‘usual conditions’ came to be attached to the granting of bail to striking miners in a way that seemed both autocratic and inevitable.
In Mansfield, for example, there were cases in which the clerk had put the conditions on the bail form even before the defendant's solicitor had concluded his application for unconditional bail.
The legality of such a procedure was upheld in the Divisional Court.
The Lord Chief Justice, Lord Lane, admitted that it did a bench of magistrates no ‘credit if their clerk continues to affix standard conditions to bail forms even while applications are being made for unconditional bail’.
However, the ‘fact that the outcome of the application was correctly anticipated [did]not vitiate the decision’.
The Bail Act 1976 required that each applicant for bail be individually assessed in order to ascertain whether there was a real risk of a further offence.
This reflected Parliament's concern that such persons, presumed still to be innocent of any crime, should be further deprived of their liberty only in narrow and defined circumstances.
The Divisional Court thought it ‘clear to everyone, and to the justices in particular, that any suggestion of peaceful picketing was a colourable pretence and that it was a question of picketing by intimidation and threat’.
The justices were, therefore, right to conclude that the conditions they imposed had been necessary and lawful.
Lord Lane did, however, express concern on behalf of the court that to some people, ‘putting into the dock together defendants who [had]been arrested on different occasions or at different places makes it difficult to avoid the appearance of ‘group justice’.
The practice was one ‘to be discouraged’, though the Court sympathized with the magistrates’‘uphill task of dealing with literally hundreds of cases over and above their normal list’.
The police did not only employ the law of criminal procedure in their tactical battle against the striking miners.
The vagueness of the substantive law also gave them opportunities.
Nowhere was this more clearly seen than in relation to their old power to do whatever was necessary to prevent reasonably anticipated breaches of the peace.
Wallington notes that road-blocks ‘were widely used, especially within and on access roads to Nottinghamshire, but also elsewhere — notably (for a few days in March 1984) at the south entrance to the Dartford tunnel.
In Nottinghamshire no less than 164,508 ‘presumed pickets’ were turned back during the first 27 weeks of the strike’(Wallington, 1985: 154).
Since the start of 1986, the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 has authorized ‘road checks’ under certain conditions.
During the strike, the policy was justified by reference first to a section in the Road Traffic Act 1972 which allows a police officer in uniform to stop vehicles and secondly to the common law breach of the peace power.
The police treated those who refused to turn back as being vulnerable to the charge of obstruction of the police in the execution of their duty, contrary to section 51(3) of the Police Act 1964.
This practice was upheld in the High Court, where Skinner J. accepted that, in the case before him, the police ‘honestly and reasonably form[ed] the opinion that there [was]a real risk of a breach of the peace in the sense that it [was]in close proximity both in place and time’.
This is despite the fact that according to the law report the police officers did not know to which specific pits the pickets were travelling and that some of the evidence of violence on which the police officers relied was that which they had gathered from press and television reports.
It is regrettable that the court in this case did not display any principled commitment to the idea of freedom of movement or evinced any anxiety that such an ancient liberty was being seriously eroded.
Instead, there was the now familiar preoccupation with the police officer's perception of impending violence.
This is all the more unrealistic in light of the fact that the judgment here was only theoretically that of the police officer ‘on the spot’.
In reality, road-blocking was part of a broad police strategy, decided upon at a high level, aimed at preventing ‘flying pickets’ travelling from county to county lending support to striking miners.
This is clear from the Attorney-General's statement in Parliament that the practice in its widest form was lawful: a curious (though not unprecedented) anticipation of a judicial decision by the Government's senior law officer and a member of the executive (Adeney and Lloyd, 1986: 104).
The affair thus highlights the unreality of the common-law rule which continues to concentrate on the independent judgment of a police officer who is in fact simply obeying instructions which are issued as part of a general policy not necessarily susceptible of being influenced by the specific facts of particular cases.
The affair also highlights the major lesson of the strike: the law was flexible enough, and the courts were deferential enough, to allow the police almost unrestrained freedom of manoeuvre.
Wallington (1985: 159) put it in the following way:
The police were given whatever resources they needed to preserve law and order and access to the pits.
This enabled them to make the choice to preserve order by containment or prevention of picketing.
With fewer resources it might in some cases have been necessary, and would certainly have been lawful, to preserve the peace by preventing individual returning miners from attempting to pass through picket lines.
Resources enabled a choice to be made as to whose activities were to be curtailed, even (certainly in the case of the operation of a blanket turn-back policy) whose lawful activities were to be curtailed.
Those critics of the police who argue that they took a partisan position can at least point to legal authority that would have justified a different approach.
It is scarcely conceivable in the political climate of the time that the alternative would have been adopted as a matter of policy, but that it was avoided at the cost of serious reductions in the level of policing in much of the country suggests a conscious choice.
The Public Order Act 1986
The policing of CND rallies and the miners' strike could hardly be said from the Government's point of view to have failed, and certainly the police did not suffer for want of legal powers.
Although some specific legislation was later to emerge, on free speech in the universities and football identity cards, for example, the breadth of what was already in place made complaints about the inadequacy of the law difficult to sustain.
Thus, during the disorder of the first part of the 1980s, the authorities utilized the 1936 Act procedure to ban many more marches than they had done before: in 1981 alone, there were 42 banning orders, and the figures for the following years were also high: 13, 9, and 11 in 1982, 1983, and 1984 respectively (Home Office, 1985b: 23).
A government review ‘revealed no yawning gaps’ and admitted that no ‘amount of tightening of the law, short of draconian measures which would be quite unacceptable, can guarantee the prevention of all disorder’.
The problem confronting the police when disorder had broken out was ‘essentially one of enforcement’(Home Office, 1985b: 2).
If anything, the problem after the miners' strike was that, in a fast-moving sequence of events, the police had accumulated altogether too much power.
1.
The use and refinement of existing powers The legal and operational precedents set by the strike were being followed and expanded by the police almost as soon as the dispute was over.
In particular, there have been several complaints of heavy-handed policing of demonstrations, of which three examples may be given here.
The first two relate to students.
In 1985 considerable disquiet was caused by the methods used by Greater Manchester Police to deal with protesters during the visit of the then Home Secretary, Leon Brittan, to Manchester University.
The way in which the police had cleared a way through to the front door of the building at which Mr Brittan was to speak was particularly controversial.
The local City Council set up a committee of inquiry to investigate the policing arrangements for the visit and complaints were made to the Police Complaints Authority.
A student protest against education loans which took place three years later in central London also ran into trouble.
Of the 17,000 demonstrators involved, 1,000 broke away from the agreed route of the march and gathered on the south side of Westminster Bridge, where they were prevented from crossing by a large group of officers.
After a couple of hours, during which some sticks and other items were thrown at the police and insults were shouted, a mounted police line was drawn up behind the police cordon and a row of police vans.
On command, the vans raced to the side of the road, the cordon parted, and the demonstrators found themselves facing a mounted police charge at full gallop.
The protesters scattered and a number, estimated by the National Union of Students at over 100, were injured.
At least 69 arrests were made, and charges were brought against 50 of these.
The alleged offences included one of riot and another of ‘assaulting a police horse’.
The total police strength on the day was: 36 police vans, 1,500 officers, 2 boats, 1 helicopter, and 47 horses.
The Home Secretary described the dispersal of the crowd by mounted officers as ‘a controlled action…not a charge’.
A major and long-running source of disorder since the conclusion of the miners' strike was the industrial dispute with Mr Rupert Murdoch's News International Group, centred on its new printing plant at Wapping in East London.
During a demonstration to mark the first anniversary of the group's move to its new location, 300 people, including over 160 police officers, were injured in battles between 1,400 police and at least 7,000 demonstrators.
A number of police officers face charges relating to their alleged misbehaviour on that night, after complaints involving more than 100 officers were referred to the Police Complaints Authority.
At the time of writing, the first batch of prosecutions had collapsed in the magistrates' court, on account of the long delay in launching the prosecutions against those involved.
Many police officers were angry that the cases had been brought at all, since the methods employed by the defendant constables were said to have involved no more than what was set out in the Home Office-approved Tactical Options Manual.
One police spokesman was reported as saying shortly after the hearings that ‘complaints were inevitable when officers ‘got involved’ with demonstrators’.
Apart from these changes in police tactics, some of the new legal powers of the police which emerged during the miners, strike have been developed in interesting ways.
We have already seen how the road-blocking and binding-over powers were employed against protesters at RAF Molesworth in 1985.
According to press reports, road-blocking now plays a regular part in police efforts to control the movement of fans on their way to football matches.
The power is often used in Northern Ireland.
On one occasion, the RUC stopped a bus containing members of a Protestant apprentice boys band, 30 miles from the largely Catholic town where it was their intention to march.
After confiscating their musical instruments, the police allowed them to proceed and they went on to parade — much more quietly than they would have liked.
The action of the RUC was upheld in court.
Even though the fear of violence may have been justified in this case, the 30-mile zone and the fact that the disorder was expected to emanate from other than the marchers make the implications of the case disturbing, even in the context of Northern Ireland.
Bail conditions appear also to have become a standard practice in public order cases.
Animal rights activists have been bailed on condition that they do not attend any hunt meetings in England or Wales.
In a letter to the Independent , a representative of the Irish Freedom Movement alleged that, at the annual anti-internment march in London on 6 August 1988, there were over thirty arrests, with the charges ranging from threatening behaviour to affray and some accused being ‘granted bail only on condition that they did not attend political meetings or marches’.
Quite apart from the development of new police tactics and the emergence of new common-law public order powers, the open-ended and vague nature of the traditional law has continued the erratic erosion of freedom for those whose views, attitudes, or behaviour is out of the mainstream.
Occasional evidence of this percolates through into the newspapers and, now and again, the law reports.
Thus, in November 1987, twenty-six Greenpeace supporters were arrested outside a conference on North Sea pollution in London; their alleged offence was obstruction of the highway.
Amongst those detained was a Belgian Member of the European Parliament who had earlier disclosed to the newspapers plans for a 3 km-wide ‘waste island’ off Zeebrugge.
In a reported case the same year, Lorraine Agu and Malcolm Hirst were members of a group of animal rights supporters who were demonstrating slogans and distributing leaflets about animal rights on a spacious pedestrian precinct in Bradford.
This activity was close to a couple of shops which sold animal furs.
The police arrested Agu and four others for conduct likely to cause a breach of the peace.
When Hirst and another four members of the group protested to the police about this, they too were arrested, for conduct likely to breach the peace and for obstruction.
The reported facts of the case reveal no hint of any threat to the peace.
Agu and Hirst were later charged with obstruction of the highway, and the breach of the peace allegation, which was the basis of Agu's arrest, was quietly forgotten.
They were convicted in the magistrates' court, but appealed successfully to the Divisional Court on the ground that the question whether their obstruction had been reasonable had not been adequately considered.
This case provides a rare glimpse into police practice and raises serious questions about the use made by the police of their arrest powers.
It also suggests the possibility that demonstrators fall foul of the law in the magistrates' court in ways which may never afterwards be given thoughtful re-examination at a more senior judicial level.
The vast majority of defendants, even politically motivated ones, have not the energy, and may not have the means, to launch long and expensive appeals.
In one extraordinary case in 1987, the defendant was charged and convicted of an offence, called abusing a constable in the execution of his office, contrary to the Justices of the Peace Act 1361.
Legal aid to appeal was denied.
Counsel took the case on for nothing and, on appeal, the Divisional Court found that the crime did not exist.
How many unlucky convicts lack the services of a generous counsel?
Yet this has not been the only old law turned to by the police.
An ominous dimension in recent years has been the use of public order legislation as a means with which to repress the expression of sexual preferences.
In a recent case, section 54(13) of the Metropolitan Police Act 1839 was used successfully against two men who were kissing and cuddling at a bus stop in Oxford Street at 1.55 a.m.
Their amorous activity attracted the attention of two passing couples and the two males in this group were beginning to respond in an ugly way when the police arrived.
The two male lovers were arrested and their convictions were upheld in the High Court.
Their conduct amounted to insulting behaviour (it insulted the women!) which may have occasioned a breach of the peace (the partners of the women might have beaten up the two male lovers).