

Transsexualism and Single-sex Marriage
‘We all know when someone has died, it is perfectly obvious.’
‘We all know whether someone is a man or a woman.
How can there be any doubt?’
Such certainty is reassuring.
Some things may change, but at least fundamental truths remain.
They are, after all, laid down by Nature.
The chink in this otherwise disarming argument is that Nature exists only to the extent that we comprehend it.
Our comprehension, however, based as it is on observation, intuition, and guesswork is always only partial.
From time to time evidence appears which challenges received notions of the truth.
It is received with fear; for it threatens that comforting security and certainty which hitherto have shaped our actions.
It is denounced, and scorn and more is poured on its protagonists.
But ineluctably it gains acceptance.
It infiltrates our conception of things, sometimes slowly, sometimes with dramatic rapidity.
A further dimension is added to our understanding.
In this way there are always fundamentals, but they may change.
Until very recently, death was an issue which we could be certain about.
No doubts existed as to our comprehension of it.
It could be recognized with ease, and the criteria for its presence were precise and immutable.
Then suddenly (in historical terms) this traditional conception was challenged.
A hitherto unthinkable question was asked: ‘What is death?’
The dramatic development of transplant surgery brought this issue out of the restrained polemics of academia into the hurly-burly of public discussion.
No final answers have yet appeared.
All that is certain is that the old certainty no longer exists.
The purpose of this paper is to examine a similar issue, the nature of sex determination, and the implications which attend a rethinking of the old certainties.
What, it may be asked, has this to do with the law?
Is it not a matter for scientists?
The law and legal rules incorporate and build upon perceptions of reality.
Of themselves, of course, the rules are normative, and their validity is thus unaffected by issues of fact.
But since they operate in a real world, their force and the respect they can command depends to a very considerable extent on the degree to which they take account of the real world.
Equally, concepts, the stuff of rules, cannot exist in a vacuum as mere semantic toys.
They represent conclusions of social policy.
Thus, to retain their value, they must be seen not as rigid dogma, but as sufficiently flexible to accommodate a changing social scene.
The concept of sex, its nature and quality, is currently under systematic and meticulous examination by medical scientists.
The old verities are being challenged.
Questions such as: what is a man? what are the essential criteria for determining sex? are being asked.
They would not have been contemplated just a few years ago.
Whenever an issue arises which turns on sex determination, the law (what is really meant is those who make the law) is asked to rethink a classification system.
The position is put that the existing system (here the method of dividing people into one or the other sex) produces unfortunate consequences and should be abandoned.
Recourse is had to the growing body of scientific knowledge to demonstrate that the traditional classification no longer reflects the external realities of life.
But, of itself, such empirical evidence does not compel the abandonment of the classification.
For classifications involve considerations of reason and policy over and above mere empirical data.
Instead, the more legitimate approach is to demand that those who maintain the existing system in the face of scientific development must justify their position by pointing to these considerations of reason and policy.
This will be a recurring theme in the paper.
To this demand, at least two responses can be made.
Scientific development can be taken as an overwhelming criterion for reclassification, with a consequent rethinking of legal rules and concepts.
That this will bring doubt and uncertainty, at least temporarily, is undeniable.
It may also bring in its wake the danger of a too-ready acceptance of that which is not yet proven.
But the ultimate dividends in terms of continued responsiveness to a changing world are considerable.
Alternatively, the rule-makers can set their faces against the pressures for change.
They can prefer the certainty and security offered by rigid rules.
They can find their justice in what has always been decided.
But their reasons will have to be good!
The dilemma of sex determination may at first seem to be far removed from the real business of the legal world.
But the recently decided case of Corbett v.
Corbett explodes this myth.
That there is a real and pressing problem was made clear by that case.
What was made equally clear was that a solution which is realistic, lasting, and just is still awaited.
Since the case, the Law Commissioners have considered the matter and dismissed it in terms which raised doubts as to whether the full implications of the issues were understood.
The House of Commons saw fit to incorporate a provision in the recent Nullity of Marriage Act to deal with the problems raised.
An issue with real social ramifications does exist.
But the particular circumstances of Corbett are not the only, or the real, problem.
What are equally challenging and will be considered here are some of the wider issues implicit in the case.
What did Corbett v.
Corbett decide?
In short compass, it was held that someone who by reference to purely biological criteria is undoubtedly of the male sex at birth remains a male, notwithstanding a diagnosis of transsexualism, medical and surgical intervention to alter external sexual characteristics, and adoption of a female role or gender identity.
Second, the court held that marriage as an institution is, by definition, the association of someone of the male sex with someone of the female sex, gender having no relevance.
From these two premisses, the judge proceeded to find that there was no marriage between April Ashley, the surgically operated transsexual who led the life, quite successfully, of a female, and Mr Corbett.
Both of these premisses warrant careful examination.
My own position is that the first finding of the judge, that April Ashley was a male, was in the light of available information unfortunate and unnecessarily conservative.
I will go on to argue that the finding as to‘maleness’, though regrettable, should not have precluded a finding that there was a marriage.
I shall suggest, in other words, that marriage as a legal institution implying certain mutual rights and obligation is capable of being extended, and should be extended, to cover single-sex relationships.
Traditional wisdom has it that there are two sexes.
Every human being belongs to one sex or the other, the two categories existing as separate, mutually exclusive units.
Contemporary opinion, however, has moved towards the view that there exists, even on the physiological plane, a spectrum of sexuality, ranging from the definite, polar positions of male and female through a whole series of indeterminate conditions where one sex prevails but coexists with features of the other, or where neither sex prevails and the individual is either of both sexes or no sex.
Rapid and dramatic developments in the medical sciences, particularly in the area of biochemistry and genetics, have demonstrated that the previous certainty which surrounded thinking in this area is an illusion.
New attitudes need to be forged in the light of the evidence which has been gathered.
The criteria of sex are, we learn, many; and none of them itself is definitive.
Decisions as to sex may depend in difficult cases on following a preponderance of factors and ignoring or correcting inconvenient anomalies.
This area is further complicated by the dilemma concerning the importance which should be attributed to factors which are not physiological, but psychological.
For psychologists would rate as a very important factor in sex determination the role a person plays and seeks to play, and the image that the person may have as regards the sex he or she belongs to.
Put shortly, they urge that sexuality is a combination of sex and gender.
They point to the existence of abnormal psychological conditions which demonstrate varying degrees of ambivalence towards the apparent biological sex, showing itself in deviant patterns of behaviour or dress.
These anomalies are separate from those the root of which is biological, for they are found in individuals who are otherwise without doubt members of one sex according to biological criteria.
The most extreme of these psychological disturbances is transsexualism.
The transsexual is one who utterly and completely rejects his biological sex, seeing personal fulfilment and even survival as possible only through the assumption in as complete a way as possible of the sex to which he feels he really belongs.
The classic phrase which describes the plight of the transsexual is that ‘he feels he is a woman locked in a man's body’.
All his energies are directed towards correcting what he sees as a tragic natural mistake.
What is involved here is, in effect, a direct and apparently irreconcilable clash between sex and gender identity, as to which should determine the sexual profile of the individual.
In the foregoing paragraph the pronoun ‘he’ was used, but of course with intent to include,mutatis mutandis , the female.
For convenience throughout this paper, I shall speak of male-to-female transsexuals.
They occur more commonly, and surgery is more frequently practised upon them; but what I say is of equal relevance to female-to-male transsexuals.
Also, I shall use the words ‘he’ and ‘she’in describing the male transsexual as it appears appropriate in the context.
There still exists some considerable division of opinion among psychologists and psychiatrists as to the most appropriate form of therapy for transsexuals.
Though transsexuals are a rare phenomenon, much attention has been focused on them, not only because of the difficulties encountered in treating them, but also because of the insight a study of their condition may offer into the wider problems of sex determination and gender identity.
As the trend in medical thinking has moved towards the view that surgery in conjunction with hormone treatment is a valid form of treatment, particularly as psychotherapy seems to produce no benefits at all, a growing number of legal problems have emerged.
For the surgery being considered here, often called ‘conversion surgery’, involves one or more of several procedures which aim to transform as far as is possible the subject's anatomy so that it approximates that of a member of the preferred sex.
Needless to say, it is irreversible.
Not all transsexuals undergo surgical treatment, though the number of such operations performed may well rise steadily as the problem of transsexualism gains more attention and becomes more visible, and as clinics are established specializing in treatment and research.
For the most part, I will concentrate in this first section on the legal problems facing the transsexual contemplating surgery.
The question here is simply whether the operation itself is lawful.
It could be argued that the surgeon could face both criminal and civil liability.
Under the criminal law, the position is by no means clear.
Without going into the question in detail, I would submit that the operation is lawful if performed by experienced practitioners after very intensive investigation of the mental condition of the patient and the conclusion that there is at least some risk of harm to the patient if surgery is not performed.
The civil law position is less problematical.
The situation at present is still that any operation performed by a surgeon is, prima facie, a battery rendered lawful by the consent of the patient.
Perhaps this is not the place to repeat the plea made elsewhere that such a legal approach to standard medical procedure is somewhat barbaric.
It could well and easily be replaced by a doctrine which has it that the surgeon's act carries liability only if good faith and due care and skill can be shown to be lacking.
There is no doubt that, superficially at least, the transsexual consents, is indeed very anxious that surgery be carried out.
But is the consent valid, coming as it does from someone who is under severe mental stress?
Further, the law requires that the consent be informed, and whatever that may mean, it certainly raises questions about whether the transsexual is fully able to comprehend the implications of surgery, both because of the uncertainty always contingent upon such an operation, and also because of the supervening anxiety which operates to play down, at least before surgery, any consequences which may be inconvenient.
Basically these problems attend many surgical operations, and the question resolves itself into whether the transsexual should be allowed to consent ; whether, in other words, the state has an interest in striking out such consent, and thereby rendering the surgeon who goes ahead liable in tort, on the ground that he cannot rely on such consent.
If the matter is dealt with purely on the basis of the doctrine of consent, then I submit that there is no room here for invalidating the transsexual's consent.
While the courts should not be slow to protect the unwary from possible error, the transsexual is usually well able to understand what is involved in surgery, and is usually operated on only after careful screening.
If these factors were absent, the question would be more difficult.
If the law concerned itself instead with the good faith of the doctor, consent would be only one of several relevant criteria.
On this view, a doctor could avoid liability only if he could show that, apart from consenting, the patient was carefully studied and examined in a context where specialist medical and psychiatric facilities were available, that the consensus of expert opinion was that surgery was called for, and that this was explained to and understood by the patient before he gave his consent.
The next set of legal problems which falls for discussion concerns the situation of the transsexual once operated upon.
The desire to pass as a member of the preferred sex has been in part satisfied by surgery.
The person who emerges from such treatment is usually superficially, and often on close examination, convincing in the new sex role.
What is still required, however, is recognition of the ‘changed’ sex by ‘officialdom’.
For it cannot be emphasized too much that the transsexual, even after conversion surgery, continually seeks reassurance that she is now accepted in her new sex role.
It follows that this quest for reassurance will cause her to seek out situations in which some sort of official sanction will be given to her change.
In other words, two forces operate to raise the problems to be discussed: first, the natural desire to avoid awkward, embarrassing, or unmanageable social situations, situations which challenge the perception of the new role; and second, the almost perverse and in a way contradictory claim to be accepted totally and without reservation.
The question which serves as a starting-point is why there should be legal obstacles to the recognition of the transsexual's change.
What business is it of the State if someone now wishes to be known as a woman, where previously she was considered a man?
Obviously the State has an interest in regulating the behaviour of its citizens.
So, equally obviously, the question becomes, what disruption to normal regulation would be caused by recognizing the change, always bearing in mind the rarity of the situation, and that even if some disruption were shown, it might not be sufficiently serious to warrant withholding recognition?
Recognition can operate at various levels.
Mere documentation of the new identity may be sought through changes in various papers.
Further, some of the privileges incident to membership of the new sex may be sought.
These privileges may range from the relatively inconspicuous one of being treated differently for insurance purposes to the ultimate extreme of contracting a ‘marriage with a member of the opposite sex’— opposite, that is, to the adopted one.
To the layman, logic might seem to compel that acceptance by the State of a person as a female for one purpose or at one level would necessarily mean acceptance of the person as a female for all purposes, on the simple reasoning that acceptance means what it says.
This, indeed, was the view taken by counsel for Miss Ashley.
But the law has never felt obliged to follow such rational simplicity if there are good reasons for doing otherwise.
The reasons advanced in Corbett therefore become critical.
Ormrod J., noting that this was ‘the first occasion on which a Court in England has been called on to decide the sex of an individual’, felt constrained to find that ‘legal relations can be classified into those in which the sex of the individuals concerned is either irrelevant, relevant or an essential determinant of the nature of the relationship.’
Whatever view is taken of this analysis, and it will be discussed more fully below, it seems to state quite clearly that the determination of sex is a matter for lawyers and courts; that the law, in other words, must establish methods for determining sex which may or may not correspond to medical opinion.
That the court is entitled to establish its own classification system has been seen already.
But it has been further seen that strong justification is needed for adopting a system at variance with prevailing medical views.
How does Ormrod J. justify his decision?
He sets down some, though not all, of the medical criteria for determining sex, and resolves that these criteria, while relevant, ‘do not necessarily decide the legal basis of sex determination’.
Fundamentally, therefore, he implies that other factors, or criteria, are of heavier weight in making the classification.
But then he proceeds to limit his enquiry to the medical criteria put before him.
In other words, rather than introducing other, more persuasive factors, he merely sets up the court as the arbiter of a medical issue, and decides that, of all the criteria involved, the crucial ones for determining how the individual is to be regarded by the law are the biological criteria.
Psychological criteria are thus given no weight, despite the fact that the medical evidence is that where the two sets of criteria clash, the only effective treatment is to try to reconcile the clash in favour of the psychological.
Ormrod J., in ignoring the psyche of the individual, seems to assume that the distinction between the criteria is effectively one between what is ordained (biological) and what is chosen (psychological).
But this overlooks two points: first, that the transsexual is living proof that, in actuality, the psyche may operate in defiance of biological truths regardless of what the law says it should do; second, that the psyche is not necessarily formed by choice, but may instead be determined for the individual by forces operating on him during its development.
The judge, therefore, sets up a legal scale for weighing the relative importance of solely medical criteria, without giving any justification for his choice, without advancing sound non-medical criteria, and despite the fact that expert opinion would have him avoid such an inflexible position.
Surely if the courts and lawyers limit themselves to medical criteria as justifying their sex classification system, they must follow expert opinion.
There are, of course, instances in other areas of the law where such opinion is ignored, and where one searches in vain for a reasoned articulation of justification based on sound policy, but they usually serve as food for the argument that in so doing the law becomes an ass.
What possible sense can there be in a legal rule, for example, which has it that a woman is presumed fertile even though she is past menopause or has undergone a hysterectomy operation?
The area of medical jurisprudence is replete with such absurdities, which date from an earlier age when superstition was a substitute for knowledge.
Attention should surely be directed towards eliminating such anomalies, rather than entrenching them further into the law.
The assertion that the courts are now in the business of adjudicating on the complex issue of sex is not a happy development towards this goal.
For the courts to take upon themselves the task of making this determination is a stultifying, even a discrediting, exercise.
This is not the same situation as in those areas of the law where there are medical concepts which are not in fact accepted without further refinement by courts; the notion of what constitutes therapy is such an issue, as are, for example, the concepts of insanity and paternity.
Here the courts see themselves as charged with evaluating such concepts further and, when necessary, imposing their own views.
The justification advanced — and clearly it has some validity — is that medical opinion is divided, or, more important, that the legal concept is of a different nature from the medical, involving considerations other than the mere question of scientific evidence, such as notions of responsibility or the common good.
In this way, the legal view of insanity really becomes a view regarding whether someone should be held responsible.
If the term ‘insanity’ were not used, this would be more obvious; for it would show that the purely medical issue of insanity was only one factor involved in the legal determination.
So, the wheel turns full circle, and the question is again asked, if there is a medical view regarding the determination of sex, what arguments exist for having a legal concept which coexists, but is not coextensive?
The answer seems to hinge on the analysis of Ormrod J. mentioned above.
In situations where sex is not an ‘essential determinant’ of a legal relationship, he appears to see no reason for denying recognition of the transsexual's change.
To this extent, then, he finds that the law will go along with the medical determination.
As this medical view is based fundamentally on the gender identity and self-image of the transsexual, he implies that the law is prepared to concede that in most circumstances sex determination is a matter for the individual.
But, as will be seen shortly, this individual freedom has limits.
This means, then, that the transsexual may obtain the necessary documentation of the new sex, and in many ways carry on as ‘normal’ a life as possible in the new role.
As was pointed out in the judgment, ‘In some contractual relationships, for example life assurance and pensions schemes — some aspects of the law regulating conditions of employment, and…various state-run schemes such as national insurance’, 35 it is ultimately a matter for the parties concerned whether the individual should be treated as a man or a woman.
Miss Ashley had in fact, except as regards changing her birth certificate, overcome all these obstacles to acceptance.
But the one type of legal relationship closed to her is that in which sex is an ‘essential determinant’.
In these cases, the individual cannot have his way.
Here, according to Ormrod J., the law recognizes a need to impose its own classification and ignore the weight of medical opinion.
The examples of such ‘relationships’ mentioned in the case are certain sexual offences, adultery, and marriage.
Now the criminal law makes heavy weather of the issue of sex change only if over-rigid conceptualism is maintained and common sense abandoned.
It makes no sense at all to tell an attractive transsexual employed as a secretary, possessed of all the necessary documentation of her sex change and all the physical attributes of her new sex — breasts, female figure, and vagina (albeit a constructed one)— that she can pass as a woman, but cannot be raped because she is a man.
A criminal court which admitted such a defence would never hear the end of it.
Equally, common sense demands that the operated transsexual should not be able to avoid prosecution and conviction for soliciting or importuning, as the case may be, by suddenly adopting for the duration of the trial the prior and now abandoned sex.
The issues become more difficult, however, and more difficult to approach free from emotional bias, when the real problem, that of marriage, is considered.
Since marriage is essentially a relationship between man and woman, the validity of the marriage depends…on whether the respondent [Miss Ashley]is or is not a woman…
. The question then becomes what is meant by the word ‘woman’ in the single context of marriage, for I am not concerned to determine the ‘legal sex’of the respondent at large.
Since marriage has an ‘essentially heterosexual character’, the criteria used to assess ‘womanhood’ must, Ormrod J. asserts, be biological .
For, he reasons, only a biological female ‘is naturally capable of performing the essential role of a woman in marriage’.
Besides begging the whole question by using the word ‘heterosexual’, the tautology of this explanation is striking.
All that Ormrod J. is in fact saying is that there has to be a woman in a marriage, because someone has to perform the essential role of a woman in the marriage, and this essential role is to be a woman, biologically so determined.
This may be a valid conclusion.
Its validity becomes somewhat suspect, however, if the foundation on which Ormrod J. rests his conclusion is examined.
Sex is clearly an essential determinant of the relationship called marriage, because it is and always has been recognized as the union of man and woman.
It is the institution on which the family is built, and in which the capacity for natural heterosexual intercourse is an essential element.
It has, of course, many other characteristics, of which companionship and mutual support is an important one, but the characteristics which distinguish it from all other relationships can only be met by two persons of the opposite sex.
This is a transparently ‘essentialist’ approach.
Ormrod J. purports to identify the essence of marriage as a ‘relationship between man and woman'; but to meet the problems implicit in this idea, he must go further and define it in terms of the capacity for ‘natural heterosexual intercourse’.
If the whole of his decision and,ex hypothesi the whole nature of marriage rests on this thesis, then indeed a fragile edifice has been constructed.
For what becomes of the marriage between two 70-year-olds seeking companionship but with no thoughts of sexual intercourse, let alone family?
Is it crucial that they still have the capacity for intercourse?
What if the ageing man has in fact lost such capacity?
What of a marriage of a male severely disfigured and without genitalia as a result of war or an accident?
What of a marriage where the parties, though young, want no family and do not engage in intercourse?
The logic of Ormrod J.'s decision must cause us to say that the male in these examples is no longer able to perform the essential role of a male — that is, assert his biological maleness — and is not, therefore, a male for the purposes of marriage, and that therefore there is no marriage.
Admittedly the examples all relate to men, since it is easier to imagine ways in which a male may lose the ‘capacity’ for intercourse but what is sauce for the goose must be sauce for the gander.
If this is the justification we seek for abandoning medical sex classification and resorting to a legal method, then it cannot defend itself from reproach.
Yet Ormrod J. follows his own logic to conclude that April Ashley, in purely biological terms, is not a woman; yet biological terms are all that count, because there has to be someone who can perform the essential role of a woman (remember, the essential role is to be a woman, since marriage is the relationship between a man and a woman): therefore, for marriage purposes, April Ashley by law is a man, and there is no marriage.45 No way out of this particular self-made legal thicket is provided, unfortunately, by an amendment to the Nullity of Marriages Act, passed into law as section l(c).
In that section, it is provided that a marriage is void if ‘the parties are not respectively male and female’.
This amendment was proposed and incorporated into the Act as a direct result of the decision in Corbett .
Its principal avowed aim was to give legislative form to the decision, contrary to the recommendation of the Law Commission, 46 and thereby allow the parties in these ‘tragic cases’ the dignity of a decree of nullity so that, if thought fit, provision for ancillary relief could be made by the court, and the unsavoury examination of their sexuality, rendered necessary if the only recourse were a declaration of status, could be avoided.
But the subsection tantalizingly offers more than it gives.
The ‘neutral’ terms of ‘male’and ‘female’are used.
The justification for this was expressed to be that it would thus be open to a court at a later date to review the matter of sex determination Ormrod J.'s decision, much cited and approved of in the House of Commons debate, evidently will remain the law.
Instead, the following submission may be advanced.
First, April Ashley should have been recognized as a female.
This would have involved giving the criterion of gender identity precedence over physiological criteria.
Since this is the rationale behind treatment of the operated transsexual — namely, causing the physiological profile to conform as much as possible to the gender identity — it is not of itself outrageous.
Second, the union of two people who have the same biological sex, but one of whom is an operated transsexual with a female gender identity should be recognized as a marriage.
Section l(c) of the Nullity of Marriage Act should, therefore, either be repealed or be given the wide, radical, but unintended, interpretation outlined above.
Immediately, problems present themselves to the fertile legal mind, and the final part of this paper will concentrate on exploring the implications of this submission.
The first and most obvious question which can be asked is, why call the union between a man and an operated transsexual a ‘marriage'?
The question as to what is involved in the marriage relationship deserves a study in itself.
Reasons of space alone demand that what may appear to be a contentious response to this question be suggested, rather than developed.
First, marriage as a legal institution developed, I submit, as an essential legal first step towards amassing wealth and power by uniting partners with these attributes and endowing with legitimacy their heirs so as to guarantee inheritance according to articulated and certain principles.
In other words, doubts as to the proper division of property at death, as well as rights between living partners, were resolved by having legal rules prescribing a formula, but only applying within the context of a sanctioned, and thereby state-controlled, relationship.
Side by side with such unions existed, and still exist, unions not sanctioned by law.
It is not a coincidence that these unions are most common among the poor, for what do they care about legitimacy and inheritance? 53 Besides this materialist aspect, marriage in Western society developed a complex overlay of social connotations.
These involve the intangible, yet very real, personal and spiritual qualities the institution has come to represent.
For it has come to pass that through marriage certain feelings are communicated by the partners to each other and, more important, to society at large.
By going through a particular formality, a qualitatively different posture is presented by the parties.
They represent to the world that theirs is a relationship based on strong human emotions, exclusive commitment to each other, and permanence.
Put another way, they wish to say, and indeed advertise, that there is nothing transient, superficial, or casual in the way they view each other and wish to be viewed .
The world is invited to see their relationship in a very special way.
The crucial importance of this point will be seen later.
Only two developments are worthy of note, both of which serve to substantiate further the notion of the institution as formalizing and legitimizing property arrangements: first, the gradual recognition of the right to end the relationship (with greater ease as social mobility increases and old class structures requiring protection of their pedigree collapse) on the condition that the more vulnerable party economically be protected; and the corollary idea that, given the possibility of separation and divorce, while the relationship subsists, certain mutual rights of support exist for the partners.
This overall picture of the marriage relationship would not be complete, however, without some reference to its role as a device imposing ‘decency and respectability’ by regulating ‘indiscriminate child-bearing’.
Intercourse, since it usually produced offspring, was only to be tolerated in a controlled and formalized context.
Clearly, this policing role, giving legal form to religious doctrine, and generally making for an ordered and ‘tidy’ society, was never successfully performed.
Changes in the values of society, the status of illegitimates, and the advent of reliable birth-control devices robbed the institution of marriage of much of its regulatory quality in the area of sexual behaviour.
If this analysis of marriage, though no doubt over-simple and lacking subtlety, has some validity, then an argument clearly exists for extending it to relationships previously outside its scope.
For other types of relationship do exist in which the parties may desire the system of rights and duties which flow from the legal concept of marriage, while — and this is a critical point — the common law is singularly lacking in alternative forms of institutionalized and legitimate union.
If marriage exists to create some kind of secure relationship, from which flow mutual rights and expectations, and to provide a stable environment for raising children, if there be any, but is not predicated solely on the opportunity for intercourse, then it can legitimately be extended to cover the union of two persons, one of whom is an operated transsexual.
Instability, with its consequent social and personal price, haunts the lives of the socially abnormal.
The pressures and prejudices which attend their activities and relationships only exacerbate their instability.
To offer a means of institutionalizing their relationships (which, if given the opportunity, would perhaps be as stable as the average ‘normal’ modern marriage), thereby guaranteeing some rights of continued support between the parties, would thus serve as a valuable method of ameliorating a particular social ill.
Children would not be a natural product of such a union, so that objections directed at the welfare and support of a family would not apply.
The issue has been considered so far in the narrow context of a union between an operated transsexual and another.
Such unions are so rare that, of course, they pose no real problem or threat for the legal system.
Clearly the real difficulties begin, and the issue becomes of real concern, when the argument so far advanced is taken further.
If the skeletal analysis of marriage proposed above is accepted, why should relationships between unoperated transsexuals and others be excluded?
More fundamental, and not to be avoided, is the question of whether homosexual unions should be excluded.
This, a particularly wide and extraordinarily far-reaching implication, obviously lurks within the interstices of the decision in Corbett Ormrod J. was no doubt acutely aware of what a decision in favour of Miss Ashley could be construed as meaning, even if in fact it were limited, it can be on the arguments advanced above, to its particular and very u usual facts.
The classic common-law dilemma presented itself.
A hard case calls for decision.
But, in a precedent system, any decision becomes a springboard for further litigation.
The lid of Pandora's box could be wrenched off or tightly sat upon.
To decide for Miss Ashley in this context could be, therefore, to question a vast area of social values and philosophy.
It is little wonder that Ormrod J. considered this the task of others in other places, and chose to sit firmly on the lid.
Let us examine first the situation of the unoperated transsexual.
He may have received psychotherapy, but has not yet undergone conversion surgery even if he is contemplating it.
First of all, the problem exists of determining whether in fact the ‘condition’ of transsexualism exists.
If it does not, and the person is merely displaying sexual ambivalence short of transsexualism, then the issue is really one of giving recognition to what amounts to a homosexual union, and will be discussed below.
The second difficulty involves the question of fraud.
This is a problem whether the transsexual is operated on or not, but is seen in greater relief if he is not.
The possibility exists of a friendship developing between a transsexual and someone else, which eventually leads to thoughts of marriage.
Even in these days of permissiveness, it may be that the one party has not had, or has been denied, the opportunity of discovering the anatomical characteristics of the other.
It is not difficult to imagine the shock which would attend such discovery after being deceived into marriage.
In the case of the operated transsexual, the discovery may never be made.
If this possibility of fraud is not to be an insurmountable barrier to recognizing such unions as marriages, what is the solution?
Any purported marriage contracted in a context of improperly gained consent is, since the Nullity of Marriages Act 1971, voidable.
The party thus deceived would therefore be able subsequently to avoid the marriage.
Is this enough, particularly in the case of the operated transsexual, remembering that proceedings for a decree of nullity must now be instituted within three years of the date of the marriage?
There is no denying that this is a severe problem.
But it must be addressed.
Let me repeat the thesis being developed: namely, that marriage as an institution should be extended, on the basis of the argument presented, not only to the transsexual, but also to homosexual unions.
If it is conceded that the really explosive issue concerns the homosexual, and that the situation of the transsexual is a rare phenomenon, then difficulties which arise within that spectrum of rarity should not be allowed to defeat the whole force of the thesis.
The following therefore is suggested.
It is in the nature of a marriage relationship that partners once married discover things about each other that were previously unnoticed or concealed.
No partner has a guarantee that the other will turn out exactly as he or she would wish.
Therefore, in the unlikely event that a ceremony of marriage is performed between an unoperated transsexual and someone who is unaware of the partner's condition, the remedy of a petition for nullity must suffice, grounded on the fact that the marriage is voidable because of the fraud of the other and the consequent lack of valid consent of the innocent party.
This would mean that a marriage did exist; but doubtless it would not be beyond the wit of the courts to arrange things so that the question of ancillary relief received short shrift.
It would also mean that the Nullity of Marriages Act, section 2(c), must be interpreted so that this type of fraud comes within its terms.
Section 2,(a) and (b), of the Statute is not relied on here, for reasons which will be obvious later.
Where the fraud is perpetrated by an operated transsexual, the innocent party will have the same remedy until the expiration of three years.
If the extremely unlikely event transpires that in three years he has discovered nothing of his partner's past, then why should he complain?
The only reason must be the absence of a family.
The most cursory testing would explain why no children have been produced.
If he undertakes such tests and discovers the truth, should he then be able to jettison his partner, otherwise presumably to his liking?
In many ways, he is in the same position as a husband who finds that his wife is infertile.
The route of divorce may ultimately be open to him, but to give him more may, in the context of this argument, be unfair.
In addition, however, he will undoubtedly experience considerable psychic shock, for he will have discovered that his wife is a biological male — that, in crude, popular terms, he has married a man.
The fact that this revelation would doubtless be made in a context of privacy and confidentiality so as to insulate him as far as possible from the prying eyes of scandalmongers may not reduce his desire to put actual and legal distance between himself and his spouse.
Therefore it is suggested that for the husband whose outrage forecloses the possibility of a mere divorce proceeding, a clear case exists for having the courts carve out an exception to the three-year rule so as to allow a suit to be brought for nullity through fraud or mistake.56 To the protesting reader who may feel that this spurious reasoning leads us into the realm of nonsense, the only answer is that it is the purpose of this paper to provoke a re-examination of certain fundamental values and ideas.
Another way out of the problem of fraud could be to require from both parties the presentation of a birth certificate as a prerequisite for the issuing of a marriage licence, as is done in some states in the United States.
The registrar could be obliged to report the matter to one party when there appears to be some irregularity between the registered sex and the appearance of the other party.
This would be obvious from the birth certificate if unchanged; and if, as has been proposed, an amended certificate has been granted, the code used to signal this fact would alert the registrar.
It is a matter for debate whether the introduction of further administrative duties is justified in terms of the dimensions of the problem being dealt with.
What, then, of the homosexual union?
Should such a union be called a marriage?
This, after all, is the real issue lurking in Corbett .
As has been said, technically, it need not be raised in disagreeing with Ormrod J., but surely it cannot be avoided.
The Sexual Offences Act 1967 removed some of the aura of instability and guilt which hitherto surrounded the lives of homosexuals.
Partnerships could henceforth be established between consenting adults so that‘two men could live permanently together without fearing prattling informers bringing down the criminal law upon them’.
Where, then, is the need to harness the concept of marriage to suit their needs?
Why not invent some other legal concept or, for example, use the legal notion of partnership?
To this latter suggestion, the homosexual can simply reply that he wants his relationship to be a marriage and nothing short of this, and can see no reason to justify the denial of his request.
A partnership connotes a business relationship, whereas what is being sought is institutionalization of a domestic relationship.
Only marriage has for him the required social connotations, expressing the kind of personal and social commitment mentioned earlier.
Furthermore, as regards the former suggestion, a new institution analogous to, but not the same as, marriage, would lack the very special connotations inextricably involved in the marriage union of two people who feel strongly for each other and desire to bear witness to this feeling to the world.
Marriage is the institution which suggests this quality; and is the only type of domestic relationship known to the common law from which flow rights and expectations prescribed by law.
If this is the case, rather than attempt to invent a new conceptual framework, there is much to be said for turning to marriage as the one, already existing legal concept which has the obvious potential for expansion so as to provide the institutional framework for such a union.
But, the argument runs, this apparently attractive reasoning offends us.
Marriage, even if it does not rest for its validity on the capacity for ‘normal heterosexual intercourse’, has an intrinsic quality of bisexuality.
Granted, hypothetically, that it may be a flexible legal concept, it nonetheless is of a nature which does not extend to the union of two people of the same sex.
Here, Ormrod J.'s view may be recalled.
Given that he may have fallen victim of an essentialist fallacy, is he not right in asserting that marriage as always understood is a relationship involving a man and a woman, commonly so defined?
Am I not guilty of the same essentialist fallacy if I tear down Ormrod J.'s thesis simply to erect my own property-based ‘essence’ which conveniently allows me, then, to advance my argument concerning homosexual unions?
My reply is that I have sought to identify some of the congeries of qualities of the legal institution of marriage, not to identify its ‘essence’.
As a legal device, it exists for a number of purposes which I have sought to set out.
It is true that it has only been considered in the context of people of opposite sex; but that may be primarily because its materialist aspect was developed to regulate the consequences of such unions .
I am, in this regard, simply challenging received wisdom as to which is the chicken and which the egg.
I am acutely aware of a further objection.
While Ormrod J.'s attempt to identify a single definitive criterion for the notion of marriage may falter, there must still be certain negative definitive criteria setting the proper limits of the concept.
Such a negative criterion could be that the parties should not be of the same sex, as could be the notion that one party should not be an animal.
To this I would respond as follows.
My analysis of the particular qualities of the institution shows that it may well extend to cover a homosexual union.
For, besides the materialist qualities, the spiritual quality of commitment and feeling is as present between homosexual as between heterosexual partners.
Equally, I am prepared to advocate that, in historical terms, the time has arrived, in the absence of other viable legal institutions, to forsake the requirement of bisexuality and thus abandon the negative definitive criterion of homosexuality, if indeed it is such a criterion.
Another argument I must meet is that while it is one thing to tolerate behaviour and remove criminal sanctions, in this case concerning homosexual activities, it is quite another thing to facilitate and give recognition to unions built on such activities.
It is submitted in response that the gradual movement of social history is towards such a position of recognition and facilitation, and that this position should indeed be adopted.
The task becomes one of persuading people that earthquakes will not follow, and that this step is merely another in the gradual process of acceptance and tolerance of varied social and sexual behaviour begun by the Sexual Offences Act, 1967; that there is nothing harmful or threatening in institutionalizing, and thereby recognizing, a relationship which some fear, many object to, and most still misunderstand.
The reasons for such fear, opposition, and misunderstanding are many and complex.
Though they cannot detain us here, an examination of them could well be a step towards dispelling them for ever.
It is indeed a salutary (and exceedingly difficult) exercise to attempt to analyse them in the security of a solitary armchair.
The more rigorous the enquiry, the more elusive become the real grounds for opposition.
My own, much attenuated view, for what it is worth, is as follows.
Fundamentally the whole complex of hostility towards homosexuality is a reflection of a biological imperative to procreate, in which the homosexual is seen as a threat to the species, ‘unnatural’, and therefore worthy of condemnation.
Introduce intellectual reasoning, and of course this threat is seen as harmless.
The species continues to survive and multiply.
A small aberrant group endangers no one.
But this does not prevent the threat from being felt as very real, with all the consequent aggressive reactions.
Whatever the truth of this, the proposition is repeated that homosexual unions should be recognized as marriages with all the rights and duties this may imply.
For instance, on a down-to-earth, but very real, level, one partner to a homosexual union may forsake his work to look after house and home, or may become financially dependent on the other.
Is it not hypocrisy to say that the new tolerance accepts the union, but gives no security or protection to the injured party if the other suddenly decides to leave?
Clearly, such a drastic change in the law could be undertaken only by the legislature.
No doubt it will sorely test the liberal and progressive credentials of certain members.
Also in its wake will follow countless problems in rewriting the law related to marriage and divorce.
However, I have no doubt that it will occur, later if not sooner.
Two final issues among the host remaining for consideration will be touched upon.
First, should the couple in the type of marriage unions discussed above be able to adopt children, since obviously there will be no natural issue?
The matter is raised here as one of principle, since individual decisions must rest with the adoption agency, and ultimately the courts, based upon an assessment of the suitability of the couple involved.
As a matter of principle it is submitted that there should not be an absolute bar to adoption in the case of a marriage involving a transsexual.
The transsexual, once stabilized in the role long seen as the only natural one, may naturally want a normal family life.
Indeed, the desire to succeed in the adopted sex role may make the transsexual a model parent.
If careful investigation reveals a secure and successful domestic situation, then there should be no reason why a child should not be adopted and raised by the couple.
Should the case of the homosexual union be treated differently?
Consistency with the argument presented earlier would seem to demand that such a couple should enjoy all rights and privileges available to a ‘married’ couple.
Yet, to propose the possibility of adoption by such a couple strikes a discordant note.
Again, it is important to try to discover the reasons for this.
If a homosexual union is to be accepted as a marriage and yet denied the right to raise children, what is really being said is that the state has an interest in sheltering and protecting children from a homosexual environment.
The premiss which serves to justify such a policy is that the young should be raised in a context of ‘normality’.
The State has the obligation of ensuring this end by guaranteeing that homosexuals, living as they do in an ‘abnormal’ relationship, do not have the opportunity to influence directly the upbringing of children.
The only acceptable environment for children is thus to be in the care of a heterosexual couple, as this is the only ‘normal’ environment which can provide a ‘natural’stable family life.
Much obviously hinges on this word ‘normal’ and the accepted idea of family life.
My own view is that perhaps the concept of normality is inappropriate here, since doubtless much of the hostility and prejudice which exists towards homosexuality is a product of this notion.
That this means that homosexuals should be able to adopt children is, however, a proposition which I hesitate to advance.
It may be that greater understanding of homosexuals is called for and that all measures aimed at countering misunderstanding should be welcomed.
Whether children should be in the vanguard of such a movement is another question.
Second, brief mention should be made of the law relating to adultery.
Notwithstanding the passage of the Divorce Reform Act 1969, adultery and the case-law governing it are still of relevance in pursuing a divorce action.
Clearly it takes on a further significance in the context of the discussion in this paper.
Ormrod J. seems to hold in Corbett that sexual relations with a woman with an artificial vagina would amount neither to consummation nor to adultery.
Clearly, incapacity or wilful refusal to consummate a marriage as presently defined, if it were to be retained at all as part of the law, could only apply to those relationships presently regarded as marriages.
In its present form it would have no relevance to homosexual unions and little relevance to a union involving a transsexual.
This is not to overlook, however, the fact that the parties to these relationships, may legitimately expect some form of sexual gratification from their partners and should have grounds for complaint if it were denied.
Whether this should be called ‘consummation’ or something else is a question of definition.
But what is to be made of adultery?
Two alternatives suggest themselves.
It could be argued that Ormrod J.'s view of the law is wrong, and that if the transsexual engaged in sexual relations outside the marriage, this would amount to adultery.
Considerable difficulty, however, would be met in outlining the degree of sexual conduct which would amount to adultery, even if it were given a much wider connotation where homosexuals were involved.
A second solution is advanced here.
Besides being far more satisfactory, it is submitted, from a social as well as a legal-theoretical standpoint, it would provide a framework applicable to all unions.
It would involve the abandonment of rigid conceptualism: the rejection, in other words, of a formal mechanical set of criteria adding up to the concept of adultery which allows hard problems to be solved with apparent ease by simply referring to a formula without examining the deeper issues of justice involved in the case.
It is regrettable that, in legislation basically aimed at facilitating the dissolution of marriages which have failed, the notion of adultery was retained.
Emphasis should be — and surely was intended to be — on the fact of breakdown, and not on the formal technicalities of establishing such breakdown.
Adultery in effect is evidence of breakdown because it represents conduct, on the plane of sexual behaviour, which is outrageous and offensive to the other partner.
The rationale is that such behaviour may make life intolerable; and that, if indeed it does, the offended partner is entitled to say that the marriage has broken down.
Conduct on other planes of behaviour may equally produce the same result.
Adultery therefore should be seen as having a symbolic quality, amounting to sexual conduct outrageous to the other.
This may not be the old rationale of adultery.
It is suggested that in the context of a monogamous union, adultery was elevated to the status of a sin (or indeed a crime) and grounds for divorce so as to reinforce this concept of marriage and, in the absence of birth control, to prevent the social ‘untidiness’ caused by the production of children not the product of a couple married to each other, with all the inheritance and support complications which could follow.
This rationale, however, is of considerably less significance now.
For this reason, adultery should be seen for what it has become, an act of sexual conduct which takes on a symbolic character if offensive to the other partner.
Once this is conceded, then enquiries into the exact details and minutiae of the sexual behaviour so as to announce on its legal pedigree become redundant.
They have always been unseemly, since they make a mockery of the moral values they purport to uphold.
The eminently more favourable position would be that if one partner engages in sexual conduct with another outside their relationship which the other partner finds intolerable, then this may be cited as evidence that the marriage has broken down.
Such a general rule would then have application, regardless of the details, to all unions recognized as marriages.
CONCLUSION
I have proceeded from a narrow premiss: the case of Corbett v. Corbett .
In that case I found questions raised which go to two major issues.
First is the issue of sex determination: how the law is to deal with changing scientific opinion which challenges old certainties, and the legality of medical procedures designed to deal with abnormal sexual conditions.
Second, the issue of marriage is raised, and I have sought to examine the notion, even though merely to question conventional wisdom regarding its nature already appears to go too far.
The suggestions that are made on the basis of the analysis may not suit everyone's palate.
The hope is that some will find in them food for thought.
POSTSCRIPT
In the latest edition of his Principles of Family Law , Professor Cretney repeats the argument that the use of the words ‘male’ and ‘female’in section 11(c) of the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973 (which repealed and reproduced the provisions of the Nullity Act 1971), suggests that it ‘may thus be possible to argue that the terms ‘male’and ‘‘female’refer to a person's gender (that is to say, the sex to which he psychically belongs)’.
‘If so’, he continues, ‘the question whether a person is ‘male’ or ‘female’is not to be resolved (as it was in the Corbett case) solely by reference to rigid tests of biological sexuality.’
I continue, however, to prefer the view I expressed earlier.
The absence of any case-law leaves the question open.
Since this paper was written, however, there has been one case in English law worth noting.
In R. v. 
Tan , one Gloria Greaves was charged with living on the earnings of prostitution contrary to section 30 of the Sexual Offences Act 1956.
She had been born a male, but had later undergone sexual conversion surgery and had lived as a woman for eighteen years.
Upon conviction, she (I use the pronoun ‘she’ for the sake of convenience here) appealed on the ground that the statute expressly made the crime one which only a man could commit.
Parker J., giving the judgment of the Court of Appeal, stated that:
It was…contended that…if the person had become philosophically or psychologically or socially female, that person should be held not to be a man for the purposes of (section 30,inter alia ).
We reject this submission without hesitation.
In our judgment both common sense and the desirability of certainty and consistency demand that the decision in Corbett v. 
Corbett should apply for the purpose not only of marriage but also for a charge under s. 30 of the Sexual Offences Act 1956.
Pace, in a cogent criticism of Parker J.'s judgment, argues that while consistency in the law may have its merits, there are limits to the extent to which it should be pursued:
It is quite true that Corbett has been applied to situations outside marriage,eg. , the alteration of birth certificates, unfair dismissal (White v. 
British Sugar Corporation Ltd .
(1977) 1 RLR 121), and the minimum age for retirement (Dec.
CF6/76 (Nat.
Ins.
Comm.),(but) there is no obvious reason why the same approach should apply to the criminal law, particularly in view of the different policy considerations which apply in civil and criminal law.
Pace also notes that even if Corbett is right, which he does not accept, Ormrod J. ‘specifically restricted the scope of his decision’.
You will recall that Ormrod J. held that ‘(t) he question then becomes what is meant by the word ‘woman’ in the context of a marriage, for I am not concerned to determine the ‘legal sex’of the respondent at large.’
Thus, Pace argues,Corbett cannot serve as the authority on which Parker J. wished to rely in Tan .
Finally, Pace takes the Court of Appeal in Tan to task for ignoring developments elsewhere.
‘It is a matter of some regret’, he writes, ‘that the Court did not see fit to investigate civil law developments over the twelve year period since Corbett was decided.’
He goes on to refer to legislation in 1980 in West Germany and in 1982 in Italy whereby post-operative transsexuals are deemed to belong to their chosen sex and have the rights and duties of that sex.
Canadian provincial legislation in Alberta, British Columbia, Saskatchewan, and New Brunswick allows transsexuals to have even their birth certificates altered, Face points out.
Similar legislation exists in parts of the United States, and Face could also have mentioned legislative and judicial changes in the law in Sweden, Switzerland, and Norway.
Notwithstanding such criticisms,Tan seems to make it abundantly clear that if any change in the law's attitude to transsexuals is to be forthcoming, it will certainly not come from the English courts.
Indeed,Tan not only confirms Corbett at the level of the Court of Appeal, but extends it beyond marriage into, it appears, a case of general application, an outcome which Ormrod J. may not have intended or desired.
But now, of course, the English courts are not the only courts which can develop English law.
There is the Court of Human Rights which adjudicates on the basis of the European Convention of Human Rights, of which the United Kingdom is, of course, a signatory.
First, a complaint must go to the European Commission of Human Rights.
If the Commission regards the complaint as validly demonstrating a breach of the Convention it reports to that effect, and the case proceeds to the European Court of Human Rights unless it is solved in the meantime.
If the court finds against a nation which is a signatory, that nation is obliged to bring its law into conformity with the law as stated by the court.
In 1984, the European Commission of Human Rights reported, on the application of one Mark Rees, that the United Kingdom was in violation of Article 8 of the European Convention.
The case then went forward to the European Court of Human Rights.
If Rees had been successful there, it would have meant that legislation would have had to be introduced into Parliament which would remove those legal disabilities affecting transsexuals which the court may find contravene the Convention.
Article 8 of the Convention, briefly stated, guarantees to a person a right of respect for his private and family life.
Rees is a female-to-male transsexual who has undergone sexual conversion therapy.
Rees applied to have his birth certificate altered.
His request was refused, and attempts to persuade the English courts to order the alteration failed when he was refused legal aid.
Rees thereupon complained to the European Commission of Human Rights that, by refusing to alter the recorded sex on his birth certificate, the United Kingdom, through its law, is depriving him of the legal status corresponding to his actual condition, to which he is rightfully entitled by Article 8.
The Commission referred to its previous opinion in the Van Oosterwijk case, ‘that a State which refused to recognise the new status of a transsexual after medical treatment resulting in a change of sex failed to respect private life’.
It was the refusal to alter the birth certificate which led to the decision against Belgium in the Van Oosterwijk case.
The Commission could find no compelling reason of public interest which could justify the position of the United Kingdom's government.
Furthermore, it found that, although birth certificates were not required by law for any kind of legal transaction in the United Kingdom, there could be occasions on which a birth certificate could be called for by, for instance, an employer or public institution.
In such circumstances, the refusal of Rees's request constituted in the view of the Commission a violation of his rights guaranteed by Article 8.
If the European Court of Human Rights had confirmed the view of the Commission, changes in the law would have been called for, at least so as to allow for alteration of all relevant documentation.
Clearly, such a law could have consequences going beyond mere changes in documents.
Parliament, had it been required to do so by the European Court of Human Rights, could have made a small, interstitial alteration of the law by, for example, merely amending the relevant section of the Birth and Death Registration Act 1953; or used the opportunity to undertake a wholesale revision of the law as it affects transsexuals.
In the event, neither was necessary.
In a surprising and unexpected judgment, the European Court of Human Rights rejected the Commission 's view, and decided that there was no violation of Articles 8 or 12.
As regards Article 8, by a majority of 12 to 3, the court rested its decision ultimately on the notion of striking a fair balance between the interests of Rees and those of the British government.
Rees argued that a change in his birth certificate was necessary –o give effect to his interest in privacy.
The British government argued, first, that such a change would have the effect of forcing them to adopt a type of system for documenting civil status which would have considerable administrative consequences and would impose new duties on the population.
This the court accepted.
The government could not, it decided, be obliged to alter the very basis of its system of documentation.
The fact that some countries who were signatories of the Convention had one system and some another reinforced the court in its view that no single system could be called for.
It is fair to say, however, that this is not fatal to Rees's case.
His complaint need not be seen as so far-reaching.
It can be interpreted more narrowly as merely calling for an incidental adjustment in the form of an annotation of the present birth register.
This the court considered next.
The British government argued that if a major change in the system of documentation was not called for, but only minor incidental adjustments, such adjustments would be different in kind from those at present allowed by law.
These, it was argued, concern the correction of errors of fact or omissions at the time of birth.
The court did not accept this argument.
It noted that adjustments are permitted in the case of adoption and legitimation.
It pointed out, however, that an annotation of the changed sex on the register would not safeguard privacy because it would reveal Rees's change of sexual identity.
To this, Rees replied that the annotation of the changed sex could be kept secret from third parties.
You may recall that I proposed earlier a scheme to do just that — namely, the registration of a new entry, but accompanied by a code known to the Registrar which would alert him in any case of attempted fraud.
This, to me, is the crucial part of Rees's case, concerning, as it does, the protection of his privacy without any significant change in policy or practice by government.
It is not clear, however, whether a proposal of the sort I have mentioned was put before the court.
What is clear is that the court rejected Rees's argument that the annotation could be kept secret, on the basis of a somewhat heavy-handed assumption of what this would entail.
The court saw great dangers arising out of such secrecy.
Public and private institutions could, it decided, act in ignorance, and great harm could flow as a consequence, and succession and family law arrangements could potentially be prejudiced.
But, I would submit, these can be avoided relatively easily.
If my proposal was accepted, legislation would not even be needed.
All that would be required is a change in practice.
So, Rees failed under Article 8.
His complaint under Article 12 received short shrift.
He complained that according to English Law he could not marry a woman, and that thus he was denied the right to marry and found a family.
The court, without offering any reasoned argument, decided that the right to marry in Article 12 ‘refers to the traditional marriage between persons of the opposite biological sex’.
This would appear to be the end of the road for transsexuals as far as the law is concerned.
They have achieved much of what they sought concerning changes in documents which affect their everyday lives, so as to accommodate their new life-style.
But any more fundamental change, which would constitute the ultimate formal recognition of their new identity, is to be denied.
Whether this represents a fair balance between the interests of the individual and those of the State I beg leave to doubt.
The Technological Imperative and its Application in Health Care
‘If it can be done, it should be done.’
‘If we can do it, why don't we?’
These are two ways of expressing what is now a widely accepted notion.
Technology has its own momentum.
To develop new skills and tools is to create the pressure to use them.
This is a familiar enough idea.
It has application in a host of contexts.
One of them is in health and medical care.
As Dr Yu has written, ‘Beginning in the 1960s, a great increase in the understanding of neonatal pathophysiology took place.
This knowledge was rapidly applied to clinical care by responsible physicians.
Since that time, neonatology as a speciality has found its place in paediatrics, with the appointment of full-time neonatal consultants in all neonatal intensive care units.
A technology has developed which enabled the growth of the speciality.’
Of course, resort to technology has always been a feature of health care, if we mean by that the development and use of skills and tools.
Anaesthesia, vaccines, scalpels, and contact lenses are all examples of technological innovation and development.
We live with them relatively comfortably.
Yet we are at the same time perturbed by more recent and present-day developments.
Are we right to be worried?
Or are we just creatures of our time, trapped by our failure to see the solutions around the corner of our life-span?
This, then, is the first question for us.
Is there anything different about present-day technological developments which warrants the kind of concern it seems to attract (and warrants this paper!)?
The answer is Yes, for three reasons above all others: their cost, the speed of innovation, and their significance at the edges of life.
Certainly, when anaesthesia, for example, was first introduced, there were the same debates as there are now over the care of VLBW babies, about its experimental nature and the long- and short-term effects of using it.
The difference now, however, is that such arguments are multiplied many times over, both by the much more extensive use of technology and the great number of technological developments which appear so quickly and exist at the same time.
As for cost, even when we talk of technological development being, in health care, at the service of all who may need it, we realize that, in fact, its supply is limited, and the limitation is expressed usually in terms of cost.
The resources, whether material or human, are not there in anything like sufficient quantities, it is said.
And, of course, talk of cost must never overlook what are known as opportunity costs: time, effort, and money spent on one thing necessarily means a lost opportunity to spend them on something else, which may be of just as much value.
This is a particularly important point to bear in mind when it is realized that many technological developments operate at the edges of life, whether they be ventilators or incubators.
So the special nature of recent technological developments concerns their multiplicity, their speed of appearance, their cost, and the consequent limit on their availability.
Understood in this light, the technological imperative can be seen to pose a central dilemma which can be expressed thus: ‘If we can do it, we must.
But is there enough of it to go around?’
Here we embark on the next stage of our analysis.
To ask the question of whether there is enough presumes that we know what ‘enough’ is.
And that involves the enormously difficult task of allocating resources which are limited among competing claims.
‘The technological imperative’ meets ‘the allocation of resources’, two aphorisms which mask an incredibly difficult set of problems.
So difficult are they, in fact, that the debate usually begins and ends at the level of aphorism, with lots of commentators wringing their hands and saying that something must be done, while doctors, administrators, and others scramble to make sure that they get a bit of the action.
Let us see if we can do a bit better than this.
Here are the issues put starkly, before we try to unravel them.
The development of technology creates a momentum towards use.
This is as true in health care as elsewhere.
Technology in modern medicine poses special problems.
There are, and always have been, limits to the amount of resources devoted to any particular technological development.
Those limits have created the need to ration what is available, as well as what ought to be developed.
Before proceeding further, let us try to set the context in which the debate must be conducted.
There can be no doubt that the introduction and development of technology brings benefits to many.
There is equally no doubt that such benefits are bought at a price.
The price includes:
(1)
the increasing cost of technology, in terms of development, purchase and service, the training of staff, and its operation;
(2)
the potential or real imbalance in expenditure which technology introduces into the allocation of resources in health care generally.
Money spent on machines or intensive care units or renal dialysis, and on staff for these, is money which is not available for other health and medical services;
(3)
the possible distorting effect that technology has on attitudes to, and the availability of, other forms of health care — for example, preventive care and the often forgotten possibility of not doing anything;
(4)
the fostering of an impersonal approach to health and medical care, where the machine intrudes between the patient and the doctor, and may thereby affect deleteriously the development of caring personal relationships.
Two questions then arise.
First, is there inevitably a limit to the resources available.
I doubt if anyone would seriously doubt that, now, as a matter of fact, this is the case.
Must it be so?
If our concern is health, widely defined, not merely medical care, it is probably inevitable in our present society that resources do not exist to meet all the demands that the pursuit of health for all may make.
So, if there are limits to what we can do, and if the development of technology brings costs as well as benefits, we now must face the second question: under what circumstances do we either develop or apply a particular technology?
Notice that I say ‘develop’ as well as‘apply’, for the thesis is that, once developed, it is extremely difficult to resist its application.
All those involved in health care know how these questions are dealt with at present.
First, they are rarely posed as clearly as this; things tend to happen incrementally or interstitially.
Second, when they are raised, they are resolved according to the simple criterion of political muscle power.
The doctor or unit or hospital that can shout the loudest and wave the biggest shrouds in front of TV cameras on the look-out for ‘human interest’ stories gets the money and the staff.
It needs only a couple of well-publicized mercy flights to the United States and appropriate patriotic breast-beating to ensure that liver transplant units spring up like desert flowers after the rain.
Are we right to think that this system, if system it can be called, is unsatisfactory?
Certainly those working with the mentally ill or the handicapped or the senile or in health education may properly think it is.
Well, can a better system be devised?
This can be answered only by identifying what is wrong with the present system and coming up with an alternative.
What is wrong is that, as a way of ordering our affairs, it is only disorder.
It is arbitrary, irrational, and does not reflect any principle.
It is one of our claims to civilization that we have transcended the level of existence at which survival means making sure you get your nose in the trough and using your elbows to keep others out.
Some would flinch at such language as a description of how medical resources are allocated, but would agree with what is behind it, that rational allocation or planning is an illusion.
I shall return to this later.
But assuming for the moment that we can do better than fight over the trough, how do we do it?
This is best answered by asking what the desired goal is.
Some may say that it is efficiency or effectiveness.
But although these are attractive and apparently straightforward goals, they are, of course, only half an answer, since they beg the central question: efficient to what end, effective in producing what?
So we have to look elsewhere.
The goal on which we would all agree, I suggest, would be one of fairness, whereby resources are distributed and technology applied in the right way.
In short, we would wish to order and organize what we do in a morally respectable and defensible way.
But how can this be done?
Some may think that you cannot argue — far less, analyse — what is morally right: it is just a matter of personal feeling or common sense.
This is a counsel of despair.
It is to say that one person's view is as good as another's, which we patently do not accept when it comes to many aspects of our daily lives.
We condemn the liar, blame the cheat, and excuse innocent error.
In medicine, we talk in general terms of a patient's ‘right to know’, but also of a doctor's liberty, sometimes not to tell a particular patient for good reason.
We analyse both the implications of our general views and the tensions between competing views.
We talk, in other words, the language of rights and wrongs.
So it is possible to look for ways of ordering our responses to technology and resource allocation in a morally responsible way; and, being possible, it is our duty to do so.
And the way we do this is by resort to moral principles, which we identify, weigh, and try to apply to the issue before us.
Two questions then emerge.
What moral principles are relevant to resource allocation in the context of the technological imperative?
Second, once identified, can they be of any use in helping us solve real-life issues?
Or are they no more than generalized exhortations, the playthings of ethicists, who love to pontificate, because that is all they are good for?
Let me answer the second question first.
If ethical analysis in this context does not help in the real world, it is a waste of time.
If we cannot help in the analysis of concrete problems, we should keep our mouths firmly shut.
We have, in short, to keep our feet on the ground, to get our facts right, and to remember that we are talking about the real world.
We must, therefore, bridge the worlds of principle and practice, move from the abstract to the concrete.
As for the question of what the relevant principles are , debates about the rationing of scarce resources are, in essence, debates about justice , about what is fair or right or just.
First we have to work out what we think justice is, therefore, before we can decide what justice demands.
This is not the place for any lengthy examination of the concept of justice.
All I will say is that I reject as a model of justice the view which has temporarily gained favour in many developed societies: namely, the view that each person is entitled to what he can get, and let the next man look out for himself as best he can.
This is not justice; it is not even a theory of morality, since it rejects a consideration of what I take to be central to moral theory, the sense of each person being a member of a community with, inevitably, obligations and duties to others , as well as rights.
The notion of justice which I find most convincing is that which tells us that we ought to seek a society in which each person is accepted as of equal moral worth and has equal opportunity to enjoy an equal share of the total sum of society's goods.
A particular feature of such a view of what is just is that any attempt to translate it into practice must begin by favouring the weakest and the least advantaged, since these are the people least likely to have the opportunity to enjoy an equal share of what we have, and are thus most in need of help.
Notice that talk of caring about the weakest and most vulnerable first may already, even when expressed so generally, have important implications for any consideration of the allocation of scarce technological resources to the care, for example, of neonates.
So, if we are concerned with what constitutes a just allocation of resources, my prescription, at the very least, would call for policies aimed at ensuring, as far as possible, that everyone had an equal opportunity to enjoy an equal share of the total net welfare of society.
One ingredient of the net benefits that a society enjoys is health.
It follows that a just society must set its policies and write its laws to ensure that everyone,beginning with the least advantaged and most vulnerable, has an equal opportunity to enjoy an equal share of the total net resources allocated to health.
Notice, I use the word ‘health’.
There is no need to remind you that health is not the same as medical care.
As you know, health is the product of a combination of factors, among which medical care plays a relatively minor role.
Ministries of Health throughout the world, however, have been converted, largely under the influence of doctors, into ministries of illness, in which policies aimed at the maintenance of health and the avoidance of illness have been ignored or left to others, with little understanding of their true nature.
Resources which could be spent on health have been diverted to waiting for ill health and then trying to do something about it, usually with only limited effect.
It will take a complete re-education of the public, as well as considerable political courage and will-power, before ‘health’ regains its proper meaning, and policies geared to achieving it are accepted.
There seems little likelihood of more resources (in terms of money) becoming available, as a proportion of the total GDP; and perhaps this is as it should be.
Therefore, improvements in health can be achieved only if existing resources are re-allocated into policies more productive of health.
Such policies would aim, for example, at the provision of education, the elimination of relative poverty, safety in the work place, environmental and ecological protection, diet, the power of the food, alcohol, and tobacco lobbies, transport policy, both in terms of safety and of minimizing isolation, care and comfort of the elderly and adequate housing, employment, and recreation.
Furthermore, these policies must aim at ensuring that everyone has the opportunity to enjoy these aspects of health.
Some may choose to neglect their health or to trade it for the freedom to do other things, as does the business executive who opts for a stressful way of life in pursuit of material success.
And obviously some compromise must be struck as, for example, in the case of transport, where undoubtedly the need and desire for mobility and the distances involved in travel have to be set against the knowledge that roads pollute and fast cars kill.
But such compromises should be made with the larger goal always in view, rather than, as at present , as a consequence of the self-interested lobbying of powerful groups.
As regards care of the neonate, which is our particular concern here, what are important are the criteria whereby resources are allocated.
These have to be examined against our bench-mark of fairness or justice; and if unjust, policies must be changed.
We can only identify the proper criteria correctly if we accept that medical treatment in general ought to be divided, for our purposes, into two classes.
The first we can call regular, standard, or ordinary treatment, the sort of treatment which any developed, urbanized country should have available for all.
The second we can call unusual, or special, treatment, requiring more than ordinary skill, effort, or resources.
Arguments will no doubt be made that such a division is unrealistic; but, in my view, not only is it essential for solving resource problems; it is also a division which is made now, albeit not explicitly.
The first point which arises from this division is the necessary implication that ordinary treatment be provided first.
One problem which such an approach may pose is that there may be nothing left for special treatment.
Third World countries often confront this, and some have opted for ‘high technology’(which may be badly delivered) at the cost of ordinary treatment.
As regards neonates, even in the developed world, there is a further, special problem.
Ordinary treatment may generally include the type of less intrusive, less expensive care we call preventive treatment.
More, or even enough, of it may exhaust the allocation of resources for paediatric care.
So two questions need to be resolved on my analysis: first, is prevention ordinary treatment? and, second, if preventive care depends on data drawn from special treatment, does this mean that special care may be undertaken only under conditions of limited, controlled research, which is what I suspect is what care of the VLBW baby really is, rather than by adopting the current haphazard approach which may wrongly dissipate resources?
We need to think very carefully about preventive strategies, particularly as regards the prediction and detection of, for example, peri-ventricular haemorrhage in the case of VLBW babies.
The issue of allocating resources becomes far more difficult if the treatment under discussion is special, or unusual.
Its being so means that more than usual demands must be made on available resources, whether human or material.
A neonatal intensive care unit is, on this view, a good example of special treatment.
It is not needed for the care of the vast majority of new-born babies, but may represent the difference between life and death in the rare cases.
There are, in fact, at least two separate problems to be solved, both of them enormously difficult.
The first is how to choose between the neonatal intensive care unit and one of the many other forms of special treatment which could benefit patients — for instance, a renal dialysis unit or a transplant programme.
The second is, if there are to be intensive care units, what share of resources should they have?
As regards choosing between special services, one response may be to argue that if, as will always be the case, there is not enough money to meet all the needs for special care, then the simple answer is to make more available.
This, of course, is not a sensible argument.
It is impractical, in that raising the necessary revenue would be politically impossible, particularly as needs grow to meet available supplies of resources.
It is also unethical, since it would involve far too great an infringement of liberty made in the name of fairness.
That a policy may meet the ideal of justice does not necessarily always mean that it is right to adopt it, if in so doing other fundamental values are sacrificed.
Given that more money simply will not be made available as a proportion of GDP, choices have to be made.
At present they are made by the politician or the hospital administrator responding to the group which can shout the loudest or bring to bear the keenest political acumen.
This cannot be a proper way, not only because it is irrational and unsystematic, but also because it is patently unfair.
A case's merit should not have to depend on strong-arm tactics.
Thus another, better system must be adopted and translated into policy by planners and administrators.
It will be said by many that there is no rational way of doing the job, and that the lobbying and jockeying, demeaning as they may be, are unavoidable.
As I have already said, some say that planning is just not possible.
The answer is that if we find the present state of affairs unsatisfactory, we have an obligation to try to come up with something better.
What we have to do is to come up with some set of criteria which relate to the relative value we are prepared, if pressed, to attribute to a particular form of special treatment.
I suppose the sort of factors we would consider are, first, the number who might benefit.
Arguably, the greater the number, the greater the priority to be given to the service.
Then there are the consequences of not having the service available.
They would range from death to the relatively minor discomfort associated with the absence of chiropody services.
Then you would consider the effect the treatment would have if available.
This would range from total recovery to the maintenance of a vegetative status quo.
Putting these together, it would mean that a life-saving service would not have by any means the highest priority if the lives saved were few or were ones of mere existence.
Another of many criteria to be identified could be the subsequent or continuing costs, economic and social, of proceeding with a particular treatment.
If, for example, to carry out a particular operation meant further long-term treatment, this must enter the equation; as must also the comparative cost in caring for the patient without the particular treatment.
The final stage in the exercise would be to ensure that whatever resources were made available, they were not dissipated, but concentrated in special units.
The relevant number of skilled personnel could then be trained, and effective procedures for referral and transfer of patients could be established.
With such a broad framework, a start could be made, through public debate and discussion, to fill in the details.
Involvement of the public would not only affirm the fact that these are issues for all of us, but would also educate people as to the range and limitations of existing therapies, and involve them in the decisions to be made in the light of this.
It may mean that a neonatal intensive care unit, after careful reflection, rather than emotional appeals and ‘shroud-waving’, may have to give way to a number of other services, relating, for example, to the mentally ill, all of which can be financed for the cost of one such unit, which, in combination, will facilitate a measure of improvement in the patients' conditions and their integration into society.
It is not, however, for me to judge the issue here, but only to point to what is involved in such a judgment.
I now turn to the second problem I posed earlier.
Let us suppose that some special service has been given priority, such that it ought to have resources allocated to it, the question then is what share it should get.
Any system of rational planning must take account of, and answer, two questions.
The first concerns the total amount available for all special services.
The answer must be the amount remaining from the total budget allocation for medical care services, which, we have seen, is a political decision, taking into account the need to satisfy other competing claims.
The second is the more difficult question.
If there are, say, nationally, 100 units of account available for special services, how much should neonatal intensive care units have as against, for example , renal units?
Any response is complicated by the fact that calls on resources are different, by being long- or short-term and by being capital- or revenue-intensive.
A formula would have to be developed which took account of these differences.
In principle, the allocation must be made on the basis of relative priority.
This, in theory, is what was supposed to happen in the United Kingdom as regards what are called the ‘Cinderella services’.
Priorities were fixed in the mid-1970s; but, not atypically, resources did not follow.
The key feature of the exercise I have outlined above is the need for centralized planning.
This, of course, is unpopular with all units and levels of administration.
It is a feature of modern administration in medical care at any level, whether the team on the ward or the hospital board or any other body, that they assert and seek to defend what they see as a right to autonomy and self-government, while using and distributing to a greater or lesser extent public resources.
Clearly, one feature of accountability is the need to show that public money is being spent in publicly approved ways.
In this context, it means that the appropriate central planner must decree what total resources on a national or a local scale are to be made available, how much is to be allocated to each special service, and where units offering these services should be established, so as to maximize their effectiveness.
Units which sought to establish themselves outside such a plan would not only not receive public money; they would also not qualify for any other public benefits.
Obviously, whatever plan was developed would have to be sensitive to regional differences, whether in demographic terms, or in incidence of particular illnesses, or local cultural or political values.
This would allow some room for choice, but would not detract from the fundamental notion of a centrally planned service.
And those of you who see this as some bureaucratic nightmare or the real face of 1984 — that is, State imposition of values and goals — it is perhaps helpful to recall that this is what happens now in an unsystematic, and therefore inefficient, way; and, of course , it is the route accepted by that arch-priestess of free choice, Mrs Thatcher.
Under her government, the Health Services, the Social Services, Education, and Local Government have all come under central planning, even more than under previous Labour Governments.
I do not hold this out as support for the thesis, but rather as evidence of the direction being taken by governments of whatever political complexion.
Finally, it is clear that centralized planning such as this must be kept under constant review, if it is to respond to changed needs and resources.
A mechanism for periodic review after what is deemed an appropriate time must, then, be built into any plan that is devised.
It now remains to ask what to many is the most difficult question, whether, given that the services are available, albeit on a limited basis, they can properly be denied to certain patients.3 This raises not only the issue of fairness or justice, but also that of selective treatment and respect for life.
This is the particular issue for debate at this meeting, and I do not presume here either to pre-empt discussion or anticipate what I will say later when I consider it in greater detail.
Suffice it here to point to what we can call a third, or micro-, level of decision making, the other two being the level of allocating as between health and, for example, defence; and the other, between different sections within health care.
Here we are concerned with allocation between different patients.
It remains a question of justice or fairness.
The issue for consideration is the selective treatment of disabled new-born babies.
As I said, I will resist the temptation to go into detail here, 4 and offer only certain points to weigh as you consider the case.
First, I suggest to you that it may be morally permissible to allow a baby to die by non-intervention.
It may also be legally permissible to do so.
It may even be morally permissible to kill the child; but the criminal law neither now nor in the future will countenance this, though it may look the other way from time to time.
Second, the basis of the moral argument is that there must be a very good reason not to intervene.
The good reason proposed here is the child's future handicap.
This is a very taxing issue.
Some would say that no degree of handicap warrants being encouraged to die.
To them, handicap is never reason enough.
I doubt if most would take this view; but if we would not, then we are forced to try to define with care the point at which handicap does become good reason.
And in so doing, we must, of course, be aware of the risk of setting a standard which goes so far that it would mean that others — for example , the senile or the mentally handicapped, whom we would wish to treat if they were ill — were also included by it.
How far is too far is what has to be decided.
If we are not convinced that any standard has been offered, or that what is offered can work, then, I would submit, the principle of respect for life demands that we treat all alike.
My third point is to remind you that fixing a criterion for non-intervention amounts to setting the moral agenda for the treatment of VLBW babies.
This task is, in my view, something for all of us, and cannot be left to doctors or parents to determine, unless we decide formally to authorize them to do so by law.
You may wish to think carefully about whether you want so to authorize them; whether you are content to leave the principle of respect for life in the hands of doctors or parents, with no check or system of accountability.
You do not do so in any other circumstance.
My fourth point is that some of you may be persuaded to regard as a good reason for non-intervention the fact that the child, if it survives, will so disrupt its parents' lives as to destroy the marriage, or will end up in some institution, in a form of living death.
These are important considerations; but you must ask whether they are a good reason to opt for non-intervention, or, rather, a reason to improve the support services available to parents or the institutions which house such children.
It is much easier to bury a problem than to consider whether our moral obligation lies elsewhere.
Finally, to return to where we began, you may wonder whether the resources in time, effort, and money which will be involved in treating the child can be justified.
I have suggested that it can be shown to be fair or just to do so; but this may not make it right if some other principle of greater weight is involved.
You may wish to say that so many more children could be benefited if the resources were diverted to them instead.
But this is to introduce a utilitarian calculus, which some may reject as a basis for choosing how to allocate resources.
For benefiting others need not be an overriding principle, but merely a competing principle as to the proper theory of justice.
This scheme assumes, of course, both the desirability and the possibility of planning.
Planning, in turn, assumes the existence of a system amenable to planning; a system, that is, which is coherent, consistent, rational, predictable, manageable, and controllable.
Some argue that while this may be desirable, it is not possible; it is pie in the sky, since it ignores reality.
Reality, they point out, shows us that assumptions about rationality and control are misplaced.
This is because, as I said earlier, there are so many different constituencies involved in the process, all of whom have different, and often incompatible, goals.
Thus ‘process’, not ‘system’, is the correct term, since there is action and reaction, but no system.
To talk of planning and decision making is, to these people, to indulge in self-delusion.
Things happen.
A newspaper story is written about a baby, or a politician is facing an election, or a leading specialist chooses to work in a particular hospital.
These are the happenstances from which actions stem, not rational planning and considered decisions.
I am sure there is some validity in this analysis.
Perhaps, however, there is a risk of throwing the baby out with the bath water.
It may be true that the processes of change and of translating policy into practice are convoluted and very hard to manage.
But this is not to say that no management is possible, and that the idea is best dropped.
A battleship may need a lot of ocean to turn around in, but this is no argument for abandoning our commitment to rudders.
Thus, it may not be a question of a total plan or no plan at all, but rather of some planning, aware of the limitations which the nature of the exercise imposes on planning.
And, if it is to be some planning, the need, then, is to focus on that approach which will best produce the results desired.
Fundamentally this consists in locating the appropriate level of organization at which any issue can best be resolved.
For example, the choice of which among several patients should receive a scarce resource is not best tackled in the hurly-burly of political debate; but the ethical ground rules which should guide such a choice may well be the product of such debate initially.
The subsequent application of such rules or guidelines must properly be left to those with particular knowledge of the circumstances of the cases in question.
Conversely, the ethically proper allocation of funds to health, as compared to education or defence, is quintessentially an issue for political debate, and cannot properly be left for individuals in the trenches to fight over, when they have no knowledge or view of the larger issues.
It will be clear from this that a proper approach will locate not only the appropriate level at which to resolve issues, but also the appropriate problem-solver.
This must be the person, body, or institution most qualified to deal with the particular issue.
Qualification will depend on the knowledge and expertise possessed and, as important, the extent to which the problem-solver can be held responsible for any decision according to the system of accountability we have; that is, the politician is accountable to Parliament and the public, and the individual to any system which the Parliament may have enacted, whether guidelines or law, and to those immediately touched by any decision.
Given that macro-decisions inherently and inevitably condition micro-decisions, the principal focus of attention must be on the political decision-maker.
Thus, it is clear that what we are in fact dealing with is an issue of political theory, the proper location of power and responsibility.
Any analysis must take account of this, by understanding and responding to the ways in which politicians reach decisions.
Fundamentally, politicians in our system are almost always guided by two considerations: first, short-term gains, since their horizons stretch only to the next election; second, public pressure if it is strong enough to suggest that votes depend on their response.
This is not necessarily a recipe for despair, however.
It means, by contrast, that when we talk of the technological imperative and resource allocation, we must realize that we are talking about the political process, and understand what this involves.
Some clearly do so already; hence the present state of affairs.
And, if it is thought that such a state of affairs is, for whatever reason, undesirable, then it behoves those who argue for another approach to learn the lesson of political realities.
This, in short, means that they must enter the political arena.
They must foster public information and analysis.
They must present their arguments to the public, using whatever honest strategies they consider appropriate.
This will ensure that the market-place of ideas, which politicians watch so closely, will have all, and not just a few, stall-holders of the truth.
The best way to impress politicians is to mobilize public opinion.
I appear to have strayed a long way from our original topic.
But it is only against such a background, I submit, that the issue of the technological imperative can properly be understood.
The Check-out: A Humane Death?
Produced by David Paterson
ITALIA PRIZE 1978, BBC Documentary Entry
Duration 49′ 50″
Broadcast on 19 August 1977 on BBC Radio 4
The technical accomplishments of modern medicine mean that doctors can often save the life of someone who in previous ages would have died.
Consequently, the doctor may appear to play the role of God, the giver and taker of life.
In ‘The Check-out’, lawyer Ian Kennedy investigates the moral and legal problems created by a group of doctors striving to use the ultimate in medical technology to keep a man alive.
Finally, the patient himself asked that the doctors kill him: they did so — through a drugs overdose.
Were the actions of the doctors ethical, moral, even lawful?
Should the patient's request to die have been respected or ignored?
Even though the case happened in the United States, are the issues it raises the same everywhere?
Ian Kennedy in ‘The Check-out’ discusses with the doctors involved and also the wife of the patient the principles that guided them in their actions.
The responses to his questions are remarkably candid.
(Because of the nature of the subject matter of this programme, the BBC has agreed to the stipulation made by the wife of the patient that if ‘The Check-out’ is broadcast in the United States, any reference to the family name be deleted or changed.
[I have subsequently changed the names of all the parties involved.])
IAN KENNEDY
I'm a lawyer, and during the past year, I've been teaching law in Southern California.
It was through this work that I came to hear of the case of Dr Ron Carrington, a 35-year-old psychiatrist.
His case raises some immensely difficult issues: issues about death and dying, issues about the appropriate moral and legal responses to be made when a man who has received the best that modern medical technology can offer decides finally that he can take no more.
Last December, Dr Carrington asked this question: ‘Doctor, will you help me to die?’
Was he crazy?
How should we, as a society, respond to this kind of request?
From when he was a young man, Dr Carrington had suffered from a chronic lung illness.
Pneumonia had followed pneumonia.
Despite his crippling disease, he had still managed to practise psychiatry with some success; but finally, the progressive nature of his condition meant that he needed treatment in an intensive care unit with 24-hour-a-day supervision, breathing only with the aid of a respirator.
What would you do if you were one of Ron Carrington's doctors?
Would you continue to fight for the life of this man who was valued in the community and initially had a strong will to live, even if the odds seemed hopeless?
Would you regard his request to be helped to die as one to be trusted and relied upon?
Or was it a request made in a moment of desperation and to be ignored?
If you were the wife of this man, what would you want?
I'd like to spell out the details of Dr Carrington's case for you.
It presents a host of problems — medical, moral, ethical, and legal — that may confront any patient, relative, and doctor when coping with death and dying.
Though it happened in California, the issues are of course universal.
As you listen to Dr Carrington's wife and doctors, you may be struck as I was by their candour and sincerity.
Mrs Carrington takes up the account from the time when her husband was admitted to the intensive care unit.
MRS CARRINGTON
I became concerned when I saw my husband becoming a different person.
He had special qualities of sensitivity, patience, rationality, intelligence, and wit; and when those qualities were completely unobservable, I became quite concerned about what was happening to him, you know, what was the meaning of his life at this point.
One day when he was extremely unrealistic and euphoric, I really became upset; it was like going in to see a stranger — he was receiving a high dosage of morphine at that time — and I called his pulmonary doctor and requested that something be done or an explanation be given.
And I was told that he was going to die shortly, and that if I wished, the measures that they were using with the respirator could be removed at my request, because he was in a terminal stage; it was just a matter of time, and I really felt that I couldn't make that decision myself.
I impressed upon the doctor to really talk with Ron, and he said he had, but that Ron didn't seem to hear what he was saying, how ill he really was; and when we hung up, I was really quite shaken.
I had developed an extreme closeness with two of the doctors, and I called them, and they both agreed to go in and evaluate Ron's condition and get back to me, and I said I would abide by their decision.
Well, the immunologist from the clinic went in and evaluated Ron and basically told him that he had…that he was not going to live more than the most a few weeks, and he could have control over the time of his death if he wished, and that was his decision to make, and he should think about it and talk it over with me.
I told Ron that whatever decision he made I would support, and he decided that he would…that he would…he would die…
I think it was the following morning after the doctor talked to him.
He requested that his parents and a very close friend of ours say goodbye to him, and that I'd be in the room at the time and stay with him when they said goodbye.
And I sat with him until he went to sleep, and he really looked peaceful…
. I decided that I did not want to stay until the moment of his death, I wanted to remember him living…but I decided that I wanted to stay just to ensure that he was in a deep peaceful sleep, that he wasn't going to suffer…and that's what I did.
KENNEDY
So was Dr Carrington exerting a right — some would say a fundamental right — to self-determination, or was he capitulating under the weight of an intolerable burden?
MRS CARRINGTON
Oh, I don't think you could clearly dichotomize and say it was one thing or the other.
I think it was a combination of things.
I think Ron needed to feel that he was in control of his fate.
He had a stubborn determination about him, and at the same time I think he was really exhausted; he was really exhausted, physically and emotionally.
KENNEDY
You will recall that Mrs Carrington spoke of her husband losing his rationality, and yet that he wanted to retain control over his fate.
Clearly, there comes a point when these two must come into conflict.
It's not uncommon also for patients in intensive care units to suffer psychological difficulties, such as depression.
So you may ask whether it's ever possible to fathom the real wishes of the patient.
One of those assessing whether or not Dr Carrington was able to make rational judgments and to take critical decisions was his psychiatrist Anthony Moore.
MOORE
Dr Carrington was trained as a physician and a psychiatrist; however, particularly as he became more ill, his professional mantle dropped away from him, as is often the case, and he became more simply a sick human.
The psychological insights which he might once have applied were no longer applicable; thus, like most people, like all of us would in a similar circumstance, the degree to which he could realistically perceive what was going on within his body and what was becoming of him came and went.
On one day he would articulate his awareness that his life-span would be short; on other days he would speak vibrantly to the issue of looking forward to returning to work, to what type of work he would be doing in the future, and so forth and so on.
His consistent wish until very very late in his course was that all conceivable medical measures be carried out.
Since his primary physicians didn't know to what degree his pulmonary disease was indeed perhaps reversible, there was no reason not to comply with Ron’ s wish.
However, as the medical picture became more clear, there became more and more a sense of underlying tension, with heroic care being delivered by people possessing the knowledge that it wasn't going to work.
KENNEDY
The heroic care Anthony Moore spoke of is only available at a price.
Dr Carrington's bill for this particular course of treatment had already reached $48,000, or about £28,000.
There's no health service in California except for the very poor, but most people carry insurance.
Nevertheless, it's not uncommon in the United States that families may, for example, have to sell their homes to pay for the medical treatment of a relative.
Dr Carrington's insurance coverage was for $50,0000 per course of treatment.
One of his doctors estimated that each day in intensive care was adding $1,000 to his medical bill.
You may reflect on what influence this financial pressure, in addition to all the other pressures he'd have felt, would have had on his will to’ live.
One doctor delivering ‘the heroic care’ was Dr John Goode, the lung specialist who was primarily responsible for Dr Carrington's day-to-day treatment.
In talking to Dr Goode, I pressed him particularly o how far he felt he could rely on Dr Carrington's ability to assess his prospects.
GOODE
I felt that there were several factors that caused him to want to continue living, and I think they're normal everyday factors.
He had a really nice family — he had a very good relationship with his wife — he was very bright, he enjoyed life, he read a lot, he had been teaching up until a month before hospitalization, and he had the will to live…
KENNEDY
He had a very strong will to live, did he?
GOODE
I'd say his will to live was extraordinary, it was more than staying alive.
He had functioned in the community, not just in his family up until…you know, with a lung function that would have kept a lot of people in bed, and he was reading, writing — he had published an article shortly before his hospitalization, and he was a very forceful fellow.
KENNEDY
Was Dr Carrington in considerable pain when he was in intensive care?
GOODE
It's really difficult for me to measure these sorts of things, but if you stop and look at him, he must have been in pain.
He had intravenous lines in his arms; he had many blood tests drawn; he had a tracheotomy tube — in other words a breathing tube — attached into his neck, and all these things must be somewhat uncomfortable.
Bedpans, not sleeping — these units are very uncomfortable.
KENNEDY
Was he under the influence of medication?
GOODE
At times I would give him more sedation than other times because of the course of the illness.
For instance, when one tries to wean a patient from a ventilator, the patient cannot be sedated heavily, because they'll tend to breathe less, and therefore require the ventilator more.
However, to get him to the point where he might be weaned from the ventilator, one must allow him to sleep and get stronger, so if it was that kind of day or that kind of period, he might have more sedation than other times.
KENNEDY
We know that Dr Carrington ultimately asked to be allowed to die.
What do you think persuaded Dr Carrington to ask that treatment be terminated?
GOODE
I can't be sure; I think it was a combination of events.
I think he finally started thinking, for reasons I can't say, about whether or not he could actually leave the hospital, and he finally asked, and he realized that he couldn't leave the hospital alive.
KENNEDY
Do you think he was under any pressure from any source — financial, from relatives, from the staff?
GOODE
I don't know his financial situation.
His wife gave me a rough idea of what their insurance situation was.
What pressures his wife brought to bear on him to come around to this decision I am not sure.
I felt that she may have either directly or indirectly encouraged him to make this decision for several reasons: she was suffering; she knew that he wasn't going to leave the hospital and she accepted that; and she didn't like seeing him talk himself into more suffering for him and for her; and I don't think there's any question that in some sense she must have gotten this across to him that he ought to give up much more than anyone else.
The nursing staff definitely did not do that.
As a matter of fact, it was one of those cases where the nursing staff had an unreasonable wish for him to live for ever— he was a very charming man.
KENNEDY
Could it be that the decision was taken in a temporary depression from drugs?
GOODE
Drugs may have had an effect.
But the thing that always concerns me about these kind of decisions under those kind of circumstances is that it might be a temporary depression: in other words a suicide wish, and this is a terrifically difficult issue that is bantered about a lot under these kind of circumstances, and normally, if someone says ‘Kill me,’ you figure they're crazy.
They must be depressed.
Everybody wants to live.
So when are you going to say that a man's request to kill him, which is what his request was, is a reasonable request?
Personally, I feel it was reasonable under those circumstances.
But again, I was closely involved.
KENNEDY
What guarantee did you have that it wasn't a decision taken in a moment of temporary depression?
GOODE
It was a very convincing, not cold, decision which he shared with everyone around him.
The other thing is that he asked for his family.
He didn't say ‘Do it right away, get me out of this.’
He listened to me as to what I thought might be a reasonable way to go about it.
All of this doesn't mean he wasn't stark raving mad, and just putting on.
But it all seemed very appropriate and didn't seem like a headstrong, desperate manoeuvre in any sense.
KENNEDY
Would it be fair to say that you accepted his decision when you thought it was the right decision, regardless of whether he may have been depressed or he may have been under the influence of drugs or some other pressure?
GOODE
No question.
I wanted him to make that decision.
For several days, maybe up to a week before that, whatever I was doing it was leading him to that decision.
He would say, ‘How about doing that?’ and I'd say, ‘Well, I…we really shouldn't do that.
I don't think that's going to make much difference.’
And that might be my only, you know, substantive interaction with him on that day.
And my goal was to bring him around to my way of thinking; there's no question that I stopped fooling around when he agreed with me.
KENNEDY
Are you sure that he was totally compos mentis?
Totally competent in his mind and lucid when he made that decision?
GOODE
Well, to get to my concept of the legal definition in this State, there's no question that he was.
I'm sure he was under a terrific amount of both metabolic and emotional stress.
You know — he's dying.
But as far as…could he pass a competency hearing?
He would have passed it with flying colours.
KENNEDY
The reason I pressed Dr Goode on the degree to which he could and should rely on Dr Carrington's decision is because both morally and legally, such a decision can be relied upon only if made by someone who's lucid and fully aware of what he's doing.
Since this is crucial in any discussion of a person's right to self-determination, I pursued the question of Dr Carrington's state of mind further with Anthony Moore.
MOORE
Ron was virtually dead physiologically before he achieved a consistent recognition of the severity of his state.
At that point, rather late one night, he and I had the last of a long sequence of talks.
He began to ask me what the realities were of his medical situation and his prognosis — what could be hoped for in the best of circumstances.
I told him.
It wasn't anything that he hadn't been told before, particularly by Dr Goode, and yet, it seemed that Ron, at this particular point, was psychologically prepared to hear the information in a way that he had not been before.
We talked.
We sat.
And he said some things like ‘And I tried so damn hard.’
And I could only say ‘Yes’.
He said, ‘So the most I can hope for would be to be at home on a respirator full-time?’
I said ‘Yes’.
And with some discussion he said, ‘That's not for me.
That simply is not for me.’
n
And I said, ‘Well, Ron, what do you want us to do?’
He said, ‘You're putting a hell of a burden on me.’
And I think I responded with something like ‘I think we're trying to share a hell of a burden with you.’
And he thought about that, and he kind of smiled and said, ‘Yes, you're right.’
Thought a bit more.
Said, ‘I'd like to have tomorrow morning to say goodbye to my father and to Laura and having done that, I'd like to die tomorrow afternoon.’
…I said, ‘Ron, you've got it.’
…A lot of pain in that moment.
Also about as close and as meaningful a human contact as one could dream of.
One that made perfect sense to Ron and made perfect sense to me.
I felt immense loss and immense satisfaction at the same time.
That was Ron's first clear statement along such lines.
It was a sudden shift for him from asking for…
‘Do everything,’ to ‘I hear what the realities are and it's no good.
You've done what you can; let's quit.’
In the possibility that it might be useful, I documented in his record what we talked about, and my view, as a psychiatrist, that he was absolutely lucid, and that his judgment was not impulsive, but rather a carefully thought through and well-considered decision which I felt should be respected.
I spoke to Dr Goode that night as well.
Didn't see Ron again.
It went precisely as he wished.
KENNEDY
I don't think that anyone would doubt that the treatment Dr Carrington received was extremely caring and humane; but can we be sure that in other cases this will necessarily be so?
Can we be sure that doctors will not continue to force treatment on a patient who has said ‘Enough’, yet not cease treatment or hasten death too soon?
No doubt the good doctor will always do the right thing, but can what the right thing is be stipulated in advance or written down?
The doctor has to make choices, and choices should involve principles.
Here we meet a central theme: can't we demand that the doctor set out the principles on which he acts for all to see?
Is it enough for society in general or the patient in particular to leave decisions over life and death to the doctor?
What for example, do we do if we, as relatives or patients, meet the rare case when a doctor is not a good doctor?
Should society ask for guidelines?
And if so, can satisfactory guidelines or rules, whether in the form of ethics or law, ever be worked out?
The bedrock of medical ethics to many doctors is, of course, the Hippocratic oath.
When one looks at this, it's surprising what little guidance in the day-to-day practice of medicine it offers.
Significantly, one of the few specific promises called for is: ‘I will give no deadly medicine to anyone if asked, nor suggest such counsel.’
In addition, can a set of precepts developed in the fifth century BC still retain sufficient vitality and relevance to regulate the practice of medical wonders at the end of the twentieth century AD?
A few moments ago, you heard Dr Moore tell how he assured Dr Carrington that his wish to die the following day would be respected by the physicians.
But it was not Dr Moore the psychiatrist who enabled Dr Carrington, in the easy vernacular of California, to ‘check out’.
That task fell to Dr Goode.
I asked him what he did, and what principles guided him.
GOODE
I have certain responses to these things in that…
I have to live with these responses.
And Dr Carrington had particularly asked me to disconnect him from the ventilator.
And I said, ‘Why do you want that?’
And he said, ‘I want to die’; and I said, ‘Fine’, and I said, ‘Is there anything else?’
And he said, ‘I don't want to have any pain.
I want to be free of pain.’
And I said, ‘Well, you know we can accomplish both these things, but I can't remove the ventilator from you — I can't do that, it makes me very uncomfortable.’
I said, ‘You know I have to stand here and watch you stop breathing if we do that, and as a matter of fact, you'll gasp for air, and you'll be watching us, and you'll see us go away…’
I said, ‘…that's going to be very frightening to you.’
He said, ‘But I don't want any pain.’
I said, ‘I know.’
And he said, ‘I want to die.’
I said, ‘I know.’
I said, ‘But I'm not going to do that.
I can't do that because it makes me uncomfortable.
It makes…it's just too hard for me.’
I watched it done before, once, as a student, and it turned my stomach, and it was very distressing to me, and in the end Carrington was going to die, and he did die, but I asked him if he would do it my way.
And I said to him — we had a fairly frank relationship — I said, ‘Listen, Ron, I'm going to be here tomorrow, and you're not; and I've got to be comfortable.’
I said, ‘I will accomplish those two goals: that you'll be pain-free and you'll die.
But how about this?’
And I suggested to him that I sedate him, essentially put him under general anaesthesia with morphine, and let nature take its course.
Maybe turn the respirator down slightly, and all the secretions would build up; he couldn't cough, couldn't be suctioned properly, and that without this intensive minute-to-minute care, he would die within hours — even attached to the ventilator.
And he said, ‘I won't have any pain?’
I said, ‘No.’
He said, ‘Will I be struggling?
Will it be hard for my wife?’
And I said, ‘No — none of that.’
He said, ‘I will die?’
And I said, ‘Yes.’
He said, ‘When?’
I said, ‘Well, that's tough, but probably today.’
And he said, ‘Okay.’
And I said, ‘Well, I'll come back in a couple of hours; think it over some more.’
So I came back, and he said, ‘Yes, it's still okay.’
And then he talked to his family, and then the third time I asked him again, and he still said it was okay, and so we did it.
All on the same day.
KENNEDY
Why wouldn't you be happy just to turn the respirator off?
GOODE
It's for myself.
It's totally…it's totally, I mean logically and legally, it's a ridiculous distinction; I don't think the distinction is important — that what comes out in the end is the same thing; I committed or omitted, however you want to put it — it's all the same thing.
So what I do is try and think about everybody involved.
His wife didn't want to watch him suffer, and she wanted him to die also, and she didn't want to see any suffering.
He wanted no pain, and he wanted to die.
And I felt like I could satisfy all these requests, plus my own discomfort, which I think is extremely important.
I have other patients to care for; I have a day; I have a family; I have…you know, I have a life ahead of me, and these things do come up often enough that I saw no contradiction to the…not only the needs of the patient but the final ending — what would happen would be the same.
KENNEDY
Do you think you behaved entirely ethically in your treatment of Dr Carrington?
GOODE
Well,…
I'm not sure.
I've gotten away from…
Let me put this in a less than shocking way, gotten away from thinking of everything in so-called ethical terms, because it confuses me.
I know that giving a man on a ventilator morphine in high doses, enough to cause general anaesthesia, is risking his life, and it distracts me to think about whether or not it's ethical.
I felt like that there was a…a more concrete and unifying decision, that…that decision was what are Dr Carrington's chances of being alive in any sense whatsoever, in having any human experiences, away from the hospital and away from this ventilator?
And once that decision was made, then I felt that there was sort of humane behaviour that was required.
KENNEDY
What would you say to the commentator who said, ‘My, here's another case of the doctor playing God?’
GOODE
Well…you see, I don't have a concept of God in that sense.
I feel like that the situation in which Carrington was in is what God does and that I'm part of that situation, and that he was going to die, and that there was nothing I could do about it.
And as a matter of fact, what got Carrington and myself to that situation on the last day was my giving up trying to play God, and I'd really reject that.
I feel that sometimes I do try to play God when I do try and keep people alive beyond reasonable times.
But he was to die.
I don't think there is any question about that, and I feel like we gave him a good shot at staying alive.
I think he got good medical care and was kept comfortable, and God decided he should die, and I couldn't prevent it.
KENNEDY
What would you say to the lawyer who would analyse what you did and what many other doctors, I'm sure, do every day, and would say, ‘This looks like homicide — killing by injection.’
What would you say to that?
GOODE
I could make no comment.
KENNEDY
Do you think it would be an insensitive response?
GOODE
I think it's a response that has nothing to do with my interaction with Carrington.
I think it's looking at a single event out of context.
I think his comment is true for what he has to say, in the sense that, you know — I always conceive of interactions with lawyers as answering questions, and that’ s not a question.
All that is, is a comment.
And I think his comment should stand for what it is.
It's not an important comment as far as I'm concerned.
KENNEDY
But don't you feel uncomfortable, you as a member of the medical profession, don't you feel uncomfortable if there exists in the wider world a set of rules which would condemn as one of the most heinous crimes that which you regard as the most humane of conduct?
GOODE
It's a really uncomfortable thing.
It's terribly uncomfortable to be trapped in this situation in the first place.
The second place is that probably one of the reasons that physicians feel threatened by these kind of laws is that, without the law, I can cruise along and maintain my patients' comfort and my sanity to the best of my ability.
When the law starts coming along, it brings in another factor that has to be contended with.
I trust myself.
Now the legal system always thinks that there are people around who shouldn't be trusted, and I think that's right, and that's what there's laws for.
Homicide isn't far away from that.
But this was not a circumstance of homicide.
That's all there is to it.
Sure, injecting high doses of morphine, or low doses of morphine in a patient like this, contributes to his demise, but so does turning off the respirator, so I don't think there's any difference really.
KENNEDY
You may feel uncomfortable hearing about Dr Carrington's case.
Society at large is naturally uneasy with the notion that doctors — even if acting humanely — may put an end to the life of a terminally ill person, whether young or old, or of a malformed baby with no prospects of survival.
Yet we all know that it goes on — under the counter, as it were.
Dr Goode's candid responses to those hard questions show, you may think, a doctor acting with great humanity and feeling.
But surely we ought to pause before we accept that ethics and law are irrelevant here.
You will recall that Dr Goode specifically regards as unimportant the distinction between omission and commission, between doing something to bring about death, as opposed to standing by and letting death take its course.
Yet this distinction is a vitally significant moral distinction to many, and is the linchpin of the law and ethics in this area.
Traditionally, the law has said that allowing someone who is terminally ill to die is lawful, but bringing about his or her death is unlawful, even if he or she consents or requests it.
Are these rules unsuited to modern medicine?
Is there a real distinction between turning off a respirator and letting Dr Carrington die, and injecting him so as to bring about his death?
If so, do we need our ethical and legal rules to continue to respect and enforce this distinction?
Here and in the United States, most experts now agree that a doctor is not obliged either ethically or legally to continue treatment when it's refused or is useless or has become a burden to the patient.
But can the doctor do more if the situation calls for it?
Dr Goode said he trusted himself, and clearly he is a good doctor; but can we always afford to trust, or do we thereby run the risk of taking a step down the road towards euthanasia, both voluntary and involuntary.
Yet again, is the price of having such a distinction doctors who are afraid to act and patients condemned to a lingering death?
It was in part to answer these questions that the California State Legislature in the Autumn of 1976 passed a law called the Natural Death Act.
It's the first Act of its kind in the world.
It attempts to clarify some of the confusion I pointed out between that which is called for by law and ethics and what doctors and patients in practice,think is called for.
Under the Act, a patient who's terminally ill and sustained by mechanical means may sign a directive authorizing the doctor to discontinue treatment and so allow death to take its course.
The doctor must do as the patient directs.
Should any relative complain, the doctor may rely upon the directive as justifying his actions.
I talked to Assemblyman Barry Keene, who, as Chairman of the California State Assembly Health Committee, wrote the bill and piloted it through the Legislature, and asked him first whether he felt that before the Act there was a grey area of uncertainty surrounding these problems.
KEENE
We found it very much a grey area.
We found that practices were very diverse, that people had different impressions, not only of what ought to be done, but what was in fact being done.
There were no good rules and regulations, and hospitals and insurance companies felt that they ought not to sit down and make them because, once they made them, they were admitting that these things were taking place and that such decisions were being made and were subject not only to public scrutiny but a threat of medical malpractice suits.
KENNEDY
But you chose to make some rules.
In the process of making them, did you meet any opposition apart from that which you said may have come from the medical malpractice fear?
KEENE
We really found two kinds of opposition.
One was the philosophic opposition of the Right-to-Life groups in this country; and they said that this was a foot in the door, the first step down the road towards active and involuntary euthanasia, and we had that argument to counter and that group to deal with, and even after countering the argument, we still had the group to deal with.
The other group were the physicians who felt that this was an unwarranted and unseemly intrusion of government into a relationship that is a very private and personal one, the patient-physician relationship.
KENNEDY
What do you think of that argument, you know, that law doesn't really have a place in the intensive care unit?
KEENE
Well, it works for everybody except the terminally ill patient.
That's the problem with that attitude; the doctor and the nurse and the hospital and everyone may be convinced that these problems are resolved adequately.
The only problem is that the terminally ill patient has in effect lost his autonomy, and it doesn't work for him, and that's what the bill is all about.
KENNEDY
Of course, when it came time to write the bill, there were great problems in choosing the exact words to be employed so that it wouldn't be seen by anyone as a ‘Euthanasia Bill’.
Originally the bill provided that treatment involving extraordinary medical measures could be refused.
These words ‘extraordinary medical measures’ were replaced by the words ‘life-sustaining procedures’which, in turn, were defined so as to be limited to respirators.
I put it to Assemblyman Keene that this weakened the bill, and restricted the freedom of action of patients and doctors.
KEENE
It depends in part on how one perceives the function that the Act serves, and it probably serves several.
The foremost is to reorient the relationship and the individuals who are party to that relationship in favour of the terminally ill patient and away from relatives and physicians and insurance companies and doctors and priests and others.
The operational effect is rather narrow; it operates on a limited group of people who are in a state of physical decline.
KENNEDY
Yes indeed, I mean many argue that in fact a law wasn't required, and that the common law, as it's developed and grown and, for example, in the Quinlan case, says that the withdrawal of treatment, the withholding of consent to treatment, is entirely lawful; and some might argue that, by giving a law like this, which is rather narrowly drawn, you've taken away a lot ; in other words, a doctor will feel, this I can do, but the other I can't do.
KEENE
Operationally the law provides a more neutral atmosphere within which the physician may operate.
We have tried to make it clear in the law that what we are establishing is a parallel procedure and not an exclusive procedure, so that the other law as it existed, whatever it is, still does exist today, but that here is a prescribed procedure which terminally ill patients may choose to use should they wish to do so.
Now some doctors could conceivably still be frightened off, but we must presume, I think, that doctors are literate people, that they can understand what the law is if it is told to them, and the medical societies and other groups are making available to them the workings of this particular Act.
KENNEDY
As you heard, the Act deals with only a narrow and fairly uncommon occurrence.
It leaves intact the old law to deal with all the other problems, ‘whatever the old law is’, as Assemblyman Keene put it.
He assumes doctors understand the law and consider it relevant.
In the light of this comment I'd like you to hear Dr Goode's observations on the Natural Death Act in the context of Dr Carrington's case.
GOODE
Well this was prior to January 1st, when the Natural Death Act became law.
I was aware of its existence, but hadn't read it and didn't know any more about it than that it was about to become law.
I didn't know the particulars of it.
KENNEDY
Would Dr Carrington's case have come within the provision of the Act, do you know?
GOODE
It could have.
In the sense that myself and another doctor, I think two doctors have to agree that the patient is terminal, and I think that would have been likely; as a matter of fact, I knew f no one who felt we should push ahead, and he had four or five physicians in different roles dealing with him, so he would have fulfilled the definition of being terminal.
The only difference then would have been that he would have had to sign, and then we would have had to wait two more weeks; and I'll tell you, it's interesting, with the bill the way it's written, to put that on the Carrington case would have meant his being alive and suffering two more weeks and honestly, I would have had to do something like that in two weeks, probably because we'd have to work hard on him.
The idea of the bill was to keep them going for two weeks, you know, so they can change their mind and…
KENNEDY
Is it your understanding then that the bill makes some acts of doctors lawful when they respond to the signing of a directive, but doesn't make lawful what you did thinking it was perfectly good medical technique?
GOODE
The Act does not help the legal standing of what I did.
KENNEDY
Do you think what you did was unlawful?
GOODE
I don't know if it was unlawful; I didn't think about it.
KENNEDY
One couldn't look for a stronger and more candid refutation of Assemblyman Keene's view that doctors think the law is relevant.
Despite what Dr Goode and others have said, however, I think the law and ethics governing the situation you've been hearing about are both understandable and quite sensitive to the needs of patients and doctors.
But it's a deplorable fact that for far too long lawyers and others have ignored this important area, and have left doctors to wrestle alone with its complexities.
Little wonder that the doctor now feels that he can do what he likes with us.
It may help if I explain the legal and ethical position as I see it.
As it happens, the only ethical guide which is relatively clear, though still very general, is that contained in a brief statement made by Pope Pius XII 20 years ago.
Though a statement of Catholic doctrine, it has received widespread acceptance.
In his famous allocution, Pope Pius declared that, morally, a doctor was not obliged to continue treatment, nor was a patient obliged to accept it when such treatment involved extraordinary medical measures.
And this has been interpreted as meaning measures which are excessively costly, burdensome, unusual, or which are of no real benefit to the patient.
Dr Carrington's treatment could well have been classified as such.
Now the legal position: though I'm referring to England, the law is, in my view, very similar in California.
First, a patient who is conscious and refuses treatment must have his wish respected whatever his condition, provided he's mature and lucid enough to make such a decision.
If the doctor thinks the patient isn't sufficiently lucid or mature, then the decision should be ignored.
Second, when a patient is near death, a doctor is not obliged to embark upon or continue heroic treatment which has no prospect of benefiting the patient.
Third, a doctor's obligation when he can no longer hold back the approach of death is to make the patient comfortable, including easing his pain.
If to ease pain, the doctor must take measures which may hasten death, this is permissible provided the doctor's aim is only the relief of pain.
Fourth, if a patient is on a respirator and has no prospects of breathing for himself again, then a distinction must be made.
The conscious, alert patient, such as the polio victim, must be given treatment for as long as he desires.
To switch off the respirator otherwise is impermissible.
If the patient is unconscious and will never regain consciousness, or is suffering from a progressive or fatal illness, then the respirator must be seen as heroic treatment and may be turned off, as in the case of Karen Quinlan, when it is no longer of any lasting benefit.
Finally, the relatives of patients have no right to make decisions on the patient's behalf.
Only a parent has such a right, and even then the parent may only act in the best interests of the patient.
These, then, are some general principles, but you may feel that they still leave considerable scope for discretion and interpretation.
So should we pass more laws?
Well, I take the view that legislation in a form like the Natural Death Act, although perhaps appropriate for California, should not be adopted in England.
Oftentimes, legislation creates as many problems as it solves — limiting flexibility and sometimes even inviting litigation.
Also, the constant political process of pressure and compromise may produce a law which satisfies no one.
This is not to say that I advocate the status quo.
Rather, I would like to see developed a Code of Practice binding on doctors which would grow out of the views of all interested parties: doctors, patients, and the public.
Thus, a whole range of decisions would not be left merely to the instinct of the doctor, good though he or she may be, but would be set down in a form which is at the same time authoritative, yet flexible and able to change if circumstances demand.
For we must never lose sight of the fact that the issues involved are moral ones; and that though doctors may be experts in medicine, they are no more competent or qualified to speak on moral issues than you or I.
You will remember that I said that the general principles I proposed still left room for discretion and interpretation.
It now remains for you to consider and debate the proper boundaries of such discretion and interpretation.
For this is a matter on which not just doctors or lawyers, but all of us, must have our say and our way.
The Law Relating to the Treatment of the Terminally Ill
INTRODUCTION
When a lawyer is invited to comment on the continuing care of those dying from cancer, the first reaction of many is surprise.
The assumption is commonly made that the decisions to be taken in caring for such patients, the therapeutic strategy to be adopted, are wholly medical matters, and thus wholly for the doctors to make, with or without discussion with the patient.
Of course, such decisions are medical matters in that they arise in the context of the professional relationship of doctor and patient, and they are for doctors to make in that the doctor is the professional ‘on the spot’ caring for the patient.
But it cannot be stated too emphatically that the principles by reference to which decisions are made are not within the unique prerogative of doctors to lay down.
The word ‘strategy’, or indeed, ‘management’, for example, implies that choices are available; and choices, if they are to be rationally defensible, must be made by reference to known and accepted principles.
Such principles are those which have been worked out by the larger society, not doctors alone, and which embody the moral, philosophical, and spiritual assumptions of that society.
The law is one source of such principles.
Indeed, in so far as the law represents the embodiment of those rules deemed so important by society as to warrant setting them out formally with appropriate sanctions for non-observance, legal principles are the most important regulators of doctors' decisions.
This is so even though explicit reference to the law is rarely, if ever, made, since the law establishes the pattern with which other normative principles, to which the doctor may more readily refer — his professional code of ethics, his or society's code of morality — by and large conform.
In the case of the dying, as in all other areas of medicine, therefore, the doctor must pay due heed to the law.
He must act within the law: he is never above it.
The law or, more correctly stated, those who make the law, have a corresponding obligation to ensure that the principles and rules laid down meet certain criteria.
First, the law must be clear.
Second, it must be sensitive to the particular circumstances it seeks to regulate — for example, the realities of modern medical practice and the availability and use of new technology and medicines.
Third, it must strike an appropriate balance between the interests of the various parties involved, without putting in jeopardy certain fundamental commitments, such as, for example , the protection of the individual and the absolute prohibition on the taking of another's life.
Some argue that the law in England vis-à-vis terminal patients does not meet the first of these criteria, and thus cannot satisfy,ex hypothesi , the other two.
This is because in England there is no statute or code setting out the law governing the continuing care of the terminally ill; nor are there more than a handful of cases that have been decided by the courts.l None the less, legal principles undoubtedly do exist and obviously condition the choices made by doctors.
The fact that the law is not well documented, however, has produced at least three unfortunate effects.
First, it has led to doubts as to the precise legal obligations of a doctor in a particular case.
This, in turn, has helped to foster the view that there is really no law at all; indeed, that the law is an irrelevance.
Alternatively, the practice has grown up that if the law is not clear, then, given that the possibility of being prosecuted for a crime or sued for damages may exist, albeit as a remote possibility in England, it is better always for the doctor to err on the side of caution and follow the most conservative or restrictive view of the law.
This practice, which is much more common in the United States, has acquired its own descriptive term, ‘defensive medicine’, a term suggestive of the notion that an unnecessary and destructive tension exists between what the doctor thinks is good medicine and what the law requires of him.
All of this can come as no surprise, since one of the greatest difficulties which confronts the medical legal commentator in dealing with the treatment of the terminally ill is that techniques and technology have developed and changed with such rapidity in the past decade or so that it is only vaguely that the problems are perceived, let alone responded to by developing a general consensus in the form of law.
Some general legal rules do exist, but often they assume a set of medical realities long overtaken by events.
The recourse to respirators and cardiac pace-makers that has made a legal definition of death based upon the absence of breathing and heartbeat outmoded is a good example.
Further, whatever legal rules do exist deal largely with the conventional medical-legal issues of acute and emergency treatment and with malpractice.
These rules are by and large irrelevant in dealing with the terminally ill patient who is, in a sense, in a special class.
Such a patient is, by definition, going to die sooner rather than later, and the regimen of care adopted, overshadowed as it is by the mass of available technology, calls for distinct and very sensitive regulation.
To make things more difficult, not only have legal rules failed to develop, but the concepts which provide the stuff of legal rules are equally ill equipped to respond adequately.
For example, a legal system which sees the contact of a doctor with his patient as an assault or battery made lawful by consent, and rests so much on the notion of informed consent without showing any real understanding of the dynamics of the doctor-patient relationship, is in danger of losing respect.
In the light of the foregoing, an invitation to spell out the legal rules governing the treatment of the terminally ill must be regarded with some trepidation.
None the less, the law of England can, in my submission, be stated with sufficient clarity to dispel the various criticisms which have been noted.
I further submit that when properly understood, it is sufficiently sensitive to the diverse realities it would seek to regulate to render uncalled-for the criticisms and apprehensions reflected in recourse (now often ritualized) to the term ‘defensive medicine’.
PRINCIPLE UNDERLYING THE LAW
Before setting out the law, it is important to discover to what extent there exists any unifying principle or premiss which draws together the individual legal rules.
Such a principle would not only add rational coherence to what would otherwise be a set of unrelated rules, but would also supply the reference point whereby novel dilemmas may be resolved.
One such principle, often referred to in Continental Europe and the United States, is that of contract, that the relationship between the doctor and the patient is regulated by agreement between the two parties.
This is unsatisfactory for a number of reasons.
First, in England there is not, as a matter of law, a contract between doctor and patient in the vast majority of all relationships, because health care is made available through the National Health Service.
Second, the notion of a contract carries the implication that medical care is a commodity to be bargained for in the market-place, and only available if the price is right, a notion specifically rejected in England.
Another unifying principle is said to be the concept of trust.
This, it is said, is the key factor governing the doctor-patient relationship.
This analysis is equally flawed.
First, to argue that each party must trust the other does not demonstrate that each in fact does so.
Indeed, oftentimes a doctor may expect trust without himself reciprocating, in that, for example, he will choose not to tell his patient certain facts, on the paternalistic premiss that the patient is better off not knowing.
Second, trust presupposes a conscious and reasoned decision by the patient which, in fact, may be beyond many patients who, through pain, the effect of drugs, or unconsciousness, cannot make such decisions.
If there is a unifying premiss which informs the law, it is to be found, I submit, in the concept of duty.
A doctor has expertise.
A patient seeks help and is therefore vulnerable.
He can only rely on the doctor's skill and good faith.
Given this reality, the law imposes duties upon the doctor which exist independently of agreement.
The patient may expect and ultimately demand that these duties be carried out.
THE GENERAL DUTY OF THE DOCTOR
So what is the doctor's duty in the case of caring for the terminally ill?
The classification of a patient as ‘terminally ill’ is a decision for the doctor to make, based upon wholly medical criteria.
Since, however, the decision carries with it certain significant implications, it is one which must be made in good faith, and on the basis of the exercise of proper medical skill.
If arrived at otherwise, clearly legal redress will be available to any patient who suffers harm as a consequence.
‘Terminally ill’, I submit means that the patient has an illness which has been accurately diagnosed, and which seems certain to bring about his death within a relatively short period of time, since the illness is beyond both cure and palliation.
The duty of the doctor in such a circumstance is, stated generally, to use all appropriate medical skills to make the time remaining to the patient as comfortable as possible.
This is both his professional, ethical duty and his legal duty.
The primary significance of stating the duty in these terms has to do with the form of caring or treatment the doctor provides.
He is no longer under a duty to adopt forms of treatment intended to cure the patient, since, by definition, the patient is beyond cure.
Nor need the doctor adopt palliative measures, if ‘palliation’ is taken to mean the use of measures aimed at modifying pathological processes or their consequences so as to delay or prevent the otherwise inevitable effects of such processes or their consequences.
The doctor's duty is limited to the control, to the extent that it is possible, of discomforting symptoms.
But even this apparently simple principle requires some clarification before we go further.
It is important to notice that although the symptoms displayed by the patient usually relate to the terminal illness, there may be times when they arise from some separate, independent condition.
When this happens, the doctor's first duty is to diagnose this fact correctly.
Then he must decide on the appropriate response, which is a legal, as well as a medical, decision.
There are perhaps, three principles which must be followed.
First, if the new condition has discomforting symptoms, these should be controlled.
Second, if it does not, it can be ignored.
Third, both these principles are subject to the question of whether the new condition may be cured or palliated.
If it can be, and if by so doing, the patient would be able to enjoy a further period of life without increased discomfort, then the cure or palliative measure should be adopted.
This general duty of the doctor, to control symptoms as much as possible and otherwise make the patient as comfortable as possible, has implicit in it two propositions worth noticing.
First, medical treatment other than symptom control or management is uncalled-for as a matter of law and, indeed, is inappropriate; not only is it unethical conduct, but the doctor could also be subject to legal sanction.
If the doctor's duty is a matter of law, a court could restrain a doctor from continuing such treatment, and he could be held liable to pay damages for any distress or increased discomfort the patient suffered as a consequence, in that his conduct would amount to negligence.
It would not be open to a doctor to argue that other doctors did as he did.
Medical evidence would be relevant only to establish whether what the doctor did was deemed acceptable medical practice to make the dying patient comfortable.
Although this is undoubtedly the law, it often seems to be ignored, particularly in the United States, where pointless efforts are made by doctors, albeit often with the best of intentions.
For example, the doctor may fear that if he does not use every technique in his armoury, he will be accused of neglecting his patient; or the doctor may simply not understand the real nature of his obligations.
The second implicit proposition is that the diagnosis of a terminal illness does not mean that the doctor's obligations to his patient cease.
There is some fear among lay people that this is so, that the doctor gives up and hands the patient over to those nursing him.
Furthermore, to the extent that some doctors, especially those recently trained, see themselves as medical scientists solving problems and dispensing cures, rather than fundamentally caring for their patients, they may, in fact, be guilty of distancing themselves from, if not abandoning, their dying patients.
This can also happen when a doctor experiences discomfort in the face of death, or an inability to come to terms with his own helplessness.
But a dying patient is still a living patient.
The law recognizes this and demands that care continue, even if its nature changes.
This is an example of the English law's affirmation of its fundamental respect for life.
SPECIFIC DUTIES
Having stated the general duty of a doctor towards his terminally ill p it is necessary to examine how this general duty is made more specific and applied in the myriad real-life situations which arise.
Analytically, the is one of deriving more specific principles from more general ones.
It is in the nature of the law, however, to be couched in abstract terms.
There is not one particular legal rule for each situation which arises or may arise.
This would be a system of ad hoc law which would suggest that each novel situation warrants the creation of a new rule.
Rather, the law works dynamically through the process of analogical reasoning.
A principle is enunciated which is intended and designed to regulate a certain real situation X. Another principle regulates another real situation, Y. When a novel situation Z arises for which no principle has apparently been specifically designed, the law is determined by examining the extent to which Z is closer to X or to Y. If it is more analogous to X, then the legal principle regulating X will ordinarily be invoked.
Occasionally situation Z may inspire the creation of a wholly new principle, which then serves as a possible precedent for the future.
Thus, what is outlined here represents both the existing law and the basis for determining the law in as yet untested or unfamiliar circumstances.
Respect for the Patient's Right to Self-Determination
Perhaps the most fundamental precept of the common law is respect for the liberty of the individual.
In a medical-legal context this means that a person's right to self-determination, to deal with his body as he sees fit, is protected by law.
The doctor's first duty is to respect this right.
This applies as much to the terminally ill patient as to any other.
The patient may not be abandoned; but the care given must change from treating for living to treating for dying.
Thus, if a patient who is aware of the nature of his condition and competent to make a decision refuses further treatment from his doctor, then continued treatment is unlawful, as constituting a battery or a criminal assault.
This is so notwithstanding the fact that the doctor may regard the patient's decision as wrong or ill advised.
To abide by the refusal may be difficult for the doctor; but it is required by law, the principle of self-determination overruling any notion that ‘the doctor knows best’ or some vague notion of there being a public policy in favour of preserving life.
In practice, this situation will arise only very rarely if a regime of symptom control and no more has been adopted.
None the less, the importance of the obligation to respect the wishes of the patient cannot be overstated.
Of course, the law only recognizes the patient's right to self-determination in circumstances in which the patient is both legally competent (that is , not unconscious or a young child) and sufficiently lucid to comprehend what he is doing.
It is obvious that there is some danger that the principle may be swallowed by these exceptions, particularly the second, since the determination of a patient's lucidity is made by the doctor who may well disagree with the patient's expressed wish and want to override it.
The decision is made harder by the knowledge that almost all terminally ill patients are receiving medication and may be suffering pain and distress, all of which could affect their mental competence, quite apart from some doctors' reluctance to ‘give up.’
Ultimately, the good faith of the doctor must guide his actions, since complaints after the event by patients or relatives may founder for lack of proof.
Perhaps the most appropriate mechanism for safeguarding both the patient's and the doctor's interests is for the hospital to document the circumstances fully in the notes, and to have the patient's competence assessed in cases of doubt by a qualified person not otherwise concerned in the case.
Thus, in summary, the first duty of a doctor is to listen to and respect the wishes of his patient.
It may be noted for the sake of completeness that respect for the patient's right to self-determination is not without its own limitation.
A person's autonomous choices call for respect only as long as they do not seriously impinge on another's enjoyment of his autonomy and that other has not agreed beforehand to give up certain of his choices as a condition of practising medicine in, for example, the National Health Service.
This allows two further propositions in the present context.
First, in the unlikely event that a patient in a hospital refused even nursing care — for example, bathing or changing sheets — different considerations would apply.
The hospital's duty to maintain hygiene and protect the health of other patients would entitle the hospital to demand acceptance of such care as a condition for remaining in the hospital.
Continued refusal would justify discharging those patients fit enough to be moved and with somewhere to go, and forcing the others to submit.
This does not extend to feeding a patient against his will, which I regard as a form of aggressive treatment.
Second, although the patient may refuse certain procedures, it is doubtful that he can insist on procedures which the doctor, in the exercise of reasonable medical judgment, in good faith regards as uncalled-for.
Indeed, to the extent that any such request may represent an unjustified use of scarce resources, it would be unethical for the doctor to comply or for the patient to insist that he does so.
The Prohibition Against Taking Life
Having established the point that it is the patient who ultimately may set the limits to the doctor's intervention, it is now necessary to consider the duties which arise in the usual circumstances in which treatment is consented to.
The almost trite observation has already been made that the patient, though dying, is still living.
This cannot be overemphasized, however, in that respect for life is a cardinal principle of English law.
It follows that the taking of a patient's life by some conduct deliberately designed with the primary intention of bringing about his death is unlawful, whether it be at the patient's request or without his knowledge or consent.
This is homicide.
The distinction between killing the patient and changing treatment so as to allow death to take place is sometimes a fine one, and taxes philosophers and lawyers.
Some see the distinction in terms of a commission which is unlawful and an omission which may not be.
I do not adopt this distinction.
Though it is part of the general law, I regard it as unhelpful here.
The real argument is not how a doctor's conduct can be characterized, but whether under the circumstances he has fulfilled his duty to the patient to care for him in good faith.
The principles of good faith reflect professional ethics and general social morality.
Neither at present condones euthanasia, so that, to cause the patient's death, whether by omission or commission, would be a breach of the duty to care for the patient in good faith, and hence unlawful.
Both, however, contemplate allowing the patient to die, if, under the circumstances, the illness is terminal and no other form of treatment, apart from treatment for dying, is ethically indicated.
Many doctors specializing in the care of the dying consider that the state of modern medicine makes even the need to consider the notion of euthanasia, whether at the request of the patient or otherwise, as an option quite unnecessary, quite apart from its moral repugnance.
For the variety of medicines now available to the doctor allow him to relieve the pain, distress, or even agony which could prompt a consideration of euthanasia.
While this is so, it is still the case that by no means all hospitals or doctors are yet educated in the pharmacological and other management of the terminally ill, and large numbers of patients outside hospices and centres of excellence may well, by virtue of their condition, continue to pose the problem of euthanasia.
The appropriate response, however, is not to alter the law so as to allow euthanasia, and thereby arguably undermine the respect for life enshrined both in the law and medical training.
Rather, attention must be directed to ensuring that doctors who care for the dying understand and use the medicines and techniques now available.
To Intervene Or Not
The question which next arises is whether the doctor, while prohibited from doing anything deliberately aimed at causing the death of his patient, may so adjust the treatment that he does not actively intervene and the patient dies.
The examples commonly cited are whether antibiotics must be administered if the patient contracts pneumonia, or whether the patient must be resuscitated if he suffers heart failure.
As has been seen, the analysis which I prefer is couched in the language not of acts and omissions, but of duties.
This approach is superior both morally and legally.
The doctor owes the patient certain duties by virtue of the relationship of doctor and patient.
The duties which arise in this situation can be set out, as can those arising elsewhere.
Moreover, to claim that in allowing the patient to die, the doctor acted lawfully, because he omitted to do anything, rather than committed any act, is to overlook the obvious point that, depending on the particular circumstances, it may be the doctor's duty to act, so that his failure to act by allowing death constituted a breach of duty.
The problem is best analysed in the following stages.
The doctor's duty to the terminally ill is centred on making the patient comfortable until death.
The doctor is not under a duty to take action to avert death if such action will not aid in the comfort of the patient.
Each patient is different in terms of the progress of his disease, his psychological response to it, his will to live or otherwise; and thus the general principle of each patient's comfort is to be judged in the light of these particular facts.
Obviously, purely objective criteria such as the patient's age or the particular illness cannot be justified or relied upon.
The patient's death is not an evil to be avoided at all costs, but is an inevitable consequence of his condition.
Thus, if, in the light of the particular facts, the patient may be discomforted by the doctor's conduct, the doctor is under no duty to act.
Equally, if the patient may be comforted by the doctor's conduct, then the doctor is under a duty to act, provided that the conduct is otherwise licit.
Another way of analysing the doctor's duty is to say that, when a patient is near death, a doctor is not obliged to embark upon or continue heroic treatment which has no prospect of benefiting the patient.
An alternative, more common, term to ‘heroic’ is ‘extraordinary’.
It was Pope Pius XII who first advanced the view that doctors were not obliged to give, nor patients to accept, ‘extraordinary medical measures’.
The term has consistently been interpreted as meaning ‘whatever here and now is very costly or very unusual or very painful or very difficult or very dangerous, or if the good effects that can be expected from its use are not proportionate to the difficulty and inconvenience that are entailed.’
In the 1976 Stevens Lecture, the Archbishop of Canterbury expressed his support for this as a moral principle.
I take the view that it is also the legal principle.
Indeed, I would go so far as to say that a doctor who continued treatment past this point would be behaving at least unethically, if not unlawfully.
It is important to understand that it is never treatment in the abstract which can be described as ‘extraordinary’, but only treatment in the context of the particular patient being cared for.
It is the particular patient's care which matters.
The real question is whether, under the circumstances, it would be wrong to continue intervention.
This is often referred to as a consideration of the patient's future ‘quality of life’.
Once this is understood, it is clear that terms such as‘extraordinary treatment’ or ‘quality of life’only state the problem.
What still have to be worked out are the criteria which would justify not intervening aggressively, or, to put it another way, would amount to a quality of life which was not worth having.
There is strong support for the idea that excessive pain, expense, and hardship, together with no hope of benefit, may serve as the starting-points — though obviously words such as‘excessive’ need further careful definition.
Thus, the term ‘extraordinary treatment’ is a conclusion rather than a starting-point for analysis.
As Dr Gillon argues, ‘once the actual criteria of decision are specified, the misleading labels ‘ordinary means’ and ‘extraordinary means’become superfluous.’
I agree with Dr Gillon that it would be more helpful to use the terms ‘ethically indicated’ and ‘ethically not indicated’rather than‘ordinary’and ‘extraordinary’.
Applying these principles, pneumonia need not be treated if, on the facts, to do so would mean that the patient recovered to endure a further period of discomfort, pain, or inevitable, distressing deterioration.
But if the patient could be restored to a state whereby he could enjoy a further period of life at the level of comfort he previously had, then it should be treated.
The same would be true of resuscitation and any similar intervention.
Given that the decision calls for considered judgment, it must always be appropriate to consider the matter in the case of each patient before it arises.
This avoids the possibility of unwarranted decisions being made in the heat of the moment.
It may also be appropriate to record the decision made so that all involved in the patient's case may know.
This is not to say that it may not be revised.
Indeed, it is appropriate to review it periodically, as the circumstances of the patient may change.
Clearly, much room is left for the discretion of the doctor, and this is as it should be, since the assessment of the patient's prognosis is one of his distinct skills.
The law lays down the general principle, and the doctor who acts skilfully, reasonably, and in good faith is protected.
This analysis also helps to clarify another issue which taxes some commentators.
The realities of modern medical technology have made it possible for doctors to extend the process of dying through the use, for example, of what are colloquially, but perhaps inaptly, called ‘life-support’ machines.
Questions are asked as to how long the doctor must maintain his patient on such a machine before discontinuing its use.
Such questions are inappropriate.
They stem from an inadequate analysis of the legal and ethical principles involved.
Life-support machines are merely one form of interventionist therapy, no different in principle from medicines, surgery, or other treatment.
In the case of the terminally ill, their use is ordinarily uncalled-for, since they can readily be categorized as heroic, or extraordinary, therapy, imposing a further burden of discomfort on the patient with no foreseeable benefit in terms of increased comfort in the future.
The key question is not whether their use may be discontinued, once started; rather, it is whether they should be used in the first place.
That is, it is not a matter of switching them off, but of whether they should be switched on either initially or again after suitable tests have been carried out.
This is, therefore, the same question as whether to give antibiotics when pneumonia occurs, and is resolved by reference to the same principle.
The Doctrine of Double Effect
A doctor's obligation in treating the terminally ill is, as has been seen, to make his patient comfortable, which includes easing pain.
There may arise circumstances in which a doctor may use a form of treatment for his patient's benefit aware of the fact that it may have the secondary effect of accelerating (or run the risk of accelerating) the patient's death.
This reflects the so-called doctrine of double effect which was incorporated into English law in one of the few cases that have been decided in this area,R v. 
Bodkin Adams .
The doctor is not in breach of his legal duty to his patient if, by adopting the particular form of treatment, his principal and primary intention is the alleviation of symptoms which are discomforting and irremediable in any less drastic a way.
This proposition is not limited to the oft-cited example of the use of increased doses of morphine, a practice which specialists argue is no longer necessary or appropriate, but extends to any treatment decision.
Aiding Suicide
It may happen sometimes that the patient may wish to end his life, rather than wait for death.
The specialists again argue that with the right regime of treatment, there is no need for this to happen; but in reality the right regime is not always available, and even if it were, some patients may wish to retain their independence to choose suicide.
By the Suicide Act 1961, section 2, English law makes aiding and abetting the suicide of another a serious crime (see R v. 
Reed ).
Thus, a doctor is under a duty to refrain from any act which may aid his patient in committing suicide.
It is, however, a fine line.
between aiding suicide and making available, for example, certain drugs to relieve pain which, if more than a certain dosage is taken, will cause death.
A court would, I submit, be slow to find liable a doctor who merely facilitated the self-determination of someone unable through illness to help himself.
This should be contrasted with the situation in which the patient instructs the doctor to refrain from further treatment.
As has been seen, the doctor is under a duty to comply with this request, provided the patient is lucid and competent.
This is not aiding a suicide, since the patient is not, I submit, committing suicide, but only declining further medical care.
Proxy Decision Making
If the patient is competent, no one else may make decisions for him.
Relatives should, of course, be involved; but they have no right to make decisions about treatment.
But the patient may not be competent.
Thus, the final matter for consideration is the duty owed by the doctor when the patient is unable to participate in treatment decisions, through unconsciousness, lack of comprehension, or legal incompetence, and others purport to speak for him.
Is the doctor under a duty to respect treatment decisions proposed by relatives or next of kin?
Proxy consent, decision making on another's behalf, is well known to the law.
There are, however, certain risks involved in delegating to people other than the patient the power to make what may be life-or-death decisions — for example, the decision to discontinue certain treatment, to control symptoms, or not to resuscitate the patient.
English law seeks to avoid these risks.
Where the patient is incompetent, any analysis of the situation should consider children separately from adults.
Incompetence (or incapacity) in a child, it should be noted, depends not on age but on maturity and the capacity to understand what is involved in any decision.
As regards the incompetent child, only his parents or legal guardian may speak for him, and then only for as long as he remains under their control or until majority at 18 years of age.
In speaking for him, they may only act in his best interests.
The test of what is in a child's best interests refers to general societal values, rather than the views of the particular parent or legal guardian.
Thus, for example, the refusal by a parent or guardian, on the patient's behalf, of a certain treatment need not necessarily be respected, if it is deemed in the patient's interests to treat him this way.
Equally, a doctor need not respect a parent's or legal guardian's demand that treatment be continued or altered if in his view it is pointless, and the treatment would be categorized as ethically not indicated.
This is because the law accepts that it may not always be in the best interests of a patient to receive further invasive, or aggressive, treatment.
Support for these propositions may be found in the case of Re B .
The Court of Appeal had to decide whether to authorize surgery on a week-old child born with Down's syndrome and duodenal atresia.
The child's parents took the view that surgery would be wrong, and wanted the child to be allowed to die.
Mr Justice Ewbank endorsed this view.
But, on appeal the same day, Lord Justice Templeman, speaking for the court, held that ‘the Judge erred because he was influenced by the views of the parents, instead of deciding what was in the best interests of the child’.
Earlier in his decision, however, he had posed the question, ‘was the child's life going to be so demonstrably awful that it should be condemned to die; or was the kind of life so imponderable that it would be wrong to condemn her to die?’
The implication would seem to be that some lives could be ‘so demonstrably awful’ that the doctor's legal duty would be limited to making the child comfortable and allowing it to die.
The court does not offer any criteria of awfulness; but it may be that the law will reflect those factors involved in the analysis of the circumstances in which treatment is considered to be ethically not indicated.
The significance of the decision here, given that the case concerned a child who was not terminally ill, is its recognition that it may not always be a doctor's duty in law to preserve life, provided certain conditions are met.
As regards others who are terminally ill and whom the law regards as incompetent — for example, the unconscious, the mentally ill, the mentally handicapped, or the seriously confused — it is not clear that anyone has authority in law to consent to or refuse treatment on their behalf.
The law's response if the matter were tested would doubtless be that, first, it must be satisfactorily established by the doctor responsible that the patient was in fact incompetent.
Second, it must be shown that there was no expression of view made by the person as to what should be done in the event that he became incompetent, or, if there were such an expression of view, that it was made when the patient was already incompetent.
Third, the doctor may then decide on the appropriate care according to the ethical and legal principles set out earlier.
Fourth, if, having acted according to these principles, he were subsequently challenged regarding the lawfulness of his conduct, the doctor would have the benefit of the defence of necessity if he had intervened, but if he had not intervened, he would not thereby be in breach of his duty to his patient.
If the patient had expressed a view while still competent as to the treatment he should receive, the precise legal status of such a statement or request is not clear.
Such express declarations have come to be known as Living Wills, and have received much attention in the United States and elsewhere.
They are not really a case of proxy decision, save that they instruct others to act.
They represent, in large part, a reaction to the fear of many, both of being the object of never-ending and useless interventions and of being a burden to others.
They represent an attempt to retain autonomy through prior expression of will, after the ability to choose and act on the choice has gone.
As with calls for euthanasia, it could be that a proper understanding by doctors of their duties to their patients, both ethical and legal, could obviate the need in large part for such developments.
Returning to the status of such an expression of view, it is probably the case that if the doctor were satisfied that it truly represented the patient's view and was executed while he was still competent, then the doctor ought ethically to respect its intent.
In law, however, it has no force, and a doctor must ignore it if it requests him to do that which is otherwise unlawful or is contrary to the duty he owes to any patient.
If, for example, a patient expressed the wish that the doctor kill her if she reached a particular point of mental and physical deterioration, or if the request was that she be left to die when she was not terminally ill, then the doctor would be legally obliged to ignore the request.
In other cases, the doctor should, of course, seek to respect the patient's wishes, since, in any event, the patient will be requesting the doctor to do only that which the law already requires and permits him to do, with perhaps some greater specificity as to detail.
For example, the patient may have indicated that if her illness has progressed beyond a certain specified point, she should not receive a particular, or any, form of intervention.
Another way in which a patient may seek to achieve control over his fate once he has become incompetent is through the device of an Enduring or Durable Power of Attorney.
This is a case of proxy decision making, since it authorizes a named person to make treatment decisions on the patient's behalf, once the patient is adjudged incompetent.
The aim, of course, is to delegate decision making to a trusted and close friend or relative who the patient feels best knows him and will speak for him when he cannot speak for himself.
No provision exists for such powers of attorney in English law.
At common law any power of attorney lapses immediately the person who granted the power becomes incompetent.
The Enduring Powers of Attorney Act 1985, although extending powers beyond the onset of incompetence does not cover decisions concerning the grantor's person, which would include treatment, but appears to relate only to the management of his property.
Thus, at present, the nominated person would lack any legal authority; and whether he would be listened to in matters relating to the treatment of the patient would depend on the good sense and good faith of the doctor.
CONCLUSION
From this recital of the general and specific duties of the doctor, it can be seen that the law in England, if understood and followed, is sensitive to the needs of patient and doctor alike.
It allows the most sensitive care to be practised, because it rests on an understanding of the realities of terminal illness and care.
It retains the flexibility necessary to meet changing circumstances, and allows appropriate discretion to doctors without sacrificing its adherence to fundamental principles.
Occasionally, disquiet is expressed that the law is not more coherently set out.
Indeed, for the majority of these propositions there is no authority in the sense of legislation or court decision.
Though I am confident of their validity, it is unsatisfactory for the law to remain a matter of conjecture.
It follows that there is a need for some authoritative synthesis of the law.
The form this should take, in my view, is a Code of Practice worked out by representatives of the medical profession together with lawyers, theologians, philosophers, and interested laymen.
It would not be statute law in the first instance, since it takes so long to get proposed statutes passed into law.
Also, there is a danger that in such a sensitive area a statute may well be a clumsy approach initially.
A code could serve as a precursor.
It would serve as the authoritative guideline, while retaining flexibility and being easier to amend.
Since, ultimately, the law has to be stated authoritatively, there is a case for passing a statute, once experience of the working of the Code has had time to show up any problems there may be.
An example of the use of Codes of Practice is the report of the working party on the transplantation of organs, produced under the aegis of the Department of Health, which itself incorporates an earlier Code of Practice on the diagnosis of death, contained in the Report of the Medical Royal Colleges and their Faculties in the United Kingdom.
In this case, in fact, it has not proved necessary to move to the next stage of passing a statute, at least not for the time being.
The Legal Effect of Requests by the Terminally Ill and Aged not to Receive Further Treatment from Doctors
The role played by consent in the criminal law warrants careful examination.
Particularly challenging to the criminal lawyer is the role played by consent in the medical-legal context.
In this article, as the title suggests, I shall deal in detail with a rather specific topic.
I hope to show, however, that in concentrating on such a narrow area, issues of wider import can be identified.
Indeed, the aim of the article is to raise the question of whether consent is a proper conceptual tool for the analysis of medical-legal problems, by considering its use and usefulness in one particular area.
Medical treatment which involves any touching of a patient is still analysed generally in law as lawful because the patient has consented to what would otherwise be an assault.
There are two key concepts involved in such an analysis.
The first, which will not concern us here, is that of ‘treatment’.
The issue, shortly stated, is whether there are touchings which do not qualify as treatment so that consent may be irrelevant.
It is arguable that there is a spectrum of touchings, ranging from the obviously curative operation, such as the removal of an infected appendix, to the performance of somewhat exotic operations such as silicone breast implants and the removal of ‘anomalous’ sexual apparatus in sex-change surgery, including en route such operations as voluntary sterilization, rhinoplasty, and abortion.
The line which the law draws is at the very least indistinct, and turns on such imponderables as malum in se , mayhem, degrees of harmfulness, and public policy, and calls for an examination of such unsatisfactory cases as Donovan ,Bravery v.
Bravery , and Coney .
The second concept, and the one we are concerned with here, is consent.
If consent makes a touching lawful, then it must follow that if a patient withholds consent, if he refuses to be touched by a doctor, any further touching will be unlawful, and will give rise to civil and criminal liability.
Indeed, this is accepted as a general proposition or principle, and I shall call it ‘the general principle’ throughout this article.
A patient has the ‘right to decline operative investigation or treatment however unreasonable or foolish this may appear in the eyes of his medical advisers’.
Glanville Williams recently wrote: ‘Some doctors seem to fail to realise that if an adult patient has positively forbidden particular treatment, they act illegally if they administer it, and could be…prosecuted for assault.’
In the United States, Cardozo J. in the landmark case of Schloendorff v.
 Society of New York Hospital , held that ‘every human being of adult years and sound mind has a right to determine what shall be done with his own body.’
It should be noted that I am concentrating here on ‘further treatment’ and therefore assume a pre-existing relationship between the doctor and the patient.
I limit my inquiry further by not considering the situation in which the doctor exceeds the norm of accepted treatment — for example, where his treatment borders on experimentation, where other considerations apply.
The basic situation which I contemplate is a patient in hospital refusing all but nursing attendance, or the patient at home refusing all care, even if it means that he will be left alone.
The general principle contemplates a model of a patient of an age recognized as endowing him with the competence to exercise a valid choice, and who is lucid in the sense not only that he regards himself as being in control of his mental faculties, but also that he is recognized to be so by others.
There are, therefore, two key features: first, that the patient is of an age the law regards as proper, and second, that he is of sound mind.
This latter feature has two distinct negative qualities: first, that the patient must not be someone categorized as chronically mentally unfit, and second, that he must not be someone who is regarded as suffering from temporary unsoundness of mind.
The philosophical premiss which underlies the general principle is the right to self-determination.
My submission is that the identification and analysis of the two key features mentioned above indicate that it is a right which is far from being the general bulwark it purports to be.
I will seek to show that it is confined within narrow, if ill-defined, bounds.
For these features have only to be noticed for it to be seen that very considerable scope exists for denying or undermining the exercise of the right.
Indeed, there exists an equally strong, and in this context often contradictory, philosophical premiss, that of paternalism.
Clearly, the basis of paternalism — that decisions concerning a particular person's fate are better made for him than by him, because others wiser than he are more keenly aware of his best interests than he can be — conflicts with the notion of a right to self-determination, whereby a person is deemed entitled to make his own decisions concerning himself, within tolerable limits, free from the interference of others.
Paternalism, however, makes its demands, which have to be met.
Indeed, it is the purpose of this article to suggest that what was alleged at the outset to be the general principle, that of self-determination, is in fact the exception.
I shall suggest that the dominant philosophy in practice is paternalism.
Chancellor Garth Moore writes:
Suppose that the patient has said to his doctor, ‘I am an old man, I know that cancer will kill me fairly soon.
If, mercifully, I get pneumonia first, let it take its course.
Do not give me antibiotics.
I would rather die of pneumonia than cancer.’
Much the same problem would be posed even more dramatically in the case of a polio patient in an iron lung.
He might say to the doctor, ‘I do not wish to live as a helpless paralytic.
Switch off that machine and let me die now.’
Less dramatic but equally puzzling would be the problem posed by the patient who deliberately went on hunger-strike in order to end his suffering.
Should the doctor and nurses apply forcible feeding?
There can be no certain answer in law to these problems…
. It is here very tentatively suggested that these may be cases in which, as the law now stands, the doctor has a discretion …either to refrain, at his patient's request, from administering life-saving treatments or to ignore his patient's wishes where compliance is likely to result in death.
In noting such comments, it is appropriate to recall that this discussion must be seen against a background described with some outrage by many commentators.
Ramsey writes that it is
now possible to deprive many a patient of a fulfilment of the wish to have a death of one's own, the scene Dr. Rynearson (whose work he is discussing) describes is one of patients with an ‘untreatable’ disease being kept alive indefinitely by means of tubes inserted into their stomachs, or into their veins, or into their bladders, or into their rectums — and the whole sad scene thus created encompassed within a cocoon of oxygen which is the next thing to a shroud.
Elkinton writes: ‘In his efforts to preserve life and restore health, the physician sometimes may fail to give enough consideration to his other obligation, namely to relieve suffering and to allow the patient, if he is to die, to die with comfort and dignity.’
I further submit that the features of the doctrine of consent which I have identified, so far from facilitating the patient's self-determination, are in fact capable of serving as a blueprint for making considerable inroads into, and even for disregarding altogether, the need for consent.
Moreover, the factual context in which the sort of decisions under review here take place further militates against the exercise of self-determination.
Indeed, the problems under discussion are in large part by their nature evidentiary problems.
Discussion based on strict legal principle becomes arid and unhelpful if this is not remembered.
Equally, any proposed remedies must be addressed more to administrative and procedural practice than to changing formal legal rules.
If the philosophical basis for these inroads into the general principle is paternalism, what legal bases or justifications are there?
They are somewhat elusive.
Because we are dealing with what purport to be exceptions to a general principle, it is sometimes argued that there is no single legal principle of justification, merely a number of disparate responses to the specific factual and legal details of a particular case.13 Alternatively, a general principle of justification is advanced and given the name of ‘necessity’ or ‘privilege’or some kind of ‘comprehensive justification in relation to medical procedures’.
Or it is merely called ‘public policy’.
The latter idea of a general justification may be more welcome and acceptable to lawyers, since it is tidy and fills the need for categorization and easy pigeon-holing.
It will be obvious to all, however, that this tidiness is an illusion, because its essence, which is at once its merit and its weakness, is its very indefiniteness and amenability to ad hoc decisions based on the ‘justice’ of the particular facts.
Whether there is a general justification or a series of specific legal responses to particular factual situations may well be a sterile debate.
If it is necessary for my argument, I am prepared to say that there is, as regards the particular situation under review, a general legal justification, and I will call it ‘necessity’.
It is one of the two arguments I will examine that are advanced on behalf of the doctor to justify him in overriding or disregarding the expressed view of his patient.
It will be noticed that I refer only to those cases where the patient, or someone on his behalf, has made his view known.
I do not deal with the equally hard problem of the patient who is admitted unconscious to hospital after a suicide attempt, where the doctrines of implied consent or necessity are used to justify a doctor in treating him.
Finally, I urge again that it is of crucial importance to remember the factual context in which these problems may arise.
For the set of circumstances in which the patient finds himself is a very great contributing factor to the possible inroads into his right to self-determination.
NECESSITY
The facts are that the patient has requested that the doctor discontinue treatment, and the doctor has ignored this request.
What the doctor is saying is that he had to continue treatment, because it was right to do so as a matter of public policy.
Stated generally, the fundamental rationale he offers for having to do so is that he, either himself or as the agent of society, knew better than the patient what should be done to or for the patient.
He points to several factors supporting this conclusion: first, the patient was incapable of making a rational decision; second, in his clinical judgment, further treatment was called for; and third, the minor harm of proceeding without consent was more than outweighed by the major benefit, in his view, which was gained from his treatment.
Stephen refers to a crime being excusable if the defendant can show as one of the requisites that what was done was done to avoid a consequence which could not otherwise have been avoided, and which, if not done, would have inflicted harm on him or on others he was bound to protect.
The word ‘bound’ begs a number of questions, and does not appear in other writers' views.
Put thus, the doctor's position is arrogant.
Does the law support him?
Everything turns on the capacity of the patient and, just as important, who makes the final determination as to that capacity.
My position is that the law is so constructed that in all probability, only the lucid, self-assertive patient who has a sympathetic, understanding doctor is able in most circumstances to have his way and be left alone, free from further interference, to die.
All other patients run the risk of having their wishes flouted.
Consent is represented as the critical feature of the law which ensures the patient's right to self-determination, whereas, in fact, it is referred to and manipulated so as to produce the opposite result.
A number of legal and extra-legal factors combine to produce this result.
First, the determination of capacity to consent or to withhold consent is not made by the patient, but by those treating him.
It is as if there existed a right to free speech, but that, before exercising it, one must submit to someone with a practically unchallengeable power of censorship a copy of one's proposed speech for approval.
Second, the presumption made by the healthy is that no one really wants to die.
When these two factors are put together, it is readily understandable that a request that treatment should cease should be seen as not really meant, but as merely the response to either a passing mood or a loss of mental fitness.
Thus — and this is a critical point — refusal of consent is seen not as an assertion of will, but rather as a symptom of unsoundness of mind.
The right to refuse should, of course, be upheld, even though the patient's view is deemed irrational or unreasonable by the doctor or is based on what seem to be poor grounds.
Hughes takes the view, however, that ‘exotic’ or ‘unreasonable’views need not necessarily be respected.
Initially, the view in the United States was that the refusal had to be based on good grounds — for example, religious beliefs strongly held — but the position now is moving towards the idea that ‘individual freedom here is guaranteed only if people are given the right to make choices which would generally be regarded as foolish ones’.
In the case of Re Pogue , the court declined to make the patient's refusal based on her belief as a Jehovah's Witness a basis for declaring her incompetent to decide for herself.
Goldstein nevertheless warns of the bias in therapeutic transactions towards perceiving refusals as uninformed: ‘refusals may therefore be used as a justification for challenging the capacity of the citizen to decide what is best for himself.’
Third, it must not be overlooked that a doctor is a professional whose training predisposes him to ‘save’ lives and treat the sick.
Furthermore, modern medical training may well encourage him to see himself as a scientist applying particular skills to solve a problem, rather than as dealing with people.
This takes on an added significance when it is remembered that geriatrics and the terminally ill are regarded as the failures of the health service and are often consigned to the young and inexperienced who, as one doctor recently put it, ‘do strive very officiously to keep people alive because they are interested scientifically and they want to use every method they can as part of their training’.
Finally, there is a group of patients who are considered mentally unfit to make decisions concerning themselves.
These are the chronically mentally ill and minors, and, if the above is accepted, also include those whose judgment, others assert, cannot be relied upon.
Once a patient is deemed incapable, having been assigned to one of these categories, his powers of self-determination are taken from him.
The law, as ever in these areas, is unclear.
Some state categorically that the fact that a patient is judged mentally unfit does not mean that he can therefore have treatment forced upon him against his will and despite his express refusal.
But the problem is not so simply solved.
I take the law to be that someone mentally unfit may not necessarily be incapable of reaching a rational decision as regards further treatment.
It would depend both on his precise mental state, whether he was capable of lucid moments at the particular time, and the particular treatment involved; for instance, refusal of therapeutic drugs prescribed to control dangerous behaviour would not be regarded in the same light as refusal to have a tooth extracted.
To ignore the latter refusal could well be unlawful The point, however, is that abstract legal discussion must pay some regard to the reality of situations.
The real problem here, because of the nature of the legal framework, is not so much a legal one as one of evidence.
For it is the doctor who makes the determination that the view expressed by the patient is unreliable and that the particular treatment is called for.
Once this determination has been made, two consequences follow.
First, the way is made clear to invoke the plea of necessity; and, in the majority of cases, such a determination is, as a practical matter, virtually impossible to overturn.
Second, the patient's right to self-determination, in other words, becomes not a matter of legal principle, but rather a consequence of the degree of paternalism exercised by the doctor, supported by societal attitudes which reinforce such paternalism.
In the light of the above, provided the doctor is of the opinion that the patient's mental faculties are such as to make his refusal of treatment unreliable, I take the view that, in the case of an incompetent child, if there is a parent or guardian who can be consulted, the doctor can rely on their consent to treatment, despite the expressed wishes of the patient.
There continues to be some doubt as to whether anyone has authority to consent to treatment in the case of an adult, in the absence of statute.
Where there is no parent or guardian available, the doctor will be protected if he proceeds to treat.
Williams argues that:
Even if the patient is compulsorily admitted under the Mental Health Act, and can therefore be deprived of his liberty, there is no authority that I know of to justify medical treatment against his express refusal.
But doctors and nurses do from time to time brush aside the protests of aged, dying or mentally affected patients.
It is tempting for them to assume guardianship and disciplinary powers that they do not possess.
With reference to the mentally unfit patient, I would respond that there is no authority which forbids such treatment apart from the general principle which, as has been seen, presupposes a ‘sound mind’ and is, therefore, a weak basis on which to rely.
Indeed, Williams then goes on to discuss the propriety of treating children against the wishes of their parents, and states that ‘the legal authority for this rests on the doctrine of necessity.’
This seems in principle to be an equally available justification as regards the mentally unfit, even though it may well be deplored.
The Medical Defence Union, in its pamphlet entitled ‘consent to Treatment’, advises that ‘a patient who is compulsorily detained under the Mental Health Act must submit to treatment for his mental disorder whether or not he agrees’, but that ‘if a compulsorily detained patient develops a condition unrelated to his mental disorder, then only such treatment as is immediately necessary to preserve his life and health may be given without his consent.’
The advice concludes, however, with the observation that ‘this situation should be looked at sensibly and the prohibition outlined above must not be allowed to jeopardise the patient's health.
It is unlikely that the courts would criticise a practitioner who had acted in good faith and in the interests of his patients.’
Goldstein in the United States, a strong advocate of the patient's right to self-determination, argues that a person involuntarily incarcerated in a mental hospital, for example, is in no different a position from a free person, except that incarceration affects volition, not the patient's capacity to make a choice.
This logic compels him to criticize the case of Kaimowitz v.
Michigan Department of Mental Health , in which an inmate was offered the choice between experimental surgery with the possibility of release and continued incarceration, and the Court held that consent could not be given by an involuntarily detained mental patient.
Goldstein argues that if a patient is capable of consenting to ordinary therapy, and if both incarceration and experimental surgery are approved social practices, a person should not be denied the choice.
Alternatively, the doctor may seek the concurrence of a relative who is neither a parent nor a guardian.
If the doctor desires to treat the patient, he is often in a strong position to persuade such a relative to concur.
After all, the relative will usually be ignorant of the processes involved and will doubtless begin with the presumption that the doctor knows best.
From a legal point of view, however, such concurrence from a relative is of no effect, since there is no power vested in a relative to consent to the treatment of another.
What is the position where, the patient being incapable, the parent or guardian refused to sanction further treatment?
I shall consider this issue again later on.
As regards the present argument, the law seems to be that a parent or guardian can consent only to treatment which is in his charge's interest.
It may be that the converse also holds, namely, that he may refuse only when such refusal is in his charge's interest.
The point then again arises, as with unsoundness of mind, that it is the doctor who initially defines and outlines these interests.
He may prefer his own assessment of the patient's interests, and ignore that of the parent or guardian.
Since the question is — or is made to be — one of his clinical judgment, his view will later be respected unless shown to be wholly unreasonable.
Skegg, though putting it differently, argues that there is a justification available to the doctor, provided two conditions are satisfied: ‘first that the procedure is necessary to save the life of the child, to prevent permanent injury to his health, or to prevent prolonged pain and suffering.
Secondly, that despite the fact of the doctor having made all reasonable efforts to obtain consent, consent has been unreasonably withheld.’
As an alternative, he proposes that the test be ‘whether it would have been unreasonable for the doctor not to have proceeded’.
The conclusion is the same: provided the doctor can argue that he was seeking to prevent pain and suffering, the other criteria proposed by Skegg allow for a sufficient degree of subjective assessment as to offer no real barrier to the exercise of the doctor's paternalism.
For the sake of completeness, if a relative refuses further treatment on behalf of a patient, this can be ignored, for the reasons advanced above.
It must be stated at this point that it is not intended here to suggest that there is a conspiracy on the part of doctors to deprive patients of their rights, or that doctors act out of ill will.
Rather, it is conceded that they doubtless act out of a well-meaning desire to treat.
What is suggested is that the supposed right to self-determination may not be the creature it is thought to be.
It is admitted that there is no evidence to support this view, except the total lack of prosecutions, which, of course, cuts both ways.
It is worth considering, however, just how flimsy this supposed general principle is.
Though it may be the last right remaining for the terminally ill or the aged, it is remarkably easy to undermine it.
Its theoretical weaknesses are implicit in the fact that it rests on the vague and easily manipulated notion of consent.
Once such theoretical weaknesses are identified, it is but a simple step to weaken the right as it operates in practice.
The persuasive power of paternalism supplies the motive for this step to be taken.
Paternalism in the guise of ‘The doctor knows best’ or ‘You don't really mean that’provides the social justification, and necessity the legal justification.
THE RISK OF LIABILITY
A second line of argument advanced on behalf of the doctor to justify his failure to accede to the request of his patient is that the doctor must continue treatment because to do otherwise would render him criminally and/or civilly liable.
The doctor is saying that he had to continue treatment as a matter of legal obligation .
He is saying that it would have been unlawful to honour the patient's request, even if he had been willing to do so.
Two principal heads of potential liability are cited to justify this position and call for consideration.
Suicide Act 1961, Section 2
Though suicide is not a crime, it is an offence under section 2 to aid, abet, counsel, or procure the suicide of another.
The argument advanced is that the doctor is not obliged to respect the request of the patient — indeed, he is obliged to disregard it — since otherwise he would be guilty of an offence under section 2.
There are clearly a number of objections to this.
First, the term ‘suicide’ calls for some elucidation.
It is by no means clear whether the omission/commission dichotomy which applies to (and some would say, in the medical-legal field, bedevils) the crime of murder applies to suicide.
If ‘suicide’ is defined as the doing of a positive act with the intention of ending life, then there would be no question of suicide in the case of patients who refuse treatment, but otherwise do no positive act, merely allowing death to occur.
Thus, in the case of a patient who did nothing more t n refuse further treatment, there could be no liability on the part of the doctor for aiding and abetting under section 2.
But the issue may still arise in either of the following two cases.
First, the patient's failure to take care of himself in the knowledge that death will result sooner rather than otherwise — and this would apply to the aged as well as to the terminally ill —may be treated as suicide, despite what has been said.
An objection to liability in this case, advanced by Williams, is that the doctor who fails to treat has not done something; he has merely failed to act, and an omission cannot amount to an abetment.
There are those who argue that the doctor in this situation is, in fact, under an obligation to ignore the patient's request, and to prevent him, under the protection of the plea of necessity, from adopting a course of conduct which would lead to self-destruction.
The much cited case of Leigh v.
Gladstone is invoked in support.
This case has become all things to all men.
I would prefer, at the risk of offending the purists, to take a robust attitude, and simply say that it is a decision made at a particular time in response to a particular situation against a particular political background, and is poor material on which to build any general proposition.
It is best seen as an anomalous departure from the general principle of self-determination.
Unless it is submitted that prisoners have, on entering prison, surrendered all rights over their own bodies, in which case medical experimentation on them would be equally lawful, the case cannot stand as authority for the proposition that there exists a duty, even as regards prisoners, far less at large, to prevent someone from refusing food and,a fortiori , medical treatment.
The second case which raises the issue of liability under section 2 is where the doctor, in honouring the patient's request, in some way facilitates the suicide by, for example, leaving around an extra quantity of tablets in the knowledge or with a strong suspicion that they will be taken in such a dosage as to produce fatal consequences.
This is rather more problematical.
Fretwell may avail the doctor, but is somewhat discredited by the decision in N. C.B. v. 
Gamble .
Alternatively, the doctor may argue that he gave the pills to ease pain or for sleeping, and invite the court to believe him.
The very few cases in point suggest that his confidence would not be misplaced.
One case which may cause problems is where the doctor's facilitation takes the form of switching off a necessary mechanical aid, such as a ventilator or an artificial kidney machine.
This may be considered by some to be an invitation to explore the issue of whether the switching-off is an act or an omission; for if it is an act, it may be an abetment.
I offer the following three alternative arguments.
first, Williams's admittedly artificial argument may be accepted that it is an omission, a failure to treat, so that there is no liability.
Second, the doctor has aided and abetted the patient only in his refusal to undergo further treatment.
No one is obliged to endure treatment for ever.
The switching-off facilitates the decision, not the suicide.
Third, mechanical aids such as ventilators and the like may be classified as ‘extraordinary measures’ in so far as they involve excessive pain or other inconvenience.
The doctor is arguably under no duty to continue treatment (as will be seen later) that is ‘useless’ or a ‘burden’.
The fact that the aid is an extraordinary measure and that the patient has indicated that it is a burden absolves the doctor of his duty to continue treatment, and he may therefore discontinue it by switching off the machine.
A final point which ought to be considered is whether the doctor may be liable under section 2 in the case that the patient expressing the wish to die is mentally unfit.
There is some authority to suggest that a doctor is under a duty to prevent the suicide of such a patient in so far as there is a duty to control the patient.
Whatever the strength of this reasoning, it seems to apply to cases where the patient commits some act to achieve his end, and would not apply to the situation being discussed here.
All in all, it is submitted that the claim that there is a risk of liability under section 2 of the Suicide Act does not serve as a valid justification for ignoring the request of the patient that treatment be discontinued.
Neglect
An alternative, and in some ways overlapping argument advanced in justification of the doctor is that his duty to his patient, once he has embarked on treatment, is to continue to care for him until he dies.
It may be that with a patient who is terminally ill or aged, the doctor's obligation does not extend to anything more than the relief of pain and making the patient comfortable.
But, the argument goes, the doctor cannot abandon the patient altogether.
The simple response to this is to recite the general principle that no treatment is warranted, or indeed lawful, without consent, and that if consent is withdrawn, nothing need be done.
We have already seen that the doctor may well honour this principle more in the breach than the observance if he is so minded.
The question here is whether he need feel compelled to continue treatment, especially since he may know that if he does continue, his actions will, if reasonable (and it will be hard to prove otherwise), qualify as being justified.
What reasons may persuade him that he is so compelled or obliged?
The first reason is really the other side of the view already considered, namely, that a patient's express wish may be disregarded on the ground that he was not of sound mind.
Here, this view becomes converted into the argument that the refusal of treatment may not have been a rational decision or may not appear to others to have been so.
Thus the doctor will be persuaded to err on the side of caution and to disregard the expressed view of his patient; that is, just as earlier we noted the possibility of the patient's view being overridden by an excess of zeal, now we see the same result produced by an excess of caution.
This caution is reinforced by a second reason, which in practical terms may be of paramount importance, the fear of being the object of a legal action at the suit of parents, guardians, or relatives, who might allege that the patient was neglected, and would urge that the patient's refusal should not have been relied upon.
Given the doubts and uncertainties surrounding this area of law, it is not surprising that doctors may feel insecure in adopting a course of conduct which they otherwise may feel to be the most desirable.
Moreover, this sense of insecurity and consequent bias towards caution may be further reinforced by the fact that very often the sort of decisions we are discussing are made in hospitals, where doctors are made aware of the views and reactions of another interested group, the nursing staff.
The involvement of nurses in every stage of medical treatment may on occasions serve as a salutary check on possible excesses by doctors.
It may also, however, particularly in the situation under discussion, be another factor obstructing the doctor even if he were to desire to give effect to a patient's wishes.
The nurse is committed, both professionally and personally, to the care of a patient, and may well, out of well-meaning but misguided concern, mistake respect for a patient's wishes for neglect.
The prospect of unwelcome publicity, particularly in the popular press, not surprisingly may further persuade the doctor that his interests lie elsewhere than in following his patient's instructions.
Is there any legal foundation for this concern?
Is the doctor in breach of his duty to his patient if he discontinues treatment?
Provided that the doctor is satisfied that the patient, when forbidding further treatment, was aware of what he was saying, the short answer must be that he is not in breach of his duty.
There is no doubt that his duty extends to informing his patient, if asked, of the nature of his illness and its likely prognosis.
He thereby puts the patient in a position to make a decision which is informed.
Once the decision has been made, he is obliged to respect it.
Thus, the doctor, on this reasoning, incurs no liability under the civil law; nor can he be accused of any crime.
To consider the issue in greater detail, the only circumstance under which his omission to treat his patient further could render him guilty of manslaughter is where he has failed to act in a situation where the criminal law imposes on him a duty to act and death has ensued.
The case of Instan seems to be authority for the proposition that a common-law duty was imposed upon the defendant to continue to care for her aunt, having once undertaken this responsibility.55 It would seem to follow from the fact that a relationship has to be created for the duty to arise that if the relationship ceases by one party releasing and absolving the other of his obligations, the duty also ceases.
Once expressly absolved, then by operation of the general principle of the right to self-determination, the other would incur no liability for the consequences of the absolution.
The words used in the case are, however, that the duty was ‘imposed’ by law.
Does this mean that absolution by the patient is ineffective in relieving the doctor of his duty?
Elliott takes the view that ‘although most persons are not liable for omissions a doctor is so liable vis-à-vis his patient, unless he can justify his failure to give treatment on the grounds that such was useless.
Williams has said that the doctor is ‘probably exempted from that duty if life has become a burden to the patient’.
There is no authority for these propositions, and a leading critic in the United States has taken a contrary view, as did the court in the case of The Application of the President and Directors of Georgetown College Inc. , holding that ‘death resulting from failure to extend proper medical care, where there is a duty of care, is manslaughter.’
This obviously begs the question of when a duty exists.
If necessary, I am content to rely on the propositions advanced by Elliott and Williams, although the words ‘useless’ and ‘burden’are not very helpful.
I think the stronger point, however, is that the arguments to the contrary revolve around questions of voluntary euthanasia as opposed to the situation I am discussing.
If a patient dismisses his doctor, the criminal law would not lightly regard as manslaughter the act of a doctor who respected the wishes of a dying or aged patient.
All this assumes, of course, that the doctor's duty demands that he first satisfy himself that the patient is capable of making a rational decision.
What if the patient is mentally unfit or is a terminally ill minor?
Will the doctor be neglecting his duty if he respect this patient's expression of will?
Ultimately this is a question as to the proper limits of self-determination, as well as turning on the specific lucidity of the individual patient.
It is also an immensely difficult decision for the doctor, who will have established over time a relationship of confidence with all but the most severely unfit of his patients (who anyway are unlikely to have expressed a view), which confidence will be shattered if the patient's request is ignored, thereby adding, if possible, to the unhappiness of the patient.
If my view that a doctor incurs no liability if he ignores the request to discontinue treatment made by the mentally unfit and minor is correct, it does not of course follow that he would also be free from liability if he complied with their requests.
It may again turn on the evidential issue of unsoundness as determined at the moment by the doctor.
But it may be that even where there is evidence that the patient was mentally unfit or too young, the doctor would still avoid liability, not so much on the basis of the patient's refusal as on the proposition of Elliott that further treatment was useless, or that of Williams that life had become a burden to the patient.
These may even prevail when a parent or guardian, learning of the patient's request, has instructed the doctor to continue.
On the other hand, the doctor would probably be in breach of his duty if it could be shown that the patient's request was made at a time when he was demonstrably and predictably suffering from a temporary condition which made his judgment unreliable.
Finally, what is the position if, in the case of a terminally ill minor, incapable himself of making any request, the doctor is asked by the parent or guardian to discontinue treatment?
I have considered this previously in the context of necessity, and have suggested that necessity may provide an adequate ground for ignoring such a request.
The question here, however, is what are the consequences for the doctor if he should honour the request.
It could be argued that the propositions considered earlier as regards the patient so requesting would be applicable, since all that has changed is that the relevant legal decision-maker is the parent or guardian, so that the doctor would be absolved from his duty.
But is this so, even in a context, which we assume throughout, in which the parent or guardian has been fully informed and can make a rational decision?
What would be the relevance of section I(2) (a) of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933, which makes it a criminal offence for the person legally liable to maintain the child not to provide,inter alia , medical care?
I take the view that the doctor has a choice here in the absence of any clear guide, either to continue to treat or to stop.
If he were to discontinue treatment and merely make the child comfortable, the courts would not find him guilty of manslaughter.
The ground would either be that he was expressly absolved from his duty, or the wider ground of Elliott's, that further treatment was useless.
These exceptional cases apart (and it must be recalled that they are not really examples of the situation under discussion), it has been seen that there is no good ground for arguing that the doctor breaches his duty to his patient when respecting the patient's wishes to be left to die.
Asserting this, however, as cold legal doctrine may well fail to convince the doctor who has to make his decision in the real world and must weigh all the arguments advanced above.
CONCLUSION
What I have tried to show, in a very narrow context, is the vulnerability of the principle of self-determination, contrasted with the persuasive power of paternalism.
Consent, which lies at the root of self-determination, should be the conceptual mechanism whereby the right is guaranteed and safeguarded.
I have suggested, however, that it is equally capable of being manipulated to defeat the right.
If this is accepted, it is of value to move from the narrow base of this article to consider whether it is so in other areas.
Further, it may even be appropriate to debate again whether consent is appropriate as the governing concept in the medical-legal context.
Daube argued several years ago that ‘it is time to revise our legal construction…of surgery in general’, and criticized the fact that it was still considered an assault rendered lawful by consent.
The intervening years have not seen any revision, but this is not to say that it is not both necessary and desirable.
Ultimately, however, what may be needed is a set of proper procedural guides and guarantees which would ensure that whatever the legal rules may be, they are observed in practice 66
Switching Off Life-support Machines: The legal Implications
In this paper I am concerned with whether the termination of the use of artificial ‘life-support’ machinery on which a person is being maintained (particularly a ventilator) ever involves a violation of the criminal law amounting to homicide.
I shall discuss three situations in which the issue is typically presented: the much publicized, widely known case of the unconscious, dying patient connected to a ventilator; the case of the chronically dependent, conscious patient whose condition is stable — for example, a polio victim; and the temporarily dependent, emergency patient.
THE UNCONSCIOUS, DYING PATIENT
A patient lies in the intensive care unit of a hospital.
He is attached to an artificial ventilator which ventilates his lungs, and his heart is beating.
His doctors reach the conclusion that his condition is hopeless.
Under what circumstances may the doctors switch off the ventilator?
This apparent problem has attracted considerable attention in recent years.
The Press has introduced into common speech such expressions as ‘pulling the plug’ or ‘switching off the machine’.
l The intent has been not only to describe the activity, but also to surround it with the appropriate drama.
An assumption has been made by everyone.
It is as follows: that the decision to turn off a ventilator is, in fact, a decision to terminate the life of a patient or to remove from a patient the last thread by which he held on to life.
For this reason, of the patient, turning off the machine has attracted to itself an enormous significance, and has already spawned its own folklore.
A recent editorial in the British Medical Journal criticizes past ‘muddled thinking’ on the matter, and calls for ‘an end to uninformed comment on the topic’.
It is therefore ironic that the report which it unreservedly endorses and which appears in the same issue should perpetuate the thinking I seek here to expose as muddled and erroneous.
This report, of the Medical Royal Colleges and their Faculties in the United Kingdom, concerns itself with the diagnosis of brain death, but at the outset acknowledges that ‘the dilemma of when to switch off the ventilator has been the subject of much public interest.’
Clearly, if the assumption were correct, turning off a ventilator raises thorny problems for the criminal lawyer.
Why is it not homicide to turn it off if, as is assumed, the patient is alive?
Those who imagine that they see the spectre of euthanasia raising its head look with particular misgiving at the doctor's decision to discontinue ventilation.4 Those lawyers who have given the issue their attention have accepted the common factual assumption that turning off a ventilator is significant, and have then sought legal arguments by which to justify it.5 For they have had to recognize both that it is a common medical practice, and that it is one which prima facie calls for some justification.
They realize, without necessarily evaluating the implications of the realization, that patients cannot be kept on a machine for ever.
The most common justification offered is elaborate and unsatisfactory.
Turning off the ventilator, ‘pulling the plug’, the argument goes, is an omission, rather than a positive act.
It is an omission because it represents a failure to continue treatment.
The doctor, to use George Fletcher's language, merely ‘permits’ the patient to die.
Criminal liability, the argument continues, ordinarily attaches only to commissions which cause consequences not omissions whereby consequences are permitted to occur.
It is conceded, however, that liability may follow some omissions, when there is a relationship between the victim and the defendant imposing on the defendant a duty to act.
The doctor-patient relationship is just such a relationship.
Thus the question of liability, whether for manslaughter or murder, turns on the duty of the doctor in the particular situation.
Fletcher resolves this by saying that ‘[It]all depends on what doctors customarily do,’ so that if doctors customarily switch off ventilators in the circumstances under discussion, then this of itself makes it lawful to do so.
This is obviously unsatisfactory, for it suggests that what is a matter of policy and values — namely, whether the doctor ought to treat — is within the special competence of doctors, whose expertise, in fact, is not in policy, but only in medical science.
The question of criminal liability cannot be relegated to a matter of medical consensus.
Furthermore, ignoring the weaknesses of this conclusion, to describe turning off the machine as an omission does some considerable violence to ordinary English usage.
It represents an attempt to solve the problem by logic-chopping.
Such an approach may demonstrate to the satisfaction of some that no crime is involved, but it is surely most unsatisfactory to rest the response of the law to what is seen as a testing moral and philosophical issue on some semantic sleight of hand.
Finally, and fatally, it rests on a flawed understanding of the relevant medical facts.
The justification, or analysis, which I propose here proceeds differently.
It seeks to take account of the facts.
It involves no recourse to sophistry, and it demystifies and strips of sensationalism the termination of the use of artificial support.
Its major aim, as will appear, is to demonstrate that the crucial medical-legal decision is not switching off a ventilator, but rather, switching it on, either initially or after having once turned it off .
My argument is as follows.
There is no doubt that the ventilator may be turned off when in fact, the patient is already dead.
Once dead, treatment obviously is no longer called for.
If not dead, the question becomes one of whether the patient still needs the ventilator in order to breathe; and, if so, whether, from the point of view of ultimate benefit, there is any longer any point in turning it back on.
As regards the patient already dead, the reasoning is that although the patient displays outward manifestations of life, in that, by virtue of the ventilator, breathing and heartbeat are maintained, these manifestations are mechanically induced and are not sustained nor will ever again be sustainable by the patient.
This, of course, merely moves the debate a step further back, because it implies an understanding of what death is.
Prompted by the rapid development of medical technology over the past decade or so, the medical community has come to reject the notion that death is associated exclusively with breathing and heartbeat, the ‘vital functions’.
The view has been accepted that the state which has traditionally been regarded as death in a human being is reached when the brain, including the brain-stem, is destroyed.
A person will not breathe, nor will his heart beat, without a functioning brain-stem; and if this is destroyed, he will never recover the ability to do so, since, once destroyed, brain cells do not regenerate.
A machine may well perform these tasks for him for some considerable period of time, but it has come to be accepted that once the brain can be shown to be dead, the machine is not keeping the patient ‘alive’ in any accepted sense of the word; it is merely ventilating a corpse.
Thus has emerged the medical concept of ‘brain-stem death’.
The crucial feature is the irrecoverable loss by a patient of the ability ever again to sustain his own breathing and heartbeat, as a consequence of the total destruction of a functioning brain-stem.
The reaction of the law was rather circumspect.
Once convinced, however, that no major philosophical change was involved, but merely the identification by reference to more sophisticated criteria of what has always been regarded as death, medical lawyers have increasingly come to accept brain-stem death as the legal description also.
Legislation has put the matter beyond doubt in eight jurisdictions in the United States and elsewhere — for example, in France.15 In the United Kingdom, although some advocate legislation, it is likely that the new description will merely be incorporated into the law without more.16 The acceptance of brain-stem death may resolve a number of problems, but there is still the problem of how it is to be established in a particular case.
Fundamentally, this is a matter for doctors, although the lawyer has a role to play in ensuring that the strictest possible safeguards attend the measures taken to establish it.
At this point the theme of this paper re-emerges.
The need to determine whether the patient has suffered brain-stem death arises only if the patient is on a ventilator.
Only in this case can breathing and heartbeat continue independently of the patient's own ability to sustain them.
At some stage in this process of determination, the ventilator must be turned off.
Only thus can there be confirmation that the patient cannot in fact sustain his own vital functions.
The Report of the Royal Colleges makes this explicitly clear.
One of the six proposed tests for confirming brain-stem death is that ‘No respiratory movements occur when the patient is disconnected from the mechanical ventilator for long enough to ensure that the arterial carbon dioxide tension rises above the threshold for stimulating respiration.’
Here lies the key to the argument being presented.
First, if the patient meets the criteria of brain-stem death in that,inter alia , he shows no sign of brain-stem activity and, in particular, does not breathe spontaneously, then the diagnosis that the patient is dead can be confirmed.
The machine need not be switched on again .
Second, if the patient breathes, however weakly and albeit without the regularity or strength to sustain himself, or otherwise demonstrates some sign of brain-stem functioning, then the question arises as to whether or not to switch the machine on again .
On this analysis the medical-legal dilemma is properly identified as being one of determining whether, and if so, for how much longer, further treatment should be continued.
Much has been written on this, and it need not be repeated here.
Basically this determination must first take account of what prospect the patient has of advancing along the line from hopelessness to improvement to recovery.
The less the prospect — and most cases which reach this point will be hopeless — the less the obligation to continue treatment, including the use of the ventilator, which is thus seen as only one factor of many which have to be considered.
Chief Justice Hughes, writing for the New Jersey Supreme Court, put it well when he wrote, resting his decision on the fledgling constitutional doctrine of privacy but addressing the wider issue: ‘We think that the State's interest [in the preservation of life]weakens and the individual's right of privacy grows as the degree of invasion increases and the prognosis dims.’
Third, if the patient breathes on his own so as to sustain himself successfully, then the ventilator is not needed and need not be switched on again .
Difficult problems may, of course, still remain.
For example, breathing may fail again, and the decision will have to be taken whether to put the patient back on to the ventilator.
The patient may still be irreversibly comatose, despite the ability to breathe spontaneously.
Thus, the problems just considered may soon arise again — namely, how much more care in terms of time, resources, and energy is called for.
Karen Quinlan falls into this third category, despite initial medical and popular views to the contrary.
She has now survived more than nine months without the aid of a ventilator.
Of course, she would die very quickly if she were not to receive intensive and expensive round-the-clock treatment from the staff of the nursing home where she is now a patient.
How long this can and should, go on is the question which has to be asked, and answered.
In none of the three alternative situations described above does switching off the ventilator have any significance, of itself, from a medical-legal point of view.
‘Pulling the plug’ is not an event to tax the criminal lawyer.
The language of analogies, such as‘cutting the last thread of life’, is both inaccurate and unhelpful.
Provided he acts with good faith and all due care in the context outlined above, the doctor who turns off the ventilator does nothing to warrant criminal sanction.
A further benefit of this analysis is that it causes attention to be focused on the real medical-legal issue; whether, and if so, what, liability (criminal or civil) ever attends the decision which is significant, namely turning, or failing to turn, the ventilator on again.
This is the really thorny question, but only relatively recently has it begun to receive the attention it merits.
THE CHRONICALLY DEPENDENT PATIENT
There are some patients who are permanently maintained on ventilators because of illness.
No question arises as to whether they are alive or not; they clearly are.
Their brains function; they are conscious and are able to do a variety of things; but they have been struck down, for example, by polio.
In the case of the chronically dependent patient (the polio victim, say), if the ventilator is turned off, he will die.
He is receiving long-term life-sustaining treatment.
‘Pulling the plug’ in such a case is significant from a medical-legal point of view.
Its significance, in terms of the legal consequences which would follow, can be assessed, however, only by drawing a crucial distinction between the situation where the patient requests that further support be terminated, and that where the ventilator is turned off without the consent of the patient.
What law governs the situation when a lucid adult whose continued existence depends on a ventilator decides that his existence is no longer tolerable and that he wishes to die?
Strictly speaking — and this is important analytically — he is asking for treatment to be discontinued.
The distinction has to be noted (because traditionally thinking in criminal law seems to regard it as important) between a request by the patient that treatment be discontinued which is complied with and a request by the patient that someone stabs him to death which is complied with.
The former, on my analysis (infra ) would not attract criminal liability, whereas the latter, on traditional analysis, would be homicide, often categorized in appropriate circumstances as voluntary active euthanasia.
I do not wish to argue that stabbing the patient should not be homicide.
But this obliges me to explain why different criminal law consequences follow compliance with the same request made in different ways.
To say that the patient cannot demand to be stabbed because he cannot suspend the operation of the criminal law and absolve the other of liability begs the question, depending as it does on a determination of what the criminal law is.
I do not wish to argue that one is an act of killing and the other an omission to treat, or that there is active, as opposed to passive, conduct.
I find such arguments distinctly unsatisfying.
Neither can reasons of motive or intention be relied upon if, for the sake of argument, I admit that good faith and the best of intentions prevail throughout.
Perhaps the distinction between the response of the criminal law to a request that treatment be ended and to (figuratively) taking a knife to the patient rests on four basic and interrelated premisses.
First, there is the libertarian premiss that a person's position should not be irremediably worsened by another's conduct.
Stabbing to death offends this principle.
Turning off a machine lets other factors intervene, and thrusts the ultimate decision back to the patient who can still (in theory, at least) change his mind.
Causation thus also plays a part.
Second, there is what some philosophers call the red-light rule.
It may not be necessary for all cars always to stop at a red light at a crossroads, but to have any other rule, such as‘stop when reasonable to do so’, or ‘stop unless the road is clear’, invites chaos.
Thus, it is better to have a clear, if crude, rule and invite leniency in the case of justifiable transgression, such as passing through a red light in an emergency.
Equally, a crude general rule condemning all acts of killing is preferable to any other possible rule.
Third, there is an evidential point.
Recourse to stabbing is at least potentially more open to abuse.
The criminal law, if faced with two alternative ways of achieving a similar end, may well prefer that which raises fewer issues of proof and potential abuse.
fourth, a patient on a machine making such a request is a comparatively rare phenomenon.
The criminal law can respond to it as a tolerable and justifiable exception to basic criminal law rules developed long before ventilators ever existed.
Stabbing consenting patients goes beyond such narrow confines, is less manageable as a practice, and makes too many inroads into these basic criminal law rules.
I discussed the law on this problem of requesting that treatment be discontinued recently in this Review , and reached the conclusion that the patient who is mature, lucid, and informed may validly withhold consent to further treatment, and that treatment thereafter would be unlawful.
It follows that the person — doctor, nurse, or other — who complied with the request that treatment be withdrawn, provided he acted in good faith, would not be acting in violation of the criminal law.
There should be no difference in principle between the patient diagnosed as having irreparable kidney failure who refuses to submit to dialysis on an artificial kidney or who refuses to continue such treatment and the polio victim on the ventilator who requested that the machine be switched off.
No one doubts the right of the patient with kidney disease to decline treatment.
The polio patient's equal right to self-determination should not be denied merely because he is helpless.
Whether a court would grant a patient an order requiring a doctor or whoever to cease treatment, to ‘pull the plug’, is not yet known in England.
But, it is submitted, the law is as stated above.
It should be noted in passing, however, that where a patient is deemed for whatever reason legally incompetent, the law is less clear.
It probably requires that treatment continue, even if a request is made by the patient or another that it should cease.
It is conceded that not all may accept this view of the law.
Some support for it, however, can be gained from the legislation which came into effect on 1 January 1977, in the State of California.
Generally speaking, the law in California in this area developed in the same way as it did in England.
by 1976, it had reached a similar degree of complexity and confusion.
The legislation, which is the first of its kind in the common-law world, was seen as clarifying and putting the law beyond doubt, rather than making new law.
It can therefore serve as a helpful guide.
In its preamble, the Natural Death Act 1976 states that ‘adult persons have the fundamental right to control the decision relating to the rendering of their own medical care, including the decision to have life-sustaining procedures withheld or withdrawn in instances of a terminal condition.’
‘[Modern]medical technology’, it goes on, ‘has made possible the artificial prolongation of human life beyond natural limits.’
Further, ‘there exists considerable uncertainty in the medical and legal professions as to the legality of terminating the use or application of life-sustaining procedures where the patient has voluntarily and in sound mind evidenced a desire that such procedures be withheld or withdrawn.’
The Act thus provides that an adult may execute a duly witnessed ‘directive’ in a form laid down, ‘directing the withholding or withdrawal of life-sustaining procedures’.
Ex abundante cautela , the Act goes on to provide that ‘no physician’ or other who complies with the directive ‘shall be subject to civil liability therefrom’or ‘shall be guilty of any criminal act or of unprofessional conduct’.
Clearly the range of the Act is very limited, applying only to lucid adult patients connected or about to be connected to a ventilator who are suffering from a terminal condition (as defined) and who execute the appropriate directive.33 A first step, however, has been taken in clarifying the law.
Both the particular rule it lays down and, more important, the general principle it enshrines should be accepted as part of the English law also, though it may be debatable whether there is a need for it to be put into statutory form.
Next, what is the law governing the situation when the respirator is turned off without the knowledge and consent of the chronically dependent patient?
It is important to distinguish the situation of the patient here from that of the patient who is unconscious and terminally ill.
Here, the patient, though chronically dependent on the ventilator is a conscious, sentient person.
Although his condition is in one sense hopeless, in that he will not recover, it is not hopeless in the sense that he is in imminent danger of dying.
He is stable and, all being well, will remain so for some considerable period of time.5 The motive for turning off the ventilator in this situation may be evil, or it may be good, as, for example, in the case of involuntary euthanasia intended to bring about an end to misery and suffering.
There is no doubt that in such a case, given the necessary knowledge and intent, the person turning off the machine would be guilty of murder.
Some may seek to argue that a lesser crime is committed, because they would like the law to be sufficiently flexible to allow the ‘mercy-killer’ to avoid facing a charge of murder.
But murder it is, and whatever leniency is called for must find itself reflected either in a verdict of not guilty by a jury, despite the facts, in the sentence of the court (though in England the sentence is at present fixed by law), or in the exercise of some executive discretion.
Others, for the same reasons or for what they believe are reasons of legal principle, may argue that no murder is committed, on the basis of the reasoning noted earlier that the ventilator is ‘prolonging life’, and turning it off is an omission permitting death, not a commission causing death.
This argument, however, is clearly untenable as a simple analogy will illustrate.
For example, a tightrope-walker balances on a high wire strung sufficiently far above the ground and without a safety net; hence a fall would ordinarily be fatal.
Anyone who cuts the wire with the necessary intent and knowledge would be guilty of murder.
No amount of talk about only permitting the tightrope-walker to fall will persuade otherwise.
For the same reason the doctor, medical attendant, or other who turned off a ventilator in this situation would be guilty of murder.
THE TEMPORARILY DEPENDENT, EMERGENCY PATIENT
The patient referred to here is one who needs to be connected to a ventilator to cope with a crisis or emergency.
It will be assumed for the sake of argument that this patient had not indicated or is unable to indicate a desire that treatment on the ventilator be terminated.
Provided the ultimate prognosis were one of improvement or recovery, it is submitted that anyone — doctor, medical attendant, or other — who turns off the ventilator with knowledge that death will result and an intent to bring this about is guilty of murder.
If the prognosis for the patient, though initially favourable, becomes poor, then the question becomes the same as that already considered, for how much longer treatment must be given.
The extent to which treatment on the ventilator must be continued is determined, I submit, by reference to the extent to which recovery or improvement is possible.
At some point, treatment becomes futile.
At this point, the ventilator, along with other forms of treatment, can and should be discontinued.