

1984
THE BUTCHER
Of course the whole thing is a pack of lies.
Or fiction.
Certain things are still here: the curling stone; the brush, or walking stick as it is now; the old photograph a little ragged at the edges which displays three men and a little terrier called Coogan.
Other things did exist but are no longer with us.
Loch Craig existed, as did the newts, Donald's blue serge suit and Simon's dictionary.
Elsie existed.
Elsie lived but we know very little about her beyond a few basic facts: she married an older man who was rather irascible and treated her badly; she disappeared in mysterious circumstances when she was about twenty-six; her body was discovered a year ago on the bed of the filled-in Loch Craig.
Consequently my life of Elsie is imaginary.
Call it a fictional biography, a historical fantasy or just plain lies.
However, there is one other thing that we know about Elsie for sure: she did have a club foot.
‘Oh yes,’ my mother said, ‘Elsie had a club foot, didn't you know that?’
I did not.
Over the years we had often talked about Elsie and Simon and Elsie's sudden departure but my mother had never mentioned this most important fact.
It was the misshapen left foot that helped the police to identify the body.
So it was my mother who pointed the police in the right direction.
She read the newspaper report of the discovery of the body.
A woman with a club foot.
‘Now that could be Elsie McAndrew,’ she said.
‘With a club foot?’
I asked.
‘Oh yes,’ my mother said, ‘Elsie had a club foot, didn't you know that?
It wasn't all that obvious, though.’
The body was identified then, but the cause of death was not.
Accident, suicide or murder?
The police could not say.
How close was the body to the curling stone?
The operator of the mechanical digger who unearthed both was not sure.
A few feet perhaps, maybe more.
There was no rope connecting one with the other but this might have disintegrated completely over the years.
In fact the proximity of the stone might have had little to do with Elsie's death.
In other words I was free to speculate and this is what I did.
I decided on a story with some happiness — well, just a little— struggle, hardship, occasional success, ultimate failure, sadness.
I suppose I was a bit brutal to Elsie, a bit brutal to some of the other characters too, but realistic.
There we are: realism based on lies, the truth approached through fiction.
You can decide.
The one thing that drew me to Elsie was her disability.
To explain why that aspect interested me particularly I have to tell you about the Butcher.
Mr Gillis was nick-named the Butcher because in summer he wore a white trilby hat which he hung on the back of the door of his tiny glass-walled office in the corridor just outside the gymnasium.
Rather like himself, his office was unusual; it gave the impression of being an afterthought, a sort of architectural cul-de-sac.
The corridor by the gymnasium was barely able to accommodate it; it forced those walking past to do so in single file.
The walls were of glass from desk-top height upwards.
This meant that Mr Gillis could patrol the corridor without leaving his seat.
It also meant that the boys could see in and witness the general untidiness of his tiny room.
Even more unusual was the door because it too was of glass.
Mr Gillis had stuck a plastic hook near the top of this door on the inside and it was here that he chose to hang his white trilby.
Boys approaching the gymnasium from the chemistry labs had a clear view of the door.
They could also see the inside of the hat.
This was not white.
It was rather dark and greasy.
‘Measuring will be on Tuesday and we'll leave the weighing till Thursday.
Got that?’
The Butcher gave us the impression that he was indeed talking about chunks of meat — sides of beef or lamb or perhaps great hams trussed up with string.
In fact he was talking about us, the boys of class 3B.
He was a large, barrel-chested man in his early forties, his black hair plastered to his skull with hair cream.
We were standing around him in a ragged semi-circle in the gym at the end of our physical education period.
It was the third week of our third year in secondary school.
We were all thirteen or fourteen years old.
‘If we do it that way, spread over two periods, we can get some games in each period.
Right?’
A few boys mumbled ‘Yes, sir.’
Mr Gillis took a long look from one tip of the arc of boys round to the other.
The Butcher image was maintained.
We might have been livestock that he was assessing for slaughter.
‘Any Fs this year, do you think?’ he asked.
His voice was loud and uncompromising.
‘One or two maybe, eh?’
Some of the boys looked round at Alec Davidson, the smallest boy in the class, and sniggered.
The bell rang to signal the end of the period but nobody moved.
We had learned this at the very first lesson of the term — something most of the boys should have remembered from the previous  year — when Mr Gillis had belted fourteen of us for setting off towards the door when the bell rang rather than waiting for his instruction.
‘All right, then.
Dismiss.’
Once away from the gym and the deadening influence of the Butcher we felt released and began to caper along the corridor to the next lesson.
Someone swiped one of little Alec Davidson's gym shoes and tossed it ahead to the front of the uneven column.
Alec gave chase until it was thrown back over his head to be caught by one of the boys at the rear.
Then he turned and began the hopeless task of chasing his shoe as it flew back and to above his head.
Once he nearly caught it but someone pushed him out of the way at the last moment.
He fell over and clouted his head against one of the heavy silvered cast-iron radiators that were to be found throughout the school.
He burst into tears.
Two or three boys stood round him as he sat on the floor nursing the side of his head where a lump was rising under his probing fingers.
The boys' attention did not spring from concern for Alec but concern for themselves if Alec was cut and needed to see the nurse.
There would be hell to pay then and they knew it.
‘Any blood, Alec?’ one of them asked.
This was Charlie McHugh, known as Snecky.
The best footballer of his year he was also regularly in trouble with one teacher or another.
He had once been suspended from school for a month.
‘Hey, Alec, any blood?’
Snecky repeated.
Alec, still tearful, examined his fingers and shook his head slowly.
‘Nah, he's OK,’ Murrick said.
‘Come on.’
‘Right.’
Alec was abandoned as the boys raced ahead to the next class.
‘Hey, Alec!’ one of them shouted from ten yards down the corridor.
Still sitting on the floor by the radiator, Alec ignored this shout.
The stolen gym shoe, hurled by Snecky, caught him on the side of the face.
Fifteen years or so after these events of my early life in secondary school it is hard to remember now how important all these things were.
Mr Gillis, the Butcher, was a man to be treated very carefully because he put up with no nonsense, had a vicious temper and he bore grudges.
Gym class was the place where we were most vulnerable.
It was the place where we had to display our knobbly knees and pimply backs, our sometimes not very clean underwear and our sweaty socks.
It was where physical prowess was under constant assessment and where a boy's self-respect could be built up or crushed.
Alec Davidson, for example, was one of those who came off worst.
It didn't matter that he was quite well built, had strong legs and could run quite fast; he was too short and that was that.
He was the titch, the weed of the class, standing about four feet eight in his  shoes and somewhat less barefoot.
He was an F and the other boys never let him forget this.
I had only just joined the school as my family had recently moved into the area.
All this talk of weighing and measuring and being an F or an E or whatever was new to me.
It was Alec Davidson who explained.
It seemed that everyone had to be classified according to height and weight so that they would compete against boys of roughly the same size in the school sports at the end of the year.
The tallest, heaviest boys were in the A group; the next size down was B and so on until F. F was the group for the real tinies, the handful of Alec Davidsons who were mostly in first year.
Alec had been an F in first year, an F in second year and he was worried — no, perhaps terrified is a better word — that he would end up an F even in his third year.
Being an F in third year would be very close to hell.
At this time, when I was thirteen years old, I was about average in height and weight for my age and so would most likely be a C. This aspect of the annual weighing and measuring routine — the actual result — didn't really bother me much.
However, as Alec explained to me in detail the procedures involved I began to realise that I could be in trouble, that I could be in serious trouble.
It became clear that my enemy in all this business, the thing that could promote my own humiliation, was the Butcher's measuring rod.
I should explain first why it was Alec Davidson who exposed these mysteries to me.
I didn't really like the way the other boys treated him.
I was new at the school and still observing, still beginning friendships.
Perhaps Alec noticed that I did not ridicule him as the others did.
Anyway, we became friends of sorts.
I didn't actually like him all that much.
I suppose I felt sorry for him; I tried to like him.
Also I didn't want to get too close to him because I felt some of his rotten luck might rub off on me.
I didn't want the other boys to view us as being mates because then I would probably come in for abuse too.
I think Alec realised this at the beginning.
He knew he was an outcast and understood why others might be reluctant to befriend him.
Perhaps I exaggerate.
After all, these things happened a long time ago.
I couldn't tell then nor can I tell now exactly what went on in Alec Davidson's mind.
However, I can remember clearly my own alarm, bordering on terror, when he told me about the Butcher's measuring rod.
This was a thin length of yellow wood, calibrated in inches, which was fixed against the one brick wall in his glass office.
A short horizontal bar slid up and down the length of the rod.
Mr Gillis seemed to delight in slamming it down on the top of the tousled head below.
He would allow no cheating.
‘McMillan, five foot three.
Are your feet on the floor, boy?
Flat on the floor?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Don't believe a word of it.
Five two and a half.
Next!’
No boy was happy with his measurement.
Everyone reckoned the rod was wrong.
After all, it did not stretch to the floor but started at three feet six and went up to seven feet.
Who could be sure that it had been positioned correctly, that the first thick black line was exactly three feet and six inches from the green tiles of the floor?
The tiles directly underneath seemed to be worn after years of having bare feet placed on them.
Maybe the weight itself of thousands of boys over the last couple of decades had led to some sort of subsidence.
These were some of the theories produced to argue that the rod was quite wrong.
It was half an inch out at the very least.
If only the bar wasn't brought down quite so hard on everyone's head.
If you winced from the blow you might lose three quarters of an inch or more and it was no use arguing about it.
All you earned for that was a belting.
Mr Gillis never measured anyone twice.
There was the added problem that the whole process was very public.
The boys lined up in the corridor by the glass office and looked in to see who was up against the rod.
Mr Gillis seemed to take pleasure in shouting out the height of each boy.
It was unfair.
It was very unfair and for Alec Davidson it was torture.
As I heard more stories about the measuring rod, not just from Alec but from other boys as well, I began to realise that it would be as big a problem for me as it always was for Alec.
Perhaps it would be worse.
When I was seven I had an accident.
I was knocked down by a car and very nearly died.
There were several injuries and all healed up after a while.
Except one.
My right leg remained shorter than my left by about half an inch.
Nowadays few people can detect this very slight disability although I tend to limp a bit if I get tired.
Even when I was a schoolboy I was able to disguise it because my parents made sure that I had the best of footwear specially made to build up my right foot without making it obvious that this was the case.
In fact, because only half an inch was involved it was impossible to see from the outside of my right shoe that it was different in any way from my left.
You had to look inside the shoes to be able to judge the different thicknesses of sole and heel.
Of course the main thing about the shoes was that I had to wear them all the time.
In stocking soles or barefoot I had an obvious limp.
Of course it is easy to look back now and say, well, would anyone have noticed if I had left my shoes lying around the changing room instead of buckling them up inside my satchel when I changed into my gym kit for  classes with the Butcher?
And if anyone had noticed, maybe I could have just tossed the whole matter off in a casual way: ‘Oh, that…it's nothing much…’
No, it's too easy to forget that something which I hardly ever think about now was then a very great concern.
I was aware what could happen, I could see that any weakness was pounced upon by the other boys and I knew that I wasn't big enough or belligerent enough to bully my way out of it.
I saw what they did to Alec Davidson and I was determined to avoid such treatment.
A lot of planning was required.
At gym lessons I needed to organise my changing routine so that I could take off my outdoor shoes, slip my feet immediately into my gym shoes and, even before I tied my gym-shoe laces, put my outdoor shoes into my satchel hoping that they would stay there throughout the lesson.
This operation was tricky because there was the little matter of taking off my trousers and putting on my shorts.
In fact I did both before changing my shoes — quite a number of the other boys pulled their trousers off over their shoes so this was not unusual.
Timing was the most important aspect of the procedure.
I even practised a few variations at home to see if the system could be improved.
However, it seemed to work, complicated or not.
I could not decide if the fact that no one had discovered my secret was actually the result of my elaborate efforts or just the boys' lack of attention.
I did not want to test this out so I took care to keep my changing routine sharp and exact.
When I heard about the business of measuring and weighing I realised that all the care and effort I had put into keeping my secret had probably been a complete waste of time.
If the Butcher insisted that we attend the measuring process barefoot there were two problems.
First, getting from the changing room to the glass office meant a barefoot walk, or run, of twenty or thirty yards.
Without my shoes I had an obvious limp.
I reckoned I might still escape detection, however, if I ran on my toes in a sort of hearty limbering up exercise.
I practised at home, of course.
Then there was the feet-flat-on-the-floor problem.
It seems strange now, fifteen years on, that I should have been so conscious of this.
Now I can put both feet flat on the floor and stand up straight without slouching or bending a knee or looking strained in any way.
Perhaps it was different then; I don't know.
Perhaps the discrepancy was more marked; I can't remember.
Whatever the case, I believed that my disability was obvious and that was what determined my approach.
I decided that I would have to get to the Butcher's office first or at least early on in the queue so that I would be barefoot for as short a time as possible.
I would run there, tiptoe across the green tiles and after measurement sprint back to the changing room to put on my gym shoes.
There was the added complication that for the first time there would be  a period of five minutes or so when I would have to shut inside my satchel not only my outdoor shoes but my gym shoes as well.
I made sure that a couple of books were left at home so that there was more room.
I had thought it all through; I reckoned I had covered all possibilities.
When the day came I had no time to think.
I got to the changing room first and was already stripping off as the sixteen other boys in the class barged in flinging satchels and blazers everywhere and kicking their shoes off so that they landed underneath the slatted benches that ran along each wall.
As I left the room at a trot everyone else was still pulling on shorts or even struggling with tightly knotted ties.
I might even get to the office and be measured and out again before the first of the boys arrived.
I prayed that Mr Gillis was on time and in a hurry to be done with his tedious task.
At the office door I found that I was second in the queue, not first.
Somehow Alec Davidson had contrived to beat me to it.
I thought that maybe he had had the same idea as me only for a different reason.
He knew that he was the shortest in the class by about three inches and that Mr Gillis was considerate enough to bark out the height of each boy after measurement so that everyone in the class knew the awful truth.
As I got to the office I could see Alec poking his head round the open door.
Mr Gillis was at his desk with his back to us.
I heard Alec saying, in a voice that tried to be light and urgent at the same time, ‘We're ready, sir,’ and I heard the reply: ‘Well I'm not.
Just wait there.’
Mr Gillis continued writing and when Alec turned to me I could see the strain on his face.
I had no time to feel sorry for him though because I was under considerable strain myself.
I experienced the agonisingly slow passage of time and decided that I needed to go to the toilet.
The first of the other boys arrived and Mr Gillis was still hunched over his book.
He glanced round quickly, saw only three boys and started writing again.
A few more boys arrived and I began to realise the terrible blunder I had made.
I had tried to be first in order to get it over with quickly but now it was clear that I would be under the gaze of most if not all of the class.
If only I had been less impatient and tried to go last.
I could surely have bluffed out the running; it was the standing under the rod that was the important part, the critical part; why hadn't I realised that?
As the last of the boys arrived I thought that maybe I could just make my way to the back of the queue, or sprint back to the changing room on one pretext or another and conveniently lose my place in the line.
In fact I was just about to do this when Mr Gillis decided he was ready.
He got up from his desk and stepped over to the measuring rod.
It was too late now for me to go anywhere.
‘Right,’ he said, ‘let's be having you.’
Alec Davidson stepped forward like a condemned man.
His plan had misfired as badly as mine.
Instead of skipping through unnoticed he was now the focus of attention.
He stood against the wall as sixteen pairs of eyes from faces pressed up against the office windows scrutinised him and saw, he knew only too well, a small, scrawny creature with spots breaking out over his face.
He wore an expression of abject defeat and for a short moment my attention moved away from my own troubles and I felt sorry for him.
The bar slammed down.
‘Four foot nine.
Next.’
Howls of laughter went up from the other boys.
‘Another F, eh, Alec,’ someone shouted.
Mr Gillis, recording the information in his book, said nothing.
Alec slipped by me and set off towards the changing room at a sprint.
A shower of jeers greeted him from the queue and, as he passed the last boy, who was just out of sight of Mr Gillis, a foot shot out, caught him on the ankle and down he went, sprawling on the wooden floor.
Another shout.
Alec picked himself up and raced for the door.
Someone, smiling, said ‘Poor wee bastard,’ and that seemed to be the extent of feeling for Alec.
‘I said next.’
It was my turn.
I tiptoed across the floor.
This got a few whistles.
Mr Gillis watched me and said: ‘Very nice.
Something wrong with your feet?’
I experienced a moment of complete terror in which my mind raced — I had been discovered after all; it was obvious that I had a limp; everyone could see it; they'd seen it all along and had chosen this moment to hit me with it, my weakest moment…
‘The floor's awfully cold, sir.’
Afterwards I couldn't believe I had managed to say this; I couldn't believe that I'd had the intelligence, the wit, the inspiration to come up with this perfect reply.
Everyone laughed, including Mr Gillis.
‘Oh well,’ he said, ‘we'd better measure you quickly then, hadn't we, in case your little feet catch cold.’
More laughter.
Then under the rod.
Slam.
‘Five foot two.
Next.’
As I reached the changing room again my heart was thumping inside my chest.
I'd made it but by the skin of my teeth.
I sat down on the bench and leaned back against the wall.
The tension had been unbearable, the relief was ecstasy.
Then I noticed Alec at the other end of the bench.
He was in tears.
‘Gillis is a bastard,’ Alec sobbed.
‘And so's Snecky for tripping me up.’
He took a handkerchief from the pocket of his trousers which were still hanging on a hook behind him.
He blew his nose noisily.
His tears began to dry.
‘But for Christ's sake don't tell Snecky I said that, will you,’ he said, suddenly afraid.
I promised I wouldn't.
The next boy returned  from the office.
We put on our gym shoes and trooped out to the gym in silence.
I remember the rest of that gym period very well indeed.
We did some circuit training and finished off with a quick game of indoor football in which I scored twice in my team's three-one win.
I felt great.
I had successfully evaded detection; I had passed the terrible test of the measuring rod.
I had also proved to myself that I could play football at least as well as the other boys, if not better.
Back in the changing room at the end of the period Alec Davidson casually asked me why I always put my shoes inside my satchel during the gym lesson.
The question took me completely by surprise.
After a moment's hesitation I blurted out, ‘Tell you later.’
This was not unreasonable as the changing room was the usual scrum of bodies with shirts, ties and the occasional boot flying through the air.
The stale smell of socks and the constant din contributed to the normal post-gymnastic atmosphere.
Steam issued from the shower room.
Showers were not compulsory and in fact only a few boys took advantage of this facility.
You can guess that I was not one of them.
There was a great deal of laughter and shouting and hurried cribbing of the history homework for the next lesson.
It was not a place for reasoned argument and Alec Davidson did not press his point further.
I had earned myself a little more time to think.
Over the years since that occasion I have often wondered why I did what I decided to do.
The precise reason escapes me now, lost perhaps in the flurry of activity that followed.
Perhaps, suddenly, I was tired of it all — the painstaking care in fashioning this huge pretence about something that probably was not particularly important to anyone but myself.
After all my care and attention to the tiniest detail of keeping my secret I decided to tell Alec Davidson the truth.
Maybe I had meant to raise Alec's image of himself, show him that I was effectively placing myself in his power, giving him the responsibility that friendship demanded.
As someone destroyed daily by the taunts and jeers of others he would now have the ability to destroy someone else in his turn.
I felt it would bind us together.
When I first mentioned the subject of the shoes, as we were walking home from school that evening, he wasn't sure what I was talking about.
As I blundered on in my explanation I realised he had forgotten all about it and if I had kept my mouth shut the problem need never have arisen.
But it was too late, or perhaps I forced the confession out of myself, determined once and for all to rid myself of the burden of this secret.
Alec received the news in silence.
When we reached the street corner where our ways separated I asked him not to tell anyone.
He promised  that my secret was safe.
I smiled at him, a little uncertainly perhaps, and walked back home slowly.
The next day it seemed as if everyone in the school knew.
The other boys in my class turned their fickle attention away from Alec and diverted it to me.
Immediately I was ‘Limping Jimmy’ or ‘Jimmy the Limp’.
I pointed out that I did not limp or at least not so much that anyone had previously noticed.
Oh no, they said, we knew.
They were adamant that it had been clear all along, they'd suspected something from the start.
I was grabbed and my satchel torn from me.
It was opened so forcefully that one of the straps broke.
This did not seem to concern anyone.
They were searching for the gym shoes.
As we were not due for another lesson till the next day I wasn't carrying them with me.
There was a moment's hesitation before attention turned to the shoes I was wearing.
Kicking and struggling I was forced to the floor and lay there, face down, while three boys sat on top of me and others pulled my shoes off.
A scuffle broke out as boys fought to claim them.
After a few moments a truce was arranged.
The shoes were examined and the discrepancy between them noted.
A cheer went up.
Still pinned to the floor I was about to burst into tears of frustration when I was suddenly released.
I rose slowly.
My attackers had scattered and I assumed that a teacher was approaching along the corridor.
When I got to my feet I wiped a mixture of snot and blood from my nose and looked around.
There was no one there; I had been released on a false alarm.
I stuffed my shirt tail back into my trousers and tried to straighten my tie.
My white shirt was soiled from its contact with the floor.
I knew I looked a mess and I could not face going into class in that state.
Besides, I had to get my shoes.
These were nowhere to be found.
I picked up my satchel with its broken strap and walked — no, limped — to the window.
The corridor was lined with windows overlooking a central quadrangle.
From my second-floor vantage point I could see my classmates as they tumbled out into the quad playing catch with my shoes.
I looked down in misery tinged with the first real touch of hatred I had ever felt.
Alec Davidson was leading the game.
When I heard about Elsie's foot I decided that I wanted to write about her to explore how she coped with her disability.
Her experience, I reasoned, would have been so different from mine.
Whereas hostility was expressed towards me in the taunts and jeers of my classmates and even by physical assault, I reckoned that Elsie would have had to put up with prejudice of a different sort.
To be patronised in a cloying, concerned manner, to be thought of as diseased or unclean, the result of some awful sin and  therefore to be regarded as someone without hope — was her situation better than mine or worse?
What happened to me might have broken me — it nearly did break me — but I got through.
There were people on my side and I made it.
I thought that maybe Elsie went under finally sickened and stifled by the righteous attitudes that prevailed at the time.
I arranged her suicide at the age of twenty-six and I felt that if this wasn't ‘the’ truth I had certainly approached ‘a’truth.
Poor old Elsie, I thought as I killed her off, but I felt fairly satisfied with my work.
What did ‘the’ truth matter anyway since there was no one left to tell me more about Elsie except my mother, and her recollection of the events surrounding the disappearance were hazy at best?
So, I felt justified in writing my life and death of Elsie in the way I did.
I took her through school, I sent her to college, I married her off and then I made her take her own life.
And I got it all wrong.
In my own defence I can say that everyone else got it wrong too.
This was revealed when the police made one rather important discovery about Elsie's body.
I'm not going to tell you what that discovery was.
Not yet.
It will keep for a while, at least until I have recorded a little visit I made after I finished writing my life of Elsie and the episode concerning the Butcher.
THE F MAN
The visit was a visit to the past.
I wanted to take an event, an experience from my own past, and re-examine it through the recollection of someone else.
I'm not sure what I hoped to achieve by this.
It was something to do with homing in more precisely on what had really happened, seeing if it was ever possible to pin down the truth.
I felt that I might be able to apply what I learned — if indeed I learned anything — to my attempts to reconstruct the life of Elsie.
Finding Alec Davidson was much easier than I thought although he surprised me by what he had become.
But then, what could I have expected?
The last time we had met, and that was fifteen or sixteen years before, we had been thirteen years old.
How could I gauge his development on that hazy memory?
There were sixteen Davidsons in the book for Strondonald, four of them A. Davidson.
However, it was a D. Davidson that I rang first as the address was familiar.
Alec had lived on one of the three main streets north of the river and it had a name I remembered — Clashbea Road.
Mr D. Davidson turned out to be Alec's father and after I had identified myself as an old school-friend of Alec's — I allowed myself a little poetic licence in this description — he confirmed that Alec still lived in Strondonald.
In fact he had only been away from the town for one period of six years when he was at university in Aberdeen.
The mention of six years suggested to me that Alec might be a doctor but I was wrong.
Alec's father said that Alec was indeed one of the four A. Davidsons in the telephone directory — the Rev. A. W. Davidson.
I thanked him and said goodbye.
My immediate reaction was to laugh.
Alec had become a minister!
I wondered at what point he had got religion.
It must have been some time after we had last met.
There had been one or two religious groups in school, I remembered, but I hadn't belonged to any of them and I was fairly sure Alec hadn't either.
Anyway, I reckoned that this unexpected development might make my task a little easier.
I was to phone him up and arrange to  meet him.
His profession would surely mean that he would listen to my request with a sympathetic ear.
And so it was.
I did get the impression, though, that he wasn't really sure of who I was.
I mentioned a boy who had only been at school for two terms, a boy who had had a limp, someone he had been friendly with for a time.
As I was giving this description it came to me that I was talking about someone else.
I could sense Alec's confusion, too.
He wasn't sure who I was talking about and I had difficulty myself in recognising this creature of so many years before.
Nevertheless I arranged to drive over to Strondonald the following Saturday afternoon and join him for tea.
The manse door opened before I reached it.
I was greeted by a very attractive woman of about thirty.
She had short blonde hair and was wearing a yellow blouse and a cotton wrap-around skirt also in yellow but blotched with large orange flowers.
Her legs and feet were bare.
She was carrying a young child who was slung in her arms and perched on her right hip.
The child was perhaps a year old and was engaged in beating his — or it might have been her — mother about the shoulders with tiny chubby fists.
Raising a hand to put an end to these blows the woman gave me a warm smile.
‘You must be James Atherton,’ she said.
‘Yes, that's right.’
‘Do come in, my husband is expecting you.
I'm Jill.’
‘Pleased to meet you,’ I said.
‘Do go in, won't you.
Alec's through there.’
She nodded towards a half-open door.
‘I'll be along shortly with some tea.’
I muttered thanks and as she disappeared to the kitchen I stepped up to the sitting room door, knocked rather timidly and entered.
‘James!
How very good to see you.’
I did not expect the greeting to be quite so enthusiastic.
More surprising by far, however, was what that tiny, snotty-nosed thirteen-year-old had become.
The man who was now pumping my hand with just a little too much fervour was completely bald.
I had no doubt he was the same age as me — his round face was not particularly lined — but he had the hairline of a ninety-year-old.
There was not a single hair on top; he was reduced to a reddish fringe running round the back from ear to ear.
He was also quite big.
This surprised me too.
He was at least as tall as me, perhaps an inch taller.
That would make him about five feet ten.
He was also broad and quite heavily built though not fat.
The figure before me bore no relation whatever to the Alec I remembered.
‘You've changed,’ he said.
He had stepped back and was looking me up and down.
‘Beyond recognition, I imagine,’ I said.
‘I would never have recognised you.’
‘No, no.’
He grinned and passed a hand over his bare skull.
‘Nature decided I was meant for hats very early on.’
‘But you were…forgive the impertinence…you were rather small, if I remember correctly.
You must have shot up from the age of fourteen or so.’
‘Really?’
He didn't look convinced.
‘I can't remember.
I suppose I was a bit on the short side early on in secondary school.
Of course it's all such a long time ago.’
‘Yes, quite.’
‘But please, take a seat.
Jill will be through directly with some goodies.’
I sat down in a very deep sofa.
Alec perched himself opposite on the edge of an armchair.
A coffee table lay between us.
It was all tubular steel and smoked glass.
I disliked it instantly.
I had little time for more than a quick glance round the room.
The place was clean and tidy but not regimented.
The dining table was spread over with newspapers and books.
A glass-fronted cabinet beyond housed more volumes arranged rather haphazardly, some on their edges but some stacked up lying flat one on top of the other.
‘How long has it been, in fact?’
This question led us off into the usual calculations that take place on these occasions, sprinkled with the odd exclamation of ‘No!’,
‘Really!’ and ‘Well I never!’
All these were Alec's, I should add.
I was as surprised as he was at what time had revealed but I did not join in when his boyish enthusiasm took hold.
He displayed that strange other-worldliness that I have sometimes detected in other people who follow some strict religious code.
I find it disconcerting.
I decided to try to ignore it as I did not want anything to distract me from my purpose.
My purpose?
‘Was there a particular reason that caused you to look me up after all this time, James?’
This was my cue but Alec was looking across at me with a grin that was too eager and I faltered.
It suddenly crossed my mind that perhaps he thought I had come to see him on a professional level, that I was in need of spiritual help or whatever.
This idea was too awful to contemplate.
I hoped that my relief wasn't too visible when Jill chose that moment to enter with the tea tray.
A couple of minutes passed in setting out the tea things and exchanging minor pleasantries.
Jill withdrew and after a sip or two of tea I began.
‘Tell me about the Butcher.’
Alec looked confused.
‘Who?’
‘The Butcher.
Surely you remember him.’
‘Which…?
I'm sorry, I'm not quite sure…‘
‘The PE master, Mr Gillis.
Don't you remember?
We used to call him the Butcher.’
‘Oh!
I see!
Of course!’
Alec managed to slop tea into his saucer.
Over-reaction again, I noted.
He placed his cup and its flooded saucer separately on the coffee table and sat back in his chair.
He gazed up in the air and appeared to be musing to the ceiling.
‘Goodness me, yes.
Well, well, that does take me back.
The Butcher.
Of course…’
He sat up straight again.
‘But the Butcher was Mr Campbell the maths teacher, not Mr Gillis,’ he said, in a very matter-of-fact way.
‘What…?’
‘Campbell.
Maths.
Remember, he always used to give us problems about cows and sheep, weights of different cuts of lamb and so on.
He was the Butcher.’
I was unable to speak for about half a minute.
He was right, of course.
I'd been at that school for two terms, eight months at the most.
Alec had been there…well…
‘How long were you at the High School?’
I asked.
‘Oh, all my secondary career.
Six years.’
‘Yes.
I see.’
Six years.
Of course he would know all the teachers and their nicknames better than I would.
‘Then what the hell…’
I looked up and saw the ghost of a frown.
‘…I'm sorry.
What did we call Gillis?’
‘Mr Gillis, the PE man.
Let me see.
He was…he was…
Just ‘Gilly’ if I remember correctly.
Yes, it was Gilly.
No more than that.’
He leaned forward conspiratorially.
‘I think, if truth be told, we were all a little afraid of him.’
He actually winked.
‘Afraid!
Afraid!’
I became aware that I was speaking too loudly.
I sat back and placed my cup and saucer on the wide arm of the sofa.
‘We weren't afraid of him,’ I said evenly.
‘We were terrified.’
‘Oh come now, that's far too strong a word, surely.
Would you care for a scone?
He raised a plate from the coffee table and held it towards me.
At this point I began to have serious doubts about this man's hold on reality.
I took a scone.
‘The measuring rod.
You remember that, don't you?’
I said.
‘Who could forget that!
Yes, that was awful, wasn't it.’
He was still smiling.
‘But it was all rather good fun looking back on it.’
I very nearly choked.
His comment had caught me in mid-swallow and I managed to spray little bits of scone onto the coffee table.
I leaned forward and grabbed a serviette.
‘My dear fellow…’
I waved away his solicitations and took a few mouthfuls of air followed by some tea.
Composed again, if still a little red in the face, I sat back and muttered apologies.
I decided to remain calm.
I said, calmly, ‘How can you call it fun?
It was torture and you were one of those who suffered most.
The man was an animal, a brute.’
‘Now, James, I must take issue with you there.’
He had the disconcerting habit of using my name as if he were addressing a butler or a chauffeur.
However, perhaps this is my own prejudice.
I dislike being called James; I am Jim.
‘Mr Gillis,’ he went on, ‘is a well-respected member of the community…’
‘You mean he's still alive?’
I asked in surprise.
‘Very much so.
After all, he's only in his mid-sixties.’
I had never really considered this.
When I was a kid all my teachers had been classified as old.
Somehow this fuzzy logic had stayed on.
I had expected Gillis to be long since dead or at best a doddering ninety-year-old.
Alec was still talking.
‘He is, moreover, an elder in the church.’
This sentence, delivered with just a hint of censure in its tone, convinced me that all further logical argument would be a waste of time.
So Gilly was an elder of the church, an upstanding member of the community.
Then I thought that maybe I was at fault, that I had borne a grudge too long.
Maybe I had exaggerated things and Gilly wasn't such a bad old stick after all.
In the silence that followed I reached for another scone.
No, damn it, I was right.
No matter how he had changed — if indeed he had changed — that man had once been a sadistic brute.
The man sitting before me could not have forgotten that; he just chose to ignore it.
I decided that I had not come all this way only to indulge in polite conversation.
I began again, though quite calmly.:
‘No matter what he is now, Mr Gillis treated me badly at school and he treated you even worse.
Don't tell me that you've forgotten that.’
‘It was a long time ago…’
‘That doesn't answer the question.’
I was determined not to let Alec off the hook.
He looked at me as if he was now wondering quite what it was he had invited into his home.
His smile had gone.
He took a sip of tea and set the cup aside.
He sat back and folded his arms, giving me the impression that he was now ready to get down to some serious talking.
I was wary lest this was just one more of his rehearsed poses.
‘I have to admit,’ he began, speaking quite slowly, ‘that my early years at secondary school were not of the happiest.
I was ribbed fairly mercilessly by the other boys, I remember, and picked on because I was, as you rightly said, the smallest boy in the class.
But it changed, James.
For one thing I learned to cope with it better and then, well, I started growing and nobody singled me out for ridicule any more.
It was fine from then on.’
‘Just like that,’ I said.
‘It was a long time ago, James, a long time ago.
These things are best forgotten.
Their effects weren't lasting, anyway.’
‘Weren't they?’
‘Not in my case, James.
I would say that perhaps you still have some forgetting to do.’
‘I think of all the boys that came after, all the ones that went before too and were subjected to Gilly's approach to education.’
‘He mellowed, James, he mellowed considerably.’
He kept calling me James; somehow I could not call him Alec.
‘I hope he did mellow.
That would be something, at least,’ I said.
‘Perhaps you would like to meet him again!’
His eyes lit up and I recognised with dismay the return of the interested, caring vicar.
‘No thank you,’ I said, a trifle too crisply.
There was another awkward little silence.
I declined a third scone but accepted a ginger biscuit.
‘I'm interested in the past,’ I said, ‘I'm fascinated by it.’
‘So it would seem, James.
But what is the past, anyway.
It's only now a bit later on.’
I laughed out loud.
It was partly the comment itself, partly the way it had been delivered, dead pan, a little gem just plucked unwittingly out of the air.
He would have forgotten it already.
He didn't understand what I was laughing at and I decided against an explanation.
I merely apologised for my rudeness and accepted a second cup of tea.
From then on idle chit-chat returned and I made no attempt to direct things back to what I believed were more important matters.
We took a stroll in the garden where we were joined by Jill.
It was a bright warm day and the surroundings were pleasantly soft and quiet.
You could lose yourself here, I thought, fall asleep for a hundred years.
Alec and I parted on good terms.
He asked me to call again and this invitation may well have been genuine; my acceptance was not.
As I drove the fifty or so miles back home I thought that I would rewrite the story, the history rather, of the Butcher.
The white hat, I wondered, had that just been another trick of my imagination?
I wasn't sure.
Clearly I could not leave the story as it was, with the wrong nickname.
That had been crucial, after all, hadn't it?
Then, quite suddenly, it didn't really seem so important any more.
Gilly, the Butcher, the grimy white hat…so what?
I decided to leave it, to leave it just as it was, as I had remembered it.
Anyway, if I changed it who could tell what other inaccuracies might creep in.
I realised I had not mentioned Elsie at all, and I was glad.
Now for what the police discovered about Elsie.
As I said, I got it all wrong about Elsie in one important detail but then we all got it wrong.
The error lay in a very simple but quite reasonable assumption which everyone made.
We assumed that Elsie's death explained her disappearance, that the two events were one and the same thing.
We never considered that they might be quite separate.
It was quite a shock to learn that the Elsie found at the bottom of Loch Craig was not a twenty-six-year-old woman but a woman in her late fifties or early sixties.
It was Elsie all right— the police seemed convinced of that — but she had died round about 1970, not 1934.
Suddenly the Elsie McAndrew affair was in the national news headlines.
Who was Elsie and what had happened to her?
I didn't know the answer and neither did anyone else.
I found myself wandering round with a wry smile on my face and occasionally bursting into laughter at my own presumption.
Oh yes, I knew the difference between reality and realism, I could argue about the truth of fiction and the value of creative reporting.
I knew all about that.
So what had I done?
I had manufactured a woman called Elsie.
I brought her up, gave her a few significant experiences, got her married, made her unhappy and killed her off.
It was all carefully arranged and rather neat and I felt reasonably satisfied with myself.
Then, just when I had everything nicely rounded off what did this ungrateful creature of mine take it upon herself to do?
Without giving me any warning at all she decided to bring herself back to life.
1947
MEETING MRS WILSON
Apart from the fact that he was wearing a suit of thick brown tweed on what was a warm day in early summer, the man walking along an elegant street in Kensington was unremarkable.
He was in his mid-thirties, about five feet eight inches tall, thickset and, by his own standards, immaculately dressed.
He had had his suit cleaned and pressed though the cost of this appalled him.
He had bought a new white shirt and was wearing a regimental tie which had cost him tuppence in a jumble sale.
His brown shoes which, like his suit, were a little too heavy for the warm weather, were nevertheless highly polished.
His thick straight black hair was parted high on the left and plastered to his skull with hair oil.
He was carrying what appeared to be a new hat.
This was wide-brimmed, dark brown, with a beige hatband.
The main reason that he was carrying it rather than wearing it was that it did not belong to him.
He had borrowed it from a fellow inmate of the lodging house in Kennington where he had been staying for the last week.
He wondered if he would be able to stand the lodging house for much longer.
He had been away from his wife and family for nearly two weeks now.
If he were honest with himself, however, he would admit that he did not miss them; it was the comfort of his home that he missed.
He thought about it a bit more and decided that home was the wrong word; it was just the place where he lived.
In the lodging house he had a tiny cubicle to himself but privacy was impossible.
There were sixty such cubicles, two rows of thirty separated by a narrow corridor.
The cubicles did not have doors, just curtains which barely covered the entrances, narrow though they were.
Through these curtains came the sounds and smells of fifty-nine other men who ranged in age from seventeen to eighty-four.
During the first few nights he had found sleep almost impossible.
The other men snored, talked in their sleep — one or two shouted incomprehensible words — farted, belched, coughed, sneezed, swore, hawked and spat.
Because some of the men were alcoholics there was often the sound of singing, or slurred attempts at it, and occasionally vomiting.
For probably the same reason, he supposed, there was sometimes the sound of crying.
That was the sound he found to be the worst, worse even than the cursing and swearing and threats he had witnessed last Friday night.
He had never heard a grown man cry before.
He began to fiddle with the hat, made to put it on and then changed his mind.
A few yards farther on he found the house he was looking for.
It was hard to believe that the place he was now visiting was only a few miles from the squalor of the area round the lodging house.
He felt intimidated by the high white building, the scrubbed step and polished doorplate.
No, Kensington and Kennington might be separated only by a letter of the alphabet but the streets that came between them took you out of one world and into another.
He checked his watch.
He was dead on time.
He took out a handkerchief and mopped the slight perspiration from his face.
He made sure his hands were dry too but while he wiped them he managed to drop the hat.
He picked it up and brushed it off quickly.
He mounted the five steps to the front door and rang the bell.
The door was opened almost immediately by a maid dressed in black with a white apron.
Although quite young she was rather abrupt in her manner.
‘Yes?’ she asked.
She can see right through me, he thought.
Even the bloody maid can see through me.
All this damn preparation for nothing.
‘I wish to see Mrs Wilson,’ he said calmly.
‘I'm expected.’
‘I see.
What name, sir?’
The ‘sir’ was just a little too grudging.
Or was it?
Perhaps he was imagining the whole thing.
Maybe she treated everyone like this.
‘Albert McKillop,’ he said.
He was admitted to the most lavishly decorated and furnished room he had ever been in.
At first he was shocked into admiration but as he waited he looked more carefully at the dark wood of the large, ugly pieces of furniture, the thick embossing on the pale yellow wallpaper and the heaviness of the dark brown velvet curtains.
He began to find the room too oppressive.
He sat down on a sofa which he realised was slightly longer than his cubicle in the lodging house.
Mrs Wilson entered and he rose.
She was a woman in her mid-forties, he guessed.
She was tall, a little on the stout side, and had long brown hair with one or two streaks of grey in it which was caught up in a bun perched on the top of her head.
This made her look slightly ridiculous and McKillop had to fight back a smile.
She was wearing a black, ankle-length skirt and a white blouse which was buttoned up to her throat.
While not exactly threatening, her  demeanour was hard and off-putting.
She extended her hand.
‘Mr McKillop.’
‘Mrs Wilson, it was good of you to agree to see me.’
‘Mrs Blackler of the agency advised me that you would be in touch.’
‘That was very thoughtful of her,’ he said.
That bitch, he thought.
‘Yes, it was.
Do take a seat.’
He sat down again, his hat on the sofa beside him.
Mrs Wilson sat in an armchair opposite.
She seemed about to launch herself into a speech but then thought better of it.
She took a look at this man before her and summed him up in five seconds flat: he was from the country; he was perspiring because he was wearing his one and only suit which was too heavy for the weather; his shoes were outrageous, huge, clod-hopping things, but at least they had been polished; his hands were heavy, his fingers thick as sausages so he was definitely a man of the land; despite all that, he was quite polite and well-spoken though with a strong accent that she could identify as being Scottish but from which part of Scotland she could not say; for some reason she was quite sure he was a liar.
‘Will you join me for tea?’
‘That would be grand,’ he said.
Mrs Wilson rang the tiny bell on the table at her side.
The maid who had admitted Albert McKillop appeared at the door almost immediately.
‘Elsie,’ Mrs Wilson said.
‘Please bring tea for myself and our guest.’
The maid gave a brief curtsy and left.
‘Elsie,’ McKillop said.
‘And not the first one.’
She looked at him.
Again it seemed as if she was about to say something but changed her mind.
Then she said: ‘Mr McKillop, I'm not sure that I approve of your visit.’
You mean you don't approve of someone wanting to find out where his only remaining relative is?’
‘I didn't quite say that, no.
It's just that…you say you are Elsie McKillop's brother…’
‘That's correct, yes.’
‘Well, Mr McKillop, I am bound to tell you that I find this most strange because the Elsie I knew assured me she had no brothers or sisters.’
He got to his feet.
‘If you are inclined to disbelieve me, Mrs Wilson, I'd rather leave now.
I'm not used to having my word doubted.’
He spoke this in a forthright manner but without anger.
She was completely taken aback by the strength of his tone, its edge of moral indignation and the dignity with which it was delivered.
She flushed with embarrassment and confusion.
‘Mr McKillop, please!
No, please, take a seat.
I…
I merely wish to point out that…well, the situation is at best confusing.
You'll grant me that at least, won't you?’
He bowed his head slightly.
‘Yes,’ he said.
‘Yes, I'm sorry.
You're not to know the ins and outs of my family.
No, I apologise if I was a bit hasty…’
He sat down again.
Christ, he thought, that was a close one.
‘There are…well, several questions, yes, several questions I feel bound to ask you, Mr McKillop, before I can answer any of yours.
In doing so I don't cast any doubt on your word.
No, I assure you of that but, well, for one thing the Elsie I knew made it clear to me that she wished to make a new life for herself, start more or less from scratch.
She trusted me to help her in this.’
‘So you wouldn't wish to help even her own brother to get in touch with her again?’
‘As I said before, Elsie told me she didn't…’
Suddenly Mrs Wilson remembered the trouble this statement had already caused.
She changed tack.
‘…I mean, I have no doubt that Elsie had one or two things to hide.
She said as much…more or less…’
‘And yet you still employed her to look after your children?’
‘Yes, yes…
I took a chance there but things…you might say things conspired in Elsie's favour.
We were just about to go abroad when our usual nanny was taken ill and was advised not to travel.
We had barely a week to find a replacement.
Not the ideal circumstances in which to hire someone who is to look after your children for a couple of years or more…’
‘No.’
‘…
But then our hands were tied.’
‘I see.’
‘Not that we didn't check on Elsie, as much as we could…’
‘Mrs Blackler told me that she had worked somewhere else in London.’
‘Only for a few months, yes.
She looked after some children in their last year before they were packed off to boarding school.
She was given an excellent testimonial.’
‘I've no doubt.
But did you ask her about her life before she came to London?’
‘Yes, of course.’
‘And what did she say about that?’
‘Well, you must remember, Mr McKillop, that the information I got from Elsie on that topic wasn't given to me all at one time.
I mean, I didn't sit her down and examine her on her own life-history.
For one thing, I was in such a rush to get everything arranged for our move.’
‘Your trip abroad.’
‘Yes.’
‘May I ask where you went?’
She thought about this for a moment or two and then said: ‘I see no harm in that.
We went to southern Italy, to Naples.’
‘Naples.’
He was surprised but nothing in his voice showed this.
‘That's right.
I'd been to Rome before, of course, but Naples…well, it's something altogether different.
Have you travelled abroad much, Mr McKillop?’
Mrs Wilson looked intently at the figure before her and realised how ridiculous her question was.
The man had plainly not left British shores and London itself was worlds apart from where he came from.
She was surprised then to hear him say:
‘I've spent some time in the Far East.’
The words came slowly, quite softly.
‘Why, how marvellous!’
Mrs Wilson was suddenly bright and animated.
‘I adore the Orient, particularly the Malay States.
Have you been to Singapore?’
McKillop's face bore no expression.
‘I have,’ he said.
‘Splendid.
And what were you doing there?’
She smiled.
I've got her, he thought.
I've absolutely got her.
‘I was in jail, Mrs Wilson.’
‘In…’
She stopped, finally aware of the terrible blunder she had made.
‘Oh, Mr McKillop, I'm so sorry, I didn't realise…
I…
I spent most of the War in the United States though my husband, Robert, saw active service in North Africa.
You…
I take it you were captured at the fall of Singapore.’
‘I was.’
‘How utterly, utterly ghastly for you.’
This was wrenched out with as much theatricality as good taste and decorum would allow.
My God, he thought, we're both frauds, both of us.
Mrs Wilson was particularly glad that the maid, Elsie, chose this moment to arrive with the tea tray.
Any awkward silence that might have followed their last exchange was overtaken by the business-like rattle of cups and saucers as Elsie placed the tea things on the table nearest to Mrs Wilson.
A side table was brought for McKillop and within a couple of minutes he had beside him a cup of tea and a plate with two small cakes upon it.
He decided to be humane and move away from uncomfortable subjects.
‘Perhaps I should tell you a little about myself, Mrs Wilson,’ he said when the maid had gone, ‘…a little about my family and Elsie's place in it and how I come to be looking for her after such a long time.’
‘I confess it's this last point that interests me,’ Mrs Wilson said.
‘I can't help saying it strikes me as rather odd that you've left it till now to start looking for her.’
‘I can understand that, Mrs Wilson.
It has been a long time.
When was it that you left for Naples?’
‘Naples, let me see.
It would have been 1935 or ‘36.
Henry was only two, I remember.
1935.
Yes, it must have been.
Early summer.
Frightfully hot when we arrived.’
‘1935…yes…’
McKillop seemed to be thinking hard as if struggling with some mathematical conundrum.
‘Yes, '35.
It fits in with what I know, certainly.’
‘And what do you know, Mr McKillop?’
‘Well, I know that my sister disappeared from home in March, 1934.’
‘Disappeared?’
‘Yes, without trace.’
He paused.
‘You see, Mrs Wilson, until recently we all thought she was dead.’
Mrs Wilson's eyes grew wide.
‘My goodness,’ she said quietly.
‘She left no clues, you see, so no one really considered that she might just have run away.’
‘No clues?’
‘None at all.
The police were convinced that either she'd had an accident or committed suicide.’
‘Suicide?’
‘Yes.’
‘But then I feel sure we cannot be talking about the same woman, Mr McKillop.
The Elsie I knew was a very bright girl, very self-assured, very confident, very capable, very…’
She seemed to run out of words.
‘I won't deny that, Mrs Wilson, but there was a period, just before she disappeared…well, I say just before she disappeared but it may have been going on for years, I don't know…there was a period when she was very unhappy, very unhappy indeed.’
That s as may be, but I can't imagine Elsie committing suicide.
It's impossible.’
‘Perhaps this might help.’
McKillop drew out an envelope from an inside pocket of his suit-jacket.
From this he took a photograph which he passed across to Mrs Wilson.
She looked at it carefully.
‘Well, I must admit it looks very like Elsie.
The clothes are very different, of course.
And who is the gentleman by her side?
It isn't you, is it?’
‘No, it certainly isn't me.
It's a man by the name of Simon McAndrew, Elsie's husband.’
She looked across at him.
He was turning the empty envelope over in his hands.
‘Mr McKillop, I believe I've had my fill of surprises for one day.’
‘There's liable to be a few more.’
‘I'm not sure I feel inclined to hear them.’
‘Well…’
He placed the envelope to one side, on the sofa, by his hat.
‘There are aspects to this that are unpleasant — no, let's say unfortunate.
The point is that if these things have to be revealed so that I can find my sister then I'm afraid that's the way it's going to be.
I've come a long way — I may have to go much farther — and I'm not turning back now.
Are you satisfied that that is Elsie?’
He gestured towards the photograph.
‘Yes…yes…
I'm…well, it must be her.
Yes, it is.
I just find it all so difficult to believe, that's all.’
‘There are more curious things in life.’
She looked from the photograph across to McKillop and he sensed that there was a hint of disapproval in her glance.
No more homespun philosophy, he decided.
He pressed on with the story:
‘Elsie and Simon had been married for six years or so when she disappeared.
I don't know how long it was that things had been going badly for them but I do know there were problems.
I suppose it built up slowly over the years…’
‘But why?’
‘I don't know all the reasons, but I know one or two.
Elsie couldn't have children, you see.
I think that was important.
Simon wanted children very much.’
‘And Elsie?’
‘Oh, I'm sure she would have wanted children too.
She lost one, you know, and after that it just wasn't possible.
I think Simon blamed her for this.’
‘More than a trifle unreasonably, I would say.’
‘Oh, certainly.
I don't excuse him, I'm just trying to find reasons.’
‘But there must have been more than that, surely?’
‘It can mean a lot, Mrs Wilson, it can mean a lot.’
Instead of ringing for the maid she rose and poured more tea.
McKillop declined another cake.
When she had sat down again she said: ‘So how is it that you're looking for Elsie now, so long after the event?
What is it…thirteen years later?’
‘Well, it's a long time, I admit.
At first, you see, I felt that Elsie probably did die, though not by suicide.’
‘By accident, you mean?’
‘Most likely.
She liked to go for walks and when things were going badly between herself and Simon she used to go out on her own a lot.
You know about her foot, of course?’
‘Yes, though it was hardly noticeable, to be fair.’
‘Would you say that she limped?’
‘I was seldom aware of it.’
‘No.
Well, the main theory was that she fell into the river on one of her walks.
She was particularly fond of the river.’
‘So you believed she died?’
‘Yes.’
‘And what changed your mind?’
‘Well…’
He paused and took a sip of tea.
‘First of all there was the fact that her body was never discovered.
Now, they dragged one of the local lochs and they poked about in the river but they found nothing.
The search didn't extend very far because Elsie never went more than two or three miles from home.
I think one thing that blindfolded us a bit was the fact that the river was in spate at the time and if she had fallen in she'd have been washed out to sea.
Of course no one pointed out then that in nine out of ten such cases the body would most likely be found on the beach sooner or later, maybe ten or twenty miles along the coast.
Anyway, that was the theory about her disappearance and it changed from being a theory to being referred to as what had probably happened and then later still it was accepted.
People just said that Elsie was the woman who fell into the river and drowned.
In the village, mothers told their children this story to warn them to be careful when they went down to the river.
So it goes…’
He drank the last of his tea and set the cup and saucer down carefully on the side table.
‘So you began to doubt the story of her death?’
‘Yes.’
‘But why would she run away?
I mean…were things so bad between her and…what was his name?’
‘Simon.’
‘…
Yes, Simon.
Were things so bad between them that she just had to disappear?’
‘I think they must have been.
You see, I think there was much more to it than just the fact that they were childless.’
‘I should have thought so.’
‘Yes, well, there were probably lots of things we don't know about.
Certainly Simon treated her badly, latterly…’
‘You mean lie beat her?’
‘No, no, nothing like that.
I think he just ignored her.’
‘Hmm.’
Mrs Wilson finished her tea and placed her cup and saucer on the tea tray to her left.
‘That's probably worse, if anything.’
‘I agree.’
‘But something else must have started you off on this search.
I mean, there's not enough evidence there, surely?’
‘No, no, there isn't.
You're quite right.
I was never really happy about the explanation but I had no proof of my own misgivings about it and anyway I wouldn't have known where to start looking even if I'd been convinced then that she was alive.’
‘So, what happened?
Did you get proof?’
‘Well, no, not exactly, not what you'd call proof.
But something did turn up.’
‘Ah.’
‘You see, Simon died last year.’
‘I'm sorry.’
‘Yes, he was quite a loss to the community, and still young too.
I got involved because his family live some way away and they asked me if I could make the arrangements, sort things out until they got there.
So I had to arrange the funeral and so on.
Anyway, while I was organising Simon's papers I came across his diaries.
He'd kept a diary for years.
Obviously I was interested to find his entries for 1934.’
‘And?’
McKillop gave a little laugh.
‘Well, I suppose I'd expected expressions of grief, probably pages and pages of it.
Instead I found no entries at all for the period from March to the end of that year.
The first entry since Elsie's disappearance was on February the eleventh the next year, 1935.
All he wrote was: ‘Elsie is twenty-seven today.'’
I checked through the rest of his diaries and every year it was the same, an entry on February the eleventh saying: ‘Today Elsie is…’ ' and then her age.
I suppose it was the way he said ‘is'’ and not ‘‘would be'’.
I suddenly started thinking that he knew, he knew all along that Elsie wasn't dead at all, that she was still alive.
I became convinced of it and then…well, I was determined to find her.’
‘There was nothing else in the diaries?’
‘No, nothing at all, not a mention of Elsie at all except on her birthday.
That was another thing which supported my argument.
I thought it was so strange for him not to mention her anywhere else.
It was as if he was dropping a hint or letting slip a little clue thinking that one day someone would read his diaries just as I was doing.’
‘It wasn't much to go on, Mr McKillop.’
‘No, but it worked, didn't it?’
‘I suppose so, I'll give you that.
But then how did you start looking?
How did you come to be here?’
‘Well…’
He relaxed a little as he began his explanation.
‘I decided that if she had run away she must have gone somewhere where it would be very difficult to find her.
I excluded the whole of Scotland because she would have been a little too near home — even in Glasgow there was just  the chance that someone might find her or she might bump into someone from home.’
But surely London was a bit of a wild guess?’
‘Not really.
I felt it was the most likely place.
She'd talked about London a lot when she was little and she used to get books out of the library with pictures of Westminster Abbey and all the sights.
I thought she'd argue that she might as well go somewhere she'd always wanted to visit.’
‘You couldn't possibly have realised how big a task you'd set yourself, trying to find someone in the whole of London.’
He gave another little laugh and then lowered his eyes.
‘No, no, I'd no idea, really.’
‘But you were lucky.’
‘Oh yes.
Now that I think about it, very, very lucky indeed.
But I had a method.
I mean, I came here with a plan.
I had to decide what Elsie would have chosen to do.
Now she'd done some training as a secretary — she'd been to secretarial college.
That's where she met Simon, in fact.
So I thought maybe that's what she was doing.
I contacted all the secretarial agencies I could find…’
‘You mean to tell me,’ Mrs Wilson interrupted, ‘that you went round every secretarial agency in London asking about someone they might have employed fourteen years before, someone who most likely had changed her name, and you expected to succeed?’
He smiled.
‘Well, I did get a bit depressed at times…and I got through a few pairs of shoes.’
‘I'm sure you did.’
‘Then I moved on to hotels.
You know, chambermaids, waitresses and so on.’
‘How many hotels are there in London?’
‘A lot.
But I knew Elsie would start at the top and not go very far down.
I started at the Grosvenor and visited about thirty-five before I stopped.’
‘How long did that take you?’
He thought carefully.
‘Let me see…about two or three weeks, I think.
I've been in London now for two months.
I spent most of my time — too much I would say now — on the secretarial agencies.
I was convinced she'd be doing that.
Anyway…’
He shrugged.
‘What happened after the hotels?’
‘I moved on to agencies for domestic help, including nannies.’
‘Ah.’
‘Yes.
That's where I struck gold.
First time in fact.
As I said, I was sure Elsie would have started at the top.
Mrs Blackler's agency was number one so I went there.’
‘Which brought you here.’
‘Yes, although it wasn't quite as simple as that.
I had to convince Mrs Blackler that I genuinely was Elsie's brother.
She was highly suspicious at first, which is natural, I suppose.’
‘Indeed it is.’
‘And are you still uncertain, Mrs Wilson?’
She looked across at him as if giving him a final appraisal and checking for further clues in his face, in his clothes.
‘Shall we say that I'm less uncertain than I was at the beginning.’
‘And that's the best you can offer?’
‘I'm afraid so, yes.
You see, Mr McKillop, although I'm reasonably happy to accept you as Elsie's brother and I appreciate that you've put a great deal of work into tracking her down, I'm bound to say that I respect Elsie's wishes to start life afresh and leave her old life behind.
No doubt she did some things that were…well, regrettable, I don't know, but she worked very hard while she was with my family and she was the best nanny we ever had.
She never revealed her own secrets to me but then after a while I made no more enquiries — I didn't want to do anything to lose her.’
‘But you say she did leave your employment.’
‘Yes, she did.’
‘And when was that?’
‘Oh, years and years ago, after we'd been in Italy a matter of fifteen months or so.’
‘As early as that?’
He could not hide his disappointment.
‘I'm afraid so.’
‘And why did she leave?’
‘Because we came home to England — the family, that is.
Elsie decided that she wanted to stay in Naples.’
‘She stayed in Naples?’
This time not disappointment but surprise.
‘Yes.’
‘I see.’
McKillop did see.
He had recovered about two years of the thirteen since Elsie's disappearance.
Although the main thing was that he now had clear proof that she was alive, he could see a lot more work ahead before he found her, if he ever found her.
‘Mr McKillop, you've travelled a long way and you've worked hard but I think this is as far as you're likely to get.’
‘Not a bit of it,’ he said, brightening up.
‘I know she's alive and I'll find her yet.
Did you hear from her at all after you left Naples?’
‘Just one letter in which she said, among other things, that she probably wouldn't be in touch again.
I understood her reasons.’
‘So you had no contact with her at all after that?’
‘None.’
This was delivered quite confidently.
McKillop was nearly convinced.
‘And no address for her at that time?
It would be a starting point.’
‘You mean you intend to continue this search?’
‘Most definitely.
I'll be leaving for Naples within the week.’
Fifteen minutes later McKillop was in the street waiting for a bus that would take him to Westminster where he could get a connection down to Kennington.
He still kept his jacket on though the day seemed to have got warmer.
He continued to carry the hat rather than wear it.
However, his appearance had changed.
He had loosened his tie and undone the top button of his shirt.
His face was beaded with perspiration and as he wiped it with his handkerchief he dislodged a few locks of his heavily greased hair.
He looked dishevelled and felt it.
He wanted to get back to his lodging house as soon as he could and get out of his suit, these tight-fitting shoes and his new white shirt which was just a little too small and caught him under the arms.
On the bus he reflected that his interview with Mrs Wilson had gone well.
He had not got very much information but he had got all that she could offer, he was sure of that.
He was sure, too, that she had believed him and he knew that the reason for this was that the story he had concocted was so very unlikely that no liar could possibly have put his faith in it.
Mrs Wilson had not thought him capable of either the guile or the imagination to make it up; it had to be true.
He wondered if she would have believed him if he had told the truth.
He was unsure about this but thought that the answer was probably no.
What was the truth, anyway?
He smiled to himself as he thought about this question.
It was easier for him to decide what was not true.
His name was not Albert McKillop and he was not Elsie's brother.
He had never been to the Far East — in fact he had not fought in the War at all.
He had newer read any of Simon McAndrew's diaries.
(This would have been difficult as Simon was not dead.)
These were the easy things to identify.
To turn the question round and say what was true was more difficult.
True, he was a reporter from a local Scottish newspaper.
True, his editor had taken the surprising step of allowing him to pursue this story all the way to London.
Because there was no doubt that he had come to London in search of a scoop.
But these points did not fully answer the question of his motives.
He knew, but rarely admitted to himself, that the search for Elsie was an excuse to get away.
He had spent all his thirty-four years in and around one small town.
He had followed the accepted paths — got a job, married, started a family — and now he was sick of it.
Elsie offered him an escape and, more importantly, it was a legitimate escape.
He knew, and  again he had to force himself to face this point, that his escape itself was a dishonest one.
He had left himself the option of return.
He despised himself for this and consequently admired Elsie all the more.
For her departure had been single-minded and irrevocable.
It had a purity about it which he could not find in any part of himself.
He wanted to find her, certainly, but not so much because of his job as a reporter, rather because of what he might learn from her.
If he had told Mrs Wilson this and even if she had believed him, she may not have wished to help him.
No, he had approached the whole business in the best way, certainly.
He wasn't as close to Elsie as he had hoped but he was about two years closer and that was something.
There was one thing, of course, about which he had not lied.
He gave a little sigh of resignation as he thought of it: to continue the search he would have to go to Italy.
The next day he made enquiries about the journey.
He had never been abroad before and the whole thing scared him a little.
He found that this feeling was not unpleasant.
He needed a passport and when he got the correct form to fill in he wrote down his real name: Albert Sandison.
PAINT AND BLOOD
The man in the white linen jacket and pale yellow straw hat left the church of Gesù Nuovo and made his way slowly towards Piazza della Carità.
As it was a warm day with a bright sun overhead he walked in the shade wherever he could.
At a corner he stopped to wait for a break in the traffic.
In fact there were only a few cars but quite a number of pack mules, some horse-drawn carts and one or two carozzelle , fine horse-drawn carriages, most of which had seen better days.
He found he was still standing there some minutes later, not because the traffic had been particularly heavy — there had been several opportunities to cross — but because he was lost in thought about what he had seen.
It was not only the size of the church that had impressed him but the decoration, the overwhelming, almost suffocating richness of the baroque interior.
Now, on the corner of Monteoliveto, and only a short walk from other similar churches, he felt once again that little nag of doubt: maybe all this was not as it should be after all.
This area was relatively well looked after.
He would reach the Via Roma soon with its elegant shops many of which were already back in business after the War.
But there were other aspects to the city.
He had explored areas which ranged from the untidy and uncared for to the downright squalid.
He found it difficult to reconcile the opulence he had just witnessed with the poverty of some of the surrounding districts.
The situation was confused for him by the fact that many of the people he had seen in the church of Gesù Nuovo, the ones who had come to pray and adore, were dressed in rags.
He pressed on to Piazza della Carità.
He sat down at a table of one of the outdoor cafés in the square and ordered a glass of wine.
‘Un bicchiere da vino, per favore.’
‘Bianco o rosso, signore ?’
The waiter was a portly middle-aged man, deferential but dignified.
‘Bianco.’
‘Qualcos'altro ?’
‘Ah…
’ He was stuck here.
‘Qual what?…’
He fumbled for the little phrase book he carried with him but then suddenly remembered.
‘Ah yes…si, un  cappucino  .’
‘Bene.’
The waiter left and the man at the table felt satisfied that he had negotiated this basic exchange successfully.
Then a doubt crept in.
Un bicchiere da vino bianco .
Was it da or di ?
He drew out the phrase book and flicked through the pages.
Un bicchiere di vino bianco .
Damn.
The mistake irritated him.
He practised the phrase a few times and then stuffed the book back in the outside pocket of his jacket.
He removed his straw hat and placed it on the empty chair beside him.
He took a white handkerchief from the top pocket of his jacket and wiped his forehead.
The square was bright, warm, dry and busy.
The gentle breeze managed to cool down the heat of the sun a little but sustained the dust raised by the passing vehicles and deposited it in a thin film on the white tablecloths and the empty seats of the outdoor café.
He looked down at his brown shoes.
They were new shoes but already scuffed and dusty from the amount of walking he had done in the past few days.
The waiter arrived with the wine and the coffee.
From the linen jacket the phrase book was removed again but the waiter had gone before the man could find an appropriate sentence.
He placed the phrase book on the table beside the coffee.
The pages of the book were dog-eared and the cover scored and discoloured.
How long will it take me, he thought, how long will it take me to learn this language?
Albert Sandison had been in Naples for three weeks and he was beginning to forget why he had come.
He took a sip of wine and then withdrew a small folded sheet of paper from inside the back cover of the phrase book.
He opened it out and smoothed it flat on the table.
On it was written a short list which he read through quickly.
In the last week he had consulted it thirty or forty times:
ELSIE
— still in Naples?
— new name?— remarried?
— if working, where? doing what?
— if not, still in Italy?
— if not Italy, where?
— consult other expats
— British library?
— any British associations, groups?
— passport control (what name?)
He took out a pen and added, at the bottom:
— where to start?
Then he crossed this out and replaced it with:
— how to start?
No, he knew where to start — he had to make contact with other British in the city.
He had failed in this so far but then he had hardly tried very hard.
No, that was untrue: he had not tried at all.
Still, he reckoned this aspect would be easy to arrange.
There was no embassy in Naples but there was probably some consular representation although the War had only finished a couple of years before and not just Italy but the whole of Europe was hopelessly disorganised.
Nevertheless, ‘where’ was not a problem; it was ‘how’that was the tricky one.
He could not afford to make mistakes.
First he would have to learn about this place, learn about how things worked here before he might start with a few tentative enquiries.
He did not wish to upset people; he saw the need for discretion.
He also realised that he had to learn more Italian than his little phrase book could teach him.
As he sipped his wine in the bright, busy square, he thought that although the language was certainly a problem and one that he would have to continue to struggle with, it only provided him with an excuse, really, an excuse for why he had not been able to get down to the job of looking for Elsie.
He had been in the city for three weeks now and he had not even started to do what he had come here for.
Drinking off the last of the wine and moving on to the coffee he finally managed to confront himself with the question of why he had been so slow to begin.
The fact was that he had been seduced.
He gave a little laugh.
Yes, he had been seduced by the city.
A couple of minutes later he rose.
He placed a few coins by his empty coffee cup and waved at the waiter.
He pointed at the table and the waiter nodded.
He set off towards the bottom end of the square to walk down Via Roma in the direction of the sea.
After fifty yards or so he sensed that something was wrong.
He stopped.
Above the noise and bustle of the street he was aware of a shouted ‘Signore!
Signore!’
He turned and saw the waiter bearing down on him with an anxious look on his face.
He experienced a short moment of panic.
Had he left enough money?
Yes, he was sure of that.
The waiter, flustered, arrived and said: ‘Signore, il suo cappello .’
‘What?
Oh…’
The waiter held out the straw hat which had been left behind on a chair.
‘Grazie, grazie .’
Sandison took the hat.
The waiter gave the slightest of bows, turned and set off back to the café.
Sandison drew out a handkerchief, mopped his brow and then positioned the hat carefully on his head, very slightly tilted over his right eye.
He shook out the handkerchief and stuffed it back in the top pocket of his jacket.
Yes, he thought.
Must go there again.
Certainly.
Half an hour later he was on Via Caracciolo near Piazza Vittoria.
For a minute or two he walked along the seafront towards Mergellina in the west.
Crowds of ragged children swarmed over the large boulders that fringed the bay.
They sported in the water, laughing and shouting, and Sandison wondered how their tiny, bronzed bodies could hold so much energy.
Several children did not join their friends in the water but watched them from the balustrade along the main road.
They spotted Sandison's approach and raced towards him.
Suddenly he was surrounded by ten or a dozen street urchins in rags, imploring him to be generous.
Tiny hands stroked his arms and began to explore his outer pockets.
Laughing, he shrugged them off.
‘Signore!
Signore!
Fate la carità !’
He held his left arm tight against his chest to maintain the safety of his wallet and hurried on.
The children skipped along with him for a few yards and he saw how beguiling their faces were, the large dark eyes, the straggle of thick black hair, the earnest looks of desperate innocence.
He gave them nothing.
Suddenly, and all together, they gave up.
He left them in his wake and when a little distance separated them from him, he heard one call out to him.
He was unsure of the exact translation but he knew it to be very, very rude.
So much for innocence, he thought.
A little farther on he cut across the strip of parched grass known as the Villa Comunale which separated Via Caracciolo from the long parallel sweep of the Riviera di Chiaia and made his way up the hill again, away from the bay.
He passed along several narrow alleyways, the tight, over-crowded vicoli that led towards Via Crispi where his pensione was situated.
Within a couple of minutes of his destination he was approached by children again.
This time hands reached out from a doorway and tugged at his trouser leg.
He turned to see a little girl, who could have been no more than seven or eight, sitting on the doorstep.
The colour of the filthy dress she was wearing was indistinguishable from the deep brown of her skin.
One of her legs stuck out straight and was heavily bandaged around the knee by a strip of dirty blue material blotched with blood.
Her feet were bare.
Her hands were cupped before him in a stylised gesture which he recognised not as that of a beggar but of a supplicant, a penitent, someone reaching out for a blessing from God.
He had seen the pose in several paintings in the churches and galleries he had visited in the past two weeks.
He had seen it too in the mass he had witnessed in the church of Gesù Nuovo.
He had sat far back and to one side but the congregation  was small for the early morning service and he had seen everything clearly.
It had been a strange experience and he had felt how different this magical rite seemed compared with the church services he remembered from home.
He saw the members of the congregation approach the altar and kneel in a row.
They waited for the priest to pass along with the thin wafer of bread and while they did so their hands were like this, cupped and raised in a gesture that might be offering or receiving.
He looked down at the girl and was moved.
She was dry-eyed but her expression just faintly betrayed a struggle against the pain of her injury.
For a moment he was swept by a desire to empty his pockets before her, give her everything of value that he was carrying with him.
As he put his hand in his pocket to withdraw a few coins he knew that he was lost.
But if he was lost, he was glad to be so.
He knelt down to place a small pile of change in her hands.
Although this probably represented ten times what she would normally expect she displayed no emotion as she accepted it.
The grazie that escaped from her was barely audible and as she lowered her eyes in what appeared to be a motion of submission Sandison suddenly felt small and mean and condescending.
He was about to fish out some more money when he realised this would make things worse — or at least his perception of things.
Undecided and still bent over towards her he became aware of the patter of running feet, approaching fast.
He turned and, in the act of rising, felt his hat being swept from his head.
He nearly fell over.
When he had recovered himself he looked up the narrow lane and saw a young boy racing into the distance, the white straw hat clutched in one hand and waving at his side as his arms pumped the air with the effort of running.
Well, Sandison thought, it was maybe a bit big for me anyway.
He turned back to the little beggar girl but she had disappeared.
‘Pittura ,’ Franco said.
‘Pittura .’
He was one of the regular barmen in a small bar in Piazza Amedeo.
About thirty-five, he was tall and running to fat, his once handsome features now puffed out, his stance a round-shouldered slouch.
The bar was quiet and he was taking the opportunity to do some washing up.
‘Pittura ,’ he repeated slowly.
Sandison was half way through his second glass of wine.
He was in the middle of explaining to Franco the events of his day.
He did not particularly like Franco whose view on life was rather cynical, redeemed only by the fact that he was quite willing to listen to Sandison's halting efforts to tell his tale in Italian.
Since Franco spoke no English, Sandison had no choice in the matter.
He convinced himself that speaking Italian to Franco presented a good opportunity to learn and therefore he should take up the challenge.
Unfortunately this logic did not make his task any easier.
And now there was this new word.
‘Pittura ?’
‘Si .’
Franco pulled glasses two at a time from the sink and set them on the tiny draining board.
Sandison was flicking through a pocket dictionary.
‘Pittura .
Paint.
Paint?’
He looked across at Franco.
‘What the hell has paint got to do with it?’
He said this in English.
Franco gave him a wry grimace and shrugged his shoulders.
‘No, no,’ Sandison said and he turned the pages of the little book as fast as his fingers would allow.
‘…No, it was…it was…yes, here we are.
Sangue .
Blood.’
‘Che cosa?’
Blood.
Blood.
Sangue .’
‘Sangue, no.
Pittura.’
‘You're a thrawn bastard, Franco.
It was…’
Sandison hesitated.
‘…Paint?’
‘Si ,’ Franco said and he tried the English word: ‘Pent.’
He had begun to dry the glasses.
‘Well bugger me.’
Franco put down the glass he had been drying and wrapped the towel round his bare arm.
He turned on the tap, wet his fingers and said: ‘Pittura .’
He sprinkled water over the towel and then went into a paroxysm of agony, nursing the injured arm against his chest and holding out his other hand for money.
‘But it couldn't have been, surely,’ Sandison said.
‘My God, the child was in agony.’
The words meant nothing to Franco but the situation was all too familiar.
He waved a hand in the air and then said: ‘Un sacco di soldi ?’
Money.
Sandison tried hard to remember how much he had given the girl.
Far too much, probably.
‘No, non molti ,’ he said.
Not very much.
‘Il mio cappello .’
He pointed to his head and mimed the whisking away of his hat.
Franco burst into laughter.
Recovering, he let out a stream of words of which Sandison understood almost nothing.
‘Well, Franco, you've got me there, I think.’
Sandison finished off his wine.
Franco continued to jabber away, his words interspersed with little outbursts of laughter.
Sandison placed his wine glass on the counter and Franco, unbidden, refilled it.
‘This one's on you, anyway, Franco,’ Sandison said.
‘Sliante !’
‘Perhaps you would allow me to get this one.’
Sandison turned to find the only other customer in the bar now standing next to him.
He had been sitting at a table in the corner reading an Italian newspaper and Sandison had hardly paid him any attention.
Now this man had approached and addressed him in English and in an upper-class  accent too.
He was of medium height and was wearing a baggy and very creased cotton suit the colour of oatmeal.
The outer pockets of the jacket were filled and sagging.
A not very clean handkerchief trailed from the top pocket.
The man was perhaps in his mid-fifties.
He had a full head of jet-black hair — dyed, or so Sandison guessed — which was oiled and swept from his forehead straight back over his crown.
He had a small black moustache which was neatly trimmed.
His features were regular, rather ordinary, though some might well have thought him handsome.
It was his posture, however, that was most striking.
His stance was apologetic, almost cringing as if he expected to be dealt a blow.
In fact he stood four or five feet away from Sandison, giving the impression he was still unsure of the reception he would get.
He had a grey hat which he held tightly by the brim with both hands.
It was pressed hard against his chest.
For a few moments Sandison allowed himself to take in the figure before him and he ignored what had been said.
‘If you would permit me, that is,’ the man said.
‘I'm sure I could interest you in something better than Franco's usual offering.’
‘Well,’ Sandison said, ‘that's kind of you…‘
The man rattled off some instructions to Franco who retreated to the end of the bar and started hunting through the bottles on a particularly high shelf.
‘Alfred Maidstone,’ the man said.
He extended a thin hand, very gingerly, as ii afraid it might be bitten off.
‘Sandison.
Albert Sandison.’
They shook hands.
Sandison's grip was strong.
Maidstone winced.
‘I believe you had an unfortunate encounter with some of the scallywag population of this beautiful but decaying city.’
‘You could say that, yes.’
‘Your hat?’
‘Yes, lost it, I'm afraid.
There was little point giving chase.
The boy was gone in a flash.’
‘Sometimes they're so quick you don't even see them.’
‘I can believe that.’
Franco returned and set two glasses before them.
The liquid was dark brown.
Maidstone had now stepped up to the bar beside Sandison but he still did not look to be at ease.
He gestured to the glasses.
‘Please…’ he said.
Sandison raised his glass to the light.
‘What exactly is this stuff?’ he asked.
‘It's a kind of liqueur, locally made.
First rate.
Well, your health.’
They touched glasses.
‘Here's to lost hats,’ Sandison said.
‘Indeed, I've had several stolen myself.’
Is that why you're holding on so tightly to the one you've got?
Sandison thought.
Maidstone had not parted with it but held it firmly in his left fist.
Sandison could see that the brim was crumpled and creased all round.
‘You've been here a while, then?’
Sandison asked.
‘Oh years, dear fellow, years and years.
Had to spend the War in England, of course— ghastly place, all wet and miserable and full of the bulldog spirit.
Ugh!
Got back here as fast as I could.
Only place to be, dear fellow, only place to be.’
He downed the dark, viscous liqueur in one go and motioned to Franco for more.
Maidstone explained that he had first come to Italy after the First World War.
‘Paris was the place then,’ he said, ‘but I wanted to be different.
Besides, ghastly people the French, so stiff and arrogant and vain with it.’
He spent some time in Rome, later Florence and then, in 1923 or 1924 — he wasn't quite sure — he ‘fetched up’ in Naples.
He was getting along quite nicely too, he said, until the War.
The mention of this allowed him to express once more how ‘utterly desperate’ a place England was.
And as for London: ‘The end, my dear fellow, the absolute end.’
Sandison found it a little difficult to figure out exactly what Maidstone did.
There was mention of some art history work, a few articles for various journals and a cataloguing job for one of the museums but it was clear that for Maidstone these were of little importance and did not really qualify for the title of job.
Sandison suspected that he had some kind of private income but, judging by the state of his clothes, his means, from whatever source, were limited.
Not that this affected his appetite for the bottles on Franco's highest shelf.
During the course of an hour or so these were removed and replaced with remarkable regularity.
Sandison, who had only had three or four glasses of wine, began to feel light-headed.
Maidstone consumed at least double that amount and seemed perfectly sober.
‘And you, dear fellow, what brings you to this city?’
Sandison was already getting tired of being addressed as ‘dear fellow’.
He realised that Maidstone was probably regarded as a local ‘character’, the kind of man who, met once, can be amusing and enjoyable company but thereafter can become a crashing bore.
He might have an interesting tale to tell but it could probably be told in the space of thirty minutes and on later meetings hauled out and paraded again exactly as it was on the first occasion.
Still, there was something about Maidstone that held Sandison's attention even after an hour.
Also, he was the first English-speaker Sandison had met since his arrival in the city.
He decided, however, that Maidstone should not be told of his reason for being in Naples — not yet, anyway.
He might prove to be useful but would have to be handled carefully.
‘I'm in Naples for a number of reasons…’
Sandison began, though he could not imagine what these might be.
His real reason for being there was odd enough without having to concoct others.
He suddenly realised he had newer thought of the possible need to tell lies about why he was there.
There was an awkward silence which Maidstone might have broken with some amiable remark to save Sandison's face.
Maidstone did nothing of the sort.
He stood there waiting silently for Sandison to work his own way out of the difficulty and Sandison realised there was a calculating hardness to this man.
He had better beware; Maidstone might be dangerous.
Then Sandison laughed quietly and Maidstone smiled.
Sandison leaned forward and said: ‘Suppose I were to tell you I was a detective, come to hunt someone down?’
He winked at Maidstone and they both laughed out loud.
‘My dear, dear fellow, if I had a lira for every time I've heard that story…well…’
‘You'd almost have enough to buy some more drinks.’
‘Absolutely!
Yes!’
He laughed again and waved at Franco who stepped forward to refill their glasses.
‘Ah,’ Sandison said.
‘Joking aside, I've certainly had my fill.
No more for me, thank you.’
He put his hand over the top of his glass.
‘A careful man, I see.
Moderate.
Temperate.
I tried that once myself, you know.
Devilish waste of time.’
He motioned to Franco that his glass, at least, should be filled.
‘Well,’ he continued, ‘you'll have one more, but perhaps a little later and I will insist upon it.
Meanwhile, let's get back to the hat.’
‘Ah, yes.’
Sandison felt relieved that there was to be no pursuit of his reasons for coming to Naples.
He retold the story of the little beggar girl with the bandaged leg and the theft of his hat.
He enjoyed telling it because his first attempt, to Franco, had been made in a desperate sort of pidgin-Italian.
However, he felt dismayed when Maidstone effortlessly translated the incident for Franco's benefit.
Franco listened with no emotion showing on his face.
He was polishing glasses and he held them up to the light to check them and thereby seemed to be ignoring Maidstone completely.
When Maidstone had finished, Franco thought for a moment, shrugged and wandered off to the other end of the bar.
‘Franco is not impressed by such events,’ Maidstone said.
‘Obviously not.
Earlier on he was saying something about paint.’
‘Oh yes.
You see, some of the beggars feign injury.
They're very good actors, know just exactly how much agony to put into it and so on.
Then for props…well, a dirty old bandage and a spot of red paint.
Works wonders.’
‘It's hard to believe,’ Sandison said.
‘Oh, I know, I know.
There's a lot of things like that in this city.
Oh yes.’
‘So it probably was paint?’
‘It might have been blood but certainly not the little girl's.
A little sheep's blood, perhaps…chicken, even fish would do.
Who knows?’
‘And the boy who ran off with my hat.
Why the hat?
Why didn't he try for my wallet?’
‘Not sure, really, though the little ones tend to go for the easy stuff.
I mean, the wallet might have meant a tussle.
To be avoided at all costs.’
‘Hmm.
Well, it wasn't much of a hat.’
‘Ah, but that's not the point.
It was something rather than nothing.
It had a resale value, even if it was no more than a few lire.
Maybe it made the difference between having lunch or going hungry.
This is a poor city, Mr Sandison.’
‘Yes, I understand that a bit more each day.’
There was a rather sombre silence for a few seconds, broken eventually by Maidstone who said: ‘Right!
We'll have that last drink — you too, no argument!— and then we'll take a short walk up the side here to visit one of the oldest establishments in this area.’
‘Oh, and what's that?’
‘Hatshop.
Who knows, you might even find your own hat there.’
Although Maidstone was now beginning to display the fact that he was far from sober — his walk was a little unsteady and one or two of his words did not come out exactly right — the visit to the hatshop passed off without any untoward incident.
Sandison bought a very fine pale grey hat with a wide, flat brim and a white hatband.
He would not have bought it had he been by himself but Maidstone assured him it was the right choice —‘Absolutely first rate, dear fellow.’
They parted at the hatshop and made an arrangement to meet at the same time the following day.
Sandison watched, a little concerned, as Maidstone made his way, quite quickly but with a very uneven tread, towards the funicolare station above Piazza Amedeo.
Sandison himself set off in the opposite direction, towards his pensione .
Back in his small room, Sandison lay down on the bed and slept for about an hour and a half.
From the courtyard of the decaying five-storey building that housed the pensione came the shouts of children playing and the occasional revving of vehicles.
But Sandison was dead tired.
He felt as if he had walked for miles and knew that he had certainly had too much to drink.
He slept deeply and when he awoke he was refreshed.
He washed and went out to the nearest bar for a tall glass of water and a coffee.
He returned to his room, sat down at the small table and wrote a letter:
Naples
June 5th, 1947
Dear Stewart,
My God, this is a rum place.
You've been to Glasgow and seen the tenements there, the filth and the meanness of the streets but I tell you Glasgow is nothing compared with this place.
There are areas where every child is in rags and learns to be a thief from the age of three.
It's true!
But in spite or all that, Naples contrives to be wonderful, in the real sense of that overworked word.
You can't walk anywhere here without finding something to astound you, whether it be something sad or cruel on the one hand or quite beautiful on the other.
Never have I been in a place of such contrasts.
As far as our Elsie is concerned, I confess I am no nearer finding her, not directly anyway.
But I'm sure she's here.
I can feel it.
Today I met someone — an Englishman — who has lived here for ages (apart from the War years, of course) and he may be able to help me.
I'll have to tread warily though, both with him and with the city in general.
I may have to stay here a while yet.
Of course, when I have firm news I'll be in touch immediately.
Till then, Yours, Albert
Sandison folded the letter into a small rectangle and put it inside an envelope which he addressed.
He went downstairs and asked the portiere where the nearest post office was.
The portiere , an over-weight, ill-tempered man of sixty, shouted into the courtyard and a few seconds later his grandson Aldo arrived.
Aldo was in his early teens.
The portiere barked some instructions at the boy and made Sandison to understand that Aldo would see to it that the letter got posted.
‘Inghilterra ,’ Sandison said, and then, as this was not strictly accurate, he added: ‘Gran Bretagna .’
‘Si, si, si ,’ Aldo nodded.
He took the envelope from Sandison who also handed over what he believed to be enough money to cover the postage.
Aldo gave a slovenly salute and left.
When he was a couple of streets away from the pensione Aldo tore up the letter into pieces as small as he could manage and dropped them in the gutter.
GOOD MEN AND ROGUES
The next day Sandison followed almost exactly the same route through the town.
He visited the church of Gesù Nuovo again and made his way to Piazza della Carità for coffee in the same restaurant.
The waiter recognised him and Sandison spent five minutes explaining in his ragged Italian about his change of hats.
The waiter found it all very amusing though Sandison was not quite sure if the laughter came from the story itself or his own clumsy attempts to tell it.
Again he left the waiter a generous tip and set off, with his hat this time, down Via Roma and along Via Chiaia towards the sea.
He passed the same group of children playing on the rocks and was surrounded, as on the previous day, by a dozen or so pairs of inquisitive hands, young but not so innocent.
He strode on.
He left the sea, crossed the Villa Comunale and headed off inland.
He entered the maze of streets and alleyways below Piazza Amedeo, looking for the place where he had seen the little beggar girl with the bandaged leg.
But all the doorways looked alike.
He tried to remember if there had been a particular shop nearby but he failed.
He walked along the same three or four streets twice until it seemed pointless to continue.
He could not say what he intended to do if he found the girl.
After all, conversation with her would be limited and he could hardly hope to find out if her injury was real or not, short of tearing the bandage from her leg.
Once, in the distance, he saw a girl who might have been the one.
She was wearing a bandage, or seemed to be, but it was on her arm, not her leg.
He quickened his pace to try and intercept her but the crowds on the pavement and the traffic on the street intervened.
When he reached the spot where he thought he had seen her she had gone.
He looked around and within a radius of twenty yards, both on his side of the street and over there on the far corner, he could see ten or a dozen little girls, each in a pale dirty dress and with hair in a dark, tangled mane.
Any one of them could have been the girl he was looking for, with or without a bandage.
Or none of them.
He laughed at his own naïvety, his gullibility.
Then, at  his feet, almost indistinguishable from the other bits of litter and scraps of rubbish, he saw a long, dirty ribbon of material, covered along its full length with bright red blotches in awkward shapes.
It was lying on the edge of the pavement, with one end trailing onto the cobbled street.
Sandison laughed again.
A few minutes later he met Maidstone.
‘It could have been her,’ Maidstone said when Sandison recounted the incident.
‘But unlikely, I think.
There are hundreds, thousands of children on the streets here.’
‘And the rag?’
‘Oh, the blood -stained rag!’
Maidstone laughed.
‘My dear fellow, you could probably find one in every gutter in Naples.’
‘Maybe I should have picked it up, found out if it really was blood or not…’
‘And what would that prove?
Eh?’
‘Well…’
Sandison gave a wry smile.
‘Nothing, I suppose.’
‘Precisely, precisely.’
Maidstone turned and shouted towards the far end of the bar: ‘Franco!’
The barman emerged, slowly, looking as morose as ever.
He nodded to Sandison but this was the full extent of his greeting.
Maidstone ordered drinks.
Sandison tried to gauge how many he had already had but was unsure.
He seemed fairly sober.
They took their drinks to a quiet corner table and sat down.
‘This city is depraved, you see,’ Maidstone began.
‘Quite depraved.
There's petty crime and crime on a grand scale, well organised.
There's dealing in contraband; there's prostitution, racketeering, murder.
The local government can't cope with the Camorra…’
‘The what?’
‘The Camorra, the local section of the Mafia.’
‘Oh.’
‘…
And…well, central government has given up trying.
They're not terribly interested in the depressed South so the depressed South gets more depressed.
Public services break down…there are power cuts, water shortages…earthquakes knock down houses and disrupt power lines and drains and what have you.
The streets aren't cleaned often enough or they aren't cleaned at all.
There are more motor vehicles around than ever and you take your life in your hands just crossing the road…
As for the War, well, that was a catastrophe, an absolute catastrophe.
People in this town starved, several buildings were bombed and crime soared because you had to steal to eat.
The Germans did some pretty horrible things here and then the Allies came and, well, they did some pretty horrible things too.
This place has been occupied by  just about everyone you could name over the centuries.
It's a wonder it's still here but it's no wonder it's in such a God-forsaken state…’
Maidstone paused.
He raised his glass of wine and downed half the contents in one gulp.
‘But you live here,’ Sandison said.
‘Ah yes, I do.
I live here.
I don't just exist, either.
I live and I have a full life too.’
‘And how do you manage that?’
‘Because this place is magical, utterly magical.
It never ceases to surprise me.
Yesterday you had the strange experience of having someone bend over backwards to return your hat to you because you'd left it behind somewhere and then five minutes later someone stole it.
I say typical.
Absolutely typical of this place.
They're all rogues here but for some reason I like them, I'm drawn to them.
Bit of a rogue myself, I should say.’
He laughed.
‘And Franco's a rogue, too.’
He turned to the bar where Franco was rearranging bottles on a shelf.
‘Franco!’ he shouted.
Franco turned.
‘You're a rogue, aren't you, Franco?’
This was also shouted.
In English.
Franco bowed slightly with great dignity.
‘You see!’
Maidstone found this very funny.
‘Franco knows I'm making fun of him.
Look at the malice in his eyes.
I shall get short measure next time, but only for one drink.
His annoyance won't last.
He's a good man, Franco.’
‘You just said he was a rogue,’ Sandison said.
‘And so he is.
But look here…’
At this point Maidstone leaned over the table in an earnest, confidential manner.
Sandison found it difficult to take him seriously.
‘…Look here, I think you're making one basic mistake, dear fellow…’
‘Oh?
And what's that?’
‘You don't seem to believe that it's possible to be a rogue and a good man at the same time.’
‘I hadn't thought it was possible, no.’
‘Ah.
You live in a very black and white world.
Dreadful mistake, dreadful.’
Maidstone sat back in his chair again.
He twirled his empty glass in his fingers.
‘Take your waiter, for example…’
‘My waiter?’
‘The one who returned your hat to you.’
‘Oh yes.
What about him?’
‘Well, what would you say…a good man?’
‘Insofar as I could judge after only one small incident like that…yes, I suppose so.’
‘And quite right too.
Yes, obviously a good man, but a rogue as well.’
‘Now you've lost me.’
‘Well, let's see…how much was your hat worth?’
Sandison shrugged.
‘I've no idea.
Certainly not very much.’
‘And did you tip him?’
‘Yes, but…’
‘Generously?’
‘Well, reasonably so, I suppose, but after the meal, not after he gave me back the hat.
I didn't give him anything then.’
‘You didn't have to.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Well, he knew, didn't he?
I mean he knew you were good for a few lire more than usual.’
Sandison shook his head.
‘I really don't…’
Maidstone pressed on with his argument.
‘Did you go there today?’
‘Yes, yes I did.’
‘Same waiter?’
‘Yes.’
‘And did you leave a tip?
A generous tip?’
Maidstone's face displayed what could almost have been called a mischievous grin.
‘Yes,’ Sandison said, quietly and evenly.
‘Yes, I did.’
‘Aha!’
Maidstone laughed.
‘I rest my case.
You see, he knew he would get more income in the long run from returning your hat than from keeping it and selling it.’
‘Are you seriously suggesting that he worked things out so carefully?’
‘Absolutely.’
‘Oh, come on.
I can't believe that.
I can't believe that at all.’
‘Ah, but you see, you're making the same mistake again!’
Maidstone leaned forward once more, intent on proving his point.
‘You think that such a calculating approach to life must be wrong.
You condemn him for his self-interest.
I applaud him for being able to marry self-interest with the needs of others.
After all, you got your hat back and he got a nice tip.
You both gained out of it so what's wrong with that?’
In spite of himself, Sandison smiled.
‘Well, you've got me there, I suppose.’
‘Oh I have, I have!’
Maidstone was clearly enjoying himself.
‘Yes, each Neapolitan is out for himself but he recognises the need to live as harmoniously as possible with everyone else.’
‘All one big happy family,’ Sandison said.
‘Exactly, exactly.
The family dominates Italian life and Naples is just one big family.’
‘I find that hard to believe.’
‘Believe it,’ Maidstone said.
‘Believe it now because you will in the end, anyway, if you stay here long enough.’
He set his glass down on the table and looked across at the bar.
‘Franco!’
Two or three drinks later Sandison felt relaxed enough to ask Maidstone about the other British in Naples.
‘Oh, there are a few,’ he said, ‘but not so many in this area.
The well-off ones live on the islands.
Have you been to the islands?’
‘No, I haven't.’
‘Oh, do go, at least once.
Then you can safely forget about them.
Too crowded for my taste.’
‘Worse than the city itself?’
‘Much worse.
I'm afraid space is at a premium in this part of the world.
If you want more, go inland; if you can get by with less, stay in the city; if you don't need more than a square foot or so, go to the islands.
Ugh!
Frightful places.’
‘Well,’ Sandison said, ‘if it affects you so much, why don't you go inland yourself?’
‘But I do.
Caserta, for example.
Aversa, Capua…’
‘But just to visit?’
‘Oh yes, just to visit.
I could never live there.
Not enough magic.
Too diluted by the fresh air.
Here in Naples you've got a balance, if you like.
Lots of bustle but just enough space to breathe.
If it all gets too much for me, I go to church.’
Sandison laughed.
‘No,’ Maidstone said.
‘I do, really.
Not when there's a mass being said of course.
No, nothing like that.
I'm only interested in a bit of peace and quiet.’
‘I see.’
‘Yes.
Lots of churches in Naples…’
‘So I'd noticed.’
‘And what's more to the point, lots of bars.’
Sandison laughed again.
‘And I've been in every one of them,’ Maidstone said.
‘Which?
The churches or the bars?’
‘My dear fellow, the churches of course!’
Maidstone laughed.
It was a loud laugh which Sandison would have found embarrassing if there had been lots of people in the bar.
At that time there was only one other customer, an old man standing quietly at the far end, near the door.
He paid no attention whatsoever to the two men seated in the corner.
Franco gave them a look which might have been faintly disapproving.
Maidstone ordered more wine.
‘As far as this part of the city is concerned,’ Maidstone went on after the drinks had arrived, ‘I think I'm the only resident Englishman.’
‘Are there any Scots in Naples?’
Sandison asked.
He was aware of making an effort to pass this question off as casually as possible and thereby knew he had failed.
‘One or two,’ Maidstone said.
‘One or two.’
After a few moments Sandison went on: ‘Do you know them?’
‘I know of them,’ Maidstone said.
‘I've never met them.
Perhaps I've tended to avoid them but then I avoid the English as well, and the Irish…’
‘And the Welsh?’
Sandison asked, smiling.
‘None here that I know of, thank God.’
‘I see.
So you stick with the local people, do you?’
‘Absolutely.’
‘So why do you manage to tolerate me?’
‘My dear fellow, to meet in a bar two days running hardly constitutes a relationship of note.
Still, I'll say this for you: you're the first Scotsman I've met who's prepared to put his hand in his pocket for a round of drinks.’
‘Is that a hint?’
‘Christ, no.
Well, not quite yet, anyway.’
He raised his glass to the light.
It was still half full.
He reduced this to a quarter and set the glass down on the wooden table with a clatter.
‘Do you always drink so much?’
Sandison asked.
‘Now you're not going to lecture me, are you?
I should be most upset if you were.’
‘Not at all.
It's just that while we've been together it's been the activity you've indulged in most.
At home I drink a lot myself but I can't keep up with you.’
Sandison was already beginning to feel the effects of the contents of Franco's special bottle, retrieved as on the day before from the most inaccessible shelf in the tiny, cluttered bar.
‘Practice, m'boy, practice.
I drink a lot at home too.
This is my home.’
He finished off his drink and set the empty glass down on the table with exaggerated care.
‘Well,’ he said, ‘maybe it's time after all.’
Sandison called over to Franco but asked for only one glass of the special liqueur.
Maidstone complimented him on his Italian.
‘Coming on a treat,’ he said.
‘Practice,’ Sandison said.
‘Practice.’
Maidstone laughed.
They left the bar half an hour later.
Maidstone expressed the wish to go for a walk — slowly — along the sea front.
They wandered down the cobbled streets to the Riviera, across the Villa Comunale and then over Via Caracciolo to the balustrade that separated them from the boulders that  sat on the edge of the sea.
They were besieged by children who disappeared quickly when they recognised Maidstone.
‘Never give 'em anything,’ he said.
Sandison was unsure whether this was an instruction or merely a statement referring to Maidstone's own approach.
The children went back to the rocks and the two men never referred to them again.
They stood in silence for a while, leaning over the balustrade and looking out to sea.
The air was bright and clear and the sea was almost completely flat.
There were a few small fishing boats in the Bay each sitting in its place without moving.
Apart from the children immediately below, the scene was almost devoid of movement.
Sandison's idling thoughts were suddenly overtaken by his realisation that he was in a place far, far from home, a place so different and not exactly hostile but alien, perhaps unknowable.
He smiled.
‘It's a strange place, isn't it,’ Maidstone said.
‘Just exactly what I was thinking,’ Sandison said.
Then he added: ‘What the hell am I doing here?’
‘Ah well, well now, that's a tricky one, isn't it,’ Maidstone said.
‘I used to ask myself that one but I gave up trying to find an answer long ago.’
He paused for a moment.
‘What did you leave behind?’
‘Oh, a wife and and one child.’
‘And do you intend to go back?’
For one moment the question appalled Sandison.
Of course, there was no doubt that he would go back.
Wasn't there?
Suddenly he was unsure and this made him feel afraid.
It made him feel afraid but it excited him too.
‘Do you know…
I really can't be sure.’
‘Ah,’ was all that Maidstone said to this but it had a knowing sound to it.
Another group of children arrived but they joined their friends by the water without approaching the two men.
Sandison wondered if now he would be classified with Maidstone.
Their clothes were remarkably similar.
Both were wearing grey flannel trousers and pale beige or fawn linen jackets.
Their hats were of different colours but almost the same shape.
How long would it be, Sandison thought, before his hat resembled Maidstone's — old, stained with sweat and with a brim destroyed by the constant folding and rolling it received in Maidstone's small, tight, nervous hands.
Already Sandison had too many things in the outer pockets of his jacket — dictionary in the left-hand one, notebook, pencil and map of the city in the other.
The line of the jacket, its original tidy shape, was being worn down already.
It was becoming battered and shapeless.
He looked across at Maidstone.
His clothes were in more of a mess but just because he had been in the city longer.
Battered and shapeless.
Maidstone's whole life seemed to be like that.
What the hell  did he do all the time, except drink?
How did he live?
Was he ever sober enough to write the articles he had mentioned the day before?
Sandison reckoned that maybe there had been an article or two, perhaps three or four, but years ago.
He had a feeling that Maidstone mentioned them to vindicate himself in the eyes of others.
Perhaps he needed these faraway successes to convince himself that his life had once had value, might yet have value again.
‘I know what you're thinking,’ Maidstone said.
‘Oh?
What's that?’
‘You're wondering how I get by, what the hell I do to get by.
In this city.
In this state.’
He kept his gaze out to sea.
‘Aren't you?’
Sandison felt uncomfortable for a moment or two but was then able to reply: ‘Yes.
Very perceptive.
That's exactly what I was thinking.’
‘And there's another thing too, isn't there?’
‘Is there?
I don't know.’
‘Well, let's just say that it's crossed your mind that maybe, maybe if you stay long enough in this place it'll get to you in the same way as it got to me.
Eh?’
After a few seconds Sandison said: ‘Tell me about the Scots.’
‘You are looking for someone, aren't you?’
‘Tell me about them.’
‘I don't think I should.’
‘I've come a hell of a long way, you know.
One hell of a long way.’
‘If you came from just down the road it would make no difference.
Distance and time, well…they're just excuses.
We try to believe they've got power within themselves but it isn't like that, believe me.
Just take my advice…’
‘What's that?’
‘Go home.
Forget why you came.
I don't know who you're looking for and I don't want to know but even I can see that whoever it is he won't be overjoyed to see you…’
‘She.’
‘She.
That's worse.
Much worse.
Take my advice, please.
Go home.
Stay a few days and visit a few places, drink more wine, eat more pasta and then go.
It's safer.’
Sandison said nothing.
He took an envelope from his inside pocket.
He drew from it the photograph of Elsie McAndrew that he had shown to Mrs Wilson in London.
He handed it to Maidstone without comment.
They were both still standing side by side at the balustrade, elbows leaning on the top rail.
Maidstone accepted the photo with reluctance.
He studied it for some time and then said: ‘That's bad, I'm afraid.
Very, very bad.’
‘I want to see her,’ Sandison said.
‘I want to see her, at least.’
‘Forget it.
Please take my advice and forget it before you get into something you can't control.’
‘No,’ Sandison said.
‘It's too late to back out now.
I've spent a lot of time and effort getting this far.
I can't stop now.’
‘Now look here,’ Maidstone said, turning to face him.
‘This lady…’
He raised the photograph before Sandison's face.
‘…This lady is well-connected, well-respected…you don't make trouble for such people with impunity.’
‘I'm not here to make trouble.’
‘Your intentions have little to do with it, I can assure you of that.’
‘I just need to see her, confirm that she's still alive.’
‘Impossible.’
Maidstone handed the photo back and turned to lean over the balustrade again.
Apart from the frolics of the children on the boulders below them the scene was a quiet one.
A light breeze came off the sea and provided a little relief from the afternoon heat.
After a few moments Maidstone said: ‘What's your interest in her, anyway?’
Sandison told him the whole story, the one he had told to Mrs Wilson: that he was Elsie's brother, that he was convinced she was still alive even though she had disappeared so many years before.
He related how he had come down to London and systematically searched through the various agencies that might have employed Elsie, how he had tracked down Mrs Wilson and had gone to see her.
The tale took some ten minutes to tell, Sandison being careful to allow no inconsistencies to creep in.
The one change to what he had recounted to Mrs Wilson lay in the time he had spent in London: he told Maidstone he'd spent six months there.
‘I see,’ Maidstone said when the story was complete.
‘And you told all this to Mrs…the woman in London?’
‘Mrs Wilson, yes.’
‘And she believed you?’
‘Yes.’
‘Well I don't,’ Maidstone said.
Sandison was not surprised by this but he was at a loss as to how to proceed.
Maidstone offered a way:
‘Look,’ he said.
‘I may not like London over much but I do know a bit about the place and one thing I know is that it's big, bloody big.
Your chances of coming down to London and finding someone who may have been there over a decade ago are not just slim, they're non-existent.
I mean, you weren't even sure she'd been there at all.’
He was right, of course, and Sandison knew it.
He decided to risk a little bit of the truth:
‘Well, let's say I reckoned Mrs Wilson needed to be told about struggle and hard work.
I mean, I thought she'd be more inclined to help me if she had this image of me tramping the streets for weeks on end…’
‘So what really happened, then?
How did you really track this woman down?’
‘Well…it was her feet that gave her away.’
‘Her feet?’
‘Yes.
You know she's slightly disabled; she needs special shoes.’
‘It's…well, it's hardly noticeable, really, but yes, her right foot…’
‘Left…’
Sandison interrupted, unsure whether this was a genuine mistake on Maidstone's part or a little test.
‘It's her left foot that's misshapen.’
‘Is it?’
The look that passed between them showed a certain amount of respect but a little mistrust as well.
They might have been playing chess.
‘Yes, her left foot's the one.
She used to get her special shoes from a little family firm in Glasgow.’
‘So?’
‘Well, I went down there, just on the off chance, really.
I asked the old man about this client from the North and he remembered her.’
‘Even after all those years?’
‘Yes.
He hadn't heard that she'd disappeared but he did wonder why all the orders had stopped.
Still, he said, she probably got as good a service in London.’
‘He mentioned London?’
‘Yes.
You see, the last order he'd had from her was made from London after she'd disappeared — although he didn't know that.
He had the order books going back for years and years and he was able to show me.
She disappeared in March 1934 but her last pair of shoes were sent for in 1935.’
‘And he sent this pair of shoes to a London address?’
‘That's right.’
‘Mrs Wilson's address?’
‘No, the agency which hired her out to Mrs Wilson.’
‘Ah.’
Maidstone thought about this.
‘Doesn't seem very wise to me.
I mean, If she'd covered her disappearance so well, why should she take a risk like that?’
‘I don't know.
Maybe she was just waiting for a chance to go abroad and wanted to be ready to leave at any time.
Maybe she needed a pair in a hurry because the ones she had were worn out.
There could be any number of reasons.’
‘Quite a risk, though.’
‘Oh yes.
She had to give her real name when she ordered the new shoes.
I suppose she just hoped that news of her disappearance hadn't made it as far as the Glasgow papers.’
‘Hmmm.’
Maidstone sounded as if he was not fully convinced.
There was silence for a few seconds and then he said: ‘And she's your sister, is she?’
Sandison looked him in the eye.
‘That's right,’ he said.
ELISA
The following day, at ten thirty in the morning, Sandison was sitting nervously at a table outside a café near Piazza Vanvitelli in the Vomero district.
This was high up above the Bay, on top of the hill.
Earlier, he had visited the museum of San Martino, not to see any of the exhibits but just to take in the view, the huge curve of the Bay.
But there was mist.
The islands were not visible at all and only the lower slopes of Vesuvius could be seen.
Sandison was not a superstitious man but he was disappointed.
He felt that this little piece of bad luck might affect his whole day.
He arrived at the café a full hour before he had intended.
He sat in the place that Maidstone had suggested, at a table at the end of the café's pavement area.
This gave him a view up one of the sidestreets which led down to the corner of the square.
He immediately started to watch the people arriving from that sidestreet.
After a while he gave up.
There were so many of them that the strain of trying to recognise each one started to give him a headache.
He remembered Maidstone had said that ten thirty was the time, never before.
He forced himself to be calm.
He took out his Italian phrase book and studied it fiercely, learning nothing.
At twenty past ten Sandison put his book away and sat back to watch the people who were walking down to the square.
He was glad that there were fewer than before.
It was a bright day now but the café, tucked in at the foot of the buildings that hemmed in the square, was in the shade.
It was cooler there and Sandison was glad of that too.
The people heading for the square were mostly men although there were a few women, dressed in black.
Sandison wondered what Elsie would be wearing, whether he would be able to recognise her at all.
He remembered the built-up shoe.
He need not have worried.
She was unmistakable.
She was dressed in blue — a pale blue skirt which reached to mid-calf and a darker blue blouse buttoned to the throat.
She had a light shawl wrapped round her shoulders.
It was white with blue flowers on it.
She stepped along quickly but quite gracefully.
Sandison tried to catch a glimpse of her feet but found it difficult.
He waited till she was closer.
For she passed by his table, within four or five feet of him.
She paused too, just before she reached him, and he felt the whole thing could not have been stage-managed better.
He watched her face as she scanned the street and the square ahead for a few seconds and then moved on.
He remembered her as being pretty but this was quite the wrong word now.
She was not beautiful either but the force of her attraction lay in her dignity, her confidence.
This was a dimension he could not remember in the old Elsie.
She was self-assured and unhesitating in her movements.
Her head was held high, not out of arrogance, Sandison felt, but because she was interested if not engrossed in all there was before her.
Her hair, which seemed much lighter than Sandison remembered, was gathered into a bun at the back.
Her profile was strong but nevertheless pleasing.
He desperately wanted to get up and speak to her.
She was here, the very person he had spent so much time and energy and money tracking down.
She was only a few yards away.
For a moment he felt that it did not matter what he had promised Maidstone.
He failed to understand why that man was so adamant that he should not approach her.
He half rose from his seat but at that point the waiter arrived with a coffee Sandison had forgotten he had ordered.
The waiter obscured his view and distracted him.
When he had gone, Sandison got to his feet but he had lost sight of Elsie.
His attention had been drawn away for only five or six seconds and there were surely only half a dozen shops that she could have entered.
If he were to run forward straight away he would almost certainly find her within a minute or two.
As he debated this with himself, suddenly all urgency left him.
He sat down.
He would leave it.
There was no point in taking risks at this stage.
Besides, if Maidstone could predict so accurately when Elsie would appear then it would be a simple matter to find her again — perhaps at the same time tomorrow.
He took out the photograph which he always carried with him and compared it to the woman he had just seen.
The physical likeness was inescapable but they looked totally different in character.
The photo showed a young, happy woman smiling brightly towards the camera.
The face had an openness and a gentleness that were not there to the same degree in this new Elsie who was more poised, a little more distant.
The photograph had been taken in the late twenties, seventeen or eighteen years before.
This shift of time was not apparent in the woman Sandison had just seen.
She appeared more mature, bore herself in a different manner but did not look more than six or seven years older than her earlier self.
Sandison got up, put a few coins on the café table and set off to meet Maidstone.
As he left the café he realised that he had forgotten to look at Elsie's feet.
At Franco's bar, Maidstone said no.
‘No, absolutely no.’
They were standing at the bar with their first glasses of wine in front of them.
‘Completely, utterly, categorically no.’
‘But why not?’
‘You just don't realise what risks you run.
You're interested in something that just isn't your business…’
‘But it is my business.’
‘No, it isn't.
It doesn't matter what you think, it's what people round here think and I can tell you now that you could get yourself into serious trouble.’
‘I'll take the risk.’
Maidstone laughed out loud.
‘My God you're so naïve!
You have no idea how things operate in this city.
No earthly idea.’
‘But I've come all the way from…’
‘Irrelevant!’
This was almost a shout.
‘Who the hell cares how far you've come.
You're a threat.
You're a threat and nobody in this place tolerates that, least of all the Stasis…’
He shook his head at his blunder.
‘Oh shit!’ he said loudly and then, quietly: ‘Look what you've made me do.’
‘Is that her name, then?’
Maidstone looked very put out but grudgingly replied: ‘Yes.’
‘What was it?
Stazi?’
‘Stasi.
Her name is Elisa Stasi and that's the last bit of information you're getting out of me on the subject.
Remember our agreement.’
Sandison remembered some vague promise he had made about leaving the city when he was satisfied that Elsie was indeed alive and well.
‘You made a promise,’ Maidstone said.
‘So I did.
Well, I never meant to keep it.’
‘I realise that now.
I should have realised it then too.’
‘You were drunk,’ Sandison said.
‘You were drunk when you told me where to see her.
Now you regret it and not because of the trouble I'll get into but the trouble you'll get into.’
‘I…’
‘Just be quiet and listen.
You don't trust me and you newer have.
And I don't trust you.
Unfortunately from your point of view we're both in this together now.
We sink or swim together.
Too many people have seen us over the past two or three days so anything I do will be linked to you.
I understand just as much as you do what the dangers are.
Give me credit for a little intelligence at least.
You've got this superior idea that I'm some sort of half-wit from the back of beyond who hasn't the vaguest notion of what happens in the big, bad world.
Well let me tell you that you're the one that's slipped up, not me.
You know it too, and you're scared as hell.
You've got a bigger problem than I have, though — you can't leave here but  I can.
You can't leave here because no other place would tolerate you or be able to support you.
You know that too and that's part of the reason why you befuddle yourself with drink.
Don't get me wrong, I've done it myself in the past and seen just how far it got me.
Absolutely nowhere, that's where it got me.
And that's where you are now.
This place is nowhere for you but it's the only place you can exist.
So, if you want to stay here, you'll help me out and if you don't…well, we're both in trouble.’
Throughout this speech of Sandison's Maidstone stood motionless at the bar, unable to say a word.
At the end he looked crushed and forlorn, crumpled like the brim of his dirty grey hat.
For a moment Sandison almost felt sorry for him.
Nothing was said for a while and then Maidstone straightened himself up.
‘Right,’ he said.
‘Well…’
Sandison could not be sure how much Maidstone had had to drink that day — it was still a few minutes before noon — but he knew that he was sober enough to understand fully what was going on.
‘I suppose you want to meet her, then,’ Maidstone said.
There was no emotion in his voice and none showing in his face.
‘Yes.’
‘Right.
I'll…
I'll see what I can do.’
‘I'll see you here tomorrow at ten o'clock,’ Sandison said.
His tone was sharp.
‘I say, that's a bit early, old fellow.’
Maidstone attempted a smile.
‘No, it isn't, it's late,’ Sandison said.
‘Ten sharp.’
‘Right…well…’
Maidstone turned towards the door.
‘I'll see you at ten then.’
He walked slowly out into the hot street.
Sandison waited for one minute and then also left, setting off in the opposite direction from Maidstone.
In the bar Franco collected the glasses.
One of them still had two or three mouthfuls of wine in it.
He was almost certain that it belonged to Maidstone but he would newer leave half a glass of wine behind, surely.
Very strange.
It took Maidstone four hours to decide what to do and during that time he drank only coffee.
He managed to stay off alcohol because for the first time for a very long time he was truly afraid.
He had been afraid before.
The last time was during the War, while he was living in London.
A German bomb had reduced the house next door to rubble and part of the ceiling of his own room had caved in on top of him.
He had been scared then but it had been short-lived: terror lasting a matter of a few seconds, a minute at most.
It was different now.
There was a good chance that this Sandison fellow would cause trouble and he would be linked to it.
And  of course, it had to be the Stasis.
My God, couldn't he have chosen another family.
Maidstone craved a drink but he had to stay sober.
He was going to visit someone and he had to be clean, bright, well-dressed, smart and quite definitely sober.
Maidstone rented a tiny apartment at the top of a very dilapidated building in the Vomero.
When he got back there after leaving Sandison — after being dismissed by Sandison — he stood in the centre of his small untidy sitting room and removed every stitch of clothing he had on.
He washed himself as best he could at the sink in the bathroom.
He managed this with the help of a flannel, some scented soap from England which he kept for special occasions and a kettleful of hot water that took five minutes to boil on the single electric ring that served as a cooker and, in winter, as a heater.
The bathroom had no shower and no hot water.
Maidstone was used to all this and he had got the procedures worked out so well that very little mess was involved.
He placed an old towel on the bathroom floor so that it would not get wet and he ensured that everything he needed was within reach so that he did not have to move from the spot and so drip water everywhere.
He hated everything to do with household chores and keeping the place clean so he concentrated hard on creating as little mess as possible.
His apartment was certainly untidy but it was not dirty.
After washing himself down he shaved, trimmed his moustache, brushed his teeth, gargled and then greased and combed his hair.
He scrubbed his hands until they were nearly raw.
He spent five minutes cleaning his nails with a nailbrush.
He inspected his face again and then his hands.
He checked the state of his teeth.
He seemed satisfied.
After making sure that his feet were dry, he left the bathroom, wrapped in a towel.
From a chest of drawers in his bedroom he drew out a clean, well-ironed white shirt and a dark blue regimental tie.
He had no right to wear the tie but he felt that it was rather distinguished and so far no one had caught him out.
He took out fresh underwear and fresh socks.
He laid all these items on the bed before searching in the small wardrobe for his only other suit.
This search was not difficult as there were few other items in there — a couple of jackets, a greatcoat and five or six pairs of trousers.
He wore the suit rarely and in one of the few points of discipline which he managed to impose on himself he always made sure that the suit, or the trousers at least, were pressed immediately after use.
This not only kept the suit in good condition and therefore prolonged its life but also provided him with a smart outfit always ready at short notice, as now.
Maidstone dressed with care on this occasion and presented a very different figure from the usually dishevelled and always crumpled one who frequented Franco's bar.
In fact, were Franco to see him now, he would  very likely not recognise Maidstone who, sobered up, shaved, scrubbed and polished, in well-cut black suit and shining black shoes, looked quite the man about town.
He also looked about ten years younger.
He made one last check — as best he could — in the tiny shaving mirror in the bathroom and then left his apartment.
Once in the street he walked at a gentle pace.
He had only a few hundred yards to go as the house he was planning to visit was also in the Vomero but he did not wish to arrive with perspiration on his forehead or dust on his shoes.
He reached the door, or rather the cast-iron gate as his destination was a villa, quite a large villa with a central courtyard.
There was a bell-pull connected up to a small porter's lodge inside.
Maidstone paused and took a deep breath.
He desperately needed a drink but he knew he had to get through the next little while — ten minutes, half an hour, an hour — completely sober.
After all, his life might depend on it.
He rang the bell and when he was greeted by a rather surly butler he enquired, very politely, if it might be possible for him to speak with the Signora Calvino on a matter of the utmost urgency.
In his pensione Sandison slept for two hours in the afternoon.
When he got up he sat on his bed and wrote a letter:
Naples
June 7th, 1947
Dear Stewart,
I've found her and I've actually seen her!
She calls herself Elisa these days and she's married to someone called Stasi.
It seems the Stasis are a well-known and influential family in this city, so she's done all right for herself.
I've managed to arrange to meet her and talk to her and this should take place tomorrow (though it's being organised by a very unreliable man, one of the expatriate drunks that live here).
So, I'll send you more information after I've talked to her.
Anyway, run the story, Stewart, run it now.
Can you think of a better way to boost circulation?
Yours, Albert
As he was going to be passing the post office on his way to his favourite restaurant Sandison decided to post the letter himself.
He put on his hat and went out.
A CHANGE OF HATS
When Sandison arrived at Franco's bar the next morning at ten to ten, Maidstone was already there, sitting at a table, drinking coffee.
‘I've fixed it,’ he said straight away, without offering Sandison any greeting.
‘Good.’
Sandison sat down opposite him.
Maidstone mentioned an address in the Vomero and told Sandison to be there at nine o'clock.
‘Nine?
Tonight?’
‘Yes.’
‘It's a bit late, isn't it?’
‘Take it or leave it.’
Maidstone was a different man.
When Sandison had last seen him he had been a sad figure, a man approaching old age, tired, dishevelled and drunk.
Now he was sharp and alert and as curt and direct as Sandison had been to him the day before.
‘I think I prefer you drunk,’ Sandison said.
‘Do you now.
Well, I think I do too but that's neither here nor there.’
‘Are you coming?’
‘What?’
‘Are you coming to the Stasi place?’
‘No, no I'm not.’
He pulled out a folded sheet of paper from his inside pocket.
‘I've drawn you a little map,’ he said.
Sandison spread out the paper on the table and studied it.
‘Start from Piazza Vanvitelli which is near the top of the funicolare , there.’
Maidstone prodded the appropriate spot on the map.
‘Right, yes.
I've got you.’
‘Then just…well, follow the arrows I've marked.
You'll have no problem.’
‘No, I think that'll be fine.’
Maidstone rose.
‘Can I get you a drink?’
Sandison asked, surprised to see Maidstone leaving so quickly.
‘No thanks, no.’
‘Another coffee?’
Sandison had not intended this to sound like a jibe but it did.
‘No, I'd better be off, I think.’
‘Well, look, thanks for fixing things up for me.
I'm grateful.’
‘Yes, well, it wasn't too difficult after all.’
He started for the door.
Sandison rose and shouted after him: ‘Tomorrow.
Will you be here tomorrow morning?’
Maidstone was at the door.
He turned and after a few seconds said:
‘Probably.’
Then he added: ‘Possibly.’
‘I'll see you then,’ Sandison said.
Maidstone disappeared.
Sandison looked over at Franco behind the bar.
He was as bewildered by Maidstone's behaviour as Sandison was.
‘Pazzo ,’ he said.
‘Pazzo .’
Crazy.
Getting through the day proved difficult for Sandison.
He felt on edge about meeting Elsie or Elisa or whatever her name was now.
Also, he realised that as he was reaching the end of his search he was reaching the end of his time in Naples as well.
He had enjoyed the city and would have liked to stay longer.
After he got home to Scotland he would write about Elsie, perhaps not just for the paper but for himself too.
He thought he might write a book about it all.
And then?
He had no idea what he would do after that.
Staying in a small town in the north of Scotland and working on the local newspaper for the rest of his life suddenly seemed a dismal prospect.
He had newer been out of Scotland before but he did not feel at all homesick.
Quite the reverse; he was not looking forward to going back.
He thought of his wife and child whom he had not seen for over a month.
He had not really missed them.
He had written two letters, both to Stewart, nothing to his wife.
He was intelligent enough to understand that his search for Elsie was, in part, an escape from his own family.
If this Elisa woman really was Elsie — and he was convinced that she was — how he envied her.
How he admired her ability just to walk out, disappear, leave everything and everyone.
He wondered if he would ever be able to do such a thing himself.
He decided to fill in the day by making arrangements for his departure from the city.
He told the owner of the pensione that he would probably be leaving in a few days and then he made his way to the station to ask about trains.
He decided against buying a ticket there and then but satisfied himself with getting a list of trains to Rome.
He made no enquiries about travelling any farther than that.
In the late afternoon he got back to his room, tired and unsettled.
He managed to sleep for a couple of hours, then rose and wandered off to Franco's bar to see if Maidstone was there.
He glanced round the bar from  the door.
No Maidstone.
He was about to leave when he was spotted by Franco who called out to him.
He went in and Franco, unbidden, poured him a whisky.
Surprised at this, as whisky was in very short supply in the city, Sandison asked what was going on.
‘Una brutta notizia ,’ Franco said.
Bad news.
He set off on a long rambling account of something that had happened in the bar that afternoon.
Sandison found it very difficult to understand him because he spoke very quickly and occasionally slipped into Neapolitan dialect.
The whole thing had to be repeated three or four times before Sandison got the gist.
It seemed that Maidstone, who had been completely sober at ten o'clock when he left the bar, returned at about midday, still sober, but immediately started drinking heavily.
By two o'clock he was very drunk indeed.
Franco had never seen him so drunk and, although Maidstone's intake of alcohol had often been greater on past occasions, this time he just went to pieces.
‘Non ce la fa piú ,’ Franco explained.
He just couldn't take it.
At five past two Franco took the unprecedented step of refusing to serve him any more wine.
Maidstone had become quite abusive at this, swearing at Franco in English, Italian and Neapolitan dialect.
He insisted that no one but he himself could decide whether he was going to drink or not and anyway, he had plenty of money, enough to buy all the drink in the bar if he wanted.
He produced a wad of large denomination bills and waved them in Franco's face.
Franco became very alarmed at this and told him to put his money away immediately.
But by this time Maidstone was beyond all reason.
He started to shout and scream, demanding that he be served with wine.
Franco did not know what to do.
If it had been one of the local men, he explained to Sandison, there would have been no problem, but Maidstone was another matter.
He wasn't sure of Maidstone's connections, what friends he had.
It was a tricky business.
Eventually Maidstone tried to scramble over the bar but he slipped and fell heavily onto the floor.
His head collided with a table on the way down and he knocked himself out.
For a few anxious moments Franco thought he was dead but he came round within a minute or so although he remained in a semi-conscious state.
It was clear that he was in no condition to get himself home unaided.
It was Franco himself who took Maidstone home.
He got his brother to look after the bar for an hour or so, bundled Maidstone into a taxi driven by a friend of his and set off for Maidstone's apartment in the Vomero.
He managed to get Maidstone inside the building and upstairs without upsetting the portiera too much.
Unfortunately the apartment was at the very top and it was quite a struggle to drag Maidstone up the eight or ten flights of stairs.
There was no lift.
Franco put Maidstone to bed.
He had taken Maidstone's money from him in the bar.
He returned this now, putting the bundle of notes in the inside pocket of the creased, off-white linen jacket.
When he left the apartment Maidstone was snoring.
It was hard work trying to understand Franco and by the end of the last telling of the story Sandison was happy to accept a second, though rather smaller, whisky.
He also agreed to go round to Maidstone's apartment to see how he was.
Franco repeated that Maidstone was crazy but he was a good man and a good customer too.
He gave Sandison the address and asked him to do three things: check that Maidstone was all right, check that he still had his money and give him back his hat.
From under the counter Franco produced the familiar battered grey hat which had been left behind in the confusion surrounding their departure for Maidstone's apartment.
Sandison took the hat and turned it over in his hands.
He tried to straighten out the brim but it had been curled and folded so often it was beyond repair.
The material sprang back into the uneven creases that had been shaped by Maidstone's nervous, insistent fingers.
Sandison looked across at Franco and shrugged.
He turned and headed for the door where he paused for a moment.
It felt strange to be in possession of two hats.
On an impulse he returned to the bar, took off his own hat, the one he had bought on Maidstone's advice, and handed it over to Franco for safe keeping.
He left the bar with Maidstone's hat in his hand, gripping it firmly by the brim.
It was just after seven so he had two hours before his appointment with Elisa Stasi.
He reckoned he had enough time to see Maidstone, then get down to the pensione and change before making his way back up to the Vomero again.
However, it would not do to dawdle.
He set off at a brisk pace for the lower station of the funicolare by Piazza Amedeo.
On the way there, Sandison saw how the pace of things had changed.
For several weeks now he had been chipping away at this problem of finding Elsie, slowly nagging it into submission.
The job had required perseverance and, above all, patience.
Now, inexplicably, just as he was about to reach his goal, things had suddenly speeded up.
Too many things demanded his attention at the same rime.
He wanted to arrive at the Stasis in a calm frame of mind; he wanted to settle himself and prepare for it.
Instead of that, he had become involved in what was most likely a wild goose chase.
Maidstone was almost certainly all right, just sleeping off the effects of too much drink.
Sandison could imagine the reception: ‘Worried about me?
My dear fellow!’
For a moment he wondered if he should leave his visit to Maidstone till later, till after he had met Elsie.
He actually paused in front of the funicolare station and considered this.
He found that he was rolling and unrolling the brim of Maidstone's hat in his fingers.
He glanced at his watch and decided there was still time.
He went into the station.
The building that housed Maidstone's apartment was in poor shape.
Half of the stucco work had crumbled away and some of the shutters on the windows had broken free of their hinges to dangle precariously over the street.
There were cracks in the walls and the steps up to the entrance had been reduced to an uneven and rocky slope.
It was the last block in the street and the side wall was supported by a network of wooden scaffolding that stretched all the way up to the fifth floor.
The building had survived the earthquake of two years before, but only just.
Sandison was amazed that it was still standing.
The portiera was an old deaf lady and it took Sandison five minutes to explain who he was and who he wanted to visit.
He made his way up to the top floor, found Maidstone's apartment and knocked on the door.
There was no reply.
He began hammering on the door and calling out Maidstone's name.
Still no reply.
He went back down and confronted the portiera again.
He explained that Maidstone was ill and that it was essential to get inside the apartment to see how he was.
It took him another five minutes to get across the fact that no, he was not a doctor but yes, he was a friend, a very good friend.
The portiera was clearly unimpressed by anything Sandison said.
Finally, exasperated, he produced ten lire.
The effect was immediate.
The old lady was quite sprightly for her age but it took a long time for them both to reach the top floor.
She obviously trusted no one else with the keys to the apartments.
The selection of the correct key added on another minute or so and Sandison could only look on feeling helpless and frustrated.
He burst into the apartment.
Maidstone was still in bed, lying on his back with his mouth open.
His face was grotesquely puffed and had taken on the colour of dark purple.
Sandison did not even bother to check his pulse or try to revive him.
Maidstone was dead.
The old lady, following Sandison into the tiny bedroom, dropped to her knees, crossed herself and started up a high-pitched wailing, interspersed with fragments of speech which Sandison found completely incomprehensible.
He decided that the best thing for him to do was to leave as soon as possible, before other people arrived and the situation became very complicated.
After all, there was nothing he could do to help Maidstone now.
He backed out of the bedroom, leaving the old lady still on her knees before the bed.
He glanced round the small untidy sitting room and saw Maidstone's jacket on the back of a chair, presumably placed there by Franco.
He quickly searched through the pockets.
There was no wad of money.
For some reason this did not surprise him at all.
He got out of the building and into the street as quickly as he could.
He hurried away until he had managed to put half a mile between himself and the body of Maidstone and then he slowed down.
He flicked back the cuff of his jacket to glance at his watch and as he did so he saw that he was still carrying Maidstone's hat.
His first impulse was to throw it away, to rid himself of anything that might link him with Maidstone and Maidstone's death.
Then he thought better of it.
What did it matter, really?
He held onto the hat and hurried on.
He was running short of time.
He might have to abandon his return to the pensione to change and go straight to the Stasi address.
That depended, of course, on whether he decided to go through with it or not.
The whole thing was getting out of control.
Without doubt there was a sinister side to events now.
Maidstone's peculiar behaviour earlier that day, Franco's strange tale about the pile of money Maidstone had showed him in the bar and now Maidstone's death itself.
It was just possible, Sandison thought, that Maidstone had died naturally — if choking to death in your sleep after a huge binge could be called natural — but that would not explain the disappearance of the money.
If there had been any money in the first place.
No, Maidstone had been right all along: Sandison knew nothing about what went on in the city.
He had naïvely stumbled into the middle of a very complicated and dangerous situation.
Sandison desperately wanted to meet Elisa Stasi but he was not prepared to risk his life doing it.
He paused at a street corner and tried to come to a decision.
He looked round and realised that he was not quite sure where he was.
He had intended to head back to the funicolare station but perhaps he had taken a wrong turning somewhere in his hurry to get away from Maidstone's apartment.
It would not be too difficult for him to find his way again, however.
He was fairly sure that the edge of the Vomero, the slope of the hill, the Bay and the sea lay to his right.
He imagined himself to be in the centre of the city now, surrounded by its magnificent old crumbling buildings, its churches and palaces, villas and castles filled with the rich trappings of the centuries and set about by the bustle, the noise, the filth, squalor and abject poverty of the streets.
No, it was too much for him to understand; he could stay here for years and never understand it.
Yet here he was, so very very near to his goal.
If he gave up now it would be like walking a hundred miles and then refusing to take the very last single step that would complete the journey.
He was holding Maidstone's hat in both hands, turning it, feeding the brim inch by inch through his  fingers.
Abruptly he stopped doing this, took hold of the brim on either side of the crown, raised the hat and placed it firmly on his head.
Suddenly he had the strangest feeling.
He felt that the forces that had brought him to this narrow corner of a Neapolitan street — the wish, on the one hand, to track down Elsie and now the fear, on the other, that this search would lead him to harm — these forces might hold him there, his foot on the edge of the pavement overhanging the choked and filthy gutter, in a kind of uneasy equilibrium and he might stay there for a long, long time.
1936
THE BEAUTIFUL CITY
From the broad and busy thoroughfare of the Riviera di Chiaia which is separated from the sea by the Villa Nazionale, a narrow strip of untidy parkland, the little street called Santa Maria in Portico leads inland and uphill over uneven cobbles to the church which bears the same name.
In a city of splendid ecclesiastical architecture ranging from the mediaeval to the baroque the Church of Santa Maria in Portico is unremarkable.
Several other churches have green domes topped with cupolas; there are many buildings with a more impressive sweep of steps from street level up to the main door; larger and better-kept churches abound.
Throughout its three-hundred-year history the Church of Santa Maria has frequently been clothed in the wooden scaffolding that has allowed builders to attempt repairs after recent earthquakes.
The church has been jarred and cracked, shaken and split more times than historians have been able to count.
With every tremor a stone falls, a joint is widened or a lintel is dislodged.
The massive front door once refused to open when the alignment of the doorposts was shifted.
The local people took this as a sign of displeasure from the Almighty who was shutting the doors of his house against his sinning congregation.
That the church still stands is itself remarkable.
Because it is not one of the more imposing buildings for which public funds are more readily available, it has had to rely on the care and attention of those who live around it and they are among the poorer people of the city.
Their houses, the tall, crumbling tenements with their cracked roof tiles and their creaking balconies huddle together round the church as if they want to shoulder it out of the way.
Some local people also work close to the church, daily setting out their stalls of fruit, vegetables or fish in the narrow alleyways, the vicoli , which spread out from the tiny square, no more than a broadening of the road really, before the church.
Some of these people have never left this area of town, have never passed a day of their lives without seeing, if not entering, the Church of Santa Maria.
After mid-morning Sunday mass many come from the church, walk down the short steep hill of Santa Maria in Portico, cross the Riviera di Chiaia  and stroll along the Villa Nazionale for a sight of the sea and the majestic sweep of the rocky shore of the Bay of Naples.
One very warm morning in June 1936 a young woman left her room on the fourth floor of a pensione at the west end of the Riviera di Chiaia and descended to street level.
As she was about to leave the building she exchanged greetings with the portiera who handed her a letter which had arrived earlier the same day.
The young woman glanced at the letter, whose envelope was quite dog-eared, and put it, unopened, inside her brown leather handbag.
With a murmur of thanks to the portiera she stepped out into the street.
She was a slim, attractive woman in her late twenties and had long fair hair which was tightly piled up under a straw boater.
She was wearing a white blouse, frilled with lace at collar and cuffs, and a long, mid-grey cotton skirt.
From the front door of the rambling palazzo which housed the pensione she turned left and walked along the Riviera.
She very much wanted to read the letter she had received and she thought of crossing over to the Villa Nazionale.
There she could sit at one of the outdoor cafés and read her letter undisturbed while sipping a cool drink of lemon or perhaps iced tea.
She decided to delay the moment, however, and increase her expectation by leaving the letter until later on.
She would complete her morning's business first and then retire to one of the cafés in the park.
Glad to leave the bright sunlight of the Riviera and the noise of the traffic she turned from the main street into Santa Maria in Portico.
Although her quest was not one of religious devotion her destination was the Church of Santa Maria.
She walked slowly up the street on the shaded side, stepping carefully round the stalls set up on the pavement and the goods displayed by some vendors which were spread out on cloths on the pavement itself.
Every two or three yards she was accosted, ‘Signora!
Signora !’ as a ripe fruit or some trinket or other was thrust before her for her inspection.
She was used to this by now and dealt with every approach quietly and without fuss.
She was careful to show no interest whatever in anything that was shown to her.
Halfway up the street she paused to look above the church to the hill beyond.
A few villas, white or pale yellow buildings, could be seen dotted haphazardly across the face of the hill, separated by small groves of olive trees and the occasional stand of poplars.
Near the top of the hill stood the large white building which was the San Martino Museum and above it, and in contrast to the museum's firm elegant lines, could be seen the solid brown ramparts of St Elmo's Castle.
Beyond the castle there was nothing but deep blue sky.
The young woman had visited both the museum and the castle before and had looked down from their heights onto the epidemic of streets below, between the top of the hill and the broad curve of the Bay.
She had been impressed by the view, the quite breath-taking view, from the headland of Posillipo round to the curiously named Egg Castle, a box of brown stone on its rocky promontory in the Bay and on farther to the Sorrento Peninsula beyond.
The islands had been pointed out to her, Capri and Procida and the ghost of an outline of Ischia.
She had seen the boats in the Bay, pleasure boats to the islands and the bigger commercial vessels entering and leaving the port area.
From her vantage point in the museum and later in St Elmo's Castle she had spent several minutes in wonder at the view.
On both occasions she had been struck by the contrast between on the one hand the beauty of the Bay itself, the islands, the fine buildings towards Posillipo and on the other the cramped and jumbled desperation of the mean and bustly streets immediately below her.
During the few moments in which she paused in her ascent to the church she reflected that now she was looking at the view the other way round; now she was in one of the overcrowded little alleys visible from San Martino as merely a crack in a vast expanse of roof tiles and crumbling masonry and noticeable from that lofty vantage point because of the fluttering of the washing hung out on poles over the street to dry.
Perhaps there were more of these poles in Santa Maria in Portico than in other vicoli because there were two laundries in the street.
The buildings above these laundries displayed the densest clustering of washing poles.
The young woman smiled as she imagined a broad rectangular ship with scores of short stubby masts and multi-coloured, ragged sails cruising up the face of the building.
She had visited many such vicoli before, but rarely unaccompanied.
Her present situation was the result of her growing confidence in her own ability to cope with events and her increased understanding of the language.
She felt herself to be reasonably proficient in Italian and she had begun, rather to the disapproval of her employers, to learn a few words of the Neapolitan dialect.
The dangers of the Naples street-life did not bother her; she believed that no one would mistreat her.
So far, no one had.
The two laundries were towards the top of the street, near the church.
This was just as well because the washing was not only hung up on poles above but spread out upon drying racks in the street itself.
Had the laundries been at the Riviera end all the detritus from the other businesses, the discarded vegetables and smashed fruit of the greengrocers, the scales and fish heads and guts deposited on the street by the two fishmongers, would have passed by and probably soiled some of the clothes as the intermittent hosing down of the street caused all this muck and filth  to edge its way slowly down towards the Bay.
As she crossed the street towards the far corner by the church entrance, the young woman was careful to step over the littering of prawn shells and orange peel, fish tails and broken heads of artichoke that had accumulated in the numerous depressions afforded by the badly laid cobbles.
The smell was unpleasant too but she resisted the temptation to remove her scented handkerchief from the cuff of her blouse.
She did not wish to display any gesture that could be interpreted as precious or affected.
She must have been noticed as being very different from the local ladies who were either young girls dressed tidily but poorly, or older women in black.
There seemed to be few females outwith these two categories.
Consequently, this young woman would have aroused curiosity because she was well dressed and, though no longer a girl, she was not wearing black.
There was also the fact that she had fair hair only partly hidden under her straw boater, a most peculiar hat in these parts.
She was not unapproachable, however.
Cries of ‘Signora!
Signora !’ continued as she made her way to the top of the street.
Determined but polite efforts were made to interest her in the purchase of tomatoes, plums, oranges, artichokes, mussels, scallops, chickens and even a swordfish steak.
The fishmonger at the top, opposite the church, was selling this last item.
Half of an enormous fish — the head end with its sword broken off but still nearly two feet long — was laid out on a trestle table and the fishmonger was slicing inch-thick steaks from it.
She made the mistake of pausing here and inspecting the fish.
It was an error because the fishmonger immediately started to cut a steak for her.
She remonstrated with him and explained that she had stopped because she had never seen such a fish before.
It was so big.
Oh, very very big, he explained and stepped away from the end of the table to indicate with his hand where the tail would have been on this particular specimen.
She expressed her wonder at this and asked for the name in Italian.
Pesce spada , he told her.
He performed a brief mime of someone fencing.
This drew a little laughter from one or two shoppers who had gathered to listen to the exchange between the fishmonger and this well dressed and clearly foreign lady.
Spada .
Of course.
A sword.
She explained that it was a sword too in English.
Ah, said the fishmonger, so you are English.
Scottish, the young woman corrected him.
Ah,Scozzese !
Of course.
He complimented her on her Italian which was very good, he said, very, very good.
The group round about murmured their agreement.
And was she a visitor in Naples?
No, she lived there.
Wonderful!
Wonderful!
And what did she think of the city?
This city, she said clearly and confidently, is the most beautiful city in the world.
This brought out a few gasps of admiration from the onlookers.
Bella ! said the fishmonger.
So beautiful!
He raised his hands to the sky.
But so many problems, so many, many problems!
He shook his head as he registered this fact.
All cities, the young woman said, all cities have their problems.
So true, he agreed, so very, very true.
She smiled and took her leave.
The fishmonger blessed her for calling and wished her a continued pleasant time in their beautiful city.
The interest that the young woman had engendered had spread beyond the fishmonger's stall.
The women by the next couple of street sellers paused in their shopping to watch her pass and two or three men who had heard her conversation raised their hats to her.
Two others had noticed her as well.
They were boys of fifteen or sixteen and they were watching her keenly from a position by the railings at the far corner of the church.
As she made her way across to the church steps she found herself suddenly in bright sunlight and away from the crowds.
She paused at the bottom of the wide stone staircase and looked up at the heavy doors of the church which had been drawn back and allowed a partial view of the dark interior of the building.
The doorway itself was framed by the network of wooden scaffolding which covered most of the front of the church.
There had been a severe tremor a couple of years before and repair work was still going on.
Lowering her gaze from the intense sunlight reflected on the upper walls to the leaded doors, she placed a foot on the first stone step.
She was only dimly aware of the approach of the two boys who were walking swiftly from the street corner.
One skipped up the steps and passed directly in front of her, brushing against her.
Her surprise at this and her immediate step backwards allowed the other one, now passing behind her, the opportunity to wrench her handbag from her grasp.
Somehow she managed to grab hold of his shirt and she shouted out her resistance.
The first boy, still above her, turned and pushed her violently to the ground.
They both then sprinted off and were out of sight before the group of concerned shoppers could reach her as she lay in a faint on the bottom step below the church.
When she regained consciousness she found herself lying on a large settee in a dimly lit room.
There were several female faces above her and the sounds of the street still reached her though they seemed distant and somewhat muffled.
Someone asked if she was all right and she found this such a strange question.
Why on earth would someone ask her that?
She was unsure how to reply.
The question was repeated.
Something cool and damp was pressed to her forehead.
She began to remember what had happened.
She tried to raise herself from the settee but gentle hands restrained her.
I am all right, she said, I am fine, but she made no further attempt to rise.
She felt very tired and as she shifted position she detected  an ache in her left hip.
Her left elbow was tingling too and as she felt for it with her right hand she found that the sleeve of her blouse had been torn.
Her forearm below the elbow was bruised.
Her head was clearing and she wondered how long she had been unconscious.
She was about to ask the nearest of the women when she suddenly realised fully what had happened.
‘My bag!’ she said out loud and then, more softly but with more than a touch of anguish, ‘Oh no, the letter!’
Despite the protests she sat up now and swung her feet from the settee.
Her hat lay beside her and she found that her piled-up fair hair had been released and had fallen about her face.
She accepted a glass of water and for the first time looked round in order to take in the room and the people before her.
She felt herself to be still very slightly dazed, disorientated enough to give the impression that she was a disinterested observer of the scene and not quite able to realise that these things were in fact happening to her.
She was in a large room which was well furnished.
It seemed to be a parlour or sitting room.
The marble floor was scattered about with individual rugs.
The large settee, upholstered in dark blue material, was one of a suite with three matching armchairs.
She noticed an open fireplace with an ornate mantelshelf in black marble.
Above this was a large rectangular mirror in a gilt frame.
The walls of the room were pale green.
There was an upright piano in the far corner with a row of framed photographs on top.
A glass-fronted cabinet displayed a collection of crib figures.
She could see French windows at the far end of the room.
Heavy dark green velvet curtains were partly drawn across these and allowed only a single column of light to enter the room.
There were three women before her, none of whom was dressed in black.
So much detail was not available to her then but she would have agreed to it all and later she would be able to describe more of the room, the contents of the cabinets, even the names of the people represented in the photographs on top of the piano; she did not know then that this was the first of many visits to this room.
Of the three ladies who were attending to her, two were in middle age and the third in her early thirties.
This younger woman was very attractive with a dark complexion and thick black hair tied in a pony tail.
Her face was made up, though not too obviously so, and she wore lipstick.
This in itself seemed unusual.
The lipstick was dark red and matched the colour of her carefully manicured nails.
It was the shiny red of these nails that the woman on the settee noticed with surprise as another glass of water was offered to her.
She accepted the glass and muttered a word of thanks.
The woman before her introduced herself as Antonietta Calvino.
Antonietta sat beside her on the settee and explained that a doctor would be along soon.
A doctor? the visitor asked.
But of course a doctor as she had injuries to be seen to.
At that moment one of the other two women who had left the room for a couple of minutes returned with a bowl of water and began to bathe the injured arm.
Also, I will get for you another blouse, Antonietta said.
And then, striking a dramatic pose she announced that she was terribly ashamed.
Ashamed?
Why yes, ashamed that the people of my city have done this terrible thing to you.
But of course these boys, these disgusting creatures, these street urchins unworthy of being called Neapolitan, they were not from this area at all, no, not at all .
There was a commotion at the door and a tall elderly man entered.
He had a grey walrus moustache and was wearing a collarless shirt with the sleeves rolled up.
He carried a leather bag which he placed on the floor by the settee.
Antonietta greeted him and introduced him as Dr Silvino.
As she did so she realised she did not yet know the name of their unexpected guest.
She asked the woman on the settee to reveal her identity.
You may call me Elisa, she said.
Twenty minutes later Elisa was fully recovered from the incident although her arm still ached slightly under Dr Silvino's expert bandaging.
Antonietta had given her a blouse which, she noticed with interest, was of superior quality to her own.
She had arranged her hair again and reinstated her hat though as she performed this operation at the dressing table in Antonietta's elegant bedroom she thought how ridiculous the hat looked.
She would buy another soon, an altogether different one.
Back in the main sitting room where she had been at first she was introduced to Antonietta's husband Gennaro who was the head of the household.
He was about thirty-five and of medium build but beginning to fill out.
In spite of the heat he was very smartly dressed in a dark three-piece suit.
He had returned for lunch from his office in the city centre.
After the introduction had been made Antonietta left the room.
‘I am most upset that you have been treated so badly by my countrymen,’ Gennaro said in a quiet steady voice.
‘I can only apologise for them.’
Elisa was surprised to be addressed in English and remarked upon this.
‘I have spent some time in the United States,’ he explained.
‘Many of my family are there.’
‘I see.’
‘And you,signora , you are from England, no?’
‘In fact no, I'm Scottish, from Scotland.’
‘Ah Scozzese !’ he said smiling.
‘Of course I know that I must not make this mistake.
It is very serious no?’
Not at all,’ Elisa replied.
‘But I cannot say what I am not.’
‘Ah, to be so honest, it is a great virtue, a great virtue.’
He had seated himself in an armchair adjacent to the settee to which Elisa had naturally returned although now she was sitting rather prim and upright on the edge.
Gennaro seemed quite relaxed.
He had a pleasant face whose lines were more likely the result of his generally cheerful disposition rather than worry or the onset of middle age.
A full and very black moustache covered his upper lip and during conversation he frequently smoothed it down in a rather absent-minded fashion with the forefinger of his right hand.
He turned and said something that Elisa could not quite catch to a young girl, unnoticed before, who had stationed herself by the door.
She muttered a brief reply and left.
‘My wife has informed me that the two boys who attacked you stole your handbag.’
‘That's correct, yes.’
‘Terrible!
Terrible!
To bring such shame upon the area…’
He shook his head.
‘But tell me, was there much of value in the handbag?
My wife has informed me…’
‘Nothing of great value,’ Elisa cut in, ‘except a letter.’
‘A letter?’
‘Yes, a letter I received this morning from a dear friend of mine…’
‘A letter…’
Gennaro seemed unsure how to react to this.
‘…From a dear friend, you say…’
‘Yes, but unopened…’
‘Oh…’
‘I received it as I came out this morning and I didn't have time to open it.’
‘Ah…’
‘There was nothing else in the bag…a little money…a few other things of no importance.’
‘And your papers?’
‘I wasn't carrying them.’
‘No?’
‘No, I left them in my pensione .’
‘Forgive me…signora…’
‘…
Signorina .’
Ah, excuse me,signorina .
Yes.
Forgive me but it seems to me strange that a lady such as you…how shall I say…should stay in a pensione .
You are…you are comfortable there?’
‘For the moment, yes.’
‘I see.’
Her confident reply dissuaded him from further questions along this line.
He decided to return to the question of the letter.
‘This letter,’ he began, ‘this letter is very important for you?’
‘Yes, it is.
It's very important.
It will take some weeks now before I can contact my friend and ask him…ask for the information to be repeated.’
‘Yes, I see.
So, a letter from home, no?’
‘Yes.’
‘I see.’
Gennaro saw quite a lot.
He had noticed the slight hesitation over the gender of the letter writer.
He was still intrigued by the sudden arrival of this most attractive English…no, Scottish…lady in Naples, living in a pensione , receiving letters from a male friend from her home.
Some of the pieces began to fit but there was a great deal more that he wished to find out.
Suddenly he rose.
‘You must excuse me,signorina but I will make now some telephone calls.
You will stay to lunch of course.’
‘Well,signore…’
Elisa rose in some confusion, wishing to remonstrate with her host about the abundance of his generosity.
She was too late however, as he was already at the door and a moment later, without a further word, he was gone.
Lunch was a grand if rather noisy affair.
The twelve at the table included Antonietta's three children and her mother.
There were also two of Antonietta's brothers, a brother and sister-in-law of Gennaro's and one of Gennaro's uncles.
The food was served by three maids and a man who gave the impression he was the major-domo of the house.
He was particularly smartly dressed in black trousers and waistcoat, white shirt and red bow-tie.
Elisa realised that she had stumbled, almost literally, into a very well-to-do household.
During the meal Elisa was able to find out what had happened to her immediately after the attack on the steps of the church.
A small crowd had gathered and she had been carried across the street and inside the nearest shop in order to get her out of the sun.
Efforts were made to revive her there but these efforts failed.
Antonietta, who was in the shop at the time, then took charge.
She had Elisa taken to her car to be driven to the house a few streets away.
Meanwhile she despatched the fishmonger to fetch Dr Silvino as she feared that Elisa might be seriously hurt.
Within a few minutes Elisa was on the settee in the sitting room where, at last, she regained consciousness.
Elisa made a mental note to return soon and thank the fishmonger for his care and attention.
At the moment, enjoying a piece of swordfish which  Antonietta had bought from that same man, she wondered how she would be able to repay the kindness and generosity of this family.
Antonietta asked what Elisa was doing in Naples.
It was a question often put to her; she was careful not to let the answer sound too glib.
She said she had been hired as a nanny by an English couple called Wilson who lived in the city.
She had met them in London the previous summer during their annual holiday and had agreed to travel out to Naples with them and look after their two young children.
After a few months however, Mr Wilson had been recalled to London as the head of his company had been tragically killed in an automobile accident.
Promotion for Mr Wilson followed and after a brief visit to Naples to tie up affairs he returned to London.
It seemed clear that his new duties would keep him in London for some time — certainly his stay in Italy was at an end.
Consequently, when he had found suitable accommodation, his wife and children had also gone back to England.
Elisa had been expected to return too and continue her duties but she had decided to stay in Naples.
She now made a living giving private lessons in English.
She lived in a very comfortable pensione near the Piazza Sannazzaro.
Once again the information that Elisa was living in a pensione provoked murmurs of surprise.
She repeated that she was very comfortable there and lived there by choice.
She realised from the quizzical looks that met this further information that she had made matters worse rather than better.
It was difficult to know what to say next.
After half a minute's silence she added that her life in the pensione was nevertheless temporary as she hoped to gain a full-time position in a private school shortly and accommodation was provided with this particular job.
This news was greeted with smiles and exclamations of approval.
Clearly living in a pensione for a short time was acceptable but only until something better came along.
It was unthinkable that one would actually choose to stay there when other possibilities arose.
In fact Elisa was not being entirely honest about her situation.
The story about the Wilsons was true enough and she herself had chosen to stay in Naples although the motivation for this, initially at least, was mainly a wish not to return to Britain.
It was true also that she gave English lessons and that she had applied for a full-time job as an English teacher in a small private school.
However, the pensione was not particularly comfortable and she preferred to spend more time away from it than in it.
Fortunately she had become interested in the art and history of the city and spent most of her free time visiting galleries, museums and churches.
Twice during the meal Gennaro was called away to the phone.
The little maid whom Elisa had seen earlier standing by the door in the sitting room came into the dining room on both occasions and  whispered something into his ear.
Gennaro rose, excused himself politely and disappeared.
He returned shortly afterwards but gave no indication to anyone of who had phoned.
In his absences the meal progressed as normal.
Antonietta still had some questions for Elisa.
The conversation continued in Italian.
And why had Elisa chosen to visit the Church of Santa Maria in Portico?
Because of Luca Giordano came the reply.
Silence followed.
Luca Giordano, Elisa went on, thinking that she had placed her hosts at a disadvantage, was a particular favourite of hers and she could easily see why he was regarded as one of Naples' finest painters.
Yes, of course, Antonietta agreed.
And such wonderful, wonderful paintings, influenced by…by…who was it?
Caravaggio, Elisa said.
Of course, Caravaggio.
Marvellous, marvellous artist.
But was there a painting by Giordano in the Church of Santa Maria?
Antonietta asked.
Two.
Two!
Yes, two.
Well, well, who would have believed.
Did anyone else know this?
Antonietta looked round the table.
How ironic, Antonietta's mother remarked, that it took a young lady from a foreign country to educate them about one of their own artists!
Laughter greeted this.
The uncle however had something to add.
He said he commended their guest for her knowledge of Neapolitan art which no doubt surpassed that of most Neapolitans.
However, he had to point out that there were no paintings by Luca Giordano in the Church of Santa Maria in Portico.
Perhaps the young lady was confusing this church with another a little further up the hill, the Church of Ascensione a Chiara.
Ah, Elisa said, yes, of course, she had made a mistake.
It was about this time that the meal ended.
Elisa thanked Antonietta profusely for her hospitality.
She would newer be able to repay her kindness.
Now she would have to take her leave.
Gennaro asked Elisa if she would please just wait a little longer.
Perhaps she would care for a coffee?
It would have been impolite to refuse so Elisa found herself back in the sitting room.
None of the family joined her, however, except Antonietta and Gennaro.
Even then Gennaro was called away to the phone once more.
As he left the room he urged Elisa not to go away before he got back.
When he returned, after a slightly longer period than on the two previous occasions, Elisa had been persuaded to have a second cup of coffee.
After a few minutes more the conversation was beginning to flag.
Elisa was about to make her second attempt to leave when a bell was heard — the front-door bell.
Without waiting to be summoned Gennaro rose and excused himself again.
‘Just one minute,’ he said.
‘I will be back.’
Elisa continued to sip from her now empty cup.
She did not want to accept a third coffee.
She and Antonietta had begun  to talk about fashion and materials and had moved on to curtains when Gennaro returned.
He came over to Elisa.
‘Forgive me,signorina ,’ he said.
‘The bag is gone forever but I have been able at least to recover this.’
To her astonishment he placed the stolen letter in her trembling hands.
TWO LETTERS
My Dearest Elsie,
It is now over a year since I last saw you and believe me Elsie it seems like an awful lot more time than that.
The time is so long and the miles too.
I cannot for the life of me imagine a place as distant as Italy.
I went to the library the other day and had a look in the atlas to see where Naples is.
It took me a devil of a time to find it I can tell you.
But it does not matter Elsie how far away you are because I will always love you.
I cannot change this and I do not wish to.
I may never see you again Elsie but even if I never do I cannot change the way I feel.
It is something that I know is fixed.
I do not know any other way to express it.
I am not very good with words I am sorry to say, so that is how my imagination allows me to tell you what you mean to me.
It would be so much easier Elsie if there was not this huge amount of land separating us and if I could just talk to you for a little while face to face.
I do not know if you want news of the village or not.
I will not go into detail but your disappearance has been more or less accepted now.
There was a period when the police were very busy looking for you.
They questioned a lot of folk though not me I am glad to say.
Anyway when they had done the rounds of your local relatives they contacted your father.
He came up for a few days and stayed in Mackay's Hotel in Ardallt.
He has done well for himself Elsie and it seems he does not drink any more.
At least he had nothing while he was up here.
I believe the police spent some time asking him questions but he had obviously not seen you so that was that.
He left after a few days as I said.
Then they got to thinking that maybe you were dead.
Someone mentioned your foot.
I thought that was unkind really since it was never very noticeable and most of us had forgotten all about it.
It was noted however and then the theory was that perhaps you had stumbled when you were out walking and fallen in the river.
They had a look in the river and on the banks but found nothing of course.
There was a heavy spate a week or two later and the river rose a good five feet higher than normal.
The water was thick and brown and went down through the top  end of Spaladale at a fearful rate.
They reckoned then that anything in the river would have been sent half way across to Norway so that put paid to that search.
After that they dragged Loch Craig with a net.
I was hoping they would find my curling stone, the one that I lost that night that Stewart Candless's Metalurjic or whatever it was went into the loch.
Do you remember that Elsie?
What a night that was.
I will never forget it.
I cannot believe that that man Candless stayed on top of his car all that time.
It must have been an hour and a half at least before we managed to get the thing out of the water.
He never forgave us you know.
The car never ran again and Stewart himself was in bed with a bad dose of the cold for a week.
Well he was a bit mad Elsie you know that and I am afraid he has got worse now.
Did he not go and shoot someone at the clay-pigeon shooting in Ardallt two months ago!
It was an accident of course but old Colonel Saunchie got a few pellets in him.
I will not tell you where Elsie!
Anyway no more clay pigeons for Candless.
He has decided now that horses are the thing.
He has bought himself a couple of Hunters and he plans to do some show jumping of all things.
Well Elsie he has been seen out on Kilmont Farm dismounting without orders quite a few times.
More money than sense he has that one.
No Elsie they found nothing in Loch Craig but a huge pike.
Nobody knew there were any in the loch but then we only got the one and it would not surprise me if he had not eaten all the others if there had been any others that is.
I was there Elsie when they pulled in the net.
I watched the whole thing.
I do not know for certain why I went up there to watch them doing it.
Somewhere in the back of my mind I think maybe I was afraid that they would find you although I had heard from you by that time and knew you could not possibly be there at the bottom of Loch Craig.
It was as if I needed proof that your first letter was not some kind of trick and you were dead after all.
No Elsie I did not really believe that but my heart was pounding I can tell you when they pulled that net in.
There was quite a crowd at the bank of the loch and I wondered why they were all there, whether they were genuinely concerned about you or perhaps that death had some awful attraction for them.
I could swear that some of them actually wanted the police to find a body.
You know how it is Elsie when you go to the show in August and they have those horses jumping and you are waiting for one of the riders to fall off.
It does not seem right if all of them succeed.
Do you know what I mean?
I felt that some of those on the bank waiting for the net to come in were wanting a body and wishing hard for a corpse.
It is awful to think so Elsie I know but I am sure some of them felt cheated when nothing was found.
There was a moment of drama though when this big pike started thrashing about in the net.
At first someone thought it might be a salmon but how could a salmon get into Loch Craig?
Anyway when they pulled it out of the net it was plainly a pike and somewhere between fifteen and twenty pounds I am sure.
Murchison the Slinnart bobby was all for killing it and he had a stone raised to despatch it when I said no.
I am not usually a forward sort of person as you know Elsie but I thought there had been enough talk about death enough of wanting bad bad things so I said why kill it it is not a fish for the pot.
Aye you could be right Murchison said and he slipped it back into the water.
It stayed there in the shallow water for a while.
It was stunned I suppose from its ordeal.
Then it gave a flick of its tail and it was gone.
I got a good look at it though while Murchison had it in his hands and then when it was lying there in the water just looking up at us all.
I can tell you Elsie I have never seen a fish like it.
I have seen a few salmon in my time and caught a few too but this thing was not like a salmon at all.
A huge head it had on it with rows of teeth and this long sleek green body with all the fins sort of pushed down towards the tail to give it speed in the water I suppose.
It was a fearsome beast in a way although I felt sorry for it when Murchison was going to kill it.
No I thought to myself you do not deserve this death and the you I was thinking of was not the fish itself but all those people standing on the bank.
You have seen your monster I thought and this time the you did mean the fish.
And that is enough I said.
But here I am Elsie spending more time writing about a fish than about people.
Perhaps you do not want to hear too much about people anyway.
But I can tell you that Simon is well.
He became a bit morose for a while a bit inside himself which is fairly natural under the circumstances I suppose.
After a few months though he seemed to accept the situation.
He got out and about more and began to enjoy life again.
On the few occasions I have met him it has been very difficult for me not to let slip something about you.
Your name has never been mentioned.
Whether he suspects anything or not I do not know.
Certainly he has never given a hint that he knows anything.
I think that the clever way that you worked out your own disappearance has managed to convince not only the police but Simon too.
I could not swear to it though.
Heather is well too.
I do not love her Elsie.
Perhaps yes I did love her once but not any more.
Our situation is not very happy but I can tolerate it.
I cannot leave her Elsie.
Even if you were only a few hundred miles away instead of a few thousand I could not leave her.
She has been good to me and although she knows there is something wrong and maybe suspects there is something I have not told her about she gives nothing away.
I am  only guessing because we do not talk about things like that.
She mentions you a lot however.
She misses you Elsie and sometimes I want to say to her she cannot miss you more than I do.
I say nothing of course.
Because I do miss you Elsie I miss you more than I can say.
I want to be with you and still hope this will be possible one day.
Write to me at the post office in Slinnart.
I can pick up a letter there without any bother.
I cannot wait to hear from you again to know you are well and happy.
Perhaps I am in your thoughts as often as you are in mine dearest Elsie.
With all my love, Donald
My dear Donald,
It was wonderful to hear from you, really wonderful.
I'm sure it's difficult for you to imagine what my life is like out here but one thing is certain and that is that there are very few people I can talk to.
I don't mean that the language is a problem.
It is, in fact, but I'm getting better and better at it.
I mean the English people I've met here (and one or two Scots).
I haven't got any really close friends.
Of course it's early days yet, I suppose, but I do so wish there was someone I could tell the whole story to.
It's impossible, of course, and I realise that.
Still, it would be nice to get some of it off my mind.
In fact I have made one very important friend in the past week or so and it's ironic that your last letter is responsible for this friendship!
Let me tell you briefly what happened.
Your letter arrived early last week — Tuesday — and I picked it up as I was on my way out of the guest house where I'm staying at the moment.
Although I wanted to rush back upstairs and read the letter straight away I decided to hold onto it and read it later.
Near the sea there is a little park which has open-air cafés in it and I decided that I would go along there and read your letter while I relaxed with a cup of coffee.
Before I could do this someone snatched my handbag and made off with it.
The letter was inside, unopened.
I can tell you, Donald, it was a very unpleasant experience, particularly as I fainted in the street just as the thief disappeared.
I suppose this was partly to do with the heat — it is very hot here at present— but to tell you the truth I don't remember very much about it.
The next thing I do remember is waking up in a very grand house a few streets away from where the robbery took place.
The couple who own the house, Gennaro and Antonietta Calvino, are obviously well off.
It seems that Antonietta was nearby when I fainted and arranged for me to be taken back to her house.
She also had a doctor brought in who examined me and said that I was fine.
I recovered quickly, I'm glad to say, but I couldn't leave because they insisted that I stayed to lunch.
I suppose I was a bit of a novelty for them, in a way.
I met the rest of the family, had a fine meal and then at the end Gennaro, who is the head of the whole household, gave me your letter!
I'm learning new things every day here, Donald, and I can tell you it's an extraordinary place.
Everybody seems to know everybody else and nobody can do anything without someone knowing what is going on.
This man Gennaro obviously has a lot of influence even among the less desirable characters in this city, or at least in this part of it.
He made a few enquiries and was able to track down the thieves.
He couldn't get my bag back for me, or the other contents, because they had some value  — although very little I'm sure — whereas the letter, having no value at all(except for me of course !) was thrown away.
I asked Gennaro how he came by the letter and he merely said that he knew the right people to approach.
I also asked whether he would be giving his information to the police so that they could catch the criminals.
He said that this would be unnecessary and I got the distinct impression that I should not ask any more questions about it but be content that I had got my letter back.
And I was, Donald, I was so happy to get it back and read it and learn that you are missing me as much as I am missing you.
In one way life for me is difficult under these circumstances because, as I said, there's no one really that I can talk to.
In another way, however, I'm finding it easier to cope with because there is so much to see and do here.
There are lots of galleries and museums and marvellous churches and castles.
I can't really describe what sort of place this is.
The old part of town is just full of magnificent old buildings.
How I wish I could draw, Donald!
I would spend all my time trying to capture this place on paper.
But there is so much poverty!
I newer knew people could live in such dreadful conditions.
There are whole areas here, Donald, where basic facilities such as water, for example, are in very poor supply or simply don't exist at all .
Such areas are filthy too.
The rubbish just gets put outside in the street.
There is no official collection because it is immediately picked over by a series of scavengers — first adults, then children, then dogs and cats.
Consequently the streets of these poorer areas are strewn with rubbish and in hot weather there is frequently a most unpleasant smell.
Despite all of these bad aspects to life here I love this place, Donald.
I thought it would take me time to adjust and it has.
I'm not saying it has been easy.
No, at first it was difficult but then I had the Wilsons to help me.
I enjoyed my life with them and I don't think I could have coped in the beginning without them.
When they left, however, and I made the decision to stay, I knew it might be hard for me but I knew also that I was doing the right thing.
Antonietta, my new friend, finds it difficult to understand that I enjoy living alone as I do, in a strange city.
She can't know how I value my freedom, Donald, the freedom to do what I like and take advantage of the opportunity to explore a new city, learn a new language, try my hand at a way of life I didn't know existed.
Of course she doesn't know what my life was like for six years or so, although I may get round to telling her, in time.
I am a bit of an oddity here and this has opened a few doors for me.
Maybe Antonietta herself will tire of me when the novelty wears off.
Only time will tell but I don't think so.
We'll see.
So, I am determined to stay here, Donald.
It's not expensive to live here and I earn enough from my lessons to keep me going.
There are some bad  things, as I have said, and it can be dangerous at times too as I discovered only recently.
However, out of that unpleasant experience something good was generated and that is how it will go on, I'm sure.
Some of the surprises in store may not be very nice but most of them will be.
That's how I've decided to approach my life here.
I know I can't come back to Scotland, Donald, and I have no wish to live in England.
I am determined to stay here, for some time at least.
I know too that you can never be with me here and for that reason I have taken a decision.
It was not easy but I think it is for the best, in the long run.
We must stop writing to each other, Donald.
I know it's hard, believe me, but continuing will only make life harder and harder if we are never able to meet.
I left Simon but I had very good reason to, as you know.
You cannot leave Heather, despite what you feel for me, because she has been so good to you.
I know you couldn't hurt her for the world.
You couldn't hurt her for me and I wouldn't wish you to.
I'm sure it's better, then, for us to stop writing.
It will be difficult at first but going on would only lead to more sorrow.
It would, Donald, I feel sure.
I will never forget you and I will think of you often and I will always love you.
I will.
Elsie