

chapter 1
If mountains can have personalities, then volcanoes are schizophrenic — they have split personalities.
For most of their life, they are dormant, and one tends to think of them as graceful upsweeping cones, delicately capped with snow, dreaming serenely over the cherry-blossom-draped landscapes of calendars and travel posters.
Sometimes, perhaps not very often during their lifetimes, volcanoes erupt and present a wholly different character.
Convolute eruption clouds tower above them, raining hot ashes on the helpless humans who live on their flanks, and glowing tongues of liquid rock ooze inexorably downwards, engulfing the flimsy structures which stand in their way.
Not surprisingly, it is for these displays of nature's most powerful forces at work that volcanoes are chiefly known, and in almost all primitive societies they have been regarded with fear and identified with deities and evil spirits.
Although today volcanoes are no longer regarded with such religious awe, their violent aspects are still widely publicized; deservedly, since volcanic eruptions are amongst the finest of natural spectacles.
There are thousands of metres of film of eruptions and hectares of accounts in newspapers and books, almost all of it devoted to the ‘human interest’ situations that arise whenever natural events interrupt the pattern of human life.
Some eruptions have become major historical events, since many of the world's greatest natural disasters have been associated with volcanoes, either directly through the effects of explosions and suffocation by volcanic gases, or indirectly through the much further-reaching effects of tidal waves triggered off by an eruption, such as those resulting from the great eruption of Krakatoa in 1883.
This book will of course deal with the familiar aspects of volcanoes and with the different kinds of eruptions that take place, but in addition to this, it will cover some of the quieter, less well-known aspects, and try to explain why volcanoes exist at all, why they occur where they do, and how they fit into the history of the Earth as a whole.
To do this will involve discussion of concepts which you may not immediately associate with volcanoes: the fact that Africa and South America were once joined and later drifted apart; that the direction which is customarily thought of as ‘north’ would, a few million years ago, have appeared to be ‘south’on an ordinary magnetic compass.
There is the fact that the very rocks on which we live — no matter where— may have originated through volcanism; that much of the gold and many of the other economic minerals that we use every day are linked with volcanic activity; that most of the world's best coffee and tea come from volcanic areas, and that there may be areas on the Moon and Mars which are analogous to terrestrial continents and oceans.
Before embarking on these widely different topics, however, it is essential to consider volcanoes in their global setting.
The World Distribution of Volcanoes
Volcanoes are not scattered randomly around the world.
If you were asked to name countries in which volcanoes occur, you would probably think of places such as Japan, Iceland, Hawaii, Italy, New Zealand and so on.
At first, these areas may seem quite unrelated, but no matter what countries you think of, the volcanoes in them have one rather odd thing in common — they are all very near the sea.
This isn't such an irrelevant statement as it may sound — it is a fact that almost all the volcanoes in the world are within a couple of hundred kilometres of the sea.
There are remarkably few active volcanoes in the centres of continents — none at all in South or North America, away from the Andean-Rockies mountain belt, none in central Asia, none in Australia, and only one away from the coast in Antarctica.
There are some important exceptions in Africa, and also some recently-dead volcanoes in France and Germany, but these form a rather specialized, distinct group, and we'll see how they fit in later on.
Given, then, that volcanoes have a predilection for the seaside, let's now pin down more precisely where they occur.
If one plots the sites of all the recently-active volcanoes in the world on a map, one finds that several distinct, narrow chains exist, some of these running along the edges of continental land masses, some along island arcs and some of them through the sea [see Fig. 1].
We'll follow two of these chains in a sort of volcanic Cook's tour since they are of fundamental importance to our story, and will crop up repeatedly throughout the rest of the text.
Before commencing it should be emphasized that when a geologist talks of a volcano having been recently active, he means that it has been active within the last ten thousand years.
That may seem anything but recent, but remember that a million years is a relatively insignificant span of time compared with the age of the Earth, at present reckoned at about 4,600 million years.
An ‘active’ volcano is usually regarded as one which has erupted at least once in historic times.
Continental Margin Volcanoes
The first chain starts off right down in the Antarctic, a few hundred kilometres from the South Pole.
Here in the lonely isolation of the Antarctic ice cap is Mt Early, the world's southern-most volcano.
Further to the north, along the ice-bound coast of Marie Byrd Land are more volcanoes, and a well-defined belt soon becomes established, swinging away into the long, crooked arm of the Graham Land peninsula, and then eastwards into a scatter of desolate, little-known volcanic islands, the South Sandwich Islands.
This line of islands swings round to the north, and finally back to the west through South Georgia, describing a great loop, and then heads off for the extreme south of South America.
Here, in the tangle of islands and fjords that is Patagonia, the volcanic chain becomes established on the South American continent with Mt Burney, an obscure, almost unknown volcano which has only once been visited by a geologist, in 1911.
From Mt Burney northwards, volcanoes occur intermittently along almost the entire 7,000-kilometre length of the Andes.
In all, there are thousands of extinct or dormant volcanoes, but only forty-five are considered to be ‘active’.
Right in the northern part of South America, in Colombia, the volcanic chain and the Andean mountain chain get a bit mixed up.
The mountains swing away to the east, running into Venezuela, but the volcanic chain after a short gap in the dreary and fever-ridden jungles of the Isthmus of Panama, reappears in full vigour in Costa Rica, and extends throughout the Central American republics of Nicaragua, El Salvador and Guatemala, which are by reputation as unstable and explosive politically as the many volcanoes that they contain.
The Caribbean islands present a slight complication to this simple picture of a single volcanic chain running up the Americas.
They form another chain, looping up from the coast of Venezuela through Jamaica and Cuba, heading towards the Yucatan peninsula of Mexico.
The West Indian islands contain less than a dozen active volcanoes, all of them congregated in a small arc at the east of the chain, but one of these, Mt Pelee, was responsible for the most lethal eruption of this century.
Mexico contains many active volcanoes, a quantity of them burdened with tortuous Aztec names such as the well-known Popocatepetl.
Moving further north, the United States has rather fewer volcanoes, and although there are some impressive cones such as those of Mt Shasta and Mt Rainier, both over 4,000 metres high, there have been only a few minor eruptions in historic times.
Further north still, Canada has no major volcanoes, but there have been some eruptions in prehistoric times.
In the south west of Alaska, the volcanic chain picks up again strongly, and swings out to sea to form the long arcs of the Aleutian and Kurile Islands.
These curve back up northwards towards the Kamchatka peninsula of the U.S.S.R., an intensely active volcanic province, and then the chain sweeps down southwards, heading for Japan.
From Japan, the chain goes on, through the island of Taiwan (Nationalist China), through the Philippines and into the Celebes.
Here there is a kind of volcanic ‘T’ junction.
One branch runs north-westwards up into the Indonesian archipelago, where volcanoes have killed more people than anywhere else on earth, and peters out before reaching the Asian mainland.
The other branch runs south-eastwards through New Guinea and the New Hebrides and through a scatter of small Melanesian islands, before making an abrupt dog's leg northwards to the Samoan islands to join the Tonga-Kermadec chain which extends southwards again into New Zealand.
Sadly, there are no volcanoes on the South Island of New Zealand, and the volcanic chain we have been following all round the pacific seems to fizzle out there.
The only volcanoes further south are in Antarctica, over 1,500 kilometres away.
These include Buckle Island, just off the Antarctic coast, and Mts Erebus and Terror, only a few kilometres from Scott's original base camp, from which he set out on his last heroic journey.
One shouldn't strictly include Erebus and Terror in the same chain as those of New Zealand — the gap is rather large — but they do bring us conveniently back to Antarctica, from where we began our journey of some 40,000 kilometres round the entire Pacific Ocean.
The chain of volcanoes which girdles the Pacific is known appropriately enough as the ‘Ring of Fire’, and although it's a much more complex, disjointed affair than it may seem from this brief summary, it is unquestionably one of the Earth's greatest physical features, and contains a large proportion of all the world's volcanoes.
And not one of them is more than 300 kilometres from the sea.
Mid-ocean Volcanoes [see Fig. 2]
Our second tour begins nearly at the opposite pole, with Jan Mayen, a small, ice-gripped island in the Arctic Ocean, roughly half-way between Greenland and Arctic Norway.
On this bleak island is a volcano, Beerenberg, which last erupted in 1970.
South-west of Jan Mayen is Iceland, built entirely of volcanic rocks, and famous for both its volcanoes and its geysers.
The Icelanders called one of their finest gushers of boiling water and steam Geysir, and this name was applied subsequently to all those depressing pieces of gas-fired plumbing which used to be a familiar part of the British bathroom scene.
Iceland has twenty-two volcanoes, but the ones which have been most in the news are located on the Westmann Islands, just off the south coast.
A new island, Surtsey, was built up by an eruption which started in 1963 and continued intermittently until 1967.
In February 1973 an eruption suddenly burst out on the tiny island of Heimaey, and for a time it seemed as though the town of Heimaey, Iceland's biggest fishing port, would be destroyed.
Fortunately, though, the eruption petered out in July 1973 before irrevocable damage had been done.
South of Iceland, the Atlantic Ocean stretches out devoid of even the tiniest of islands for thousands of kilometres.
In 1884, sightings of a submarine eruption were reported by the officers of ships, right in the middle of the ocean, half-way between Ireland and Newfoundland.
This may have been an eruption similar to that which built Surtsey, but it came to nothing, and no island succeeded in raising its head above water.
Just about level with the Straits of Gibraltar and 1,300 kilometres from the Portuguese coast are the Azores, a small group of islands which are entirely built of volcanic rocks, where eruptions took place in 1957 and 1973.
South of the Azores, but only about 100 to 150 kilometres from the African coast are the Canary Islands, also volcanic, and also the scene of recent eruptions.
South and west of the Canaries, the Atlantic extends emptily for thousands of kilometres, broken only by the Cape Verde Islands (also volcanic) and two tiny specks of land, St Peter and St Paul's Rocks, which are not strictly volcanic, oddly enough, but are composed of material that must have been derived from much deeper levels in the Earth than most volcanic rocks.
South of this tiny pair are a few lonely islands separated from one another by hundreds of kilometres of sea — first, Ascension Island, then St Helena, and then over towards the Brazilian coast, Trinidade.
Further south still is Tristan da Cunha, notorious for its eruption in 1962 which precipitated the evacuation of the unfortunate islanders to Britain.
Tristan has two near neighbours, both uninhabited, Nightingale and Inaccessible, and a third a couple of hundred kilometres further south, Gough Island; all of them are the battered remains of extinct volcanoes.
Further south still, the Roaring Forties begin — those empty expanses of the ‘Southern Ocean’ which stretch right around the world at this latitude.
The last link in our tenuous volcanic chain lies even further south: south of latitude 50 degrees; Bouvet Island, desolate, inaccessible and almost entirely icebound.
Little is known of eruptions there, but there may have been one in the last decade, since sets of aerial photographs of the island taken many years apart show some slight changes.
Continental Drift and Plate Tectonics
Part 1: Continental Drift
In the days before modern oceanography, the story would stop short at this point, with just a long, tenuous chain of widely-separated volcanic islands running down the middle of the Atlantic with no obvious connection between them.
The link, however, was discovered soon after systematic depth soundings were taken, when it was discovered that there was a long submarine mountain range running down the middle of the Atlantic from Arctic to Antarctic.
This range, although covered by many hundreds of metres of water for most of its length, breaks surface in a few places to form the chain of apparently unconnected volcanic islands.
(But not all; some, like the Canaries, although related to the ridge, lie well to one side of it.)
More important, the range almost exactly bisects the Atlantic Ocean from north to south following closely the profile of the African and South American coasts, so it's always called the Mid-Atlantic Ridge.
Specimens recovered from the sea floor showed that this ridge consists entirely of volcanic rocks, and similar ridges were soon found to be present beneath many of the oceans.
Not all of them are strictly mid-ocean — some of them run right up to the continents — but together they form a world-wide network of mountain belts far higher (above ocean floor level) and more extensive than any on dry land.
The Mid-Atlantic Ridge will play an important part in our study of the nature of volcanism, and so will another, the East Pacific Rise, which runs up the eastern Pacific, and eventually intersects the North American continent in the vicinity of California.
After Francis Bacon first drew attention to it in 1620, there was endless speculation on the reason for the striking similarity in shape between the coastlines of Africa and South America.
Cardboard cut-outs of the two continents were made and fitted together, computer programmes written to devise the most perfect match between the two continents, similarities and the differences in the geology of corresponding areas studied ad nauseam, and even details of the animal life in each continent compared, but without reaching any firm conclusions on whether or not the two continents had ever been united.
The remarkably faithful matching of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge to the shapes of the continents was a great boost to the theory of continental drift, which postulated that Africa and South America had originally formed a supercontinent, which subsequently split up, with the two parts moving away in opposite directions.
But even the presence of the ridge proved nothing — it merely made the problem at once more difficult and more fascinating, and debate over the possibility of continental drift raged fiercely, with geologists divided into two opposing camps.
So long as no viable cause for continental drift could be demonstrated, however, belief in it remained an act of faith.
The elegant solution to the uniquely challenging problem of finding a cause was first suggested in 1929 by Arthur Holmes, one of the greatest of British geologists, but it was not until 1960 that the late Professor Harry Hess of Princeton University in the U.S.A. developed Holmes's idea into a convincing hypothesis.
Although he did not know it at the time, Hess's work was to initiate a revolution in geological and geophysical thinking, and ultimately it became the foundation of a major new theory about how continents and oceans are related, and what part volcanoes play in the evolution of the Earth.
This new approach to world geology is generally known as the Plate Tectonic Theory, or just Plate Tectonics.
Although geology is a fairly elderly discipline, as sciences go, in its 150-year history there have been no sudden ‘breakthroughs’ of the sort beloved of journalists.
It has advanced slowly, by the patient amassing and interpretation of data in many varied fields, ranging from the study of fossils (palaeontology) to the chemical and physical properties of rocks themselves (petrology).
Plate Tectonics, however, was truly a great leap forward since it helps to explain the interrelationships of almost all geological phenomena.
As such it must rank as one of the most fundamental scientific advances of the century.
Apart from its intrinsic interest, Plate Tectonics is also an excellent example of how many major scientific advances are made: the starting point is a bright idea in the mind of some unusually-gifted scientist, an intuitive feeling probably based on thoroughly shaky evidence rather than some great intellectual tour de force.
The first idea is refined into a hypothesis by collecting more evidence to see if it really works, and ultimately it may be elevated into the rather grand status of a Theory, if successful predictions can be based upon it.
Any theory must be useful; it must be able to explain how or why things happen.
If in the course of its development observations are made to test the theory, and the theory fails to explain some of them, then it has to be refined to take account of the new observations.
Before considering the Plate Tectonic Theory and its evolution, however, a short background description of the overall structure of the Earth is necessary.
Our planet has three main parts: an inner core which is believed to consist of a mass of iron and nickel; a mantle, composed of dense dark silicate rock, rich in iron and magnesium, known as peridotite; and a very thin crust [see Fig. 1].
Since we live on the crust, it is important to us in more ways than one, but we are only going to consider it in its relationship to events in the mantle, since these explain how Plate Tectonics works.
The crust can be divided into two types, oceanic and continental.
The continental crust, taken as a whole, consists of rocks fairly light both in colour and density which contain a lot of silica, silicon dioxide.
(Silicon and oxygen are by far the most abundant constituents in the Earth's crust.)
Broadly speaking, the rocks of the continental crust have the composition of granite, the rather coarse-grained pink- or grey-speckled rock beloved of the more respectable banks and monumental masons.
This should not be taken too literally — not every rock in the crust is a granite — things like limestones are vastly different in composition — but the average composition of all the rocks on the continents is about that of granite and contains over 60 per cent of silica.
In most areas the continental crust consists of a thirty-kilometre thick slab of such rocks, but under high mountain ranges it is fifty or more kilometres thick.
Continental crust is also present beneath most of the shallow seas of the world, such as the 200-metre-deep North Sea, which is in geological terms just a temporarily flooded bit of the European continent.
The oceanic crust, which forms the floor of all the deep oceans of the world, is much thinner, only about eight to ten kilometres thick, but since the oceans cover a much greater proportion of the Earth's surface than the continents — the proportion is roughly three to one — they are quantitatively just as significant.
The rocks of the oceanic crust are different in many respects from the ‘average’ rocks of the continents: they are black, dense rocks, usually very fine-grained, contain much less silica (less than 50 per cent), and are remarkably uniform, even monotonous in appearance.
These are the archetypal volcanic rocks, called basalts.
Both the oceanic and the continental crust are separated from the underlying mantle by a sort of boundary, or discontinuity, known after its Yugoslavian discoverer as the Mohorovicic discontinuity, or Moho for short.
This discontinuity was recognized by studying the behaviour of shock-waves from earthquakes: above the Moho, shock waves travel relatively slowly; below it, in the denser rocks of the mantle, they travel much faster.
Now what happens in the mantle is extremely important, because it is in the mantle that we have to look for the mechanism behind Plate Tectonics.
The rocks of the mantle are rather curious in one respect — they appear to have the properties of both liquids and solids.
Where geologically instantaneous events such as earthquakes are concerned, they are rigid enough to transmit the shock waves, like any solid.
But on a much longer time-scale, involving thousands of years, they behave differently and can ‘flow’ like a highly-viscous liquid, millions of times more viscous than even the stickiest treacle.
In this respect the mantle rocks resemble pitch or brittle toffee, which will shatter at a sudden blow, but will bend easily if flexed slowly and continuously.
Pitch, of course, gets progressively softer as it is heated, and similarly, since the rocks of the mantle are also at high temperatures — the temperature in the earth increases downwards at a rate of about 30 degrees C per kilometre — they can also be thought of as being rather ‘soft’.
Accepting then that the material making up the mantle can behave as a viscous liquid, this raises an interesting possibility.
If a body of liquid is at the same temperature throughout, it will remain still, unless someone comes along and stirs it up.
But if the lower parts of the liquid are hotter than the upper parts, then it will be anything but still.
The hottest parts of a liquid are also the least dense or ‘lightest’ and so they tend to rise upwards to float above the denser, cooler liquid.
As the liquid ascends, though, it cools down and thus gets denser, so that it must sink again.
A continuous cycle soon gets established, with hot liquid rising and cold descending [see Fig. 2]— the effect can be seen in any hot liquid that has particles in it, even tea or coffee made with instant milk.
The process is known as convection, and it is widely, but not universally, believed to work on a huge scale in the mantle.
In a cup of tea, the particles whizz round at a great rate; in the mantle the flow is so slow that it would be barely perceptible over the course of a human lifetime.
It was Arthur Holmes who first suggested that mantle convection currents might be responsible for continental movements, but he lacked any direct geophysical data that might have supported his views.
An upwelling current of hot liquid, be it tea or mantle, carries a lot of heat with it, and this factor provided one of the starting points for the new Plate Tectonic ideas.
It was found that the heatflow, or rate at which heat is moving upwards through the Earth's crust, is several times higher along the Mid-Atlantic Ridge than on the ocean floor on either side.
This is where Hess started in his attempt to explain the nature of global processes.
He suggested that beneath the volcanic Mid-Atlantic Ridge there was an upwelling convective current of hot, partly-liquid rock in the mantle and that as this column approached the surface it would split, turning away from the ridge in two branches.
Both branches would move steadily outwards to form the oceanic crust, which, as it got progressively further away from the ridge would rapidly acquire a thin veneer of deep sea sediments (muds and clays, mixed up with myriads of tiny shells from planktonic organisms).
Hess mistakenly thought that the oceanic crust consisted of altered peridotite, the material of the mantle itself.
It is now known, however, that it is made up of basaltic rocks, derived indirectly from peridotite, and erupted by volcanic action along the ridge itself, building up the long submarine mountain range and giving rise to the relatively few volcanoes which poke their heads above sea level.
Hess's outstanding contribution was the suggestion that new oceanic crust is actually generated at a mid-ocean ridge, and spreads out laterally away from it.
This suggestion, which was made in 1960, is at the root of all that follows; we can label it the ‘sea-floor spreading’ hypothesis [see Fig. 3].
Right from the beginning, it had some obvious implications.
Hess thought that the spreading rate at the ocean ridge was of the order of one centimetre per year.
If this were true, and if oceanic crust was being generated at all the oceanic ridges in the world at this rate throughout geological history, then the entire present oceanic crust could have been formed in a mere couple of hundred million years, and therefore, without some other kind of process acting, there would be a vast quantity of spare oceanic crust lying around.
(Remember that the age of the Earth is 4,600 million years.)
It was obvious that oceanic crust must be continually destroyed somewhere at a rate comparable with that of its creation at the oceanic ridges in order to maintain a balance.
Hess suggested that this took place along the deep ocean trenches, such as the Chile-Peru Trench, which runs parallel to the west coast of South America, and that the relatively ‘cold’ oceanic crust dived down beneath the continents in these zones, descending deep into the mantle to complete the convective cycle.
Continental drift could therefore be easily explained by Hess's hypothesis, since the rocks of the mantle under the continents are identical to and continuous with the rocks of the mantle underlying the thin oceanic crust.
The continents just drift around passively on the backs of the mantle convection cells, like great rafts, with the ‘leading’ edges of the rafts being dragged down and thickened where they encounter descending oceanic crust.
The thickened edges of these rafts are of course the mountain chains such as the Andes.
A great deal of evidence from many different fields of research was required to turn Hess's ‘sea-floor spreading’ idea into a theory.
Strangely enough, the most critical discovery had already been made, before Hess published his idea, but it was left to two other geologists, F.J. Vine and D.H.
Matthews, to demonstrate three years later how this pre-existing evidence supported the new hypothesis.
The evidence was of the way in which the rocks of the oceanic crust are magnetized; it's not the kind of thing that one comes across every day, so it will take a bit of explaining.
Rocks may not seem initially to be particularly magnetic.
They aren't on the whole, though some will affect the needle of a compass brought up near to them.
All rocks, however, and especially basaltic rocks which contain a lot of iron minerals, are weakly magnetized, and this magnetism can be detected by sensitive instruments.
The magnetism is built into the basalt when it is first formed, and it records the nature of the Earth's magnetic field at the time of formation.
This record is retained permanently, so if a specimen of rock is put into the detecting instrument, and various careful measurements made, it is possible to find out what the Earth's magnetic field was like at the time when the basalt cooled from its original molten state.
We are all used to thinking of the Earth as some kind of large magnet, with two magnetic poles located quite near the geographic North and South Poles, so that the needle of a compass always lines up in the same direction.
We are so sure of this that we go out confidently into the hills, or sail away in boats armed only with a magnetic compass, certain that it will always point in the same north-south direction, so we can judge our own direction of travel from it.
Over the period of a man's life, small changes are in fact detectable — the magnetic poles wander very slowly around the geographic poles, so the direction of ‘magnetic’ north varies slightly from year to year.
To all intents and purposes, though, magnetic north remains north.
But if we were gods, and immortal, and could sit ourselves comfortably to watch the years slide by, with a magnetic compass conveniently to hand next to the ambrosia and nectar, we'd see something extraordinarily interesting.
After about 100,000 years or so, the needle of the compass would abruptly become unstable and then swing round to face in the opposite direction, so that what was once compass north would become compass south, and vice versa.
Nothing else would change, though, the north geographic pole wouldn't move, and if we were to go outside to check up, the sun would still rise and set in the same place, and the Pole Star would appear at night over the local gas works.
All that would have happened is that for some reason the Earth's magnetic field would have reversed itself.
If, after a stiff swig of nectar, we were to watch further developments, we'd find that in another 100,000 years or so, or even longer, exactly the same thing would happen again, and the compass would swing back suddenly to its original position.
This process would continue indefinitely, with reversals taking place at intervals of as little as 100,000 years or as much as one million years, but with the overall result that the compass spent about as much time pointing in one direction as it did in the other.
No one yet knows quite why these reversals occur, but they were the keystone to Vine and Matthews's modification of Hess's ‘sea-floor spreading’ concept.
Reversals have, so far as is known, been taking place throughout geological time, and the evidence of these reversals is stored up in the magnetic fabrics of the rocks of both the continents and the oceanic crust.
A group of geophysicists who were working on the rocks of the floor of the north-east Pacific had discovered, before Hess's suggestion was published, that instead of a random pattern of reversals, such as were common on land, the oceanic crust in the Pacific exhibited a pattern of ‘strip reversals’; the rocks in each strip were magnetized in one fixed direction, but the rocks in alternate, parallel strips were magnetized in the reverse direction.
[See Fig. 4]
Hess did not appreciate the significance of these strip reversals, but Vine and Matthews did, and they suggested that while the ‘sea-floor spreading’ concept was basically right, it could be refined and that instead of the simple kind of gigantic conveyor belt that Hess had conceived, with oceanic crust being generated at the ridges and moving away in opposite directions, the situation was much more like that of a conveyor belt-cum-tape recorder.
As the moving convection cell carries basaltic crust away from the ridge, slowly but continuously, the magnetic reversals taking place every few hundred thousand years or so leave their imprints on the newly-formed rocks emerging from the ridge; as every reversal occurs, so it is recorded in the formation of reversely-magnetized strips on each side of the ridge.
Once a strip of new ocean floor has been formed, and acquired its magnetic recording, nothing further happens to it, but it continues to move away slowly from the ridge, at a rate of anything up to several centimetres per year.
Three implications followed immediately from Vine and Matthews's brilliantly original modification of sea-floor spreading: first, the ‘strips’ should always be parallel to the ridge axes; second, they should be symmetrical about the ridge, so that the strips on one side are mirror images of those on the other; third, and most important, the rocks furthest away from the ridge should be older than those nearest to it.
A great deal of effort was put into the collection of new data on the magnetic patterns of the ocean floors in the 1960s and this quickly demonstrated the correctness of the first two points: the strips certainly were parallel to the ridges, and symmetrical about them.
One of the classic studies of this time was that of the Reykjanes ridge, part of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, just south of Iceland.
The map shows clearly how the magnetic pattern relates to the ridge.
[See Fig. 5]
The strips of course are not complete, exact rectangles; that would be asking too much, but they obviously are strips, and obviously are symmetrical about the ridge axis — each black strip left of the axis can be matched with a similar black strip of equal width on the right of the axis, at the same distance from it.
The third implication, that the rocks furthest from the ridge should be the oldest, was less easy to test.
However, in 1969, a large-scale American project, JOIDES (Joint Oceanographic Institutions Deep Earth Sampling) was able to confirm it, in the course of a programme of drilling into the deep ocean floors to sample the rocks and sediments there.
Thirty bore-holes were drilled in the Atlantic at various carefully-selected sites, and in each hole the drill first passed through a thin surface layer of sediments into the basaltic rocks of the oceanic crust.
The material obtained from the drill holes could then be dated, both by sophisticated radio-isotope methods, and by the more ordinary, down-to-earth method of examining the kinds of fossil organism present in the sediments.
(Different fossils are characteristic of different periods in the Earth's history.)
In splendid confirmation of Vine and Matthews's hypothesis, it was found that the age of each sample was proportional to its distance from the mid-ocean ridge.
The bore-holes nearest the ridge gave ages below seven million years, while those furthest away gave ages of over 160 million years.
[See Fig. 6]
With this discovery the concept of sea-floor spreading was home and dry, and almost universally accepted.
Many scientists saw at once its far-reaching implications and a whole spate of major papers were published in 1967 and 1968, which quite suddenly added up together to make a completely new way of looking at the Earth's main working parts: Plate Tectonics.
Continental Drift and Plate Tectonics
Part 2: Plate Tectonics
It would probably be unfair to single out a single worker as the ‘discoverer’ of Plate Tectonics, but the term ‘plates’was first used by an American, W. Jason Morgan, who was following up earlier work by J. Tuzo Wilson of Toronto University.
Almost at the same time D. P. McKenzie of Cambridge and R. L. Parker of the Scripps Institution in America had come to much the same conclusions as Wilson and together these scientists were responsible for what they called the ‘New Global Tectonics’.
That term didn't last long, though, and ‘Plate Tectonics’ really came into being when scientists all over the world, such as Isacks, Oliver, Sykes, Le Pichon and Morgan (to name but a few), began to apply the new way of thinking to specific parts of the globe.
They demonstrated that the crust of the Earth can be divided into seven large plates, and many smaller ones, and that all major crustal processes can be related to the relative movements between these plates.
Thus, the oceanic ridges are sites of intense seismic activity: a huge number of earthquakes occur along and beneath them.
[See Fig. 1]
Many thousands of earthquakes can be recorded along the ridges in any one year and a few of these are quite severe, but since they are generally a long way from anywhere, they don't hit the headlines.
For us, though, they are important, because if one plotted a map to show the distribution of all earthquake centres in the world for the last ten years, a large proportion of them would be scattered along the oceanic ridges.
And the rest?
Most would be congregated around the circum-Pacific ‘Ring of Fire’.
The earthquakes in these Pacific coastal areas, of course, are notorious, since they occur at sites beneath the continental crust, with all too familiar effects on human life.
These major linear belts of earthquake or seismic activity are used to divide the Earth up into major plates, each plate being bounded by plate margins.
There are three types of plate margin, two of which we have already come across.
The mid-ocean ridges where oceanic crust is being continuously created are known as constructive plate margins, while the deep ocean trenches which define the sites where the oceanic crust dives down again into the mantle are known as destructive plate margins.
There is also a third type, called conservative or passive plate margins which are margins between plates at which nothing special happens — the two plates merely slide sideways past each other without fuss or bother.
It would be quite impossible to discuss all the plates and sub-plates making up the Earth's crust in this book, and it wouldn't be very useful either, since some of them are extremely complex and not at all well understood.
But to get over the main ideas, we will consider just two plates, and the margins between them: the East Pacific Plate and the South American-Atlantic Plate.
We'll make a hypothetical traverse from Easter Island on the East Pacific Rise (an oceanic ridge, remember) right across South America as far as the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, so we'll be starting at one plate margin, crossing a second and ending up at a third, each of them, of course, marked by a major belt of seismic activity [see Fig. 2].
Notice that there is no seismic zone along the east coast of South America, the continental crust merely sits passively on top of the mantle.
The East Pacific (or Nazca) Plate, between the East Pacific Rise and the west coast of South America, consists entirely of oceanic crust, but the other plate consists of both continental crust (South America) and oceanic crust (the bit of the South Atlantic Ocean floor between South America and the Mid-Atlantic ridge).
Easter Island, where the traverse starts, is entirely volcanic but it is really only an insignificant scrap of land in the vast Pacific.
Geologically, the most critical zone is the junction between the two plates, which is defined by two major physical features; the extreme depths of the Chile-Peru Trench, which runs along just off-shore of the continent, and the extreme heights of the Andes mountains, the crest line of which runs parallel to and 350 kilometres east of the Trench [see Fig. 3].
There is a vertical difference of something like fifteen kilometres between the two extremities.
Using sensitive earthquake-detecting instruments (seismographs or seismometers), it is possible to pin down quite precisely the sites where the shock waves originate in this region, and it can easily be shown that these sites are confined to a narrow belt which dips steeply down under the continental margin at about 60 degrees, and which hits the surface just where the ocean is deepest, in the Chile-Peru Trench.
These steeply-inclined belts or zones of earthquake sites are known now to exist all round the Pacific; they are called Benioff zones, after their discoverer, the seismologist Hugo Benioff.
Now seafloor spreading tells us that the oceanic crust of the Pacific is moving away from the East Pacific Rise towards South America.
But South America itself is moving away from the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, since the Atlantic Ocean is widening steadily as new oceanic crust is generated at the ridge.
So what happens when the two plates meet?
A sort of steady-state continuous collision — and the site of the collision is marked by a major belt of active volcanism, the Andean part of the ‘Ring of Fire’!
More fully, it looks as though what happens is this.
The oceanic crust of the East Pacific Plate does collide with the continental mass of South America but instead of piling up in a heap, it ducks down, and dives under the continent; the site of the ‘bend’ being below the 7,500 metre deep Chile-Peru Trench, while the zone of actual sliding contact between oceanic and continental crust is defined by the 60 degree dipping earthquake belt, the Benioff zone.
[See Fig. 4]
A colossal amount of energy is involved in the process of the two massive plates sliding over one another and most of the energy is manifested in the form of heat.
Any two surfaces rubbing together produce frictional heat, such as a brake shoe pressing against a brake-drum.
Along the Benioff zone so much heat is generated that some of the rocks of the oceanic plate and the lower part of the continental plate melt, and the molten material then moves upwards and away.
To escape, the heat has to travel up through quite large thicknesses of continental crust, and a large proportion does not get very far; instead, it comes to rest and solidifies a few kilometres below the surface, forming enormous masses of igneous rock which have been forced or intruded into the crust and are known as batholiths (Greek origin, meaning something like deep stones).
The rest of the melted material reaches the surface and is erupted as lava and ashes, building up the narrow chain of volcanoes that runs the whole way up the South American continent.
So Plate Tectonics, with its underlying concepts of constructive and destructive plate margins, explains very elegantly why volcanoes exist where they do, in distinct chains.
So far, though, volcanoes have been discussed in rather general terms as though the volcanoes of the constructive plate margins were identical to those of the destructive.
This isn't the case at all, and to see why, one need only to look at the composition of the rocks involved.
Hawaii and Iceland are nearly as far apart as it is possible to get on Earth, but both are composed of basalts, and oceanic volcanoes everywhere in the world are composed of almost identical basalts.
There are small variations in composition from one island to another, of course, but these are insignificant, and should not obscure the underlying fact that basalt constitutes a fundamental rock type, common to all parts of the Earth.
Basalts form the entire oceanic crust of the Earth, and all of this basalt originates in the same way, from the melting of rocks in the upper part of the mantle, underneath the ocean ridges.
These source rocks are the peridotites, and since geophysics tells us that the mantle consists of the same kind of material all over the world, it's clear that melting part of the mantle beneath Hawaii should produce the same kind of rocks as those produced by melting part of the mantle beneath Iceland.
The ‘continental’ volcanoes are a different kettle of fish.
The lavas of which they are built appear to come from three separate source areas.
Some comes directly from the upper mantle above the descending oceanic plate, some from partial melting of the oceanic plate itself, and some from the lower part of the continental crust.
Some of the sea-floor sediments, muds, and oozes sitting on top of the oceanic plate also get melted.
The upshot of this is that, while melting of the rocks of the oceanic plate by itself might produce rocks similar to those of the oceanic volcanoes, when it gets melted at the Benioff zone, a great deal of other material is added, from the mantle (peridotitic) and from the continental crust (granitic).
Thus the volcanic rocks formed are drastically different from their oceanic counterparts.
They are the andesites, named after the Andes where they make up almost all of the major volcanoes.
Andesites come halfway between basalts and granites in almost every property: silica content, density, colour and so on, so they are known as intermediate rocks.
A typical andesite is light grey in colour, contains about 60 per cent of silica (silicon dioxide) and has a conspicuous number of small white crystals, a few millimetres across, scattered throughout a fine-grained homogeneous matrix.
These small crystals are known as phenocrysts and are one of the most characteristic features of andesites.
To sum up, remember that basalts are produced at constructive plate margins (oceanic ridges) and andesites at destructive margins (such as the ‘Ring of Fire’ type).
The two rocks are different in chemical composition, and this difference manifests itself in a number of intriguing ways; ways which a fair part of this book will be devoted to exploring.
Chapter 2
Three Classic Eruptions
In the few thousand years that civilized man has lived on Earth, there has been an extremely large number of volcanic eruptions.
Of this number the great majority went unrecorded, probably even unobserved, but a very few made such an impact on human affairs that they have become significant historical events, and have been described and discussed in the minutest detail.
The eruption which probably had the most far reaching effect on civilization was that of Santorin (Thera) in the Aegean, in about 1470 B.C. This abruptly extinguished the highly-developed Minoan culture centred on Crete, and, because the eruption caused the submergence beneath the sea of a large part of the island of Santorin, it may have given rise to the age-old legends of Atlantis, the ‘lost’ or ‘drowned’continent.
Most of the evidence for these legends is drawn from some rather vague references by the Greek historian Plato, in particular a passage in his Timaeus: ‘But at a later time there occurred portentous earthquakes and floods, and one grievous day and night befell them when the whole body.
.. of warriors was swallowed up by the earth, and the island of Atlantis in like manner was swallowed up by the sea and vanished.’
Although this written account is extremely tenuous, patient archaeological excavations that have been going on for many years on Santorin are beginning to reveal a story to rival that of Pompeii.
The eruption of the volcano buried a town, Akrotiri, which is thought to have had a population originally of about 30,000.
The eruption itself was preceded by at least two major earthquakes, which seem to have scared off the inhabitants, since they stripped the town of all movable objects and fled — no bodies have been found in the ruins.
When it came, the eruption was of massive proportions and deposited a great thickness of ash which completely buried the town, and it set off great tidal waves which may have been responsible for the termination of the Minoan civilization by ravaging the coastal towns all around Crete.
The excavations on Santorin are far from complete, but already some of the wall paintings that have been recovered from the ruins and preserved in the museum at Athens have been ranked as amongst the most important artistic discoveries of the century.
Since there still remains so much more archaeological work to do on Santorin, three more completely documented eruptions will be described in this chapter.
These can be regarded as classics of their kind, and are important not only because of their intrinsic interest as dramatic events in history, but also because they illustrate some of the facets of volcanic eruptions which will be discussed in later chapters.
The three volcanoes concerned are about as widely scattered around the world as possible — Vesuvius in the Mediterranean, Krakatoa in Indonesia, and Mt Pelee in the Caribbean.
The latter two are simple destructive plate margin volcanoes, but the Plate Tectonic setting of Vesuvius is a bit complex.
Vesuvius, A.D. 79
On 5 February A.D. 62 a severe earthquake shook the area round what is now Naples, on the west coast of Italy.
In Roman times, of course, Naples and its sprawling suburbs did not exist, but clustered around the shores of the bay of Naples there were many small, thriving towns and ports.
[See Fig. 1]
Two of them, Pompeii and Herculaneum, which were located on the lower flanks of Vesuvius, were particularly badly shaken by the shocks, and some damage was done, but the townspeople were not especially alarmed.
They simply rebuilt the fallen walls, and carried on with their normal efficient and highly organized lives; they did not associate the earthquake with Vesuvius, and there was no particular reason why they should.
Although they knew that it was a volcano, it had been dormant for centuries, and they had no records whatever of any eruptions.
So peaceful had the volcano been, in fact, that its fertile soils were extensively cultivated, vineyards flourished on favoured sunny slopes, and the people living on and around the volcano were enjoying the prosperity and security of the Roman empire at its height.
The earthquake, of course, was an expensive nuisance, but earthquakes had never been particularly rare events in Italy, so little significance was attached to it.
[See Fig. 2]
During the next sixteen years minor earthquakes continued to shake the area spasmodically.
We now know that major eruptions are commonly preceded by seismic activity, and these shocks would have provided ample warning of the forthcoming eruption, had anyone been aware of their significance.
No one was, however, and life went on normally until the very last moment.
On 24 August A.D. 79, with all its preliminary stirrings ignored, Vesuvius burst into life, and one of the most momentous eruptions in history commenced.
It lasted two days.
At the end of it, both Pompeii and Herculaneum had been obliterated, and thousands of people killed.
One of those to die was a naturalist and an Admiral in the Roman Navy, Caius Plinius or Pliny the Elder, who was a much-respected man and widely-known in his own time.
By one of the ironies of history, it was the death of this great man that led to our having an extraordinarily vivid, accurate eye-witness account of the events of 1,900 years ago.
Because Pliny the Elder had been so widely-esteemed, the historian Tacitus was anxious to find out more about the circumstances of his death, and about the eruption in general, so he asked Pliny's nephew, who was seventeen at the time and survived the eruption, to provide him with details of what had happened.
Pliny the Younger's account took the form of two letters to Tacitus, in which he described the fate that befell his uncle, and how he and his mother had fared.
These letters are particularly valuable to us because Pliny was clearly aware of the need to describe objectively what he had experienced, and to resist the temptation to exaggerate.
As he wrote himself, ‘Nec defuerunt quifictis mentionisque terroribus vera pericula augerunt.’
(’ There were people, too, who added to the real perils by inventing fictitious dangers.’)
Well, of course, there always are!
The following account is closely based on Pliny's letters.
On the morning of 24 August (the ninth day before the kalends of September) when the various Plinys were all in Misenum, a small town across the bay of Naples from Vesuvius, a curious large cloud was seen in the sky over the volcano.
At first it looked harmless enough, and did not even seem to be coming from the mountain.
It grew rapidly, however, soon dispelling all doubts.
Rising initially in a vertical plume for many thousands of metres, and then spreading out laterally in the upper atmosphere, it took on a shape rather like that of a pine tree, with a trunk and branches.
The elder Pliny was full of curiosity at first, and planned to sail across in his galley for a closer look, but his nephew was not so keen on the idea, and turned down his uncle's invitation to go along as well , pleading pressure of work.
Before he had even set off, however, Pliny the Elder received urgent requests for help from people living nearer the volcano, so his trip which had been intended as something of a scientific investigation rapidly became a rescue mission.
Pliny intended to try and evacuate people living on the coast immediately beneath the volcano, in the area which is now Torre del Greco, but as his galley approached the coast it was showered with hot ashes and sizeable lumps of pumice from the volcano.
The shore was already becoming inaccessible as piles of ash accumulated, so he was forced to abandon his attempt, and turned to the south, running before the wind to escape from the increasingly heavy rain of ashes.
He landed eventually at Stabiae (near the present Castellammare), where things were still fairly tolerable, and there he encountered a friend of his, one Pomponianus, who was making frantic preparations to escape, loading his possessions on to ships and fretting for a favourable wind so that he could put to sea.
Full of confidence, Pliny tried to calm down the overwrought Pomponianus, and to demonstrate his own unconcern, went off to freshen up in the local baths, and subsequently sat down to eat a hearty meal.
As night fell on Stabiae, Vesuvius presented an awesome sight, with the oppressively heavy ash cloud above it lit up in a baleful red glare from the many fires that had been started by the rain of hot ash.
Remarkably, Pliny slept calmly during the early part of the night, although ashes had begun to pile up outside the house, but he eventually awoke as the situation deteriorated.
Pomponianus and his companions were badly worried both by the ash-fall, and by the frequent tremors which were now shaking the house.
After a discussion, they decided that their best hope for safety would lie in leaving the house, making for the shore and trying to get away in a ship.
Tying pillows to their heads with towels to protect themselves from the larger falling lumps, they set off.
It was totally dark, blacker and denser than the darkest night — even after dawn should have come — as the thick cloud of ash hung over them, cutting off the light from the sun.
Carrying torches to light their way, they all reached the shore safely, but to their dismay found the wind still unfavourable, and the sea too rough to allow them to get away.
At this point apparently, Pliny became unwell; he lay down on a cloth spread out for him and twice asked for water to drink.
Later on, when wafts of sulphurous fumes from the volcano still so frequent that their chariots were constantly on the move, despite having their wheels chocked with stones.
Overhead, lightning flickered frequently as the static electricity accumulating in the ash cloud discharged.
At one point, they saw the sea receding from the near-by beaches; sucked away and apparently forced back by the earthquakes, so that quantities of sea creatures were left stranded.
Ash began to sift down round them, lightly at first, adding to the horror of the situation.
Conditions were not so bad, however, that Pliny and his mother could not have got well away from the town into a safer region, but they were reluctant to leave because they were worried and uncertain about the fate of the elder Pliny.
They remained, therefore, on the outskirts of the town, until, terrified of being crushed by the mob, they decided to seek refuge in the open fields, but they had hardly agreed on this when fresh ash clouds, denser than ever, overwhelmed them and brought total darkness.
The darkness was so complete that Pliny compared it with a sealed room in which the lamp had been put out.
It was infinitely more unnerving than that though, for they were not in a sealed room but out in the open, with the air rent with cries from the crowd: screams of naked terror and prayers for deliverance.
The ash fall became heavier, piling up around them, so that they had periodically to shake themselves clear of it, to prevent themselves being buried.
This living nightmare lasted for many hours until a sickly daylight showed again and the sun could be seen once more through the haze of dust.
Peace returned, and the dazed survivors were able to collect themselves, find their friends, and look about.
Great changes had been wrought by the eruption.
[See Fig. 3]Where once the smooth cone of Vesuvius had risen, only a shattered stump now remained; where once there had been fields and vineyards and all the normal clutter of the countryside there now stretched a silent grey carpet of ash, mantling everything like a thick, dirty snowfall.
Amidst it all, not a bird or insect stirred.
Pliny's account naturally didn't go into the details of the mechanics of the eruption, but his account is so illuminating that it is quite clear what happened, and similar eruptions, blasting large volumes of pumiceous ash into the air are still called Plinian eruptions.
It was the heavy fall of ash from the eruption which brought an abrupt end to the town of Pompeii.
It almost disappeared under a carpet of pumice over three metres deep, so that only the upper parts of some tall buildings emerged above it.
With most of its inhabitants either dead or financially ruined by the eruption, there was no hope at all of salvaging the buried town, and it was abandoned.
So completely was it abandoned that with the passage of time, and the weathering away of what little remained of it, its location was forgotten, although the facts of its existence and its fate were widely known.
Centuries passed.
The Roman empire declined and fell, the Dark Ages came and went, new peoples settled round Vesuvius, and ultimately new towns began to spring up.
In 1595, some remains of the city came to light during excavation work for a new aqueduct — a few coins, and some fragments of marble tablets containing inscriptions referring to Pompeii.
In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, when noble families all over Europe were becoming increasingly art-conscious in the wake of the Renaissance and anxious to fill their mansions and palaces with pieces of classical statuary and other antiquities, the remains of Pompeii were ravaged haphazardly, with innumerable random pits being dug in the hope of turning up items of value, particularly small carved figures, vases and pieces of jewellery.
There was no pretence of archaeological intentions — the subject hadn't evolved by then — Pompeii simply acted as a large open pit mine for works of art.
(Sir William Hamilton, Britain's envoy to Naples, was once deeply involved in this pillaging, giving most of his acquisitions to his wife, Emma, better-known as Nelson's mistress.)
Herculaneum suffered equally badly, except that there underground shafts and tunnels had to be driven to get at the antiquities.
Things began to improve in the nineteenth century, however, when more coordinated methods were employed, and for the first time, digging began to be directed at finding out about Pompeii, rather than making a profit.
It has been said, in fact, that systematic archaeology was born in the ruins of Pompeii.
Although the excavations are not yet wholly complete, many hectares of the town have now been revealed to the light of day, and it is now possible to stroll along the abandoned streets once more with the remains of shops, houses and villas on either side.
The general impression is rather eerie, but it is more reminiscent of a Second World War bombed city than of one abandoned nearly 2,000 years ago.
Judging by the size of the town, it probably had a population of about 20,000 in A.D. 79.
Many of these people were able to escape before the town was overwhelmed, but about 2,000 died; some because they elected to remain in what they thought was the safety of their houses, some because they left their escape until it was too late, some because they were too burdened down with prized possessions to move quickly enough, and some because they were just plain unlucky.
It's quite clear that the eruption was totally unexpected.
The normal business life of the town continued right up to the last moment and in some houses food was laid out for meals that were never eaten.
Many corpses, or rather fossils of corpses, were found by the excavators in the ash.
After death the bodies of the victims of the eruption were rapidly buried by the accumulating ash, and rain falling on this ash soon after the eruption cemented it into a fairly hard mass before the flesh of the corpses had decayed.
The ash swelled slightly as a result of the wetting and set hard round the corpses, making perfect natural moulds of them, and in some cases preserving even the imprint of clothing and the details of facial expressions.
These moulds were found as holes in the ash by the nineteenth century excavators, and they discovered that by pouring in a setting compound such as plaster of Paris they could obtain a complete three dimensional cast of the original corpse.
Many hundreds of casts of these human fossils have since been made, and from them we can learn a good deal about the last appalling hours in the life of Pompeii.
A few of the victims who sought refuge in their houses were killed when the weight of accumulating ash caused the roofs to collapse, but most were suffocated by the choking sulphurous fumes of the ash cloud.
The plaster casts demonstrate this with unpleasant clarity; in many of them the hands are still pressed to the mouth, preserving the last hopeless efforts to breathe.
Those who died in the streets attempting to get away suffered the same agonizing fate and were stifled by the fumes.
The many casts all tell the same sad story.
[See Fig. 4]
One of the most pathetic is that of a pet dog, which died still chained to a post.
It survived for quite a long time, until the accumulating ash had built up to such a thickness that its chain would no longer allow it to keep above the ash, and it died, its dreadful last moments clearly visible in its taut body, arched back and straining neck.
Many of the human victims clearly left their homes feeling full of optimism, carrying bags of gold, pieces of jewellery and other valued objects, which they refused to abandon even at the point of death.
They died still clutching them.
At least one citizen died through coming back into the town after a great thickness of ash had accumulated, and presumably during a lull in the eruption, either to loot or to rescue his own little hoard of gold.
So great is the lure of material possessions!
Pompeii was not the only town to suffer from the rain of pumice and ash; the fall-out in fact covered an area of hundreds of square kilometres and several other Roman settlements, but Pompeii was particularly badly hit because it was so close to the volcano and was down-wind of it, so that the ash-laden eruption cloud was carried towards the town by the prevailing wind.
Neighbouring Herculaneum suffered quite differently.
It was upwind of the volcano, so it escaped the worst of the thick ash-fall that Pompeii experienced, and almost all the population seem to have escaped unharmed — not more than thirty skeletons have been found.
The main difference, though, was that while Pompeii was obliterated by the steady accumulation of ashes over a long period, perhaps as much as two days, Herculaneum was overwhelmed in a matter of minutes, possibly well after the eruption proper had ceased.
Great thicknesses of pumice and ash had piled up on the slopes of Vesuvius above Herculaneum, and this loose material very rapidly became saturated by torrential rainstorms which may have been triggered by the eruption cloud itself: the dust particles acting as nuclei on which water vapour could condense to form droplets.
The waterlogged heaps of wet muck soon became unstable and eventually began to slide downwards, quite suddenly becoming semi-liquid slurries or mudflows, which swept down the sides of the volcano, gathering speed and more and more material the whole time.
Some of these mudflows rushed through Herculaneum and engulfed it completely; crushing some buildings and smothering the rest twenty metres deep in a slowly consolidating welter of mud, pumice, boulders and debris.
So thoroughly buried was Herculaneum that a new town, Resina, has been built right on top of the old.
The compacted mudflow presents a much more serious problem to archaeologists than the relatively soft pumice of Pompeii, and this coupled with the awkward presence of the new town on top of it makes it unlikely that it will ever be completely excavated.
In some respects, however, Herculaneum is even better-preserved than Pompeii, although it did not escape the attentions of the treasure seekers of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and it has furnished an even greater wealth of detail than Pompeii on the day-to-day life of a flourishing Roman town.
The social and historical value of both Herculaneum and Pompeii are well known and need not detain us here.
The ash-fall which buried Pompeii and the mudflow which covered Herculaneum, however, are first-class examples of two major kinds of volcanic phenomena, which have been repeated scores of times on different volcanoes in different parts of the world and we will be following them up more closely when we come to a detailed consideration of the mechanisms of eruptions.
The Sunda Straits, between the Indonesian islands of Java and Sumatra, are one of the great sea lanes of the world.
Even in the nineteenth century, many hundreds of vessels passed through the Straits each year, most of them small coasting ships but also a good many larger vessels trading between Europe and the East Indies (Java and Sumatra were at that time prosperous Dutch colonies).
[See Fig. 1]
The Straits, which are only twenty-four kilometres across at their narrowest point, are not particularly deep, averaging about 200 metres, and there are a number of islands dotted about them.
Approximately thirty-two kilometres west of the narrowest point of the Straits there lay a small group of rather oddly-named islands: Krakatoa, Verlaten Island, Lang Island and, oddest of all, Polish Hat.
[See Fig. 2]
Most of the coastal details of these islands were fairly well known to the hydrographers of both the British and Dutch navies, but little was known about their inland geography.
The largest of them, Krakatoa, was known to be about nine kilometres across from north to south and the British Admiralty charts showed it to consist of several volcanic cones arranged roughly in a line.
At the southern end of the line was a particularly prominent, fresh-looking cone, 798 metres high, known by its Javanese name of Rakata.
(Somehow, by the mangling that place names go through, the name Krakatoa was corrupted from Rakata.)
At the northern end was a much lower, broader cone, Perboewetan, whose crater wall had been breached at some time in the past by a large lava flow.
None of the islands was inhabited, nor were they often visited, except by woodcutters from both shores of the Straits who landed periodically to fell timber in the luxuriant tropical forests that clothed the islands.
From time to time, too, native fishermen would anchor in their sheltered bays to take on water or ride out storms.
Some of the Naval survey parties may also have landed briefly on Krakatoa, because a hot spring is marked on some maps, but apart from this we know remarkably little about the islands or their volcanic history.
There are some reports of a major eruption which took place between May 1680 and November 1681, and this eruption is said to have stripped bare the rich vegetation and ejected vast quantities of pumice that covered all the surrounding seas, but this is all that is known.
It isn't even known where on Krakatoa the eruption was centred, but the chances are that it was Perboewetan, since the lava flows in the crater looked extremely fresh when they were examined in the nineteenth century.
It's possible that some other minor eruptions occurred between 1681 and 1883, but if they did, there is no record of them, and all of the reports and descriptions made by ships passing Krakatoa suggest that it was quite dormant.
The islands were well-known for their beauty to the passengers of the steamships passing up and down the Straits, but few of those who leant on their ship's rail on sultry moonlit evenings, gazing out at the serene islands could ever have conceived that they were to be the site of some of the most catastrophic events that the world has ever seen.
The first intimations that the forces which had lain dormant for two centuries would soon be unleashed came in the late 1870s, when frequent minor earthquakes began to shake the areas round the Sunda Straits.
A particularly big tremor on 1 September 1880 damaged an important lighthouse on the Java coast, and was perceptible as far away as northern Australia.
But Indonesia, in common with Vesuvius and almost all volcanic areas in the world, is located in the middle of an intensely active seismic zone, so earthquakes in the area were far from uncommon, and the local people did not attach much special significance to this latest bout of tremors.
The seismic activity gradually increased in intensity until on Sunday, 20 May 1883, Krakatoa abruptly came to life, announcing its re-awakening with a series of explosions audible in towns over 150 kilometres away.
These went on for several hours, rattling doors and windows almost continuously.
On the following day, a sprinkling of ash fell over a wide area, and a great column of steam was seen rising above Krakatoa, leaving no doubt that a major eruption was under way.
This vigorous phase continued for a few days, with the column of steam and ash climbing eleven kilometres high above the volcano and showering ash over points up to 480 kilometres distant.
By 27 May, though, things had quietened down sufficiently for a daring (or foolhardy) party to charter a steamboat from Batavia (now Djakarta) and sail out to the islands to see what was going on.
The noise at one point as the party approached the island was quite deafening.
In the words of one of them, the background noise was so loud that a rifle shot sounded comparable to ‘the popping of a champagne cork amid the hubbub of a banquet’.
(Sophisticated crowd, these Dutch colonials.)
From their boat, they saw that everything on the island was entirely covered with fine white dust, like snow, and that the trees on the northern part of Krakatoa and Verlaten Island had been stripped of their leaves and branches by the rain of falling pumice, while those growing on Lang Island and Polish Hat seemed to have got away without much damage.
Scrambling ashore, and scuffing their way inland through ankle-deep ash, the party were able to see that the centre of all the excitement was the small cone of Perboewetan, at the northern end of Krakatoa.
This was in a state of semi-continuous eruption, with minor explosions taking place every five or ten minutes, showering fragments of pumice 200 metres into the air, and occasionally revealing the cherry-red glow of liquid lava in the crater, while all the while a great banner of steam rose 3,000 metres into the air.
The visiting party, who were the first and last ever to get a good look at the crater of Perboewetan, found it to be about 1,000 metres in diameter and about fifty metres deep, with a small pit, also about fifty metres deep, in the centre of the crater floor; it was from this pit that the steam cloud was escaping with a great roar.
After this remarkable visit, the volcano continued to be active for a week or two, but the explosive activity died down somewhat, and it began to look as though the eruption was going to be just a nine-days' wonder, and would soon fade away and be forgotten.
On 19 June, however, things began to warm up again, and the plume of steam and ash, which had been showing signs of flagging, rose higher and higher as more and more powerful explosions shook the air.
By the end of June, observers on the mainland of Sumatra reported that all the higher parts of Perboewetan had been blown away, and that a second eruption column was now rising from the centre of the island.
During the month of July, many areas in Java and Sumatra were rocked both by explosive blasts of exceptional violence, and by many minor earthquakes.
Even this severe shaking, however, failed to cause alarm amongst the local people; they had by that time been living with the eruption for many weeks, and it is remarkable just to what extent familiarity of even something as exceptional as a volcanic eruption can breed contempt.
On 11 August a Dutch government surveyor, Captain Ferzenaar, made another examination of the island at close quarters, but he prudently stayed on his boat.
He reported that all of the formerly rampant vegetation on Krakatoa had now been destroyed, with only a few of the thicker tree-trunks still rising above the thick mantle of ash, and that there were now three major eruption columns carrying clouds of dust and pumice high into the air, escaping from three separate vents.
One of these was the original pit at the centre of the Perboewetan crater; the other two seemed to be more in the centre of the island.
From the north-east side of the island Captain Ferzenaar also reported that he could see no less than eleven other minor centres of activity, which were either emitting small columns of steam, or occasionally ejecting dust in small explosive bursts.
There may well have been others on other parts of the island, but unfortunately the heavy curtain of dust and fumes being carried by the wind prevented him getting right round.
Captain Ferzenaar's observations on the state of Krakatoa in early August, even though made only from a boat keeping to the upwind side, are particularly useful because they provide the last reliable account of the situation before the culminating events which ensued fifteen days later.
Volcanic eruptions are sometimes compared with the drama, colour and spectacle of Wagner's operas — the ‘Ride of the Valkyries’ has been used very effectively as the background music to a film of some particularly lurid eruptions.
Wagner's operas are remarkable for their length, their tedium, and the magnificence of their occasional climaxes.
The eruption of Krakatoa has some parallels in these respects, for after an impressive opening, the eruption dragged on for a full three months before reaching its climax on 26 and 27 August.
So extensive was the havoc wrought in those two days that it was only many months afterwards that a complete picture began to emerge of what had happened.
The Dutch government appointed a fact-finding Scientific Commission in October 1883, and they published a preliminary report some six months later.
The Royal Society in Britain also set up a committee to investigate the scientific aspects of the eruption and published a weighty tome containing the committee's findings in 1888.
These two reports remain the source of almost all the information about the eruption; the Royal Society in particular went to great lengths to amass every possible scrap of information and even inserted a notice in The Times requesting anyone who had seen or heard anything to come forward.
Part of the difficulty in compiling these accounts was that there were so few survivors from the coastal towns in the Sunda Straits which were most directly affected, and those who had survived were often too distraught and confused to give an accurate description of what they had experienced.
The best eye-witness reports came from European officials living in the two important towns of Batavia and Buitenzorg, where there were even some useful scientific recording instruments — one of them at the Batavia town gasworks — and from the officers on board the various vessels that were on passage through the Straits at the time of the eruption.
There were a great number of these at different points along the Straits, but there were three that found themselves right in the thick of things.
First, there was the British ship Charles Bal, under Captain Watson, on voyage to Hong Kong, which was sailing eastwards through the Straits on 26 August, keeping to the south of Krakatoa, and passing about sixteen kilometres distant.
Second, there was a local Indonesian vessel, the Gouveneur-Generaal Loudon, which was plying back and forth across the Straits between Anjer in Java and Telok Betong in Sumatra.
She passed about forty-eight kilometres north of Krakatoa on the evening of the twenty-sixth, spent the night of the twenty-sixth to seventh anchored in Telok Betong, tried to sail again for Anjer in the morning, but was prevented from doing so by the violence of the eruption.
Third, there was another British vessel, the Sir Robert Sale, which was at the eastern, narrower end of the Straits, sixty-four kilometres from Krakatoa on the twenty-sixth, and attempted to sail westwards (towards Krakatoa) on the twenty-seventh, but was quite unable to do so.
Apart from these three, reports came in to the Royal Society from more than fifty other vessels, whose log-books provided a valuable source of information, particularly since officers-of-the-watch habitually keep a note of the time at which observations are made.
After months of sifting through scores of reports from observers at sea and on dry land, the geologist in charge of the Dutch investigation, R.D. Verbeek, was able to piece together a comprehensive account of the events of the two fateful days, Sunday 26 and Monday 27 August.
All the reports agreed that there had been a gradual but marked increase in the intensity of activity on Krakatoa during the three days preceding the twenty-sixth.
At 1 p.m. on the twenty-sixth, explosions loud enough to be heard well over 150 kilometres away were taking place at intervals of about ten minutes, and at about 2 p.m. an English ship, 120 kilometres from the scene, sighted a black cloud, rising to an altitude estimated to be about twenty-five kilometres above the volcano.
By 3 p.m., the explosions were so loud that they were audible 240 kilometres away; by 5 p.m. they were so stupendous that the sound was carrying all over Java.
In towns such as Batavia, 160 kilometres from Krakatoa, the din was terrific, the noise being compared with ‘the discharge of artillery close at hand.
.. causing rattling of windows and shaking of pictures, chandeliers and other hanging objects’.
The same pattern of events continued throughout Sunday evening and most of the night.
The Charles Bal, which was at its closest to the volcano at this time, reported:.
.. sounds like discharges of artillery at intervals of a second of time, and a crackling noise, probably due to the impact of fragments in the atmosphere.
.. the whole commotion increasing towards 5 p.m. when it became so intense that the captain feared to continue his voyage, and began to shorten sail.
From 5 to 6 p.m. a rain of pumice in large pieces, quite warm, fell upon the ship.
Captain Woolridge on the Sir Robert Sale, rather further away, reported seeing the eruption column rising above the volcano: ‘.
.. a most terrible appearance, the dense mass of clouds being covered with a murky tinge, with fierce flashes of lightning’.
A little later, at 7 p.m., the whole scene was lit up from time to time by electrical discharges, and at one time the cloud above the mountain presented ‘the appearance of an immense pine tree, with the stem and branches formed with volcanic lightning’.
(There's an interesting analogy here with Pliny's description of the great cloud at the A.D. 79 eruption of Vesuvius.)
Things became so bad for the Charles Bal later on in the evening that she had to spend the entire night tacking back and forth south east of Krakatoa, probably remaining within twenty kilometres of it — the ash-fall from the eruption was so thick that Captain Watson could not see well enough to steer away to safety, but ironically, the glare from the volcano provided a weird and somewhat improbable lighthouse.
A less pleasant night can scarcely be imagined, with a steady rain of hot ashes falling on the ship, and the air laden with hot, choking fumes of sulphurous gases.
To make matters worse, peculiar pinky glows of static electricity lit up the mastheads and rigging of the ship with an unearthly light.
On the Gouveneur-Generaal Loudon, this phenomenon (known to mariners as St Elmo's Fire) was even more extensive, and the native crew ‘engaged themselves busily in putting out this phosphorescent light with their hands.
.. and pleaded that if this light.
.. made its way below, a hole would burst in the ship; not that they feared the ship taking fire, but they thought the light was the work of evil spirits...’
The peculiar phosphorescent glow was the result of the atmosphere around the ship being highly-charged with static electricity, generated by the rush of the steam through the volcanic vent, and the friction between the myriads of fragmentary particles that were blasted up with it.
After 4 a.m. on the morning of the twenty-seventh the eruption appeared to die down a little, but the grandest moments were yet to come.
They came in the form of series of explosions on a far greater scale even than any of the preceding ones, and greater than anything that man has experienced before or since.
According to the painstaking analysis of the records by Verbeek, the largest of these took place at 05.30, 06.44, 10.02 and 10.52 Krakatoa time, on the morning of 27 August; of these the third was much the most violent.
The sound of these great explosions was audible over a large part of the Earth's surface: at Elsey Creek in South Australia, 3,224 kilometres from Krakatoa, the noise was loud enough to wake sleeping people, who described it as being similar to the sound of rock being blasted.
At Diego Garcia Island, 3,647 kilometres away (in the Indian Ocean), the sounds of the explosions were at first thought to be coming from a ship in distress, firing its guns to attract attention, so the people ran out to vantage points on the coast of the island to try to see it.
The furthest point to which the sound carried was Rodriguez Island, 4,811 kilometres distant, near Mauritius in the Indian Ocean, where the sounds were also taken for gunfire at first.
Nearer Krakatoa, the effects were much more serious.
At Batavia and Buitenzorg, the blast blew in dozens of windows, and even cracked walls.
A barograph used to record the pressure of gas in the gasholder in Batavia enabled the times of arrival of the pressure waves from the explosions to be recorded accurately, but the blast produced by the greatest of the explosions was such that the gasholder leapt out of its well, causing the gas to escape.
Much the most destructive effects of the explosions, however, were a series of tsunamis (often wrongly called tidal waves) which swept up and down the shores of the Sunda Straits.
It was these, not so much the explosions per se that made the Krakatoa eruption the most lethal on record.
Very few people are known to have been killed directly by the explosions, great though they were, but no less than 36,000 died when the tsunamis ripped over low-lying areas all along the coasts, overwhelming towns and villages.
The port of Anjer quite simply ceased to exist as the succession of great waves washed over it, carrying away all the flimsy wooden buildings that made up the town.
The climactic series of explosions of 27 August added volumes of fresh material to the already huge eruption column above the volcano, and some estimates suggest that it rose as much as eighty kilometres into the air.
The ash raining down from it added to the misery of the people in the area — the Sir Robert Sale reported lumps the size of pumpkins falling on her decks, and she was at least forty kilometres distant.
At Batavia, the pall of ash took a fair while to arrive; in the early morning of the twenty-seventh, the sky was clear, but by 10.15 it had become lurid and yellowish as the ash spread across the sky; by 10.30 the first fine ash was actually sifting softly down on to the streets.
At 11 a.m. a heavy rain of ash was falling, and by 11.20 the air was so thick with ash and pumice dust that the sun was blotted out, and total darkness fell on the city, remaining until 1 p.m.
The ash-fall itself ceased two hours later.
Since Batavia was over 160 kilometres from Krakatoa, it escaped fairly lightly; in some places, nearer the volcano, total unrelieved darkness lasted nearly two days.
These awful conditions naturally made it quite impossible to tell what was happening actually on Krakatoa, but it is thought that some milder explosive activity continued.
The Charles Bal and Sir Robert Sale were beating about in the darkness for the whole of the twenty-seventh, and ash rained down on them so steadily that the crews had to spend hours shovelling it off the decks and shaking it clear of sails and rigging.
On the Gouveneur-Generaal Loudon, it was reported that at one time dust and water were falling together, as mud, and a thickness of fifteen centimetres accumulated in only ten minutes.
Fortunately, this soon declined to a more tolerable rate.
At 7 p.m. on the twenty-seventh, another outbreak of fairly violent explosive activity occurred, and got progressively more and more vigorous until 11 p.m. when it started to decline.
These outbursts marked the end of the entire eruption, for at 2.30 p.m. on the twenty-eighth, after being active for a hundred days, the last, mild explosion echoed out over Krakatoa, and silence returned.
Slowly, life returned to something like normal in the Straits, and the bewildered survivors were able to bury their dead, and salvage what they could of homes in towns and villages that had been swept by tsunamis and showered with ash.
Initially, the great masses of floating pumice which had piled up on the sea made it difficult for ships to force their way through the water — rafts three metres thick were reported in places — but eventually parties were able to reach the islands and determine what changes had taken place.
The Royal Dutch Navy made a detailed survey of the whole group of islands immediately after the eruption, and the maps they produced revealed the full extent of the effects of the explosions which had reverberated round so much of the world.
The whole of the northern part of the island of Krakatoa had disappeared, with the exception of a bank of pumice and a small isolated rock, about ten metres square, which was left standing above the ocean with deep water on either side.
Not a vestige remained of the cone Perboewetan, and the whole of the northern part of the cone Rakata had been blown away, leaving a semi-vertical vertical cliff.
A great crater had been formed, most of it below sea level, and soundings showed that where land had once stood 300 metres above sea level, the water was now 300 metres deep.
In all, about two thirds of the island of Krakatoa had disappeared and Verbeek estimated that about fifteen cubic kilometres of matter had been ejected by the eruption.
This fell as pumice and fine ash over an area of nearly four million square kilometres, but most of it, of course, fell in the immediate vicinity of Krakatoa.
So while the island of Krakatoa ended up considerably smaller, Yerlaten Island and Lang Island ended up much bigger, due to the accumulation on them of enormous volumes of ash, which also piled up in the sea to form ‘sand’ banks.
And Polish Hat?
Not a trace remained.
[See Fig. 3]The mighty Krakatoa eruption was compared in some ways with a Wagnerian opera.
In the case of the 1902 eruption of Mt Pelee there is no need to resort to such artificial comparisons, because the eruption does in fact form the basis of an opera, known as The Violins of St Jacques, which has been performed in London within the last few years.
The opera, by Malcolm Williamson, was itself based on a novel of the same name by Patrick Leigh Fermor, who wove a complicated plot of romance and intrigue against the colourful background of a sultry Caribbean town in the midst of a hectic carnival, while above the town a volcano rumbled threateningly.
The volcano ended up by destroying the entire island.
In the book Mt Pelee is thinly disguised as the volcano Salpetriere, while St Pierre, the town which was actually involved in the eruption, appears as St Jacques, but the actual events of Thursday 8 May 1902 were so dramatic in themselves, and the tragedy so complete, that it seems a little unnecessary to dress up the facts in a romanticized account.
But this is probably better than some of the attempts that have been made deliberately to exploit the natural human interest in such a tragic event with supposedly factual accounts of the eruption, in which accurate reportage takes second place to lurid, entirely hypothetical detail.
A recent offender makes its intentions of arousing morbid curiosity perfectly clear on its front cover, proclaiming ‘30,000 people burned, boiled and suffocated to death’, ‘A whole thriving city levelled to the ground in seconds’, and ‘The world best-selling account of one day when the earth exploded’.
At the time of the eruption, St Pierre was the principal town on Martinique, a small island in the Caribbean, and a prosperous French colony.
Six kilometres north of the town rose the gentle slopes of Mt Pelee, not a particularly impressive volcano, only 2,250 metres high.
The island and the volcano were renowned for their beauty.
To quote a contemporary description, which reads rather like a modern travel brochure:
It has the softest of summer zephyrs blowing across its fields and hillsides; swift and rumbling waters break through forest and plain; and mountain heights rise to where they can gather the island's mists to their crowns.
There are pretty thatched cottages, nestling in the shade of coconut, mango and breadfruit, and decked out with bright hibiscus and bougainvillaea.
The town of St Pierre itself was no less appealing, stretching for some three kilometres along the shores of the Caribbean.
It boasted a number of imposing public buildings, including a town hall, cathedral, military hospital and a theatre, and even had electric lighting, unusual in those days.
Most of the town, however, consisted of a picturesque maze of narrow, rambling streets, lined with old-fashioned houses with steeply-pitching red-tiled roofs.
The population of this delightful little town was estimated in the official census of 1894 to be 19,722, most of them Martiniquians — a hybrid mixture of creole, mulatto, negro and coolie — with a few French government officials and civil servants.
Like Krakatoa, Mt Pelee had been active for quite a time before disaster struck.
Whereas, however, the Krakatoa eruption was the first for two centuries, Mt Pelee had previously erupted within the living memory of some of the older residents of St Pierre; a mild affair in 1851 which did little apart from sprinkling a bit of ash about.
The first signs of the new eruption were seen on 23 March 1902 when a rambling party were making an ascent of the volcano.
Looking down below them from the top, they saw that a small crater with the remains of a dried-up lake in it was emitting sulphurous vapours from several points.
This crater was known as the Etang Sec, or dry tarn, a name worth remembering because it was later to become the focus of the eruption proper.
On 25 April things began to liven up, and minor explosive activity in the Etang Sec hurled ashes and bits of rock into the air, and the eruption gradually increased in vigour.
On 27 April, an investigating party climbed up from St Pierre to find out what was happening, and found that the Etang Sec now contained a small lake, in the middle of which a small volcanic cone had begun to grow.
The days that followed this discovery saw a steady increase in activity, with the town of St Pierre now being showered with light falls of ash and subjected to unpleasant wafts of sulphurous fumes.
Mrs Prentiss, the wife of the American consul in St Pierre wrote a letter home: ‘The smell of sulphur is so strong that horses in the street stop and snort, and some of them drop in their harness and die of suffocation.
Many of the people are obliged to wear wet handkerchiefs to protect themselves from the strong fumes of sulphur.’
By 3 and 4 May the situation was really bad, with frequent loud explosions, and substantial amounts of ash accumulating in the streets.
The St Pierre local newspaper, Les Colonies, carried an article saying: ‘The rain of ashes never ceases.
.. the passing of carriages is no longer heard in the streets.
The wheels are muffled.
.. puffs of wind sweep the ashes from roofs and awnings, and blow them into rooms, the windows of which have imprudently been left open.’
The first major blow in the events of 1902 struck on 5 May, when the crater lake in the Etang Sec burst through the crater walls, and rushed down the valley of the Riviere Blanche.
The mass of new, hot rock forcing its way up through the crater floor had both helped to displace the water from the crater, and heated it up to nearly boiling point, so it was a scalding torrent that flashed down the valley, travelling at a speed of something like ninety kilometres an hour.
As it flowed, it incorporated into itself masses of loose debris, mud, rubble and boulders, some of them reported to weigh fifty tons.
This peculiarly unpleasant mixture combined to become a mudflow, which over-ran everything in its path; in particular a large sugar processing plant, the Usine Guerin, which stood on a tongue of flat land in the valley of the Riviere Blanche, surrounded by sugar-cane plantations.
Thirty workmen died in the factory, of which nothing remained but a tall chimney stack, sticking up like a post above a desert of black boiling and seething mud.
as if this were not bad enough, the great mudflow rolled on into the sea at the mouth of the Riviere Blanche, setting up a series of waves as it did so, one of which was powerful enough to capsize the yacht Precheur moored off the river mouth.
All on board died.
Some accounts also suggest that these waves swept over the low-lying parts of St Pierre, near the waterfront, causing some damage and casualties.
As the situation went from bad to worse, the people living near the volcano became increasingly distressed, and many tried to leave St Pierre, heading for Fort-de-France, Martinique's second town.
The local authorities, however, did not welcome the prospect of a large-scale evacuation.
Apart from the problem of dealing with large numbers of frightened refugees, there was also an election coming up on 10 May, and the political factions in the town were anxious that nothing should interfere with it, so there was a concerted effort to play down the possible risk.
A ‘scientific commission’ comprising some of the most learned people on the island was set up, and they produced a report designed to set fears at rest.
One of the members of this commission and principal of the Lycee, Monsieur Landes, was rather worried by events, but when interviewed by the local newspaper, made a cautious, noncommittal statement, and warned that some of the areas nearest the volcano should be evacuated.
The nub of Monsieur Landes's thinking was that Mt Pelee presented no more danger to St Pierre than Vesuvius did to Naples, a distinctly ambiguous conclusion!
The editor of Les Colonies, however, seized on this statement, and in an editorial in the very last issue his paper was ever to publish, tried to use it to encourage people to stay in St Pierre.
‘Where,’ he asked, ‘could one be better than at St Pierre?
Do those who invade Fort-de-France believe that they will be better off there than here, should the earth begin to quake?
This is a foolish error against which the populace should be warned.’
His appeal must have met with some response because although some hundreds of people did leave for Fort-de-France, many hundreds more sought refuge in St Pierre itself, flocking in from the surrounding countryside, so that on the morning of 8 May, as many as 30,000 people were probably crowding the town.
Mrs Prentiss, the American consul's wife, in her last letter to America, said that she had the opportunity of leaving St Pierre with her husband on an American schooner, but decided that the situation did not warrant it.
She died with her husband on the next day, only a few hours after writing her letter.
At 07.52 (St Pierre time) on 8 May, the telegraph operator in St Pierre tapped out the single word ‘Allez’ to his opposite number in Fort-de-France, meaning that he was ready to receive a message.
It was the last word to come out of St Pierre.
We shall never know exactly the sequence of events in St Pierre on that morning, but we can build up a fairly accurate picture from the physical evidence of the ruins, and the reports of eyewitnesses.
We can at least be sure of the time when the town died, because apart from the abrupt halt in telegraph traffic, the big clock on the Military Hospital was found intact in the smouldering ruins, with its hands stopped at 07.52.
8 May was Ascension Day and many faithful Catholics had assembled in the Cathedral, to celebrate the day, and to pray for deliverance from the volcano.
At about 07.50, a series of deafening detonations was heard, and a great black cloud was seen to issue out from near the top of Mt Pelee.
The cloud rolled effortlessly and relentlessly down the slopes of the volcano, spreading out into a broad fan which rapidly engulfed St Pierre, and in the next two or three minutes killed all but two of the population, and set the town ablaze from end to end.
The eye-witness accounts of what happened in those few minutes naturally vary in many details, but one of the most reliable descriptions of the actual eruption of the cloud was that of Monsieur Roger Arnoux, a member of the Astronomical Society of France, who was observing from a vantage point well above and away from the town.
He was awakened by a minor earth tremor during the night of the seventh to the eighth, but went back to sleep again and experienced nothing else untoward during the night.
The following morning, however, at about 8 o'clock:.
.. while still watching the crater, I noticed a small cloud pass out, followed two seconds later by a considerable cloud.
This latter cloud rolled swiftly down towards St Pierre, hugging the ground, but extending upwards at the same time, so that it was almost as high as it was long.
The vapours.
.. were of a violet grey colour, and seemingly very dense, for although endowed with an almost inconceivably powerful ascensive force, they retained to the zenith their rounded summits.
Innumerable electrical scintillations played through the chaos of vapours, and at the same time that the ears were deafened by a frightful fracas.
The phenomenon that M. Arnoux had observed and described so graphically was new to science, and subsequently when other examples were observed on Mt Pelee, they became known as nuees ardentes, or glowing clouds.
These turbulent masses of superheated gases and incandescent solid particles present some fascinating problems to vulcanologists, which will be discussed in a later chapter.
The sailing ship Roraima arrived at St Pierre early in the morning of Thursday, 8 May, and anchored a little way off shore.
She could not have come at a worse time; a few hours after she arrived, she was a helpless burning hulk, with most of her passengers and crew dead.
A few survived, though, and were able to describe their experiences.
They had seen that the volcano was in eruption even before dropping anchor; many of them had come up on deck to see the spectacle.
At about 7.45 (ship time), they heard a major explosion and a few minutes later a searing hot blast of gas roared over St Pierre and the ships lying off shore, capsizing the steam ship Grappler, and rolling the Roraima so severely that she lost all her masts and smokestacks.
The fiery blast killed everyone on deck instantly, with the single exception of the captain, who lived on for a short time before becoming unconscious and falling overboard.
The force of the blast was such that skylights were blown in, and boiling hot mud and ashes rained down on those below decks, killing many and scalding others.
The ‘fiery blast’, or nuee ardente, did not itself last long, but it set St Pierre ablaze.
Some of the damage was done by the thousands of casks of rum which were stored in the town, and which exploded in the heat and caught fire immediately.
The Roraima survivors described burning rum running down the streets and even into the sea, spreading out as far as the ship and causing small fires on her.
The conflagration raged for many hours throughout the town, spreading rapidly through buildings already torn open by the blast, and with not a single person left alive to check it.
It is possible that a ‘fire storm’ condition developed in the town, similar to that which occurred in several German cities during the last war, when saturation bombing raids started so many fires that the city became effectively one big fire, sucking into itself hurricane force winds to bring fresh oxygen to the heart of the inferno.
One consequence of the blaze in St Pierre was that it is difficult now to diagnose how much of the damage was a direct result of the nuee ardente, and how much a result of the fires it started.
This is a matter of considerable importance, since it is clearly desirable to know as much as possible about the conditions within the nuee ardente.
One of the first to go ashore at St Pierre after the disaster was the Vicar-General of Martinique, Monsieur Parel, who was at Fort-de-France on the morning of the eighth, having left St Pierre only the afternoon before.
He was able to join a rescue party which set off by boat from Fort-de-France, and he returned to St Pierre a scant twenty-four hours after he had left.
Let him describe the scene that met his eyes in his own words:
Thursday 8 May.
Ascension Day.
This date should be written in blood.
.. When, at about 3 o'clock in the afternoon we rounded the last promontory which separated us from what was once the magnificent panorama of St Pierre, we suddenly perceived at the opposite extremity of the roadstead the Riviere Blanche with its crest of vapour, rushing madly into the sea.
Then a little further out blazes a great American packet (the Roraima), which arrived on the scene just in time to be overwhelmed by the catastrophe.
Nearer the shore, two other ships are in flames.
The coast is strewn with wreckage, with the keels of the overturned boats, all that remains of the twenty to thirty ships which lay at anchor here the day before.
All along the quays, for a distance of 200 metres, piles of lumber are burning.
Here and there around the city.
.. fires can be seen through the smoke.
But St Pierre, in the morning throbbing with life, thronged with people, is no more.
Its ruins stretch before us, wrapped in their shroud of smoke and ashes, gloomy and silent, a city of the dead.
Our eyes seek out the inhabitants fleeing distracted, or returning to look for the dead.
Nothing to be seen.
No living soul appears in this desert of desolation, encompassed by appalling silence.
The blast that struck St Pierre was remarkable not only for its searing heat but also for its sheer force — masonry walls one metre thick were blown down, heavy cannon torn from their mounts, and a three-ton statue carried sixteen metres.
Angelo Heilprin, an American geologist who visited the scene a few weeks later and wrote a book about the tragedy, described ‘twisted bars of iron, great masses of roof sheeting wrapped like cloth about posts upon which they had been flung, and iron girders looped and festooned as if they had been made of rope’.
Amidst all this evidence of the effects of unlimited destructive powers unleashed, there were small pockets in which some remarkable things survived — delicate china cups, corked bottles of water, still drinkable, little packets of starch in which the granules were untouched; even a street fountain still splashed cold drinking water in one of the ruined streets.
Because the actual physical damage was so variable in its extent, it was immediately obvious to the early investigators that the almost total mortality was not solely the result of the force of the blast, since there would have been at least a few survivors in areas where the blast was less severe.
Evidence that the heat of the blast was the cause of death was abundant — there were many poignant scenes of entire families dead in rooms where glass bottles, jugs, bowls and cutlery stood perfectly undamaged on tables where they had been set out.
The many thousands of bodies in the ruins all told much the same story, of practically instantaneous death when the searing hurricane from Mt Pelee reached them.
There had been no time to attempt to flee, or even to struggle; hundreds simply died in their tracks.
The hot gas did its work swiftly, extinguishing thousands of lives in the space of two or three minutes.
Many of the victims, of course, were badly burned after death by the fires that swept the town, but even those that died in the open showed severe burns on their bodies, even though in many cases their clothes were not even singed.
This suggests that although the blast that killed them was intensely hot, it lasted only a few moments, not long enough to ignite fabrics.
The story that the survivors from the town itself told (the number varies in different accounts, between two and four) confirms this interpretation.
The most famous tale of all is that of the ‘prisoner of St Pierre’, a murderer who was incarcerated in the town jail at the time of the disaster.
Fortunately for him, his cell was extremely secure, partly below ground level, without even a window — the only aperture into it was a tiny grating above the door.
The prisoner, a negro stevedore called Augustus Ciparis, remained locked up in his cell for four days after St Pierre had been laid waste, without food, half-dead from burns and shock, until his cries for help were heard by two negroes picking through the ruins of the town.
When he had recovered from his ordeal, Ciparis was able to tell of what had happened — and he went on telling the story for the rest of his life, for he was given a free pardon, joined a travelling circus, and became something of a celebrity.
On the morning of 8 May, Ciparis had been waiting as usual for his breakfast to be brought to him, when it suddenly grew dark, and immediately afterwards, hot air laden with ashes began to come through the grating over the door.
It was not a strong gust, but it was fiercely hot, and he was severely burned all over his back and legs.
He was wearing a shirt and trousers at the time; these were unmarked.
The heat did not last for more than a few seconds, and when it had passed, Ciparis was left in an awful solitude, his cries for help going unanswered as the city burned above him.
Had he not had a bowl of water in his cell, he too, would have succumbed before his rescuers found him.
A second survivor, a negro shoemaker called Leon Leandre, had an equally lucky escape, but in circumstances more difficult to understand, since he was not below ground like Ciparis, and several companions around him were all killed outright:
On 8 May, about 8 o'clock in the morning, I was seated on the doorstep of my house.
.. all of a sudden I felt a terrible wind blowing, the earth began to tremble, and the sky suddenly became dark.
I turned to go into the house, made with great difficulty the three or four steps that separated me from my room, and felt my arms and legs burning, also my body.
I dropped upon a table.
At this moment four others sought refuge in my room, crying and writhing in pain, although their garments showed no signs of having been touched by flame.
At the end of ten minutes, one of these, the young Delavaud girl, aged about ten years, fell dead; the others left.
I then got up and went into another room, where I found the father Delavaud, still clothed, and lying on the bed, dead.
He was purple and inflated, but the clothing was intact.
I went out and found in the court two corpses interlocked; they were the bodies of the two young men who had before been with me in the room...
Crazed and almost overcome, I threw myself upon a bed, inert and awaiting death.
My senses returned to me in perhaps an hour, when I beheld the roof burning.
With sufficient strength left, my legs bleeding and covered with burns, I ran to Fonds-Saint-Denis, six kilometres from St Pierre.
There are certain inconsistencies in Leandre's story, but he was obviously describing what he had experienced as well as he could remember it.
It seems likely that he owed his remarkable escape to the fact that his house lay right on the fringe of the nuee ardente, in the extreme south-east of the town, so that he escaped its worst effects.
He was also a strong, well-built man, so his good physique may have helped him.
So much for the death of St Pierre.
The eruption did not stop after the destruction of the city, though, and the nuee that was responsible for the tragedy was in volcanic terms a relatively minor affair and it was by no means the last from Mt Pelee.
On 20 May, a second powerful nuee swept through St Pierre, flattening many of the ruins left by its predecessor, but taking no lives — there were none left to take.
[See Fig. 1]
Several other nuees swept harmlessly down the valley of the Riviere Blanche during the next couple of months, but on 30 August death came again to Martinique, where a powerful nuee blasted out from Mt Pelee and rolled down in a new direction, engulfing the small village of Morne Rouge.
Two thousand people died, in circumstances almost identical to those of St Pierre.
After this final fatal episode the eruption dragged on for many months, lasting well into 1903.
The ash which had been falling on St Pierre since the beginning of May 1902 continued to accumulate, sifting down softly to cover the ruins of St Pierre in a grey pall and burying many of the bodies that still lay in the debris.
[See Fig. 2]
One should not attribute human qualities to natural phenomena, but in a strange way the gentleness with which Mt Pelee buried its victims seemed like a sort of atonement for their deaths.
A stranger gesture was to follow.
In November 1902, a great spine or pillar of solidified lava began to rise above the crater of the Etang Sec, forced upwards by the pressure of the magma below.
Growing at a rate of about ten metres a day, by May 1903 the spine was no less than 310 metres high, rearing up above St Pierre like a memorial obelisk, a tribute to the thousands that had died below.
Chapter 3
Volcanic eruptions are difficult things to classify.
Most of the difficulty stems from the fact that an eruption is an extremely complex phenomenon.
A single eruption may not only last for months, but it may also consist of a series of separate, different phases, and in many cases different things may be going on on different parts of the same volcano at the same time.
However, so long as one is aware of their limitations, classifications are useful, since they provide a series of labels to attach to different eruptions, aiding recognition and simplifying the job of describing them.
There are two principal ways in which eruptions can be grouped.
The first, purely spatial method groups eruptions according to the shape of the volcanic vent and where this is situated relative to the volcanic edifice as a whole, while the second depends on the character of the eruption itself, and the nature of the deposits it produces.
Both of these methods will be discussed briefly, but it's important to remember that any particular grouping should only be applied to individual recognizable phases of an eruption, and that it doesn't necessarily apply to the whole thing.
Spatial Groupings
By far the most important division here is between central and fissure eruptions.
If one had to define a volcano, the definition would have to be something like ‘a site where molten rocks (magma) have been erupted at the surface of the Earth’.
Central vent and fissure eruptions represent the two basic ways in which magma can reach the surface.
Central vent eruptions are the best-known kind.
Basically what happens is that lava and other material is ejected from a hole in the ground, or crater, which is fed by a single pipe-like supply channel extending deep down below ground.
As the eruption continues the ejected material piles up round the vent, building up that heap of material that is called a volcano.
The standard Fuji-like conical volcanoes are constructed in this way, but a host of other forms can also develop in different circumstances.
Central vent eruptions occur all over the world, on the mid-ocean ridge volcanoes, at destructive plate margins, and along the African rift valleys; there is no particular environment which is specially favourable to them.
Fissure eruptions are different in this respect.
They occur in areas where the Earth's crust is subjected to tensional forces, trying to pull it apart.
Where this happens, the crust may actually break, gaping open in long, narrow, slot-like vertical cracks.
At the surface these cracks may remain open and empty, forming deep clefts, but deeper down, magma forces its way up into the crack, widening it considerably by hydraulically wedging the walls apart.
These magma-filled cracks are known as dykes.
If the magma pressure is great enough, it will force its way right up the dyke to the surface, spilling out to form lava flows.
This will happen more or less simultaneously at several points along the length of the dyke, hence the name fissure eruptions.
[See Fig. 1]
If you reflect for a moment on which areas are likely to have rocks under tension, and where cracking and dyke intrusion are likely, you will realize that the mid-ocean ridges are hot favourites for this kind of activity.
Iceland, astride the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, provides an excellent example.
With the Atlantic Ocean floor spreading away in opposite directions from the ridge, Iceland is getting wider at a rate of about half a centimetre per year, so a lot of new material has to be added continuously in the zone of tension in the middle, or else the two halves would soon be completely separated.
Most of the material is injected in the form of dykes which don't reach the surface, and it's been estimated that the total thickness of dykes intruded in the last ninety million years is over 400 kilometres!
Since each dyke is quite narrow, averaging only ten metres wide, that's an awful lot of dykes, and a cross-section through Iceland would reveal hundreds and hundreds, sometimes so closely spaced together that there would be scarcely any non-dyke material present and many dykes would be intruded up the middle of earlier ones.
A few of these dykes reach the surface; when they do so, a fissure eruption takes place, and basalt lavas pour out over the surface.
[See Fig. 2]
When particularly large volumes of basalt are involved, such eruptions are commonly known as basaltic flood eruptions.
The most recent example of this kind took place in 1783, when lava was erupted from the twenty-five kilometre length of the Laki fissure in southern Iceland.
The eruption lasted between June and November of that year, and in those six months about eleven cubic kilometres of lava flowed out from the fissure, covering an area of nearly 600 square kilometres.
Most of the lava followed the courses of river valleys, principally the Skaftar and the Hverfisfljot, and formed glowing rivers of rock over fifty-six kilometres long.
So much lava flowed into the Skaftar valley that it was completely filled and lava began to spill out over the surrounding countryside.
[See Fig. 3]
The long-term results of this eruption were profound: it proved to be Iceland's worst ever disaster.
We'll see why later.
Apart from oceanic areas such as Iceland, fissure or basaltic flood eruptions have also occurred in several important continental areas: the western United States, India, South Africa and South America.
Most of these are rather old, and don't relate to the present Plate Tectonic picture, but rather to the situation ten or twenty million years ago.
It's thought, in fact, that they represent areas where ‘midocean’ ridges once formed below the continents, in the late stages of continental rifting, but before an ocean proper had opened (cf. chapter one), so in a sense the kind of volcanic activity that is typical of oceanic areas in fact took place on dry land.
Although they are now inactive, these old regions of continental flood basalts are impressive because of the sheer quantity of lavas involved.
In the Columbia River area of the western U.S.A. where most of the lavas were erupted about twenty million years ago, such vast amounts of basalt were poured out on to the surface that hills 1,500 metres high were drowned in lava!
This didn't happen during a single eruption, of course; the individual flows average only ten metres thick, so many hundreds of individual flows are piled up one on top of the other, covering an area of about 130,000 square kilometres.
[See Fig. 4]
It's not now possible to identify the fissures from which each of these thousands of lava flows were erupted, but it is likely that each was produced by an eruption broadly similar to that of the Laki fissure.
It may seem initially that differentiation between a central and a fissure eruption is the simplest thing in the world but, unfortunately, it's not.
A lot depends on the scale that is considered.
For example, the Laki eruption taken as a whole constitutes a splendid example of a fissure eruption, but along its twenty-five kilometre length dozens of small volcanic cones were built up, none of them very big, although each one, if considered separately, could be called a central vent volcano.
More important, the big volcanoes which make up the Hawaiian Islands all seem at first sight to have central vents — they are mountains thousands of metres high, with craters right at the top.
But the summit craters are situated on a fissure zone, and most of the lavas that are erupted actually emerge from fissures.
This means that as the volcano grows, it becomes elongated in the direction of the fissure zone.
[See Fig. 5]
So it's impossible to make a hard and fast distinction between fissure and central eruptions.
That isn't particularly important in itself, but it does illustrate some of the difficulties involved in dealing with volcanoes.
Let's leave that problem, though, and look at a few of the more important kinds of places in which eruptions occur, relative to a preexisting volcano.
First, all the activity may be confined to the summit crater at the top of the volcano, just where one might expect it to be.
Second, it's possible for some explosive activity to take place in the summit crater, but for most of the lava to be erupted quietly from a vent or fissure on the flanks of the volcano.
Third, there may be very little activity at the summit crater, but the feeder pipe (usually a dyke) may branch off and most of the eruption may take place on the flanks of the volcano, with a small cone being built up, and lavas emerging from it.
This is called a lateral eruption.
Finally, by a natural progression, there may be no activity at all in the summit crater, instead the new eruption may take place completely independently of the main volcano, and a new mini-volcano or parasitic cone may be built up.
In some cases, such parasitic cones can outgrow their parents, but at that point the term becomes irrelevant.
[See Fig.6]
Groupings Based on the Characters of Eruptions
In the past, vulcanologists have traditionally grouped eruptions into a sequence of progressively more violently explosive types.
This is rather a subjective approach, and has sometimes led to the situation where the same eruption has been given a different label by different observers.
It is still useful, though, and is described in this chapter.
In the last few years a more objective method, based on the properties of the material erupted has been devised.
This method is particularly valuable, since it can be applied to deposits produced by prehistoric eruptions, for which of course there are no observer's records.
This method will be discussed in chapter five.
Hawaiian eruptions are the mildest of all, and are characteristic of the Hawaiian island volcanoes, which all have soft, peaceful-sounding names such as Halemaumau, Kilauea and Mauna Loa.
The important thing about these volcanoes is that since they are right in the middle of the Pacific, they are basaltic, and their basalts are hot and very fluid.
When any supply of magma is present below a volcano, it usually contains a great deal of gas, and this gas is often at high pressure.
When the magma gets near the surface the gas expands and tries to escape.
If it can escape freely, then the eruption will not be violently explosive, since all explosions are the result of the more or less instantaneous expansion of large volumes of gas.
Now, since the Hawaiian basalts are so fluid, any high-pressure volcanic gases present can blow off steadily, without much fuss or bother, and the rising magma can reach the surface (to become lava), and flow away quietly quietly from the vent.
The Hawaiian lavas are so fluid, in fact, that as they stream away downhill they are often very graphically described as ‘rivers of fire’.
Sometimes, when an eruption takes place within a large crater, the lava can't flow away, and gets ponded up in the crater.
This has frequently happened on the Halemaumau volcano, which has a deep, circular, pit-like crater about one and a half kilometres across at its summit.
This crater often gets filled with lakes of lava which remain molten for amazingly long periods.
For a hundred years prior to 1924 the lake was present continually, and has appeared and disappeared again several times since.
By night the lava lake presents an unearthly sight, with great slabs of dark, solidified crust shifting about slowly on the surface, allowing the bright lava underneath to gleam through along the cracks between slabs.
Sometimes, small lava fountains play in the centre, and these reveal just how completely liquid lava can be, as it splashes and sloshes round the base of the fountain; at other times, small jets of gas blow up through the lava in fiery gouts, churning up the lake into glowing whorls and currents of molten rock.
For long periods, this somewhat improbable lake is so safe and tranquil that visitors can come right to the edge of the crater, without the least hazard.
Not surprisingly, this lava lake is one of the most photographed features in Hawaii, and the crater has been labelled in suitable post-card terminology ‘The House of Everlasting Fire’.
This, by the way, is something of a misnomer, since although adjectives like ‘fiery’ are often applied to volcanic phenomena (count the number of times in this book!) it's not strictly correct, since there is rarely any actual fire, in the sense of combustible material burning to produce flames and smoke.
Almost all the red and yellow colours come from the glow of the hot lava, and the ‘smoke’ consists of steam, dust clouds and fumes of sulphur dioxide and other pungent-smelling gases.
Very occasionally true flames are seen, usually small and faint, and these are believed to be produced by the burning of hydrogen gas escaping from the magma.
The ease with which the dissolved high-pressure gases can escape from Hawaiian magmas leads to some very spectacular eruptions.
The pressure of the escaping gas sprays liquid lava high into the air, just as a soda siphon squirts water, to form fire fountains.
[See Fig. 1]
These fountains must surely be amongst the most remarkable of all natural phenomena; the plumes of incandescent liquid rock commonly reach many tens of metres in height, and one in 1959 reached not less than 400 metres.
They are not just short squirts, either.
Some fire fountains play for hours on end.
Not unvaryingly, though, like the miserable affairs in Trafalgar Square, but swelling, dying away and surging up irregularly.
At the top of the fountain, the spray breaks up into individual droplets which get carried by the wind and fall a long way from the vent, so that downwind of the fountain there is a shifting curtain of glowing droplets showering down.
Hawaiian-type eruptions are not confined to Hawaii, although in few other areas are fire fountains quite so beautifully developed.
Similar lava lakes to that of Halemaumau have been reported from many strange places: two of the most active volcanoes in Africa, Nyamlagira and Nyiragongo, have both had persistent lava lakes at different times in their history.
Generalizing rather, it is probably true to say that Hawaiian-type eruptions are more common on the oceanic island volcanoes than elsewhere (though the examples of Nyiragongo and Nyamlagira emphasize that it is only a generalization), since it is in these environments that the fluid basalt lavas are most likely to be found.
Slightly more explosive are Strombolian eruptions, named after the tiny volcanic island of Stromboli, between Sicily and Italy.
[See Fig. 2]Stromboli has been showing the same kind of activity more or less continuously for centuries, and is often called the ‘lighthouse of the Mediterranean’.
In a typical Strombolian eruption, basaltic lava is again involved, but it is not quite as fluid as in the Hawaiian eruptions and gas escape takes place spasmodically in minor explosions every few minutes or so, sometimes rhythmically and predictably, sometimes irregularly.
The explosions usually sound more like thumps and whooshes than proper bangs, and there are sometimes sustained blasts like the din made by a powerful jet engine at close quarters.
Each explosion shoots out glowing fragments of semi-solid lava high into the air.
These, although they must be travelling very fast initially, seem to move quite slowly, twisting and turning lazily in the air and tracing out elegant parabolic paths as they fall back to earth round the vent.
When they hit the ground, they may stop abruptly, embedding themselves still glowing, fuming and sizzling slightly in the loose ash; or they may bounce off, to leap down the steep sides of the cone in a series of great bounds, developing a rapid spin as they do so, and whirring downhill like cannonballs, ending up in a rattling shower of small stones at the bottom.
Sometimes, when activity is particularly intense, the wall of the crater is breached and a small lava flow emerges and flows away downhill, and if this happens, the activity tends to quieten down for a while.
Large volume lava flows, though, are not an essential part of a Strombolian eruption; the term is usually used to describe the activity within the crater.
Strombolian activity, then, is a bit noisier than Hawaiian, but it's still not particularly dangerous — there are two villages on Stromboli only a couple of kilometres from the ever-active vent, and the inhabitants rarely have cause to worry about whether they will live to see the sun rise on another day, or on another boatload of visitors coming across to look at the volcano.
This kind of semi-continuous mild activity is quite common on volcanoes all over the world.
Etna, on the island of Sicily, has been whooshing and thumping away in one or other of its twin summit craters intermittently for hundreds of years — Milton refers to it as ‘Thundering Aetna’ in Paradise Lost — and the lurid spectacle of gouts of lava being ejected from the crater every few minutes makes an odd contrast with the winter sports going on on the smooth, snowy slopes beneath the summit.
In a quite different part of the world, the volcano Pacaya, only thirty-two kilometres from Guatemala City, in Central America, is just as active, if not more so, and the red glare from the volcano can easily be seen from the city on a clear night.
This is a relatively small volcano, and so easily accessible that it has even been suggested that a hotel should be built beneath it, to make an especially attractive night spot for jaded Guatemalans, but so far no one has risked the capital.
Mt Erebus, the 4,045 metres-high volcano near McMurdo Sound in the Antarctic also has bouts of mild Strombolian activity.
It was in this state when a team consisting of six men from Scott's base camp made an ascent of the volcano in December 1912, with a geologist, Raymond Priestley, in the lead.
The party reached the lip of the main summit crater safely, only to find that it was quite docile, and that there was little to see within the crater apart from dense, swirling clouds of pungent sulphurous steam.
They took some photographs, left a record of their ascent in a sealed tin in a cairn, and set off back down again.
About twenty metres down from the top, Priestley realized that the tin they had left in the cairn in fact contained their exposed photographic plates, and that what they were carrying down with them was the tin containing the record of their ascent.
He sent back one of the party to retrieve the proper tin, but no sooner had this poor unfortunate reached the crater rim than the volcano blew up in his face.
Fortunately, he survived unscathed, apart from being showered with dust and ash, and inhaling a few lungfuls too many of sulphur dioxide fumes.
Some way to the west of Stromboli, and just to the north of Sicily, are the Lipari Islands.
One of these islands contains a small and rather drab, unimpressive-looking conical heap of rubble, with a deep crater at its centre.
This is Vulcano, the ancestor of all volcanoes.
It has been intermittently active throughout history and may have been even more active in Greek and Roman times than it is now.
To the Greeks, Vulcano was known as Hiera, the chimney of the forge of Hephaestus, God of Fire, but it was the Roman God of fire, Vulcan, blacksmith to the Gods, whose name stuck.
Vulcan, by the way, is supposed to have forged the breastplate of Hercules and the shield of Achilles as well as the arrows of Apollo and Diana.
And just to cap all this mythological irrelevance, the island of Vulcano is now linked by a small spit of land to another small volcano, Vulcanello, which used to be a separate island, and it has been suggested that this pair comprised the ‘Scylla and Charybdis’, beloved of Homer and modern politicians, but then so have several other island pairs in the Mediterranean.
Apart from this dubious distinction, Vulcano has also given its name to a type of eruption, the Vulcanian, very different from the Strombolian.
Several features identify these eruptions.
First, they don't occur often during the life of the volcano, but when they do, they may continue intermittently for several months.
Second, the magmas involved are much more viscous than those in Strombolian eruptions so that the explosive activity tends to be violent, often demolishing parts of the volcanic structure.
In Strombolian eruptions, the red-hot fragments of lava that are hurled out of the vent are usually fairly plastic, smallish, and don't travel far.
In a Vulcanian eruption, the ejected material comes in the form of solid blocks and highly-fragmented ash, and the explosions are often powerful enough to heave blocks weighing many tons clear of the crater while smaller ones may be thrown for a kilometre or more.
Third, and perhaps most conspicuous, a great plume of gas and ash rises above the crater, rolling upwards in tight turbulent convolutions often to a height of several kilometres.
A word here in passing about what actually goes to make up a typical volcanic eruption cloud.
Three quite separate elements may be involved, all or any of which may be present at any one time.
First, there may be a more or less continuous emission of steam and other vapours, not carrying much solid material, which forms a white column rather like the plume above a power-station cooling tower.
Next, intermittent or semi-continuous explosions may hurl solid material up in a dense dark mass, with the leading fragments soaring straight up into the air, trailing smaller fragments behind them, and looking from a distance like rockets.
These don't usually rise more than a couple of hundred metres before falling back along parabolic paths.
The profile of this short-lived low-level blast cloud is supposed to look something like that of a clump of fir trees, so it's sometimes described as ‘cypressoid’.
Such clouds are usually best developed in eruptions of marine volcanoes.
Last, and most important, is the cloud of fine ash which rises.
If there are distinct separate explosions taking place during the eruption, then a fresh ash cloud will develop after each explosion, just like the ones produced by the explosion of a bomb, or after blasting in a quarry.
If the explosive activity is more or less continuous, then clearly ash will rise continuously.
These debris laden clouds usually have a dark, solid appearance, often compared with the globular voluted surface of a cauliflower, and rather like the black, towering cumulus clouds that threaten thunderstorms.
Often, the three elements are intermingled, so that the result is a mixture of white streaked with the grey or black ashy material.
Beneath and down-wind of the ash cloud there is a steady rain of fine ash particles, sometimes falling so thickly that a dark curtain appears to be hanging beneath the cloud, while in and around it electrical storms rage, with lightning flickering frequently, so that the whole effect is much more dramatic than even the most ominous of thunderclouds.
Vulcanian eruptions sometimes form the first phases of a longer eruption, when the volcano is ‘clearing its throat’ for the real business, and as such, there may be no new magmatic material involved, and all the material that is showered up as ash to form the ‘cauliflower cloud’may be merely old, cold, solid lava which was previously blocking up the throat; if this is the case, the eruptions are sometimes called ultra-vulcanian.
On the other hand, though, it's quite possible for Vulcanian eruptions to continue for long periods, with fresh viscous magma constantly being supplied.
Between 1963 and 1965 the volcano Irazu in Costa Rica was more or less continuously active, with frequent explosions raining ash over a wide area and ruining the all-important coffee crop, but throughout this time no lavas were erupted and there was no significant change in the pattern of the eruption.
Vesuvian (or sub-Plinian) eruptions are one step further on from Vulcanian, their principal distinguishing feature being that rather than intermittent explosions there is a fairly sustained blast of escaping gas from the throat of the volcano, which carries the cauliflower cloud of ash much higher into the air.
These continuous blasts may last for several hours, and in that time they eject large volumes of ash, which is always new magmatic material, rather than shattered bits and pieces of old rock.
Vesuvius, which is only about ten kilometres from the centre of Naples and in one of the most densely populated areas of Italy, has an irregular cycle of eruptions with twenty-five to thirty years of quiet being followed by a major outburst, when a great plume of dust and ash from the volcano rises over the city, reaching many kilometres into the air.
The ash-fall from a typical Vesuvian eruption rarely causes casualties, but it did cause problems during the most recent eruption in 1944, when Allied airfields in the Naples area were carpeted with ash, making the runways temporarily unusable, and gritty particles found their way into the air intakes of aircraft flying in the area.
Pliny the Younger's account of the death of his uncle during the A.D. 79 eruption of Vesuvius has been commemorated in the term Plinian eruption, the most violent of all in the sequence we have been considering.
Although their effects are more extensive, Plinian eruptions are not basically very different qualitatively from the Vesuvian type.
(By the way, don't forget that it is only types of eruption, that are being discussed, and that any individual volcano may erupt in any of these ways — or in none.)
The one thing above all others which characterizes a Plinian eruption is the sheer volume of the fragmentary material ejected by the gas blast.
Pompeii, approximately eight kilometres from Vesuvius, was buried over three metres deep in pumice in A.D. 79, and the total volume ejected in the forty-eight hours or so of that eruption was probably about three cubic kilometres.
Frequently, too, there are major structural changes to the volcano, with a large part of it being blown away or collapsing to form a gaping crater, up to several kilometres across.
The 1883 eruption of Krakatoa was of this kind, although the four explosions that took place at its climax were so stupendous that a separate type of eruption, the Krakatoan, is sometimes referred to.
Probably the best modern example of a Plinian eruption was that of the Bezymianny volcano in Kamchatka, part of the Russian segment of the ‘Ring of Fire’.
Bezymianny was a rather obscure volcano (the name itself means ‘no name’) before the eruption and was generally thought to be extinct.
The volcano was 3,102 metres high, and had a conical profile.
In September 1955 seismic activity began to make itself felt in the surrounding area, gradually increasing in severity until 22 October, when the eruption commenced.
For several months intermittent Vulcanian activity continued, hurling ash between four and eight kilometres in the air, but died down somewhat in early 1956.
On 30 March, however, an exceptionally violent explosion occurred, blowing off the top 200 metres of the volcano, and propagating a dense eruption cloud which expanded upwards at a speed estimated to be something like 500 metres per second, finally reaching a height of thirty-eight kilometres.
About four cubic kilometres of ash were ejected, falling out over an area of 57,000 square kilometres.
After the eruption, it was found that almost the whole of one side of the cone had disappeared, and it looked as if a giant bite had been taken out of it.
In the bite-shaped hollow, a small mound of viscous lava was growing and continued to do so for a long time afterwards.
The significance of this little mound will soon become apparent.
The 1902 eruption of Mt Pelee was the first recognized example of a Peleean eruption, a very different kind of phenomenon from the ‘ordinary’ Vesuvian or Plinian types, although Peleean eruptions often occur as short-lived side-shows to the latter.
Only one feature characterizes a Peleean eruption; a nuee ardente, or glowing cloud, of the sort that had such lethal effects on St Pierre.
(Remember that Mt Pelee unleashed several nuees during the eruption of 1902–3, but only two caused casualties.)
All of these nuees were linked with the growth of a large pile or dome of viscous lava on the site of the Etang Sec, where the eruption first started.
For the most part, the growth of this dome was accompanied by intermittent Vulcanian activity, responsible for the loud explosions heard in St Pierre and for the ash that was showered down on the town before and after the fateful 8 May.
On that date, a part of the side of the dome was blown out, and a large cloud was blasted out sideways, rather than straight up as in a normal Vulcanian eruption.
This was a nuee.
A nuee consists of an incandescent mass of solid fragments, buoyed up by the rush of expanding, heated gases.
The escaping gases rise upwards, forming a turbulent, dynamic wall, while the denser part, containing most of the solid material, hugs the ground and rolls rapidly over it, travelling at great speed, since each particle of the solid material is in a more or less floating condition, cushioned by escaping gas like a hovercraft.
A nuee is at once immensely hot and immensely powerful — the St Pierre nuee has often been called a ‘tornadic’ blast — and its destructive capabilities are all too clear.
It's a little surprising, then, that similar phenomena had not been recognized prior to 1902, since they must have occurred on numerous occasions in the past.
Since St Pierre, though, nuees have been observed in a number of different eruptions, and in a great many of them they are linked with the construction of a lava dome.
So often, in fact, that the presence of such a dome is sometimes considered to be a characteristic feature of Peleean eruptions.
This is where that small mound of lava on Bezymianny comes in.
This eruption could as well be termed Peleean as Plinian, for part of the force of the great eruption of 1956 was expended in powerful nuees which swept down the flanks of the volcano with terrific force.
Trees twenty-four kilometres from the volcano were felled by the blast, and sandy ash carried by the nuees formed deposits over thirty centimetres thick even nine kilometres away.
Not all nuees are associated with lava domes, though.
Ironically enough, only the day before the St Pierre tragedy, a series of nuees were erupted from the volcano Soufriere on St Vincent, 144 kilometres south of Martinique.
About one third of the island was devastated but fortunately it was thinly populated, and casualties were relatively few: only 1,350 people were killed.
The interesting thing about the St Vincent nuees is that they were a side-effect of a conventional Vulcanian-type explosion column.
As this rose vertically into the air, the nuees rolled away sideways from its base, and down the flanks of the volcano.
These radially-directed nuees are an example of a phenomenon known as the base surge or ground surge, first recognized in studies of test explosions of nuclear weapons.
Next time you see that familiar mushroom cloud rearing up (hopefully on your T.V. screen, not across the road), look at the base or stalk of the mushroom, and you'll almost certainly see a ring of cloud rolling away horizontally from it.
That's the base surge.
[See Fig. 3]Remember the term, because it will turn up again in a rather odd context.
In 1951 a well-documented eruption of this kind took place on Mt Lamington in Papua, another of those volcanoes which was thought to be extinct until something nasty happened.
After a few days of premonitory seismic activity, the eruption started on 15 January and for a few days well-developed Vulcanian activity continued, with frequent explosions and a great eruption cloud reaching up to 10,000 metres.
At 10.40 on 20 January a climactic explosion occurred, with a huge ash-laden cloud climbing upwards to a height of 13,000 metres in two minutes.
Base surges spread out radially in all directions from the base of the rising ash column, rolling down the volcano at speeds of nearly a hundred kilometres per hour and covering an area of more than 230 square kilometres.
[See Fig. 4]
Within the affected area the destruction was almost complete and there were no survivors.
The force of the blast was impressive.
The thick forests growing on the flanks of the volcano were completely levelled, in some cases so completely that it was hard to tell that there once had been trees growing there.
To quote the Australian vulcanologist G.A.
Taylor, who reached the scene two days later, ‘in many places the only evidence of the forest cover was charred roots carved off level with.
.. soil surface’.
Elsewhere fully grown trees were uprooted, and were found laid out in the direction of the blast.
Near the village of Higaturu, the mangled remains of a vehicle were found hanging upside down in a tree.
Most of the houses in the village itself were totally destroyed, and 3,000 people were killed.
Many other examples of Peleean eruptions are now known, especially among the volcanoes in the Philippine Islands, and they have been closely studied, since there is considerable interest in how these eruptions occur and in particular how the material in a nuee is actually transported.
This is important because it is directly relevant to understanding the mechanism of a type of eruption not yet observed at first hand by any human being, but one that would make the Mt Pelee eruption pale into insignificance if an example were to occur today.
These eruptions give rise to rocks known as ignimbrites, and they are so powerful that tens of cubic kilometres of ignimbrite can be erupted in nuee ardente-like incandescent clouds in the space of a few hours or days.
Less than one million years ago an eruption of this sort took place near Naples; the ignimbrites erupted spread out over 5,000 square kilometres, and performed the almost incredible feat of rushing up and over mountain passes 600 metres high.
Such eruptions are clearly something rather special, and will be discussed in more detail later.
In discussing the various types of eruption that are generally recognized, it was emphasized that labels such as‘Strombolian’ or ‘Plinian’should only be applied to recognizable phases of an eruption; they may not necessarily apply to the whole thing.
To see just how important this is we'll follow the course of one eruption from start to finish.
The example we'll consider is that of Mt Etna in 1971.
This wasn't an especially spectacular event, although it was the biggest eruption on Etna for some years, and there were no casualties, but none the less it was very instructive.
Etna is a big volcano, much the highest in Europe, and it has a record of activity going well back into history.
It's just over 3,300 metres high, so that the top part is snow-covered for much of the year, and the fortunate Sicilians can ride up in a cable car from the warmth of the lower slopes to ski there.
Etna has two summit craters, the Main Crater and the North-East Crater (both lying along the line of a fissure), and the North-East Crater had been showing mild Strombolian activity for many years prior to the 1971 eruption.
The first evidence that this was on its way was noticed towards the end of March, when a patch of snow just below and to the south of the Main Crater began to melt, and simultaneously, activity in the North-East Crater began to die down.
On 5 April, a set of fissures opened in the same place, and showers of incandescent fragments of lava were ejected.
These rapidly accumulated round the fissure, building up into a conical heap, and then, as more and more new material emerged from the fissures, lava flows were erupted and began to stream down the ski-slopes.
This was the first phase of the eruption; it lasted about two weeks.
Strombolian activity continued for most of this time in the little cone built up over the fissure, until it was a respectable thirty metres or so in height, while the lavas snaked down-slope in several glowing tongues, permanently ruining many of the best skiing slopes, engulfing one by one the pylons that carried the cable-way, and demolishing the upper cable-station.
These flows were relatively small and they didn't get down to the lower, inhabited parts of the mountain.
Ironically, though, they demolished an imposing volcanological observatory built in the 19th century and modernized under Mussolini in the 1930s.
The second phase was completely different.
A long linear fissure opened abruptly on 13 May, well down on the eastern slopes of the volcano, and at a height of only 1,800 metres.
There was no explosive activity, no eruption column, just a crack in the ground opening up, and a few pungent blue sulphurous fumes.
Soon, though, lava began to flow freely from the fissure, quite quietly and in much greater volumes than in the first phase.
This undramatic release of large volumes of lava, would, if one had to give it a name, probably best be described as a Hawaiian-type eruption.
Since they were erupted so low down, it was not long before the rivers of lava were flowing through inhabited areas.
They did a great deal of damage to vineyards, roads, bridges and houses and threatened the villages of St Alfio, Fornazzo and Macchia.
The people of St Alfio talked the local priest into exorcizing the lava with the help of sacred relics, and, with or without divine intervention, the villages escaped serious damage.
The third and final phase was different again.
On 18 May a deep pit-like hole opened high up on the volcano, east of the Main Crater, at a height of 2,980 metres.
No lava at all was erupted, but great dark cauliflower explosion-clouds rolled out of it, laying a thin carpet of ash downwind of the vent.
This was classic Vulcanian activity.
So, not counting the initial Strombolian activity in the North-East Crater, there were three separate sites of activity during the course of the eruption, and each showed different behaviour: Strombolian, Hawaiian and Vulcanian.
[See Fig. 1]
In part, the difference in behaviour at the three sites reflects the relationship between a lava and its gas content, a topic which will be discussed further in the next section.
In the first phase, the gas pressure on the magma was released by the mildly-explosive Strombolian activity.
This meant that the magma that fed the fissures of the second phase was almost completely de-gassed, hence its quiet emission.
The third, Vulcanian phase, also probably reflects this de-gassing process, with gas escaping from the magma below accumulating in the higher parts of the volcano, and then blasting its way to the surface.
This sort of pattern, high-level de-gassing followed by low-level emission of gas-free lavas, is typical of Etna, and many other volcanoes.
Controlling Factors in Eruptions
The rather crude criterion that we have used to distinguish between types of eruption, the degree of violence of explosiveness, reflects two more fundamental variables, the viscosity of the lava and the gas content.
Let's have a closer look at these two — viscosity first.
In common with all other liquids, from petrol to treacle, molten rocks have a viscosity, and also in common with other liquids, the viscosity decreases with increasing temperature.
A ‘hot’ lava, freshly-erupted, is a great deal less viscous than a ‘cold’one, and it can therefore flow faster.
The temperature of a lava flow is naturally lower at its far end than at its source, and this means that there are obvious differences in the speed at which the lava moves.
At source, a basalt lava may be moving at twenty or more kilometres an hour; at the far end it may be oozing forward like treacle at only a few metres per hour; so the temperature of a magma will obviously affect the style of an eruption considerably.
There's a complication, though.
Not all magmas have the same composition, and magmas with different compositions melt at different temperatures.
Basaltic rocks melt at about 1,100 degrees C, while granitic rocks melt at only about 650–700 degrees C, so magmas of granitic composition are many times more viscous than basaltic ones.
In a Hawaiian eruption, the magmas are basaltic, hot, and of low viscosity, so they can be extruded from a vent as lavas with little effort.
Basaltic magmas are usually involved in most Strombolian eruptions, too, but these are slightly more viscous, so there are rather more bangs and thumps, but the material that is ejected is still fairly fluid.
As one goes up the scale, though, one finds that magmas of more granitic composition are involved and they and the lavas they produce are more viscous.
The more viscous the lava, the more difficult it is to force it through a vent, and the vent may well become blocked with a slow-moving or stationary plug of lava.
If this happens, and gas pressure builds up beneath the plug, a potentially highly-explosive situation develops.
In Vulcanian eruptions, such a plug may be blown away by repeated explosions, after which lavas may flow away quietly, or if the magma is very viscous, and keeps on coming, explosions will continue.
Highly-viscous lavas are always concerned in Peleean eruptions; as we saw earlier, a dome or plug of lava often builds up within the crater concerned, blocking the throat of the volcano, so that the pressures building up beneath can only be relieved by vigorous explosions, which may be directed either upwards or sideways, blasting out as nuees ardentes.
Evidence of just how viscous the lavas are, and how great the forces involved are, was provided by the great spine which was pushed up out of the vent of Mt Pelee, reaching over 300 metres in height.
A viscous magma, however, is not by itself explosive; it is the gas content which is decisive, and which puts the bang into an eruption.
If two magmas have identical viscosities, it's the one with the highest gas content that's erupted most violently.
In the case of the 1971 Etna eruption, the magma involved was the same basaltic one throughout, yet its behaviour was quite different in its de-gassed condition in the second phase from its original state in the first, when the eruption was mildly explosive.
The contrast between gas-rich and gas-poor magmas is much more pronounced at the viscous granitic end of the scale.
If such a granitic magma had a low gas content, it would be erupted at the surface as a viscous lava flow, which would ooze sluggishly out of the vent, travel only a short distance and pile up into massive heaps.
If, on the other hand, the same granitic magma had a high gas content, the result would be spectacularly different.
As the magma approached the surface, the pressure on it would decrease, and the gas in it would expand; as the gas expanded it would take up more room, and this in turn would force the whole mass to rise faster and higher up the vent.
So a violent kind of self-accelerating process would take place, with the magma rapidly blowing itself up into a froth of gas and liquid rock and blasting itself clear out of the vent.
It is the myriad solidified fragments of this rock froth which form the large volumes of ash mantling the countryside round the volcano which is definitive of a Plinian eruption.
The light-weight rock froth itself is quite familiar, and turns up in British bathrooms; it is, of course, pumice.
Submarine Eruptions
Quite a large proportion of the world's volcanoes are located on the oceanic crust, most of them forming parts of the mid-ocean ridge systems.
Inevitably, therefore, there must be a good many eruptions taking place below sea level, so we will conclude this chapter by looking briefly at the sort of activity that results.
Two things stem directly from the location of a submarine eruption.
First, since the volcano is built on oceanic crust, the magmas involved will be basaltic, so that the sort of eruption that we can expect will be a modification of an ordinary Hawaiian or Strombolian eruption.
Second, when red-hot magma comes into contact with a large volume of sea water, the water is converted instantly into steam, and an explosion results.
So we can expect our submarine eruption to be much more explosive than its terrestrial counterpart.
The power of such underwater explosive activity was demonstrated forcibly in 1952, when a Japanese research vessel, the No. 5 Kaiyo-Maru, 211 tons, was sent to investigate reports of a submarine eruption about 420 kilometres south of Tokyo.
She never returned from that mission; it is believed that an explosion took place while she was directly over the site of the volcano.
There were no survivors from the crew of thirty-one, but some floating debris was found later, with fragments of rock particles from the eruption deeply embedded within it.
The ship had clearly been blown apart.
The effect of sea water on a basaltic magma is sometimes clearly displayed in places like Hawaii if there is a long active fissure, extending from inland towards the coast.
Along the inland part of the fissure ordinary Hawaiian-type eruptions will take place, with lava being emitted quietly, and perhaps a bit of fire-fountaining.
Near the sea, though, where water is able to penetrate inland and downwards through joints and cracks, the activity is much more vigorous, and in many respects resembles Vulcanian activity.
A tall, turbulent white steam column rolls upwards above the vent, often becoming grey or black as ash is blasted upwards.
Frequent powerful explosions throw showers of fragments into the air, forming the ‘cypressoid’ eruption cloud mentioned earlier.
It has recently been suggested that a good name for eruptions of this type would be ‘Surtseyan’, after the eruption off Iceland in 1963.
When a volcano erupts actually beneath the sea, a series of stages in the activity can usually be identified.
At first, there will be little to see other than an area of dirty, discoloured water, possibly hot or ‘boiling’, and probably with a good many dead fish floating around in it.
Next, explosive activity will start, blasting ashy material in jets a couple of hundred metres above sea level.
A more or less permanent steam column will soon establish itself, and a Surtseyan eruption ensues, with ejected material accumulating on the sea floor until there is such a pile that the top of it shows itself above sea level, and an island is born.
The style of eruption doesn't change much, though, until the island has grown substantially, and a recognizable cone and crater have developed.
By that time, the feeder pipe of magma will have become fairly well insulated from the sea, so for the first time the cherry red glow of liquid lava will be seen, and small lava flows will emerge, cementing the island together.
Mild explosive activity usually takes place in the crater, throwing up showers of red-hot lava, and in this condition the style is no longer Surtseyan but Strombolian, and of course the eruption has ceased to be a strictly submarine one.
The kinds of deposits that are produced by the submarine and surface phases of the same eruption are also quite different, as we shall see.
Chapter 4
In the last chapter, the different types of volcanic eruption were described; in this chapter and the two following some of the different types of rocks that result will be considered.
It is important to emphasize how varied volcanoes can be in this respect.
Some volcanoes produce only one kind of rock during their entire lives, but others show an impressive diversity.
It is hard to imagine a greater contrast between two rock types than that between obsidian, a natural volcanic glass which will shatter at a blow into razor-sharp splinters, and pumice, a rock so light and frothy that it will float on water.
Both, however, may be produced by a volcano during the course of a single eruption, and they may be chemically identical.
The pronounced physical differences between them result only from the contrasted ways in which they are erupted.
Obsidian is erupted quietly as lava, forming thick, sluggish flows, while pumice is blasted out rapidly and blown up into a consistency something like expanded polystyrene, with a delicate cellular structure that results from the expansion of large volumes of gas within the magma.
Rocks like pumice, which are ejected as broken, solid fragments rather than in liquid form, are known as pyroclastic rocks (pyro — fire, clastic — broken = broken by fire).
All volcanic rocks, whatever their composition, may turn up either as lavas or pyroclastics, but rocks of some compositions are more often found as lavas, while others are more common as pyroclastics.
This is an important point, and one that will be followed more closely.
First, though, a word about the stuff that rocks and minerals are made of.
The Chemistry of Rocks
When moving around the surface of the Earth, one cannot fail to be impressed by the diversity of all that one sees, and it is easy to imagine that there is an infinite complexity of different ‘things’ not apparently related to one another.
In chemical terms, though, the situation is much simpler, since all matter is composed of only a hundred or so elements.
So the apparently boundless diversity of plant life disappears when one recalls that all plants are composed of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen and a few less important elements, and that chemically there is little difference between a daisy and an oak tree.
The same is true of rocks.
Thousands of different kinds of rocks have been described and separately named, but when one gets down to their chemistry, one finds that they all have a great deal in common.
Ninety-two elements exist in nature and another dozen or so have been made by nuclear physicists.
Of these ninety-two, only twelve occur in proportions greater than 0.1 per cent in the Earth's crust.
In the following table they are in order of abundance: Percentage Oxygen 46.6 Silicon 27.7 Aluminium 8.1 Iron 5.0 Calcium 3.6 Sodium 2.8 Potassium 2.6 Magnesium 2.1 Titanium 0.4 Phosphorus 0.2 Manganese 0.1 Hydrogen 0.1
Of these twelve, the first eight are much the most abundant, with silicon and oxygen head and shoulders above the rest.
Silicon and oxygen, in fact, are the fundamental constituents of almost all the rocks in the Earth's crust.
The two can occur just by themselves, in a compound represented chemically as silicon dioxide; this is silica, and in the form of quartz it is one of the commonest rock-forming minerals in the world.
Apart from quartz, silicon and oxygen combine together to form an atomic building-block known as the silicon tetrahedron, with a single atom of silica surrounded by four atoms of oxygen.
[See Fig. 1](To get an idea of what a tetrahedron looks like in three dimensions, look at one of those awkwardly-shaped cardboard milk cartons.
They are made up of four triangular sides, and are splendid tetrahedra.)
This SiO4 building-block can combine with almost all of the other twelve elements in the list to form silicate minerals, and these, with quartz, make up more than 99 per cent of all volcanic rocks.
To be academic for a moment, minerals can be defined as ‘naturally formed, inorganic substances which possess a definite chemical composition and a definite atomic structure’.
Many thousands of separate natural minerals which fit this definition have been described, and, especially in the nineteenth century, scientists spent decades of their lives in searching out new ones.
Fortunately, though, all but a few volcanic rocks are built up by various combinations of only seven different minerals, or rather mineral families.
Here they are: Silicates Olivines Pyroxenes Amphiboles Micas Feldspars Quartz Oxides
The first six are all silicate minerals; the last are also-rans, making up the 1 per cent non-silicate content of volcanic rocks, and are almost always oxides of iron and titanium.
The olivines, pyroxenes, amphiboles, micas and feldspars are true families, not individual minerals; each family has the same atomic structure, but the chemical composition of minerals in each family can vary widely, within certain limits.
The atomic structures which characterize each family are built up in different ways with the basic SiO4 building-block.
So volcanic rocks are composed of only a few mineral groups, each group having its own characteristic atomic structure.
Most volcanic rocks are composed of only four or so of these groups, and there is a steady change in the proportions of different groups present as one goes from one end of the rock spectrum to another.
Rocks are classified chemically according to how much silica (silicon dioxide) they contain; rocks with a lot of silica are known as acid.
They consist mostly of quartz and feldspars, with a little mica or amphibole.
Basic rocks form the other end of the spectrum, they contain much less silicon dioxide, there is no free quartz (all the silica is present as silicates), but there is a lot of feldspar, and a great deal of pyroxene, olivine and oxide minerals.
Apart from quartz and the feldspars, most minerals are dark in colour, so basic rocks with no quartz tend to be dark-coloured, while acid rocks are much lighter and usually have only isolated specks of dark minerals.
As far as actual examples of volcanic rocks are concerned, it was mentioned that the most abundant are basalts, which form at mid-ocean ridges, and andesites, which are formed at destructive plate margins.
Basalts are examples of basic volcanic rocks, while andesites are intermediate between basic and acid.
To these should be added a third group, which are not so abundant in terms of volume, but which are equally important.
These are the rhyolites, which are right at the other end of the spectrum from basalts; that is to say they are acid, contain a lot of silica and have the same composition as granite.
They are lighter in colour and lower in density than basalts or andesites, and contain fewer dark minerals.
Obsidian is a special kind of rhyolite; it is a natural glass, whereas ordinary rhyolites are not.
The important properties of these three principal volcanic rock groups can be summarized in simple tables.
Property Basalt —
Silica content Least — about 50% (therefore basic)
Content of dark minerals Highest
Typical minerals Feldspar Pyroxene Olivine Oxides
Density Highest
Melting point Highest
Viscosity as surface Least molten rock
Tendency to form lavas Highest
Tendency to form pyroclastics Least
Property Andesite —
Silica content Intermediate –60%
Content of dark minerals Intermediate
Typical minerals Feldspar Amphibole Pyroxene Mica
Density Intermediate
Melting point Intermediate
Viscosity as surface Intermediate molten rock
Tendency to form lavas Intermediate
Tendency to form pyroclastics Intermediate
Property Rhyolite —
Silica content Most — 65% (therefore acid)
Content of dark minerals Least
Typical minerals Feldspar Quartz Mica Amphibole
Density Lowest
Melting point Lowest
Viscosity as surface Highest molten rock
Tendency to form lavas Least
Tendency to form pyroclastics Highest
These tables illustrate the all-important variations in properties between the two extremes: basalt and rhyolite.
Fundamentally, it is the differences in composition that are responsible for all the variations between the extremes, and this produces an interesting chain of cause and effect which can be summed up like this:
Composition dictates melting temperature
Temperature dictates viscosity
Viscosity dictates explosive potential of eruption
Explosiveness of eruption dictates whether lavas or pyroclastics are produced
So while it may not seem obvious that two magmas, differing only by 5 or 10 per cent in silica content, should behave quite differently on eruption, this chain of cause and effect operates to produce very substantial differences indeed.
Physical Properties of Lava Flows
Lavas are amongst the most harmless weapons in a volcano's formidable armoury — one can always see them coming, and almost always get out of their way quickly enough.
For all their harmlessness, though, they are still absorbingly interesting natural spectacles.
A specimen of basalt taken from a cold lava flow, however, is not a particularly inspiring object at all— in most cases, it probably looks like a dirty black lump of clinker.
It is usually difficult to see the individual minerals making up a basalt, since they are far too small, so one has to use a microscope.
First, though, one has to obtain a very thin section of the rock, thin enough to be translucent.
Cutting these sections is a skilled job, requiring the services of a technician in a specially-equipped workshop, so there can be no question of using even the most portable of microscopes to study rocks in the field.
When a thin section of a basalt is examined under a microscope, it can be seen to be made up of a closely-felted mass of interlocking needle-like crystals of feldspar, a millimetre or so long, with a scattering of more colourful tiny crystals of olivine and pyroxene and some black opaque specks of iron oxides.
It is the word crystal that is important.
A crystalline substance is an ordered substance: all the atoms in it are arranged in a regular geometrical pattern; so when the lava cooled from its original molten condition, the initial homogeneous liquid melt crystallized out to form well-ordered, identifiable minerals.
This may seem quite straightforward, but it is important, because in some cases this orderly process of crystallization does not take place, and the result is a homogeneous lump of rock.
Different minerals crystallize at different temperatures, so that when a basalt magma cools, a sequence of minerals appears.
The first mineral to crystallize is usually olivine, which carries on crystallizing as the magma cools until a temperature is reached at which a second mineral, pyroxene, begins to appear, and then, as the temperature drops still further, these two continue to crystallize together.
Finally, a temperature is reached when a third mineral, feldspar, joins in.
Crystallization then continues until the rock is completely solid.
Quite often, olivine and pyroxene begin to crystallize out early on, so they may be present in the final rock as quite large crystals, up to a centimetre across, many times larger than the crystals surrounding them, and easily visible with the naked eye.
So there is an important contrast here between the groundmass of tiny, felted crystals and the much bigger, separate phenocryst minerals.
Most volcanic rocks contain some phenocrysts — they are a bit like the pips in raspberry jam.
The groundmass crystals form when the lava cools on reaching the surface, so the individual crystals are tiny, simply because they don't have the time to grow any larger in the relatively short period that the flow takes to cool.
The phenocryst minerals, the pips in the jam, however, crystallize out much earlier, while the magma is still underground.
So they have plenty of time to grow to a respectable size and are merely carried passively up to the surface with the rest of the magma when it is erupted, and are distributed uniformly throughout it.
But what about those lavas that solidify into one homogeneous lump, without crystallizing?
These are quite common, but instead of being featureless, uninteresting ‘lumps’, they are highly distinctive natural glasses.
When a melt of any kind is cooled rapidly, it does not have time to sort its atoms out into the ordered atomic structures of mineral crystals.
The atoms are all ‘frozen’ into the random positions they occupied in the liquid, producing a material which is neither crystal nor liquid: not crystal because it doesn't have an ordered structure, not liquid because it doesn't flow.
It is, in fact, a supercooled liquid, and if heated, it would soften slowly over a broad temperature range, rather than melting abruptly.
Ordinary window glass is an example of matter in this state; it is made by melting up silicate materials such as quartz sand and allowing the melt to cool under controlled conditions so that crystallization does not occur.
Glass, however, may crystallize out or devitrify in the solid state if it's left long enough, with myriads of tiny crystals forming and making it opaque.
Brittle toffee is another example of a glass; it consists mainly of non-crystalline sugar, while some kinds of fudge are devitrified toffee.
When lava flows are erupted at the surface, they are necessarily rapidly chilled, and volcanic glasses are common.
The surface layers of basalt flows are commonly glassy; but deeper within, the amount of glass gets less, and more crystals appear, until the whole mass is composed of crystals.
The transition from glass to crystals in a basalt may cover a few centimetres, but in andesites and rhyolites it is much broader, and large thicknesses of glass may be present.
One of the most characteristic features of basalt lavas is that they are often riddled with holes.
Large quantities of gas may be involved in the eruption of basaltic lavas; when the lava is below ground, the gas is kept in solution in the molten rock, when the pressure on the lava is reduced the gases come out of solution and bubbles form, just as they do when a bottle of champagne is opened.
If the bubbling gas can escape freely, the lava will become de-gassed, or ‘flat’, and the rock that results will be free of bubbles.
If, on the other hand, gases continue to escape while the lava is being erupted, bubbles will go on growing in the lava, and these will be preserved in the rock when it cools.
Normally, these bubbles (or vesicles) are only a few millimetres across and quite thinly scattered, but sometimes, if the lava has been particularly gas rich, the rock is so honeycombed with large bubbles that it looks like some kinds of Swiss cheese; more holes than solid.
Gas bubbles in any liquid tend to rise to the surface, so in any basalt lava flow, it is only the top part which is likely to have a honeycomb texture.
In the lower parts of the flow, vesicles are much smaller and scarcer, and are often absent altogether.
There are a great many other possible variables within a single basalt flow, apart from the vesicle distribution.
To get an idea of some of the many different features that can be produced, consider what happens to a single, large flow as it is traced from its source to its tip.
When it emerges from below ground, a basalt lava is usually at a temperature of about 1,100 degrees C, and it glows fiercely reddish yellow, the colour of molten metal poured from a furnace.
At this temperature the molten rock is at its least viscous and it flows downhill as a fiery river, splashing and bounding over minor irregularities like a mountain stream, and cascading over larger obstacles in glowing fire-falls.
As it flows, the lava cools, and its initial fierce glow subsides to a less intense yellow, and more important, the viscosity increases so that the lava becomes more like treacle.
As the viscosity increases, the lava flows more slowly and smoothly, not as boisterously as at first.
In practical terms, this means that when a yellow-hot lava is first emitted, it can flow at a rate of many kilometres an hour, but lower down on the flanks of the volcano, when it is cooler, it slows to the speed of a run, and then of a fast walk.
(The actual rate of flow at any point will, of course, depend on the slope of the ground.)
Further away from the source still, the lava flows even slower, and the yellow glow gives way to a bright cherry red, and black streaks and blobs of chilled solid lava appear on the surface.
Initially these are no more than tiny wisps streaked out on the surface of the lava, like flecks of foam on a river, which are soon engulfed once more in the main mass.
As the lava cools down further, to a dull red, more and more chilled fragments remain on the surface, and these small particles soon agglomerate together, forming progressively larger plates or rafts which cover the surface of the flow, the hot lava itself only glowing through in the cracks between rafts.
When the lava has reached this cherry red temperature, it's extremely viscous, like sticky treacle, and if one can get near enough to the flow to push a pole into it, quite a lot of material can be collected, and this can be carried away while still very hot and soft.
In many volcanic areas the locals make a practice of collecting small samples of lava in this way, and then mould it while still hot into ashtrays, medallions and so on, to sell as souvenirs of the eruption.
When a basalt flow has cooled sufficiently for some sort of crust to form, one of two possible things can happen.
It can either form a thin, skin-like layer of solid lava over the liquid, rather like the skin that develops on custard or boiled milk, or else it develops a rather thick, rubbly surface layer consisting of loose blocks of solidified lava.
This blocky layer is carried along on top of the moving flow, looking for all the world like rocks on a conveyor belt in a quarry.
The custard-skin type of surface is not as common as the rubbly type, but it is often particularly well-developed on oceanic volcanoes, and especially on the Hawaiian islands.
When lava like this comes to rest or slows down, the ‘skin’ piles up against itself, buckling up into a closely-spaced series of pleats.
These pleats give the lava a ropy appearance, and the flows are called by a name given to them by the Polynesian islanders — pahoehoe flows.
[See Fig. 1]
The other kind of flow, with the rubbly ‘conveyor-belt’ surface is also known by a Polynesian name; it is called an aa flow.
Areas of many square kms can be covered by aa lavas, and they present severe obstacles to anyone trying to cross them.
[See Fig. 2]
Every cindery boulder making up the jumbled chaotic surface is loose, irregularly angular in shape, and covered in razor-sharp protrusions.
Every step is a balancing act; every slip of the foot means a series of razor-like slashes on one's boots; to fall means badly lacerated hands and knees.
So crossing one of these flows is a dreary, difficult and painful job.
No wonder the Polynesians call them aa flows — and go round the long way!
However unpleasant these flows are to scramble over when cold, it is very instructive to watch them when hot.
As the lava cools, not only does the surface solidify, but the material at the sides does too.
As soon as the flow becomes established, in fact, piles of solid lumps of lava build up at the sides of the flow, and help to confine it to its course.
These marginal banks rapidly build up, and the lava soon finds itself channelled into a sort of self-made canal.
Often, the initial rapid rate of flow decreases, and then the level of the lava in the canal drops, leaving the banks, or levees as they are called, standing up high and dry like walls.
[See Fig. 3]
If the flow rate should increase for any reason, the lava may burst out over the levees, flooding out to form a new branch of the main flow, and this ‘break out’ will itself rapidly become established between levees.
Solid lumps of lava also pile up in front of the advancing nose of the lava.
In the higher, hotter parts, the lava continually advances forward over this solid material, engulfing it and rolling it up like the tracks on a tank or caterpillar tractor.
In the lower, colder parts, though, there is much more solid material on the surface, on the flanks and in front, and the lava can no longer simply advance over the top of the mass of its own rubble in front of it.
The flow doesn't stop, though.
From the outside, it may look like a static heap of boiler slag, but it's still very much alive, and mobile lava is still arriving deep within it and pushing forward.
So the nose of the flow is unstable and there is a constant gentle clatter of small lava chunks falling forward.
Every few minutes a large solid mass breaks off and topples forward in a cascade of loose, glowing material, and comes to rest a few feet from the main mass, leaving a fading, sullen red glowing scar to mark the place on the flow where it came from.
In this way, with one small rock fall following another, the flow continues to advance, very slowly, clanking and rattling forward like a shuffling slag heap.
This movement, perhaps only a few metres per hour, continues until the supply dies away at source, and the nose of the flow gradually slows down and stops, still and silent.
In a matter of hours the surface will be cold enough for geologists, sight-seers and small boys to swarm over it without harm, apart from singed boots and perhaps bottoms.
Deeper down, though, the main mass cools down much more slowly, so that for weeks afterwards the core of the flow will be red hot, with the glow visible from time to time when small collapses take place.
The rubble of solid chilled material overlying the hot core naturally tends to insulate it, and it does so very efficiently.
There is even one report of a couple of Russian geologists hopping on to the bouldery surface of an aa flow on the slopes of the Klyuchevskaya volcano in Kamchatka while it was still moving.
They were carried along on their gently-moving conveyor belt at a speed of about one and a half kilometres an hour, while they made determinations of the viscosity of the lava beneath the rubbly crust, and eventually hopped off again, none the worse for wear.
Features Associated with Basalt Lava Flows
A stream of lava is a long and complicated object and a great many things can happen to it, depending on its own physical condition and the sort of ground it is moving over.
For example, a basalt flow which is moving over a dry, sandy surface is quite well-behaved and peaceful, but if the same flow were to advance on to an area of wet, boggy ground, or on to a snow-field, the water trapped beneath the lava may be heated up and turned into high-pressure steam.
This steam sometimes blasts its way up to the surface through the lava, causing what is known as a phreatic explosion, so the advance of the lava is then anything but peaceful, and unwary spectators are sometimes injured by the explosions.
Processes such as these produce a great range of minor surface structures and other curiosities, but unfortunately, there is only space here to mention one or two of them.
Lava tunnels result from the rapid cooling of the surface and side of a flow.
If the flow is a big one, this usually means that the flow has an outer layer of rubbly fragments, an intermediate layer of solid, hard lava, and a core which is still molten.
This core of lava may continue to flow for a long while, but when the supply of fresh lava slows down at source, there will not be enough coming through to fill the whole volume of the core, so an empty space will be left, and this will form a long tube or tunnel running along the centre of the flow, sometimes for many kilometres.
[See Fig. 4]and [see Fig. 5].
Such lava tunnels are quite common, and they can be most useful.
At one time, there was one high up on Etna which served as a convenient overnight refuge for geologists watching activity in the crater.
It was at a height of nearly 3,000 metres & the air outside was well below freezing, but the lava tunnel was in an area of recent activity, and as a result it boasted beautiful underfloor heating.
Near the entrance the temperature was comfortable, but further in it rose progressively until it was intolerable.
Brewing up was easy — all that had to be done was to shift a few boulders to reach a hot spot lower down, and pop a billy-can of snow into the hole.
All things have drawbacks, however, and the sulphurous fumes wafting down from the crater were distinctly smelly, and the occupants of the tunnel awoke in the morning with headaches and mouths that tasted like the bottom of a parrot's cage.
Lavas which are fluid enough to produce tunnels also produce a number of other oddities.
Sometimes, in the middle of a flow, or else at the small mouths or boccas from which the flows emerge, gas venting from the lava flings small glowing gobbets of it short distances up into the air.
These fall back to earth as soft, squishy pancakes which pile up closely round the vent, soon enclosing it in a kind of chimney or hornito.
These hornitos, which are also known rather aptly as driblet cones, go on growing as long as there is both gas and lava to feed them, and they may reach a height of many metres.
The rate of flow of gas blowing off through these vents is often surprisingly fast.
It's sometimes possible to approach them closely enough to stick a device like an anemometer, or wind speed gauge, into the gas jet, and by doing this, supersonic speeds have been recorded.
Unfortunately, though, the gas is often extremely hot, probably over 800 degrees C, so the instrument that comes out of the jet is often only a sad relic of the instrument that went in.
Sometimes it doesn't come out...
Submarine Basalt Lava Flows
It may seem self-evident that submarine lava flows should be different from those formed on land, and that their formation should be accompanied by violent interaction between sea water and hot lava.
In some cases, where large aa lavas flow from land into the sea, this is true, and great quantities of steam are generated, while the lava is broken up into small glassy fragments which pile up in thick heaps at the front of the flow.
A lava flow originating on land can advance considerable distances into the sea in this way, building up a kind of delta of fragmental material on to which the flow proper can advance.
Surprisingly, though, small pahoehoe lavas can pour into the sea with as little disturbance as cream poured into coffee, there is a little steam, but little else.
This unexpected situation seems to arise because, when the molten lava enters the water, a layer of steam bubbles forms around it immediately, and this forms an effective insulating blanket, so that no violent interaction is possible.
The same is true of lava flows which are actually extruded under water.
These are common enough, since, as has already been mentioned, a large proportion of the world's volcanoes are situated in or below the oceans.
Unfortunately it is not easy — for obvious reasons — to study modern submarine lava flows in their proper environment.
The most convenient way to study flows of this sort is to look at old examples which have been brought up above sea level by earth movements of one kind or another, and which have been subsequently cut through by erosion and exposed in clean, dry cliff sections.
Their appearance in such an exposure is extremely distinctive.
Instead of a single thick unit, like a land-based basalt, a submarine flow consists of a multitude of little packets of lava, commonly about one metre across, each with a fine-grained, glassy skin, and these packets are piled on top of one another, sometimes in thicknesses of hundreds of metres or more.
These packets are properly called pillows, and the lavas pillow lavas.
It is clear that the skin of each pillow must originally have been fairly flexible, since the base of each pillow characteristically sags into the gap between the ones below it.
For many years there was much debate about how pillow lavas formed.
One idea was that they roll downslope from the submarine volcanic vent like plastic bags full of water, before piling up on top of one another; another was that they whizzed along the sea bed, supported by a cushion of collapsing steam bubbles; while a third suggested that ‘pillows’ aren't separate entities at all , but long, worm-like tubes whose thickness varies along their length.
It also used to be thought that pillow lavas could form only at great depths below the surface.
In the last few years our understanding of pillow lavas has advanced dramatically, due almost entirely to some remarkable observations made by diver-geologists of pillow lavas actually in the process of formation in the sea off Hawaii.
In some of the most outstanding film sequences of volcanic activity ever made, the divers were able to demonstrate to the world exactly how pillows are born.
Their film shows the steep underwater flow front of a lava flow which was being erupted from a vent on Hawaii itself.
The flow front appears as a mass of rounded pillows, disappearing into the blue haze of the Pacific, all appears to be motionless.
Suddenly the camera picks out a rounded tongue of hot lava being extruded from the flow front; there is a brief flash of red, almost immediately extinguished, and a new pillow has been created.
The flow advances in a manner similar to that of pahoehoe flows on dry land, and the pillows are budded off so quietly that the cameramen were able to swim up to within less than a metre of the swelling pillows.
The only hazards, in fact, lay in the presence of pockets of scalding water, and in the possibility of a newly-formed pillow becoming detached from the steep flow front and rolling down on top of them.
Their unmistakable appearance, coupled with the fact that they always form under water, makes pillow lavas very useful in interpreting the volcanic history of geologically old rocks.
Pillow lavas have been identified in some of the oldest rocks on earth, over 3,400 million years old, and in rocks of all ages up to the present.
Wherever one finds pillow lavas in sequences of old rocks, one can be sure that they formed under water in the same way as their modern counterparts, and this, amongst other things, helps to establish the sites of ancient oceanic volcanoes and mid-ocean ridges.
Andesite Lava Flows
Describing natural phenomena under separate headings always has the unwelcome implication that they can be considered as separate entities, each in its own water-tight compartment.
There is no hard-and-fast difference between basalts and andesites; there is a broad transitional group of rocks between them, known as basaltic andesites, just as there is a similar transitional group between andesites and the next group of rocks to be described, the rhyolites.
So the discussion of these three groups will necessarily be in general terms.
The first generalization that can be made is that andesite lavas are more viscous than basalt ones.
This difference is primarily an effect of the composition of the lava, but to a certain extent it may also be the result of the high proportion of phenocrysts present in the lava.
A typical basalt contains a few per cent of phenocryst minerals, but in an andesite phenocrysts may form as much as 50 per cent volume of the rock.
Such lavas resemble raspberry jam that is half pips (or is it wood shavings they use?); they are not so much liquids as pasty mushes of solid material.
In an andesite, the phenocrysts may be up to a centimetre across; the groundmass (or jam) is extremely fine-grained, and is often glassy, even in the centres of flows.
Basalts, because of their low viscosity, tend to form low, thin flows which spread out over large areas, and are rarely more than thirty metres thick.
Andesites, by contrast, form massive flows which may be anything up to 500 metres thick.
Some andesite lavas reach staggering proportions; the largest yet described, in northern Chile, has a volume of no less than twenty-four cubic kilometres!
If this flow could be transported to North Wales, it would stand half as high as Snowdon; if it could be transported to Surrey, it would be half as high again as the highest hill, and, such is the attraction of all high objects from mountains to the cost of living, it would be an important landmark, regularly thronged in summer with picnickers and ramblers, and would feature on scores of postcards.
Basalts can also form large volume flows, in some cases exceeding twenty-four cubic kilometres, but because they are so much thinner, they are not so conspicuous and don't attract attention.
Another consequence of the greater viscosity of andesite lavas is that they flow more slowly.
A basalt flow can advance over a kilometre of flat ground in a matter of hours; an andesite may take months.
Similarly, andesite flows show none of the obvious surface features of ‘liquid’ lavas: pahoehoe flows never occur and all andesite flows have a rough bouldery surface.
This is often not quite so unpleasant as an aa flow to move across; instead of loose angular cindery material, the surface consists of big, angular, smooth-sided blocks of solid lava, much more agreeable to touch and walk over.
This kind of flow is called block lava.
The blocks are produced because andesite lavas are so viscous that they flow as plastic, rather than liquid, materials and consist of an outer chilled surface of solid rock with a steady progression towards increasing plasticity in the hotter, central parts of the flow.
Because the outer layer is hard and brittle, any heaving or shifting of the more mobile material deeper down will cause it to break up, providing the clean, sharply-defined angular blocks which cover the surface of the flow.
Sometimes quite large ‘solid’ blocks break off from the flow, with the same kind of clean fracture, and then, since they are still very hot, continue to flow slightly!
This emphasizes the vital point that in geology a solid is only a solid if you think of it on a short enough time-scale.
In many respects, rocks are like pitch, which flows like a liquid if it is left unsupported for long enough, for example on a steeply-sloping roof, but will also break suddenly along clean shiny fracture surfaces if it is given a sharp blow.
It was mentioned in chapter one that the rocks making up the Earth's mantle show the same kind of behaviour — on a short time-scale, they are rigid (’ solid’) enough to transmit shock waves from earthquakes, but on a much longer time-scale, they can ‘flow’, and accommodate the convection movements which are believed to provide the driving mechanisms behind Plate Tectonics.
The viscous nature of andesite lavas has some interesting side effects, especially in those which approach rhyolites in composition — that is, they contain more silica than an ‘average’ andesite.
These rocks, called dacites, are often so viscous that they scarcely flow at all, and merely heave themselves sluggishly to the surface to form an irregularly flat-topped mound over the vent.
These mounds are not really lava flows at all; they are the lava domes (sometimes also called tholoids) that were mentioned earlier in connection with the eruption of nuees ardentes and the destruction of St Pierre.
Lava domes form remarkably slowly.
The dome of Santiaguito in Guatemala has been growing ever since 1922, and was still growing at the time of writing.
In a case like this, it's clear that an extremely viscous, semi-solid lava is being slowly and continuously forced upwards through the vent; as it does so, it cools, and thus the dome grows effectively by the addition of material from within.
In the case of Santiaguito, there is little evidence that the dome is actually growing at all— one can sit and watch it for hours without seeing anything more than a few wisps of steam from the top — and it's quite safe to scramble all over it.
Material is continually arriving deep within the mass of dead-looking rock, however, and the pressure of this imperceptibly forces up spines of solid lava which rise in jagged battlements along the crest of the dome.
It's impossible to see these spines growing, but easy to record their growth with a series of photographs taken from the same place over the course of a couple of months.
So domes don't sound particularly exciting things.
But as they continue to build up and up, with spines getting higher and higher, the time comes when large portions of the mass become mechanically unstable, and break away, collapsing in a clattering, roaring avalanche.
Usually, these are ordinary ‘cold’ avalanches such as one finds on any mountain, but if the collapse is a big one and it exposes hot rock deep within the dome, a nuee ardente may be produced.
So dome-watching is not so dull after all.
Santiaguito, which was a complex of four distinct domes joined on to one another in a single elongate ridge, is rarely quiet for long, and one can literally hear it growing, because there is an almost continual rattle of small stones and rocks falling from the higher parts down on to the scree slopes below it.
Even when the tholoid is shrouded in mist and invisible, as it often is in the afternoon, the dry clattering continues, with every now and then a much larger collapse taking place.
These start off usually with a thin, gentle slithering sound of sliding boulders on the scree slope, which abruptly gives way to a much louder, roaring collapse as the main mass of rock falls away and hurtles downhill, and then afterwards minor falls continue intermittently for long periods.
Sometimes a single boulder bounds and clatters down the scree pile, echoing loudly, sometimes a larger mass breaks away, sometimes the scree itself shifts and readjusts itself in a prolonged rattling clatter — a noise rather like the sea swashing back over pebbles.
Domes like Santiaguito often develop within the crater walls of an older volcano — Santiaguito itself is nested inside a large crater on the flanks of a volcano called Santa Maria.
The crater was formed by a powerful eruption in 1902, the same year as the eruption of Mt Pelee.
That eruption also involved the growth of a lava dome in the Etang Sec, and it was from this dome that the great spine of Mt Pelee was forced up.
Such spines are a common feature of lava domes; in fact they are an almost predictable result of the squeezing of viscous lava into a pile of loose, broken rocks.
The Mt Pelee spine was exceptional only for its extreme height — over 300 metres.
In every other respect it was typical of its kind, and like most spines, it was short lived; as it cooled, it cracked and started to break up, while the heaving of fresh pulses of lava in the dome below rapidly caused what was left to collapse.
Within a few months of reaching its greatest height, nothing remained of it but a heap of rubble.
Sometimes a mass of viscous lava gets intruded near the surface, but doesn't actually manage to break through; instead it forces up the surface of the ground on top, forming a considerable hill where there was no hill before.
This has happened twice in the crater of the Usu volcano in Japan, the first time in 1910, the second in 1943.
The first upheaval produced a hill which was called Sin-Zan, or ‘Roof Mountain’; the second, logically enough, was called Showa Sin-Zan, or ‘New Roof Mountain’.
Showa Sin-Zan grew during the height of the Second World War, so that there were no official records of its growth, but a particularly astute village postmaster, Masao Mimatsu, kept a valuable pictorial record of its progress by drawing a series of profile sketches on the paper covering of his window.
[See Fig. 1]
This is what happened.
After a long series of preliminary earthquakes, a circular area of ground began to rise slowly and steadily in January 1944; by April the area affected was three kilometres across, and had gone up fifteen metres; by June it had gone up fifty metres, and had taken the village of Fukaba and all its inhabitants with it.
Some fairly violent explosive activity then followed, forcing the people of Fukaba to leave their homes, but still no new lava showed its head above ground.
By October, the uplifted area was no less than 150 metres above its surroundings, but still no lava had broken through the cover of soil and rocks.
Eventually, in November 1944, a plug of incandescent lava poked up through the middle of the elevated dome, and this gradually rose during the course of the next year until it was over a hundred metres above the top of the dome, and nearly 300 metres above normal ground level.
The odd thing about this new lava plug is that it went straight up, like a piston in a cylinder, wearing on top a thick cap of mud and clay, which had originally been deposited in a crater lake and had formed the ground surface prior to all the upheaval.
Apart from being baked hard by the heat of the lava, these sediments were quite undisturbed, and had been carried bodily as smoothly as if they had gone up in a lift.
Rhyolite Lava Flows
Lavas become scarcer amongst rocks of more acid compositions and rhyolites are much less abundant than andesites They are highly viscous, never flowing far from their source, and usually merely ooze up from the vent like toothpaste to pile up into short, thick flows and domes.
Like dacite domes, rhyolite domes often form within the crater of a preexisting volcano, but they may equally well pop up at the surface as isolated extrusions, not visibly related to any volcano.
Obsidian, it will be recalled, is the black volcanic glass with the composition of rhyolite.
Although it is one of the most widely-known volcanic rocks, obsidian lava flows are rare.
In Europe the only flows of any consequence occur on small volcanic islands in the Mediterranean, the most famous of all being those on the island of Lipari, which are thought to have been erupted about 1,400 years ago.
Even better-known are a pair which were erupted about 1,000 years ago in Sisikyou County, California.
These two formed a massive pile, hundreds of metres thick, which the Americans, in their inimitable way, call ‘Glass Mountain’.
A mountain of glass it certainly is.
From the air it looks exactly as if someone had poured a couple of bucketsful of molten glass on to the surface, forming a puddle which slowly oozed away.
The flows are covered with large, high wrinkles and ridges, concentric with the edges of the flow, where the stiff surface layer was crinkled up by the pressure of more material arriving from behind — rather like a pahoehoe surface on a basalt lava, but on a much bigger scale.
Obsidian itself is splendid stuff.
The best material is jet black, pure glass, free from bubbles or other imperfections.
It shatters satisfyingly when hammered, and it does so in a characteristic way.
There are any number of razor-sharp splinters and jagged, irregular surfaces, of course, but some fragments usually show what is called a conchoidal fracture: the surface is fairly smooth, but ridged with a number of concentric corrugations, centred on the point of impact of the hammer, and the effect produced is somewhat reminiscent of the appearance of the ridges on a cockle shell.
Unlike most volcanic rocks, obsidian does not contain phenocrysts; it is, so to speak, all glassy groundmass.
Glasses are not particularly stable materials, and in the course of time they devitrify, acquiring a micro-crystalline structure, and losing their glassy transparency.
In some cases, devitrification begins at centres scattered regularly throughout the whole mass, and this can produce very attractive effects.
Some obsidians, such as those from the Yellowstone National Park, have white spots about a centimetre across scattered liberally throughout the black glass.
This is called ‘snowflake’ obsidian, and is something of a collector's item.
In most glassy lavas, bands of devitrified glass and layers of frothy, bubbly glass are interleaved with layers of unaltered material.
When this happens, one can see clearly displayed just the convulsions and contortions the lava goes through as it flows: the bands are tightly folded in tortuous patterns.
These folded patterns are characteristic of flow in all kinds of media — one can see similar folds in glaciers, in some kinds of metamorphic rock which have been heated strongly, and whenever immiscible liquids become intermingled.
The iridescent films of oil on top of puddles provide perhaps the best analogies.
If such a puddle is stirred gently, the swirling, winding folds produced look exactly like those in obsidian lavas.
Few obsidian lavas consist of obsidian all the way through.
In general the obsidian forms only on the outer skin of the lava, which is rapidly chilled, while the central parts of the flow, which remain hot for a long while, consist of rhyolite.
Rhyolites are pale grey or buff-coloured rocks with a micro-crystalline structure and a rather distinctive sugary texture or ‘feel’— like obsidian, they usually have a well-developed banding running through them, which shows up the flow folds in the lava plainly.
by no means all rhyolite lavas are associated with obsidian — the majority are not — and, as one goes further back through the geological record, obsidian becomes progressively more and more scarce, due to devitrification, and none at all is found in rocks more than a few million years old.
A Plate Tectonic Re-cap
Rather a lot has been said in this chapter about the minor details of lava flows.
It's important, however, not to lose sight of the bigger issues.
All the differences that have been discussed between basalts, andesites and rhyolites fundamentally reflect their differences in composition, and this in turn is a function of the geological environment in which the lavas occur.
Basalts are the rocks which are formed at mid-ocean ridges, and which make up the entire oceanic crust.
Some basalts do occur in continental areas notably the basaltic flood plateaux mentioned in chapter three, but to see an eruption of basaltic lava taking place, one would have to fly (at short notice) to an oceanic island volcano, such as Iceland.
On Iceland, one might, if one were lucky, also find small quantities of andesitic and rhyolitic rocks being erupted but they are scarce, since they can only be formed by skimming off silica-rich material from a large volume of basaltic magma, in the same way as cream is skimmed off the top of milk.
Andesite lavas are characteristic of destructive plate margins, where the rocks of the oceanic crust are diving down beneath a continental plate.
The Andes is obviously a good place to go looking for an eruption of an andesite lava, but one would be extremely lucky to find one, because although there are numerous ‘active’ volcanoes along the Andean chain, andesite eruptions are really rather rare events compared to basaltic ones.
Destructive plate margins tend to produce a greater variety of lavas than constructive ones, and in some cases basaltic and andesitic rocks are found together.
Although rhyolite lavas do not occur in large volumes anywhere in the world, they are much more characteristic of destructive plate margins than constructive ones.
They are rare because, since they are so highly viscous, rhyolite magmas are involved in more explosive eruptions than either basalts or andesites, and therefore are usually erupted as pyroclastic rocks rather than lavas.
Which brings us on nicely to a discussion of pyroclastic rocks themselves.
Chapter 5
Volcanic Rocks — Pyroclastic Fall Deposits
Pumice is much the best-known of all pyroclastic or ‘fire-broken’ rocks, but it is only one of many types which are ejected from volcanoes as solid, fragmentary material.
This chapter will be concerned with the most straightforward kinds of pyroclastic deposits: those which are made up of fragments which have simply been shot up into the air and fallen back down again, so they are known as pyroclastic fall deposits.
The following chapter will be devoted to an examination of the rocks produced by nuees ardentes and similar phenomena; these travel over the surface of the ground as pyroclastic flows, and are very different.
A shorter word for ‘pyroclastic fall deposits’ is tephra.
Tephra comprises all the solid fragmental matter ejected by all types of volcano, and covers all rock compositions from basic to acid.
The tephra in any one place may include a wide range of different-sized fragments and a simple set of terms is used to distinguish between these:
Ashes are particles less than four millimetres across.
Lapilli (Italian: ‘little stones’) are between four and thirty-two millimetres across.
Bombs and blocks are lumps bigger than thirty-two millimetres across.
Thus while newspaper accounts and other sources (including this one), often talk rather loosely about volcanic ‘ashes’ during an eruption, a vulcanologist properly restricts this term only to the smallest particles.
Tephra are often erupted extremely rapidly.
During its 1947 eruption, the Icelandic volcano Hekla ejected ash at a rate estimated to be nearly 100,000 cubic metres per second during the first half hour, slowing down subsequently to a more modest 30,000 cubic metres per second.
Rapid production of such large amounts of material clearly has profound effects on the land round the volcano.
In the immediate vicinity of the vent, ashes and lapilli pile up to form a mantle many metres thick, which blankets the countryside like a dirty snow fall; like a snow fall too, the ash tends to smooth out the earlier irregularities of the ground surface, ultimately producing a landscape of soft, gently moulded hillocks and hollows.
Such carpets of ash sometimes cover thousands of square kilometres, but they need not be particularly extensive to be damaging.
The town of Heimaey in Iceland was buried under basaltic tephra in a matter of days after the commencement of the eruption of the volcano Helgafell in 1973.
During the space of a few hours, a one-metre thickness of ash accumulated in some parts of the town which were only a few hundred metres away from the active vent and many house roofs collapsed under the weight.
In other parts of the town, a kilometre or more from the vent, the ash fall was thinner and damage proportionally less.
Since there is such a wide difference between the least violent types of eruption (Hawaiian) and the most violent (Plinian), it is scarcely surprising that there is an equally wide difference between the kinds of pyroclastic rocks produced by each.
Recent work has shown that the types of deposit produced by different kinds of eruption can be recognized by objective criteria such as the total volume of material erupted, the distance that it travels from the vent, the degree of fragmentation, and the range of particle sizes present at any point.
The details of this analysis of pyroclastic deposits are rather complex, so only a few of the more interesting aspects will be described here.
Hawaiian Eruptions
One consequence of the extremely fluid nature of the lavas erupted in Hawaiian eruptions, especially those of the Hawaiian volcanoes themselves, is that they are sometimes so fluid that when ‘fire fountains’ are spraying lava upwards, some of the liquid sets solid into teardrop shapes, with bulbous ends and long-drawn-out tails.
They are made of basaltic glass, so when they come to rest, they glisten blackly on the ground.
[See Fig. 1]
The Hawaiian islanders have their own name for these glassy droplets; they call them Pele's tears, after the Hawaiian goddess of volcanoes, Pele.
(Not to be confused with the volcano Pelee in the Caribbean.)
It has been suggested that the term achnelith (Greek, ‘spray stones’) should be used to describe pyroclastic particles which originated from lavas so fluid that they owe their shape more to the effects of surface tension than any other cause.
If a piece of ordinary glass is heated over a gas flame, it softens easily, and eventually the heated part will gather itself into a drop and fall to the ground.
It doesn't detach itself completely, though; as it falls, it draws out behind it a thin, flexible thread of glass, which seems to stretch almost indefinitely.
The same thing happens with Pele's tears; they draw off behind them a long hair-like tail of glass, which may be a metre or more long.
If the hair should snap off from the tear, it may drift for many kilometres on the wind, falling slowly, and come to rest a long way down-wind from the vent.
The finest of these thin threads of glass are extremely soft and flexible, and are a light golden brown in colour.
Little wonder, then, that they are known as Pele's hair.
There are even reports that this hair is gathered by the more discriminating kinds of birds to build their nests!
When less fluid lavas are involved, which don't break up into droplets, large gobbets of the molten rock are flung up from the vent, spreading out into irregular plates which may break up in the air into smaller bits.
As they trace their lazy parabolas back down to earth, these bits twist around slowly, over and over, until they hit the ground with a flop or a flump, splodging out to form round, flattish masses.
When cool, these splodges look like the brown steaming splodges observed near cows on pastureland, so they are known as cow-pats.
The individual cow-pats are often still very hot and plastic when they hit the ground, so that as they pile up one on top of each other, they spread out further, and weld together, forming a solid mass known as spatter.
A spatter cone or spatter ring consisting exclusively of welded cow-pats often builds up around the vent.
These spatter cones contain little, if any, fine-grained ashy material and are amongst the most characteristic products of Hawaiian eruptions.
Strombolian Eruptions
The most abundant basaltic pyroclastic material is variously termed ash, clinker, cinders or slag, depending on local preference.
These terms are all very descriptive, since the material which accumulates around a Strombolian vent does indeed look rather like boiler slag, but it is more correctly called scoria, and the cones which build up around the vent scoria cones.
The scoria from a typical Strombolian eruption consists of loose, rubbly material, with a wide range in size of the constituent fragments, but with only a small proportion less than about one millimetre in size.
The fragments themselves characteristically have a light, frothy texture, the lava being honeycombed with large numbers of gas bubbles or vesicles.
Normally, basaltic scoria is a drab grey colour, but sometimes when it is fresh the surface may be beautifully iridescent, shining in peacock blue colours.
Quite often, also, hot steam blasting through a scoria cone may oxidize or ‘rust’ the iron in the rock, giving the scoria a deep reddish-brown colour.
Scoria cones are themselves distinctive objects.
They are rarely more than a couple of hundred metres high, and they are usually symmetrical, although they may be ‘breached’ on one side, where a lava flow has emerged.
Their most characteristic feature, though, is that the angle of slope of the sides of the cone is always that of the ‘angle of rest’ for loose scoria, which means that all young scoria cones have side slopes of 33 degrees.
[See Fig. 2]
Naturally this crisp geometrical profile becomes softened and less perceptible as scoria cones grow older and are subjected to the normal processes of erosion.
Many of the fragments which go to make up a scoria cone are individually big enough to be called ‘blocks’ or ‘bombs’, according to the simple size classification.
But how does one differentiate between a block and a bomb?
It has been suggested that a bomb be simply defined as an ejected block with a shape sufficiently interesting to attract attention.
While this is not a particularly scientific definition, it is perfectly adequate, and the term ‘bomb’ is in common use in vulcanology, although this is perhaps unfortunate since it may suggest to the reader some unpleasant kind of projectile which explodes on impact.
This is not the case.
Volcanic bombs are just lumps of solid (or sometimes plastic) lava which are lobbed out of the vent, fall back to earth with a wallop, and that's all.
The biggest bombs, though, land with a considerable wallop, and are quite as unpleasant to be standing beneath as any military weapon, and they can be a good deal larger.
Cotopaxi in Ecuador is reported to have lobbed a 200-ton bomb over fourteen kilometres, but this seems a little difficult to swallow.
Macdonald, however, has described a well-documented case of an eight-ton bomb being hurled nearly one kilometre by an explosion in the crater of Halemaumau, Hawaii in 1924, and there are many other equally impressive accounts.
Such large bombs are rather exceptional, though; most are well under a metre across, and don't travel more than a few tens of metres from the vent.
There are a number of different kinds of bomb, some of them known by a variety of colourful synonyms, but in many cases, there is a good deal of argument about exactly how they acquire their shape.
Some are undoubtedly produced when ropy strands or shreds of sticky lava are flung up out of the vent, twisting and turning slightly in the air before falling back to earth; these are known as rope or ribbon bombs, and they may be as much as one metre long.
When a bigger, more compact lump of lava is ejected, it commonly happens that the outermost skin of plastic lava tends to be pushed backwards towards the trailing edge of the bomb by the rush of air passing it.
If the bomb also twists or spins at all, the skin gets drawn into a tail, forming a spindle bomb.
Ribbon and spindle bombs both owe their shapes to events taking place within and above the volcanic vents, but other shaping processes also operate.
Bombs made from plastic lavas tend to remain where they fall, but denser, more solid bombs sometimes bounce off the sides of the scoria cone at a glancing angle, and acquire a rapid spin.
Once spinning, they are difficult to stop, and they flash down the slopes in a series of great leaps and bounds, making a loud whirring noise, and travel sometimes for hundreds of metres.
In their headlong rush they naturally tend to get their corners knocked off at each bounce, so they end up as peculiarly smooth, rounded lumps, the smoothness being the result of mechanical abrasion.
Such bombs often smash into other bigger, stationary boulders at the base of the cone, shattering into smithereens, but in doing so they leave their own mark on the boulder.
Walking around the base of an active cone erupting these bombs is a bit like walking around a battlefield, with spent rounded cannonball bombs and shattered fragments of cannonballs lying around, and many big battered boulders exhibiting the bruises of a long volcanic siege.
Every few minutes a fresh fusillade of whirring bombs hurtles downwards to smash into the debris below, compelling the observer to stop walking idly around and take cover.
Surtseyan Eruptions
In chapter three it was mentioned that the effect of getting large volumes of water mixed up in a volcanic eruption is to make it more violent.
Not surprisingly, one result of this is that the pyroclastic material erupted in a Surtseyan eruption is much more highly fragmented than that in a similar basaltic eruption taking place on land, and this in turn means that the deposits produced contain a much greater proportion of very small particles than their Strombolian counterparts.
This doesn't mean that there are no large fragments present; there are merely less of them.
A second consequence of the more explosive nature of a Surtseyan eruption is that the pyroclastic material gets scattered much more widely.
This means that a typical Surtseyan cone has a different profile from a Strombolian one.
Put side by side, the differences are obvious.
[See Fig. 3]
These low, broad cones are called ash rings.
They are quite unmistakable, and are often very elegant indeed, especially when they are perfectly circular and symmetrical.
Ash rings are characteristic of submarine eruptions, but they are by no means confined to marine environments.
They can be formed on land near the sea, in shallow lakes or indeed anywhere where it is possible for a large volume of water to find its way into the volcanic vent.
Vulcanian Eruptions
The deposits produced by Vulcanian eruptions are similar to those produced by Surtseyan eruptions, in that they too consist of highly-fragmented material, with a large proportion of it less than one millimetre in size.
The principal difference between the two is that Vulcanian deposits consist of non-vesiculated material.
Each fragment is a small, dense, angular piece of lava, quite unlike the frothy, vesiculated basaltic material that is characteristic of both Strombolian and Surtseyan deposits.
Probably the best known Vulcanian deposit is one produced by an eruption of Vulcano itself in the 1880s.
This deposit mantles the flanks of the pre-existing cone, but is no more than a few metres thick at most.
Littering the slopes of the volcano are thousands of large bombs ejected by the eruption, some of them over a metre in diameter.
The most intriguing of these are bread crust bombs, which are rounded or angular lumps with a smooth, glassy crust broken up by deep cracks and fissures which expose the frothy, vesicular core of the bomb, so that it looks rather like a well-baked crusty loaf.
These bombs were produced when lumps of viscous, gas-rich lava were ejected from the vent; the outer surface of the lump chilled quickly, forming the glassy crust, but the inside remained hot, and the gas trapped within it continued to come out of solution and to expand, forming a spongy mass of vesicles.
This internal expansion caused the outer skin to crack open, forming the diagnostic crusty-looking surface.
The pumice deposits produced by Vesuvian (sub-Plinian) and Plinian eruptions are much the most interesting of all pyroclastic rocks, so they will be discussed in a little more detail.
First, a word about pumice itself.
The pumice that we know from painful experience in the bathroom consists of material containing over 65 per cent of silica, and there is a general tendency to associate pumice only with acid rocks such as rhyolites.
Strictly speaking, though, pumice is only a kind of highly vesicular glassy rock with a low density, so low that many types will float on water, and it may be anywhere between basalt and rhyolite in composition.
Pumice of basaltic composition, however, is rather rare, although there are some rather peculiar varieties in the Hawaiian Islands.
Some of these are the lightest known rocks in the world, with apparent densities of only 0–3.
Surprisingly, these ultra-light pumices sink in water, since there is so little basaltic material and so much air space that all the air spaces are interconnected, and water can fill the whole mass.
Ordinary pumice, by contrast, shows a wide range in density, depending upon the degree of vesiculation that has taken place in the magma, but it is still nothing more than a solidified rock froth.
The vesicles are separated from one another by thin films of glass, so that air can be trapped inside, enabling the pumice to float.
Sometimes, when a volcano erupts in the sea, massive carpets of floating pumice accumulate on the sea around it and may drift a long way from it.
These have occasionally given rise to strange sea-farers' tales of ‘floating islands’.
These islands are rapidly broken up by wind and waves, but the pumice fragments may be carried thousands of kilometres, to be washed up on some distant coral strand.
No pumice will float indefinitely, though.
After a period of months, water finds its way into even the innermost air spaces, and the pumice becomes waterlogged and finally sinks.
All air-fall pumice deposits originate in the same way — in Vesuvian or Plinian gas-blast eruptions which throw up dense clouds of ash tens of thousands of metres into the air.
The violence of the eruption and the lightness of the pumice fragments means that they will go higher, and stay air-borne longer than any other kind of pyroclastic material, and it is this that gives pumice deposits their unique properties.
Around the volcanic vent itself, a jumbled mass of highly irregular pumice fragments, most of them very large, piles up to form a conical heap round the vent.
Unlike a scoria cone though, a pumice cone is usually rather low and poorly defined, and sometimes does not even have a recognizable crater.
In a Plinian eruption, it's usually impossible to pin down the site of the vent exactly, since it stands a high chance of being obliterated or destroyed by the eruption itself.
Pumice deposits, in fact, are usually much better preserved and more informative when one sees them at points some way from the vent.
As one goes away from the vent, two effects become apparent.
First, the thickness of the deposit steadily diminishes; one which is ten metres thick close to the vent may be only twenty centimetres or so thick at twenty kilometres' distance.
The thickness does not decrease linearly, but follows an exponential curve, with the thickness decreasing much more over the first kilometre than the second, and so on.
[See Fig. 1]
Second, and also predictably, the average size of the fragments present at any one point also decreases with distance from the vent.
[See Fig. 2]
Perhaps the most interesting property of all, though, is that the range of sizes present at any one point in an air-fall pumice deposit is rather restricted, so that the fragments tend to be all more or less the same size, or to put it formally, the deposit is said to be well-sorted.
This point can best be illustrated with a couple of size-frequency graphs.
[See Fig. 3]
A badly-sorted deposit gives a low, broad curve, whereas a well sorted deposit, which has exactly the same range of fragment sizes, gives a single very well-defined peak.
This kind of peaked size-frequency distribution is thoroughly typical of air-fall pumice deposits, so how does it come about?
It's all to do with what happens to the fragments of pumice while they are in mid-air, suspended in the ash cloud above the volcano.
Within the cloud itself, violent currents are at play, sweeping round and round in tight convulsive cells, just as in a thundercloud.
These currents keep all the ash thoroughly mixed up, but inevitably, as the ash cloud drifts away down-wind, the heavier particles tend to fall out, leaving the finer ones behind them.
This doesn't contradict Galileo's famous observations on the speeds of falling bodies; the pumice fragments are so light that their aerodynamic properties rather than their weight control their rate of fall.
The larger particles, naturally, fall out nearer the vent; the smaller ones fall more slowly and are dispersed by the wind.
The finest material may be carried for tens of kilometres down-wind, and some of it may even stay suspended for many months, eventually falling back to earth on the other side of the globe.
The process is a bit like winnowing, the old method of using the wind to separate wheat from chaff, except that in the case of pyroclastic material there is no simple division into light material (husks) and heavy (grain) but a continuous gradation in sizes (and therefore weight) of particles from fine to coarse.
So it is a wind-winnowing process that is responsible for the well sorted distribution of grain sizes that is characteristic of air-fall deposits.
The same process operates throughout the size spectrum.
This latter is quite an important point, because although it may not be immediately obvious, a deposit which consists only of large particles can be just as well-sorted as one which consists only of small ones.
A case which illustrates some of these features well is the ash erupted by the Chilean volcano Quizapu, during a Plinian eruption in 1932.
The ash cloud reached over 15,000 metres in height and was carried by the prevailing winds to the north-east, into Argentina.
Ash began to fall on Buenos Aires seventeen hours after the eruption had started on Quizapu, 1,120 kilometres away.
The ash-fall was thick enough to darken the sky, and about half a centimetre accumulated on the ground.
A few days later, ash from the same eruption had reached Rio de Janeiro, 2,960 kilometres away, but here the fall was very scanty indeed — not thick enough to form a measurable deposit — and consisted only of the finest, dust-like particles.
The ash cloud drifted at somewhere between twenty-five and sixty kilometres per hour, and it covered in all more than two million square kilometres of the South American continent.
[See Fig. 4]
Isopach Maps
Because they have been an important part of some historic eruptions, a few pumice deposits are well-documented, but surprisingly few have been studied closely from a geological viewpoint.
This situation is changing, though, and some interesting things are now being done with pumice deposits.
One of the simplest and most informative things to do is to measure the thickness of the pumice deposit at as many places as possible, plot these thicknesses on a map, and then draw lines on the map, rather like contour lines, linking points of equal ash thickness, say ten metres, five metres, one metre and so on.
These lines look a bit like the isobars on a weather map, but the lines are isopachs, and the map an isopach map.
(Bear in mind that pachydermal = thick skinned.)
[See Fig. 5]
These maps are useful in a number of ways.
It's immediately obvious how the thickness of the deposit varies away from the vent, and it's also possible to work out fairly rapidly the total volume of ash erupted.
Less important, these maps show up clearly the direction of the wind at the time of the eruption, since the isopachs are all elongated downwind.
(To digress for a moment, it's a curious fact that most isopach maps for pumice deposits reveal winds blowing generally in an easterly direction; the ash deposits are all concentrated to the east of the volcano.
Partly, this may be due to the fact that outside the tropics atmospheric circulation is from west to east, due to Coriolis forces, the forces which result from the effect of the Earth's rotation on moving bodies.)
In areas where there are a number of pumice deposits present, all of them looking much the same, it's clearly a difficult job to tell them apart and, more important, to recognize the same individual deposits in separate localities which may be many kilometres apart.
Much slow and painstaking geological detective work is needed to make correlations such as these, but the results can be very valuable.
The use of successive pumice or ash deposits in building up a history of the eruptive activity in an area is known as tephrachronology, and this is increasingly being used to add precision to the study of the history of volcanic areas.
Not only does tephrachronology enable a far-flung ash to be uniquely identified, but if the ash can be independently dated at any single locality by isotopic methods, then it provides a firm foundation on which to build the history of a volcano.
On the academic site, detailed tephrachronology makes it possible to study patterns in the behaviour of volcanoes — the magma erupted from one volcano may become steadily more acid, or it may show cyclical changes, or it may even vary consistently during each eruption, starting off fairly basic and ending up at the close of the eruption much more acid.
Evidence of this sort can provide clues to the history and origin of the magmas themselves, and of the processes which are acting deep below the volcano.
Turning briefly to Plate Tectonics, studies of pyroclastic deposits can contribute much useful information.
It is easy enough to measure the volumes of lava flows, but it is only by constructing isopach maps that the volume of pyroclastic material erupted can be estimated, and this is particularly important in volcanoes at destructive plate margins, where the mass of magma represented by pyroclastic rocks sometimes far outweighs that represented by lavas.
This is a point that has been commonly overlooked in the past, even by geologists, since there is a general tendency to assume that the only rocks worth bothering about are ‘hard’ rocks, which can be hit with a hammer!
The ratio of the proportions of lavas and pyroclastic rocks in any area is of some intrinsic interest, but the total rate at which new pyroclastic rocks and lavas are erupted at destructive plate margins is of more fundamental significance.
Although oceanic crust is consumed at destructive plate margins at very nearly the same rate at which it is created at constructive plate margins, a small proportion of mantle material — perhaps only a few per cent— is involved in the generation of andesite magmas at destructive plate margins, and contributes to the volcanic rocks erupted at the surface.
The effect of this is that there is a slow but steady conversion of mantle material into continental crust, and therefore a steady net increase in the volume of continental crust.
It's been estimated that this might be of the order of one cubic kilometre per year.
This in turn means that over the course of geological time, the continents have been, and are, getting steadily bigger…don't worry, though, the extra real-estate coming on to the market won't make mortgages any easier to get!