

RUNNING BEFORE I CAN WALK
Things were not so bad in daylight.
I had slept for almost four hours more, made myself a mug of tea at about nine o'clock and carried it outside while I wished Mick and Paddy a merry Christmas.
The wind was blustery and cold and the wheelbarrow and Land Rover were wet with melting frost.
We were camped on a sand and gravel plain with the road running north–south, fifty yards from us to the east.
Less than a mile beyond it, was a ridge of shallow dunes.
There were even smaller dunes, no more than eight feet high, two hundred yards to the west.
The plain stretched north and south as far as the eye could see and there was no sign of either vegetation or habitation — nothing but dust, rock and sand.
I walked over to Mick, who was crouched near the rear wheel of the Land Rover tending the petrol stove.
My legs were steadier than they had been the night before but they still dithered weakly.
It was difficult to believe how much effort I had put into training and preparation.
In February 1973, when I first decided to make the journey, there can have been few twenty-eight year olds who were less fit for the task.
I was not quite five feet eight inches high, weighed only nine and a half stone, and found it uncomfortable to stand without arch-supports even for the duration of a hymn in church.
Scholl gave me four pairs to take to the Sahara.
Acquiring fitness over the next twenty-two months was not easy.
My job as a curate took mornings, afternoons and evenings, six days a week — I was given one day off — so there was no time to get fit by walking.
Instead, I took up running in order to take more exercise in a shorter time.
The first training run was a one-mile loop from home.
I began a slow jog, but after a quarter of a mile, it seemed that my feet had  gained weight and that somebody was sitting on my chest.
Then a stitch stabbed my ribs and forced me to walk the next few yards.
The mile took nine and a half minutes, at the end of which my dead weight pulled me, wheezing and red-faced, into an armchair.
Breathing was even more difficult now that I had stopped running, and I was racked by bouts of coughing.
The next morning, I was so stiff that it was difficult to climb downstairs.
I trained most days from then on.
Training hurt and it was always a battle to force myself out, but after six months I was managing sixty miles a week and sometimes doing fifteen miles non-stop in a hundred minutes.
A further six months and I could run thirty miles with little stiffness afterwards.
The main obstacle was that the only time available for training was late at night.
To go out at midnight in heavy rain or frost, as I sometimes did, when I would be working next morning and when I had hardly seen my wife all day, almost broke me.
Training was not only arduous but dangerous.
I lived in one of the rougher parts of Manchester, and was chased by gangs, had bottles thrown at me and once inadvertently put a gang to rout.
I was running along the pavement of Rochdale Road, just after midnight, wearing, among other things, two quilted anoraks, one of which had fourteen pounds of sand sewn into the lining.
The extra weight and clothing was to help me get used to the combined effect of heat and exertion, but it made me look twice the man I was!
Without realizing, I found myself between two groups of youths throwing bottles at each other.
I had run through the ranks of one gang from the rear, and was approaching the other, twenty-five yards ahead of me along the pavement.
With bottles still in the air, those in front fled, thinking I was one of their rivals.
I found myself in pursuit, not out of choice, but because I was being chased by the mob behind.
The first thirty seconds were the worst.
I had already run three miles, and my boots were too heavy for sprinting — besides I did not want to catch the gang in front.
For a few moments, someone behind was grasping for me, but he fell back and gave up.
Most of those who were fleeing dispersed down side streets and, after a quarter of a mile, the last two ran into a garden as I passed.
Assault by thugs was not the only risk.
After six months' training, I repeatedly found blood in my urine, which a consultant thought indicated a kidney disorder.
Both he and my own doctor warned me to stop all running for the sake of my health; their manner was so grave as to imply danger to my life.
I could see no reason for panic.
Nobody with such a disease could have been training so hard and felt so well.
Instead of stopping, I ran even more, promising myself that if I began to feel ill, I would heed the warning.
If I had done as they said there would have been no chance of being fit enough for the expedition.
After nine months of tests, I was told that there was ‘probably’ nothing wrong with  my kidneys and that I had had a bladder infection.
I could resume light training but I must undergo further tests.
Hospital appointments seemed to go on for ever and when I left for the Sahara, I forgot to cancel one of them.
I had also managed to artificially acclimatize myself.
During August, I had learnt to sweat, going to bed with hot-water bottles, an electric blanket, a seaman's jersey, plastic underwear, and a down quilt.
I went running wearing two anoraks, a seaman's jersey, and a rugby shirt, on top of plastic and thermal underwear.
In the first year of preparation, despite writing over nine hundred letters, I had acquired no major backers.
All I had was a promise of a pair of boots from Jack Riordon, a quartermaster in the Green Howards Regiment.
No one else, except the media, wanted to know.
I had written to hundreds of firms asking for material support, and had asked royalty, influential people and famous explorers to lend their names to a list of patrons, but all without success.
After a year, I had only the boots, but I knew that if somebody of importance would approve the idea then the rest would follow.
With this in mind, I sent my plans to the Special Air Service Regiment, reputedly the best collective authority in Britain on desert survival, and asked them to comment.
I had given up hope of a reply when, after two months and three days, a letter came which began, ‘We find your proposals perfectly feasible…’.
I had a hundred photocopies made of their reply and began another support-raising campaign, including a copy of the letter from the SAS with each request.
The response was spectacular.
Before long the Parachute Regiment had added their name to the backers.
The Royal Air Force gave me emergency rations, advice on medical supplies, and a day at RAF Cranwell to learn how to navigate with a bubble sextant.
Stewart Wilson of the Department of Engineering Science at Oxford put forward the idea of using a Chinese sailing wheelbarrow instead of the two-wheeled cart which I was considering, and one of his students, Khalid Nazir, made a wooden prototype.
At the same time, Hawker Siddeley offered to make the one I would use, and other firms donated equipment and food.
Now that events were moving in my favour, it was as troublesome finding out what was needed as it was getting it.
Putting a medical kit together, for example, involved consulting books, obtaining lists from other expeditions and writing to the armed forces.
There were the names of all the venomous creatures in North and West Africa to be  listed and the manufacturers of antiserums for their bites and stings to be contacted.
Eventually, a church member who was a nurse tabulated all the medical information, and helped me to write begging letters to pharmaceutical firms.
When six cartons of drugs, bandages and serums were heaped on my study floor there was the business of finding out when and how they should be administered.
Then I was tested for allergies to the serums and taught how and where to inject myself.
Besides training and obtaining supplies, there was Arabic to learn, though I never got very far, French and Hausa to improve, and dozens of books to read on desert survival and the background to the Sahara.
Appropriate clothes also had to be found.
I chose a straw hat I had brought from Nigeria.
It had a wide brim and a small ventilation hole in the top like a chimney.
Such hats were worn by the Fulani, a semi-nomadic tribe of cattle herdsmen.
The outer garment was an all-covering, loose-fitting, robe, made by Joan to a Nigerian design.
Schools, churches and individuals had to be encouraged to sponsor me and, periodically, information sheets had to be typed, duplicated, and sent to them.
Suitable recipients had to be found for the money raised.
(A programme for the repatriation of refugees in the southern Sahara was chosen, along with the Desert Research Trust, a Cambridge-based body, investigating the causes of famine.
A smaller amount was to go to the theological college which I had attended and which has been host to many students from Africa.)
Hours were spent practising navigation with the bubble sextant.
There were meetings with backers and the press to be organized, including trips to the seaside with newspaper photographers and television crews, who wanted pictures of me walking on sand.
Such training and preparation brought both me and my marriage almost to breaking-point.
Most days, I worked into the early hours, leaving little time to spend with Joan.
In spite of my working frantically for months, preparations fell behind.
In early October 1974, exactly two weeks before the sailing date to North Africa, a telegram came, saying that the voyage on the Southern Ferries' ship,The Eagle , was cancelled.
The ferry service was making a loss and had stopped running for the winter.
It might have been more depressing if I had been otherwise ready to leave.
Many major obstacles had been overcome: a friend had loaned me £1,500, and two others, Tommy and Hilary Thomas, had given us a home after my curacy at St Luke's Church, Cheetham, had terminated.
I also now had sufficient food, equipment and maps.
There was, however, still no Land Rover, nor anyone to drive it.
Nor was there any sign of diplomatic clearance for Algeria, Niger and Nigeria.
Furthermore, my passport was lost in a postal strike in France, and the wheelbarrow was  not yet ready, Hawker Siddeley having been hampered by staff shortage and technical snags.
On the day the telegram arrived from Southern Ferries, a close friend who had given me much encouragement now began to question my continuing any further.
I would save myself and those around a lot of heartache by forgetting the Sahara and looking for another curacy.
He was talking sense.
The trip could not be postponed for ever.
It would not be possible at any other time of the year because of the oncoming hot season.
Travelling by any means was forbidden in the Algerian Sahara from the end of May to September, while walking would, in any case, be impossible after March.
Beginning in late October and maintaining fifteen miles a day would get me to Kano, my destination on the other side of the Sahara, just in time.
If the walk was to take place, it could not be seriously delayed.
Anyway, I had no income other than occasional fees from the news media and they would dry up.
Nor would the expedition have been possible the next winter.
The trip was aimed to fit between appointments at two churches.
I could neither remain unemployed for eighteen months nor begin a new job now and break off after only a year.
The logical thing would have been to admit defeat.
There were too many things to do and not enough time.
Yet, with an almost insane confidence, I was sure the walk was on: when I read the telegram from Southern Ferries, I had a feeling that all would be well.
In spite of depressing circumstances, I was more excited and confident than I had ever been.
I am still not clear whether my confidence was the product of my faith or whether I had generated a blind optimism to prevent the facts from crushing me.
When the telegram arrived, Joan and I went for a walk so that I could work the adrenalin out of my system.
The Sahara had become my deity, and, though I was therefore in no position to claim any closeness to God, I arrogantly did.
‘I feel so excited,’ I said.
‘I know God is going to do it, but I don't see how.’
‘I told you before that he's throwing your plans overboard one by one.
All your effort has shown him that you don't trust him.
I've watched you punish yourself and we've suffered.
You've worked like a maniac day and night.
You've tried too hard.
You've not allowed him to help you.
If he wants you to go, then you'll go, and if he doesn't, you won't, so let him show you he's in control.’
She was right.
I would stop the frantic activity and just follow the leads that came my way.
At the outset of the plans, we had prayed for a sign of divine approval.
If God would provide accommodation for my family while I was away, preferably with friends, and convince my parents that I was doing the right thing, then I would know that the trip was on.
It had  been a lot to ask.
We had no friends in Manchester with a large enough house.
Moreover, my mother, who worried even if I travelled to London, was initially distraught by the idea.
I could not have gone without her goodwill, as it could have been injurious to her already poor health.
Early on in the preparations, she had had an inexplicable change of heart and remained committed.
Sometime later, Tommy Thomas, an old college friend, had been made vicar of Pendleton, Salford, only three miles from our home.
He and his wife had offered us accommodation with them from the time my curacy finished until after the expedition.
Encouraged by reflecting on these events, we walked home arm in arm.
I was later puzzled that it did indeed happen as we had prayed it would.
It was not that I eventually doubted that the Almighty responded to faith, but that because I had been so bound up by the desert, so full of self-interest, so neglectful of the God I was supposed to serve, that I could not have expected any co-operation from him.
Within a few days we had become bystanders, watching things happen beyond our control.
My Member of Parliament, Harold Lever, in response to an earlier letter of mine, wrote to the Algerian ambassador in London and got approval for me to cross the Algerian Sahara on foot.
This was despite the fact that I had already visited the Algerian Embassy to no effect after writing thirteen times.
British Airways then flew me free of charge to Paris, where the Niger authorities gave me permission to cross their territory.
The passport office in Liverpool issued me with a new passport, and, though I had made dozens of requests to the army for a vehicle, BBC Radio Manchester succeeded where I had failed.
It came about when my mother made a live appeal for a Land Rover on Sandra Chalmers' ‘phone-in’ show.
While the programme was still on the air, one of the BBC staff, Rob Frost, was telephoning the army's Adventure Training Unit in London.
This unit had just received a request from Colonel Keest in the Outer Hebrides for men to be taken off his hands.
The firing range which he was running was not to be fully operational for several months and he had too many soldiers to employ usefully.
Adventure Training put him in contact with me and after five days Bombardier Michael Goldsmith and a subaltern had come to see me from the Outer Hebrides with a view to offering an army vehicle.
As a result, Colonel Keest promised the loan of a Land Rover, trailer, and two soldiers.
The two men were to be Michael Goldsmith — the bombardier whom I had already met — and Charles Lynch, known as Paddy, a red-haired lance-corporal of the Royal Electrical & Mechanical Engineers.
They would be on army pay, but I would be in command.
I would also be responsible for financing the trip with respect to fuel, ferries, extra food  and insurance, though several regimental charities gave donations.
After seven weeks' work on the part of many army personnel, we were ready to begin.
We planned to use the north-south route through Tamanrasset in Algeria as it had the greatest number of watering points.
The choice of starting and finishing places was arbitrary — the desert does not begin at a defined line.
Kano, the end of the camel routes, seemed to be the obvious terminus.
There were a few suitable towns at which to start but we chose Beni Abbes because the map showed it to be two thousand miles from Kano.
Getting to Beni Abbes took several days.
I flew to Gibraltar on 19 December 1974, and met up with Mick and Paddy, who had taken the Land Rover, wheelbarrow and kit there on a munitions ship.
We took a ferry to Tangier and drove through Morocco almost continuously for two days, arriving at Figuig on the Algerian border on 22 December.
We were apprehensive about crossing into Algeria.
The diplomatic clearance that Mick and Paddy needed as soldiers to pass through the Sahara had not yet been obtained.
Out of kindness to me, the army had allowed them to travel without permission from the Algerians, though we were under orders not to enter Niger without confirmation of clearance.
We hoped it would be waiting at the post office at Tamanrasset, the last town before the Niger border.
There was still danger of Mick and Paddy being arrested as spies in Algeria, and in theory, though it was unlikely, of facing capital sentences.
They had to travel with civilian number plates on the Land Rover, with civilian papers, and out of uniform, so that their military connections would not be known.
Coming into Algeria from Morocco our papers were examined by five groups of officials.
Mercifully, none could read English, as all our documents showed the Land Rover to be army property.
One of the checks was in what we thought was no man's land, a rocky valley with the odd bush here and there.
We were stopped by what Paddy described as a gang of ‘armed bandolieroed henchmen’.
The leader stepped out of a hut adjacent to the road block.
He wore a tatty grey uniform, peaked military cap, black moustache, and the smile of a Mexican bandit.
We jumped out and met him at the rear of the vehicle and tried to show him a letter of introduction from the Algerian Ambassador to Britain, Lakhdar Brahimi.
He frowned, screwed up his mouth and brushed away the letter.
His comic-opera face contorted, his moustache drooped and he gripped his rifle with both hands to motion us to open the back of the vehicle.
We were obsequiously co-operative, all smiles and courtesy.
Out came two tents, a suitcase, another suitcase, and a box of food.
‘What's that?’ he said, pointing inside the Land Rover with his rifle.
‘Beer,’ we answered.
He forced an acid smile and held up two fingers.
We almost fell over ourselves to oblige.
Mick was there first and climbed onto the tailboard to pull out for the rogue two of Paddy's cans (a fact which Paddy was slow to forget).
With a wave of the rifle the ‘bandit’ moved us on.
The final check on the Algerian side was in a small crowded office.
Brown walls bore dog-eared posters of camels and cave paintings.
The air was stale, clouded with cigarette smoke, and stank of the contents of the lavatory down the corridor, whose pan was half full.
Travellers and officials looked weary, and we perhaps more than most: we were in our sixth hour of confusion at the border.
A young, sweaty man in the usual grey uniform sat behind a large desk.
‘Fill in the forms, please,’ he said in French.
Mick began, then paused where it asked for the name of the vehicle's owner.
He wrote ‘Royal Artillery Firing Ranges, Outer Hebrides’.
The young official pointed to this and asked abruptly, ‘What is this?’
There was silence.
The others in the room were unusually quiet.
There was only the scratching of pens and the rustle of paper as everyone waited for the reply.
‘What is this?’ he said sternly, pointing.
The stubble on the back of my neck tingled.
I searched for Mick's eyes and found them.
‘What is this?’ he demanded.
‘Is it the name of your company?’
‘Yes,’ Mick and I answered in simultaneous relief.
‘Yes, my company,’ said Mick.
When we were driving down from the border towards Beni Abbes, we quaked every time we saw police or soldiers.
In Bechar, we took a wrong turning and drove to the gates of an army barracks.
As we backed away, we disguised our panic with laughter when the guards asked what we wanted.
That evening we camped on a hill overlooking Beni Abbes.
At half-past twelve on the next day, 24 December, I picked up the shafts of the wheelbarrow and pushed off towards Kano on those first, torturous, thirteen miles.
BANDITS
Soon after nine, when I had wished Mick and Paddy a merry Christmas, I was back in my sleeping-bag.
Paddy was still in his, but Mick was up.
He had propped the tarpaulin trailer-cover against the Land Rover and weighted it with jerry cans to eliminate the wind that swept under the vehicle.
Thus sheltered, he was making a cup of tea on the petrol stove.
I heard him pumping up the pressure and singing a folk song which began, ‘We don't smoke pot in Norwich City’.
‘Wasn't it horrible,’ he said, ‘coming into Algeria on Monday?
I tell you, if a helicopter had come down at that customs post, there would have been no stopping me.
I'd have been in it and in those bars in Gibraltar giving it the big lips by last night.’
I heard Mick unzip the tent he shared with Paddy and hand him the tea.
He zipped it up again, and I imagined him going to sit on a black plastic jerry-can to drink his own tea and have a smoke.
Mick controlled the morale.
The previous evening, I could not have completed the last fifty yards without his help, but now if he had climbed on my back he could not have been more of a hindrance.
He was indulging in his pet topic.
He was talking of giving up.
‘If I had to drive back to Tangier now, I'd do it in one go.
All I'd need is a few fags to keep me awake and I'd have my foot down all the way.
I wish I was back in Norwich now.
Never mind, I've got a few cans.
I'm gonna give it the big lips this afternoon.
At half-past twelve, Mum and Dad will be on their way to my sister's in Ipswich.
They'll have lunch and then at two o'clock, when they're drinking my health, I'll be drinking theirs.
Dah dih dah dah, we don't smoke pot in Norwich City, doo doo…’
When I got up, Mick was fiddling with his radio on the Land Rover bonnet.
We had no transmitter, just Mick's ordinary transistor radio with a short wave receiver.
The ritual was the same as it had been the day before, adjusting the aerial, then, as he turned the tuner to the sound of whistles, crackles and snatches of foreign music, he said, ‘Speak to me, London,’ and, in obedience, it did.
It was the Christmas service on the BBC World Service from the parish  of Dedham in Essex.
We did not really listen, but it helped to put us in the right mood.
We whipped up Christmassy feelings and pulled decorations and paper hats out of a hamper given by soldiers in the Outer Hebrides.
We tied balloons and streamers to the tents, wheelbarrow and Land Rover and watched them being thrashed by the wind.
I was sitting on my fishing stool wearing winter clothes, and a sailcloth robe thrown over me for extra warmth.
I had had my head shaved for the sake of hygiene the day before I left England.
A conical party hat was now perched on top of the grey stubble, with the elastic stretched under my chin.
With a balloon bobbing against my left shoulder and sand blowing over my boots, I opened my presents — a hot-water bottle and a small canister of shaving foam from Joan, and the book of Job and a miniature of whisky from my parents.
At midday, with the tent and kit packed in the wheelbarrow, I was almost ready to begin the second day's walk.
Before that, though, I opened a can of whole chicken and ripped off a leg dribbling with jelly.
I had no time to steam my Christmas pudding, so I poured boiling water over it and ate it like cake.
It would keep me going for the afternoon, until I could heat up the rest of the chicken for supper.
Then, before hoisting the sail, I trundled the wheelbarrow onto the road.
After half an hour, flesh-pink dunes, perhaps a hundred feet high, appeared several miles ahead.
The dunes that had been on the left were replaced by a sandstone ridge and the sand on that side of the road was now black.
To the right, a brick-red dune stood alone among golden yellow ones.
The only sign of life was a man, wearing what looked like a woollen dressing gown with a hood, riding past on a camel.
The scene might have been absorbing had I not been fighting to keep control of the wheelbarrow.
Sailing wheelbarrows have been used in China for two thousand years.
They are supposed to be easier to move than the western, garden variety.
I had told everybody so, and the Oxford don who had suggested the design had said it was a proven scientific fact.
In theory he was right.
There are other advantages besides their having a sail.
They are one wheel lighter than two-wheeled carts, and more manoeuvrable since they are able to turn on the spot and negotiate narrow gaps on rocky ground.
Moreover, due to their large diameter wheel, they have a low rolling resistance on poor tracks and, importantly, it is the wheel, and not the person pushing, which carries the weight, since the load is balanced in a pair of lockers, one on each side, and distributed both in front of and behind the axle.
It takes no effort to lift the shafts.
Pushing the wheelbarrow should have been child's play, but I still could not get the hang of it.
There had been a delay in building it, so that I had only managed a  few hours' practice in the streets of Salford.
As I set out on that Christmas afternoon, I planned to learn as I went along.
I would take it easy and avoid a repetition of the day before.
I adjusted the sail at forty-five degrees to the east wind, and walked south.
If the wind had been constant, it would have been easy to lean the wheelbarrow into it.
Instead, it came in gusts.
The wheelbarrow, which, when loaded, was three times my weight, toppled, spinning me in circles.
I was blown to one side off the macadam, then dragged back and crashed down on the other.
The wheelbarrow seemed to want to shake me off like a steer at a rodeo.
I hung on, having to force the shafts to the ground to slow it down.
This not only strained the backs of my arms but also made the aluminium legs screech against the ground, which set my teeth on edge.
Concentration was essential.
Each time I looked away from the road, the wheelbarrow fell over.
It must have done so thirty times before dusk.
Loading was part of the problem.
A gallon container a foot out of place would put everything off balance, so each time the wheelbarrow fell, the dislodged kit had to be re-adjusted.
After an hour, every joint and muscle in my body hurt.
When I had breath to spare, I shouted, ‘Why on earth did I come?
I'm an idiot!’
And looking to heaven, I complained, ‘And why did you let me?’
And it was not helping the poor that kept me going, but the thought of having to admit that I had no stomach.
To go home would have been to face not only the critics but the people who had helped.
The sail had been a hindrance, making sport of me at each whim of the wind, so I lowered it.
The mast was still waving ten feet above the ground, making the wheelbarrow top-heavy, and from sideways on there was my voluminous robe and thirteen square feet of metal for the wind to catch.
I maintained a straighter course now but perpetually wanted to stop, and so had to ration myself to two minutes rest in every fifteen, and ten minutes on the hour.
I sat on one of the lockers with both feet on the bar that ran between the shafts.
My back was to the wind which whistled coldly in the wire frame of my spectacles and cracked the loose folds of my robe.
I took a drink from one of the twenty-four plastic gallon containers which I had been collecting for two years.
One was labelled ‘Doby Washing Up Liquid’ and another ‘Barr's Orange Squash’.
They now held diluted fruit juice donated in its doubly concentrated form by British Airways Catering Department.
I sat looking round.
I never noticed much on the move.
On the left of the road, a mile across the brown dust, was a high ridge of black rock which glinted like coal.
The sky behind was a pastel-blue wall.
To the right, massive pyramids of rose-pink sand blockaded the Moroccan  border.
The air was Alpine-clear, bringing the ridge, rocks and dunes to arm's length, like a film set.
I panned the view, looking for visual stimulation to jerk me out of my maudlin stupor.
In fact, I needed to look no further than the ground below me.
At three o'clock, when I had scanned every crack in the ridge, every curve of every dune, every patch of colour on the plain, I looked down and saw an ant, crawling into the wind.
It was carried back on the blowing sand, but it moved unhurriedly forward.
At home I might have fed it to the fish, but here I felt sorry for it and watched until it was time to move on.
When I was putting the orange juice bottle back into the wheelbarrow, an empty plastic bag was blown out of the locker and soared towards Morocco, like a racing pigeon from a basket.
I had visions of a nomad's only camel eating it and dying, so I gave chase, watching the dust from my feet overtake me.
The bag was increasing its lead, almost out of view, when it arced and plummeted like a kite above the beach and was slammed against a rock.
I reached it, peeled it off sadly, wishing it could have had its liberty, and walked back with it flapping to be free.
Being sorry for an ant may be excusable, even commendable, but what sort of madness takes pity on a sandwich bag?
Perhaps I was ashamed of feeling sorry for myself and had to transfer the pity to something else.
My self-pity was enhanced at four-thirty when I came to camp.
Mick's tape-recorder was playing ‘Wipe Those Womble Tears From Your Eyes’.
It was a song I grew to love.
Though I was exhausted and had managed only nine miles, it had been a better day than the first.
I was by no means ill, and the ground by the road was firm enough for me to get to the Land Rover without too much of a struggle.
Some time after dark, when the cans which had held chicken and plum pudding lay cold in a shallow pit, and when our plates and dishes had been scraped clean, we wrapped ourselves up and sat out of the wind, behind the Land Rover.
It was the only evening for weeks that we stopped out.
Since it was Christmas, it was worthwhile, but otherwise it would have been too cold.
The lads were each sitting on a black, plastic jerry-can, while I was perched on my fishing stool.
The petrol stove was roaring under a steaming kettle, sheltered by three sides of an unfolded carton.
Mick was perched close to it, with a bowl of hot water and suds at his feet.
He had been scouring a pan, but now put it on another jerry-can to drain, alongside two clean plates.
‘Do you want this soapy water, Geoff, or shall I bin it?’
‘No thanks, Mick.
I've done.’
He picked up the bowl and tossed the water into the darkness.
Paddy was sitting with his back to the Land Rover looking at the map.
He beamed his torch on the suds dispersing in the sand.
Mick said,
‘You know, I never knew what ‘bin it’ meant until I joined the army.
I picked it up off the Manchester lads in our regiment.
A right rough lot.
Damned good soldiers though.
You wanna see 'em on exercises.
Couldn't give two monkeys!’
‘Are exercises all that dangerous?’
‘Course!
Squaddies get killed sometimes.
Ferrets are the worst.
They're always turning over,’ he said, explaining that Ferrets are small armoured cars.
‘Then you've got the jokers who sleep under lorries to get out of the rain.
The lorry sinks in the mud and that's it.’
He turned to Paddy, ‘Did you hear about that sergeant who walked into the back of a chopper in Northern Ireland?’
‘Yes, I did.’
‘You know, Geoff,’ said Mick, ‘half of those killed never get in the papers.’
Paddy murmured agreement.
‘Do you go on exercises often?’
‘Two or three times a year.
It's good fun really, especially in Germany.
We ride all over farms and knock down fences.
Farmers don't mind.
They just send the bill and the army pays.
I've heard of farmers slipping the lads a few marks to drive through an old fence so they can get a new one free.’
By eight-thirty, after putting the army to rights, and warming ourselves on one cup of tea after another, we were too cold to stay up.
As usual, Mick checked underneath and around the Land Rover, locking everything away and tightening the ropes on the tarpaulin trailer-cover.
I secured the locks on the wheelbarrow, crawled under canvas and wrote up the log and two letters.
Then, as would often be the case when the wind permitted, I opened the flaps and looked at the stars.
They gave me a feeling of my own finiteness, and put me in the mood for my evening Bible reading.
It was not the quantity of stars that was so impressive, though if there had been more they would have blended into a whitewash, nor was it their brilliance, though they were a dazzling variation of colour and size, but that they seemed alive.
The sky pulsated with countless blinking lights.
I put my head down at nine-thirty.
The time for this never became regular.
It was any time between nine and one, depending on what had to be done.
I usually set my alarm clock for five, ready for me to be away two hours later at dawn.
After I woke, I would make a cup of tea and soon afterwards dash out with the toilet-roll.
I would scuttle back, shaking with cold to read the Bible and pray.
While supplies lasted, breakfast was a combination of the foods I disliked, but felt to be essential: glucose, oats and Sanatogen powder, mixed with water, milk powder and cocoa to disguise the taste.
It was awful.
Uncooked Quick Quaker Oats was the main constituent.
It was my staple carbohydrate, eaten either as a snack or main meal — it needed no cooking, was light to carry and would not go stale, but provided energy, protein and roughage.
It took an hour to break camp — half an hour inside the tent, securing lids, folding up the canteen, and packing food, maps, writing paper, foot powder, vitamin pills and the rest, everything into its own bag — before putting my feet through the flaps into cold boots.
Not many yards away, dunes and hillocks looked as if they had been dumped at random, each one rising about sixty feet above the plain.
Under the night sky, they looked like slag heaps.
For the first few minutes outside, I used the torch, until the blackness behind the dunes turned to a deep red.
The redness flowered into a sort of technicoloured aurora borealis, beams of magenta and pink fanning across the brightening sky until everything was transfigured by a brilliant crescent above an eastern dune.
Rocks, dunes, the Land Rover and I shone gold with its borrowed light.
The enchantment dissolved in seconds as the pale circle appeared and all the world became the same shade of grey.
I was glad to get moving.
My hands were cold, gloved as they were, and though I wore a jersey, jacket and jeans, I shivered for the first ten minutes.
I was in less difficulty than on the first two days: I no longer pushed the ends of the shafts but gained better control from between them and was able to look around without overbalancing.
The road followed a wadi, a dried-up river bed, which was green with palms and which a trick of light sometimes filled with water — such mirages are natural and common in the desert.
They are the same phenomenon as water seeming to appear on a dry English road on a sunny day.
Occasionally, there were villages — huddles of mud dwellings, shaded by palm-trees.
Plots of vegetables were fenced in by mud-brick walls to keep out the hobbled donkeys and camels which foraged in the wadi.
It was rare that I saw people, though now and then I came across sheep and goats being herded by children — boys in night-shirts or girls in blue gingham, every dress made from the same roll of cloth.
Dunes, palm trees, mud-brick villages, children and animals would have made good picture postcards, but, for all its beauty, the desert was terrifying.
Were it not for the narrow strip of tar, I would have been stuck hopelessly — several times I was bogged down when the wind blew me off the road.
In its native China, the wheelbarrow's narrow wheel might have sliced through the mud and found rock beneath, but here it just cut deep into the sand.
I wondered what Stewart Wilson, the Oxford don who had suggested it, would have said if he could have seen me.
That afternoon the wheelbarrow even stuck when I pulled it off the road for a break.
It rolled into a hollow and it took me half an hour to get it one yard back onto the road.
Having got there, I felt like resting, but curiosity pulled me on to my feet.
There was a strange rasping noise coming from over the next rise.
It turned out to be a man shovelling sand off the road.
His buttonless jacket was blown open and the wind pressed his grey shirt to his chest.
The end of his black head-wrap hung loose and flapped over his shoulder, giving a clear view of his face.
A dune had encroached onto the road and he was slicing away its tip, tossing it clear of the tarmac behind him.
When he saw me, he leaned on his shovel until I was near enough to shake hands.
Though his skin was pale, he had the lips and round face of a black African, and that African quality of showing that one does not need a reason to be happy.
He was one of many people of mixed race I was to meet in Algeria.
He unclipped a plastic water-bottle from his belt and held it out with a smile that was almost a grin.
‘No thank you.
I have plenty in here,’ I said, touching the wheelbarrow.
‘Where are you going?’
‘Nigeria.’
‘Oh, I see.’
There was no look of surprise, just the nod of a deaf man trying to give the impression he can hear.
He had not understood.
Half an hour later, an open-backed lorry carrying the same man and a dozen of his workmates raced past, stopping quickly enough to throw them comically forward, and then reversing hurriedly to me.
The men poured off the lorry, the wheelbarrow was hustled from me, and they fought playfully to have a turn.
After a babble of Arabic, the tailboard of the lorry was dropped and a dozen men were lifting the wheelbarrow.
‘Stop!
Stop!’
I yelled, flinging my arms about in a style I might have copied from them.
‘It's all right.
We're helping you,’ said the driver.
The men were holding the wheelbarrow above their heads.
‘Only five miles,’ he continued.
‘We will take you five miles.’
I hesitated and the men looked appealingly for instruction.
The pressure of administration had stopped my training before I had left England and my feet had grown soft.
As I had mistakenly left my only pair of worn-in boots in Salford — I had been wearing them when I packed the kit, and changed into shoes to travel to North Africa — I now had blisters under the balls of both feet and another running from the  top of my left heel right under the foot.
There were blisters, too, where one buttock had chafed the other, and my hands and face were raw with sunburn.
My knees were blue with bruises.
I had fallen many times and could not control the wheelbarrow unless I was close enough for my legs to bang into it.
There was cramp in my neck and arms and I was so tired that it seemed almost as if a malevolent magnetism was trying to drag me to the ground.
I wanted to cheat.
Five miles would have made a difference.
I would get to camp at three, and could have had an early night.
‘Put it on the lorry,’ the driver said.
Two men were already up there reaching out to guide it on.
‘No, please stop,’ I said.
‘I must walk.’
‘On foot?’ the foreman asked.
‘On foot,’ I maintained.
‘On foot?’ they said, still holding the wheelbarrow high.
‘Yes, on foot.’
I insisted.
They put down the wheelbarrow.
‘Why?’ someone asked.
I explained, falteringly, my motives — at least, as far as I understood them myself.
‘To Nigeria ?’ said someone, in high-pitched amazement.
There were cries in French of ‘Impossible!
Too much sand!
Too difficult!’ and oaths in Arabic that I did not understand.
Then after a lecture from them on my stupidity, each man stepped forward and shook my hand.
I was a little way ahead before they moved off.
When they overtook me, they gave a cheer so loud that they drowned the noises of the wheelbarrow and lorry.
Their friendship continued for the next few days.
The driver dropped off a man or two at dunes that had drifted on to the road and would then go back and pick them up when they had finished, before taking them further south.
I never found out which area they covered, nor whether they returned home at night, nor whether there was another side to their work.
One thing was certain: unless machines were one day to take their places, they had a lifetime's job.
The trade winds have been moving the dunes south-west for thousands of years and show no sign of stopping, but unless they do, much of West Africa will be engulfed.
Even now, many desert towns would be buried if their inhabitants did not transport the encroaching dunes bit by bit to the other side of their settlements.
Each time the workmen saw me, they offered a ride and it became more difficult to refuse, until on the sixth day I weakened.
There was a mile along which I did not walk.
The blisters were hurting and the men persuasive.
I got on the vehicle but the driver had not long been in fourth gear when I came to my senses.
I was ashamed, though not ashamed enough to walk back.
I tried to tell myself that the road was  only practice for the desert.
But the guilt would not go away: I omitted the incident from the log and it took me two years to own up to it.
That night I woke at half-past three and lay brooding over my lack of progress.
We had come only forty-two miles in three days — fourteen miles a day.
The army had said we would average fifteen, but I had hoped for eighteen and had told them so.
The West African temperature would be rising during the European spring; the longer I took, the worse it would be at the end.
We had barely enough food for three months, let alone the four and a half it would take at fifteen miles a day.
Nor would the £1,500 I had borrowed last that long.
Insurance, ferries, food and kit took a large slice, the rest went on fuel for the Land Rover's seven thousand mile round trip.
Petrol consumption was high, with the price often twice what it was at home.
We were short of batteries, too.
The lads had brought four dozen for their torches and Mick's radio.
I had six dozen smaller ones for the tape recorder and my torch.
The tape recorder was used to send reports to churches and schools who were using the expedition to raise money for famine relief.
The torch was even more essential.
I made camp at sunset, and then cooked, wrote letters, and did my chores after dark.
In the morning, I broke camp in the dark.
At present usage I would run out of batteries before the half-way point and Mick and Paddy would run out just after.
I had to cover more than fifteen miles a day.
I had hoped for thirty on the paved road to bump up the average before the open desert at Adrar.
Just before the alarm clock rang at five, I conceived how it might be done.
Crossing the Sahara was a personal ambition and all the rules were self-made.
I wanted to prove that a man using only natural supply and watering points could cross it without a camel or motor vehicle.
The Land Rover had originally been meant to be no more than a safety net.
Later it made economic sense to plan for the vehicle to carry things which had been given free in England but which were too heavy for me to manage for the whole way.
It was a cheap alternative to buying from local merchants, but I was only allowed access to the provisions at points of safety such as towns and wells.
In open desert, I was on my own.
Until Mick had objected for reasons of safety, I had even planned to camp half a mile from the soldiers.
The Chinese sailing wheelbarrow was not a gimmick.
If I could have done without it, I would have done.
It was a tool to help me from one point of safety to another; it carried not only the tent, camping equipment, and food, but the weightiest item of all, water.
But at this stage I could manage without it, without breaking the overall aim of carrying my own food and water.
I could put everything on my back  between villages because, this side of Adrar, they occurred almost every twenty miles.
There was nothing against my packing a bag and loading the wheelbarrow on the Land Rover so that it could be used for the longer, more difficult sections.
I could then walk much faster and push up the average daily mileage.
We were now at a point of safety, half a mile from the village of El Ouata, so I was allowed access to supplies in the Land Rover.
I could begin today.
There could be no early start: the lads' co-operation was needed and we always found it difficult to agree on rules.
Mick and Paddy had been well briefed on most things, but in the last-minute rush they were not given full details of my self-made code of conduct.
We had finally thrashed this out on the ferry from Gibraltar to Tangier.
Mick had disagreed with my proposals.
He had said it was unwise to load up in villages because of thieves and dangerous to camp apart from each other because of bandits.
‘Don't forget,’ he had said, ‘we're responsible for your safety and for the safety of the kit.
If anything should happen to you…’
He was suspicious of the local people, and when any of them showed up he always put things of value out of sight.
The thought of bandits and deep sand seemed to haunt him.
He expressed his feelings so many times in the same way that when he could not see me I would find myself mouthing the words with him: ‘The thing that worries me is bandits and deep sand.’
To be fair, he had spent some time in the cities of North Africa and, as one might do in similar urban areas of Britain, he had met the worst of the indigenous population.
To confirm his fears, when we had been driving out of Tangier docks late at night, having only just arrived on African soil, a group of men had tried to stop us.
We had been coming onto the main road at about five miles an hour when three men had blocked our exit.
While one had climbed on the bonnet, another had pushed his hand through the open window on Mick's side.
Mick had accelerated and the men had jumped clear.
Mick had argued his case forcefully, and I had reluctantly agreed to camp next to them.
Depressingly, this meant that I was within sight, sound and smell of their superior rations, bacon-burgers, goulash, and bolognese.
I had also agreed to load up out of sight, though within easy walking distance, of villages — it would be as as if I had gone into the villages for supplies, but this way meant that I wouldn't attract anyone's attention.
Tailoring the rules to make life easier was a common, but regrettable feature of the expedition.
The rules were intended to simulate a solo walk, and along the most arduous sections it did — I was out there without aid — but in the region of towns and villages things were lax.
The problem of interpreting the rules was caused by the fact that, having made them myself, I was the sole arbiter.
I now planned to discuss my proposed modifications with the lads before leaving camp.
While I was waiting for my companions to stir, I put water on to boil, but soon noticed that the stove had given up.
I went outside to change the cylinder — the same sort as used on most small camping-stoves — and began to unscrew the burner.
A gas dropping in pressure also drops in temperature — the principle behind the household refrigerator.
On letting a tyre down, for example, the valve becomes cold because of the loss of pressure of the escaping air; conversely, the valve gets hot when the pressure is increased and the tyre is pumped up.
As I unscrewed the burner, there was a rapid escape of gas.
While I was struggling to stop it, frost was formed where it struck my already cold hand.
‘Damn!
Damn!
Damn!’
I screamed, loud enough to prompt a comment from the other tent about the vicar's strong language.
The cylinder had been partly full, but the jet was blocked.
I dived angrily inside the tent to clear it, dumbfounded as to how sand could have got in.
I always cleaned the stove after use and wrapped it in a tough plastic bag.
Moving outside to fit the new cylinder, I noticed that I had dropped the tiny rubber washer that fitted between the cylinder and stove.
I emptied the tent, shook every item, and retraced my steps outside.
Paddy got up to help and we both crawled about ferreting in the sand.
‘It's no use, Paddy.
I probably trod on it and buried it.
I'd make a new one except the only rubber I've got is in the sole of my boot.’
‘Try a few layers of polythene,’ he said.
I was doubtful, but there was nothing else, so I tore a plastic bag into pieces, fixed these in place, and began to screw on the cylinder.
A white streak of gas burst over my left hand.
After struggling for a moment to stop it, I screamed and dropped the lot.
My index finger was sleeved in frost and I dared not bend it for fear of splitting the skin.
I gave up the idea of tea, but was able to make a washer in the afternoon with rubber from an abandoned tyre.
Before I left camp, I discussed the modified rules with the lads.
They agreed to transport the wheelbarrow on those days when I was able to carry supplies on my back from one village to the next.
Walking without the wheelbarrow turned out to be a success.
Though it was noon when I set out, I made up time, maintaining a speed of almost five miles an hour.
I hardly noticed the rucksack with its load of bread and water.
It gave me a sense of liberation, being able to look around without overbalancing.
The air was warm and uncharacteristically still.
Palm trees and crescent-shaped dunes seemed to waver in the heat.
The road rolled over a hill and curled down among flesh-pink dunes.
Seen from a hill, the dunes stretched as far as the deep blue of the horizon, above  which were a few streaks of cirrus cloud.
The road pitched and banked over and around waves of sand and, periodically, I met the workmen busy with their shovels.
For the next day and a half, the scenery was spectacular, especially when viewed from high ground.
A sea of huge, irregularly shaped dunes seemed to tumble from blue, hazy hills over to my left.
Half a day's walk further on, away from the turbulence caused by high ground, the dunes were no more than ten feet high.
These smaller dunes were distinct from the level ground on which they stood, as if they had been tipped in discrete heaps by the workmen's lorry.
Their surfaces were ribbed by corrugation, which ran in wavy lines three inches across, like giant fingerprints, but without whorls or loops.
In the evening, when the sun mellowed and cast deep shadows, these ribs became stripes of light and shade.
For that last half-hour of the day, the dunes became a deeper gold and were scored with the long shadows of palm trees, whose tops were so green that I fancied that if my arm had been long enough I could have plucked a leaf and eaten it as if it had been parsley.
Then, abruptly, for the following day and a half there was neither sand nor palm trees, just a thirty-mile climb up a canyon of broken slate and rock.
The desert is full of surprises.
One day you can be swamped by sand and the next climbing a hill the size of Ben Nevis.
The Sahara is a new desert, and, other than water, it has the same geographical features as other major land masses.
The canyon was a natural cutting through a mountain of basalt.
Its sides were neither high nor sheer, just slopes of black shale rising no more than fifty feet.
The road ran along the valley between them, where boulders had settled.
Parallel to the canyon, but just out of sight, was a wadi, along which there was a string of villages.
Early in the afternoon, on the third day of walking without the wheelbarrow, four men appeared on the road a quarter of a mile further up the canyon.
They were so still that they might have been made of granite.
Two more joined them.
I felt uneasy and the back of my neck was prickly with sweat, but relentlessly I kept the same pace towards them.
Eight or ten others were crouched behind the rocks.
They were not the shabby workmen, but were dressed in what looked like blue and white satin.
I looked back down the hill hoping a vehicle would be coming.
Mick and Paddy might be on their way.
They usually started out about now, and after catching me up went forward an agreed distance to make camp.
No sign of them.
I was alone.
I wanted to drop everything and run, but I was so scared of appearing to be a coward, even to myself, that I dared not.
There was movement to the side of them, but I could not see what they were doing because of the size of the boulders.
Were they regrouping?
Were they trying to outflank me?
My face was tingling with fear and I felt in imminent need of a toilet-roll.
They were only a hundred yards away now, still as a cobra before it strikes.
These were the bandits Mick had spoken of.
They would kill a man to steal his clothes.
Only inertia carried me forward.
I could neither have deviated nor run.
I could not have turned my head nor moved my hands from where they hung on the straps of the rucksack.
One move and they would shoot.
‘Keep on walking and talk your way out of it,’ I told myself.
I dared not turn round now to look for a vehicle, but I held my breath and listened for one — there was only the sound of my rubber soles on the macadam and the noise of wind.
A figure darted from his cover on to the road.
My heart beat violently, almost painfully, and sweat trickled down my face.
I now saw everything.
The figure was a boy, dressed in clean white shorts and T-shirt, looking like an Italian child on his way to church.
He was crossing the road to join his father, who was standing with a group of men on the other side.
There were more children playing among the rocks, while their mothers complained to each other(I imagined) about the price of grain.
They were desert folk waiting for the bus.
Strength went from my limbs and I felt faint with relief.
The canyon ran parallel to the continuation of the wadi which I had been following for days.
That dried up river-bed, which was out of sight over the ridge and down a thousand feet of shingle, was rich with palm-trees, and with villages.
These people lived there.
The wadi would rarely have been filled with water, but deep down, the soil was moist, and trees were able to drink from its reserve.
The villagers ate dates from the wadi's palms, fed their sheep and goats on its shrubs, and made their homes from the mud and vegetation.
They grew carrots, onions and tomatoes: the palms shielded plants from the sun, and wells provided a ready supply for watering by hand.
The women, dressed in yards of a blue-and-white, shiny fabric, even looked overfed.
The men, thinner than their wives, greeted me and gathered round.
A tall, old man, wearing western-style trousers, with a knee-length white robe over the top, was the only one to speak.
His face was kindly, brown and wrinkled.
He had blue eyes and his head was bare except for a few short grey hairs.
Perhaps he was the chief.
‘Are you well?’ he asked.
‘Very well.
Are you?’
‘I thank God that I am,’ he said in Arabic, and continued in French,
‘Where are you going?’
‘Adrar,’ I said, not telling the whole story.
I was in no mood to be upbraided about my stupidity.
I might even have had to explain where  Nigeria was.
Half the local people had never heard of it.
After all, it was almost two thousand miles away.
‘Adrar?
On foot?
That's over two hundred kilometres,’ he said.
‘I like the exercise and, besides, I have two friends down the road in a Land Rover,’ I said, implying that I would be given a lift.
‘Where are you going?’
I asked.
‘Kerzaz.’
Kerzaz was the small market-town through which I had passed, when at the bottom of the canyon two days before.
I looked at my watch.
‘I must go.
I'm late,’ I said, as if I had an appointment to keep.
I was always on edge, eager to be further south.
The gathering of men pressed closer to see my watch, so I held out my wrist.
‘What time is it?’ asked the chief.
‘One o'clock,’ I replied, ‘so I must go.’
The crowd parted, and they stood gazing up the canyon, not out of interest in me but to see if the bus was coming.
It passed a few minutes later.
It was not the sort I had seen in West Africa, with side-windows missing and as many chickens on board as people, but as plush as the one that had recently taken our Parish Fellowship for an evening drive around Cheshire.
According to the sign on the front of this one, it was the shuttle between Adrar, the last place linked by road in the south, and Oran, a large commercial city on the coast.
There was a good transport system all over Algeria, even in the desert, though beyond the road, lorries replaced coaches.
On this stretch, I even saw a taxi.
SLANT EYES
Just before sunset on 29 December, four hours after the bus to Kerzaz had passed, I was bending over, hammering at the tent-pegs.
Mick was trying to light the petrol stove.
‘I bet the newspapers would like to know about this!’ he said.
‘What'd happen if I told them how you'd cheated?’
‘I don't follow.’
‘Well, there's no village here and we're carrying the barrow for you.’
‘Of all the cheek!
It was you who wanted to keep away from villages.
Timoudi is a mile over that ridge!’
‘Yes, but what about the gravy I gave you?’
I wanted to hit him.
On Boxing Day I had accepted a few spoons of gravy, but only after considerable coaxing from Mick, having refused it twice already.
We had been outside the village of El Ouata — we would have been inside but for him.
I now knew that I would have to put the wheelbarrow back on the road next morning, despite a relative abundance of settlements.
I took the threat seriously, and dared not risk Mick causing adverse publicity.
When the tent was up, I had to prove that I had been right about the proximity of a village.
I scrambled up the side-wall of the canyon and peeped over.
There, down a mile of scree, were thousands of palm trees, and, I thought, a village.
According to the map it was there, but the fact that the dwellings seemed half hidden by the trees and were the same colour as the desert gave me a tinge of doubt.
I suppressed my uncertainty.
It was unthinkable that Mick could have been right.
Perhaps if I had allowed myself to be doubtful, I might have understood Mick's concern about the rules, and his inability to express it without aggressive confrontation.
That would have eased the tension but, as it was, I was so keen to justify myself that I felt compelled to confront him.
I came down the slope, trying not to smirk.
Mick was still at the stove.
‘Lovely view of Timoudi,’ I said.
‘You ought to go up.’
There was no comment; instead he began to sing: ‘We don't smoke pot in Norwich City…’
Later, I was still disturbed by Mick's comments, but it was Sunday  and self-pity was always sweeter then.
Sunday was my day: I could do what I liked with it.
Mick had Saturday.
We had never consciously allocated days to each other; it had just turned out that we had grabbed them and put our stamp on them.
Each day was different.
For no particular reason, Monday always seemed a little dull.
Friday was special because it ushered in the weekend.
On Wednesday evening there was a sports programme on the BBC World Service, and Saturday was the day of the football results.
The weekend was the high spot.
I would walk during the day every day, but evenings were different from one another.
If there was water to spare I would smarten up and shave, regardless of where I was, and I might cook myself a treat, kippers or pilchards.
There were almost enough tins to have one or the other each week.
On Friday and Saturday tea-times, we would sometimes fantasize about which pub we ought to go to and what we would eat afterwards.
But today was my day, a day for prayer and worship.
As usual, after supper I played one of a dozen tape recordings of sermons by the Reverend John McArthur of Sun Valley, California.
While they often helped me to gain a perspective on, and strength for, what I was doing, the one I played on this particular night enhanced my self-pity.
It gave me sanctuary.
I was using an ear-plug and the lads could not hear it — I had gone to church alone.
I was acting like someone who puts on his Sunday best, lifts his nose in the air, and goes to worship feeling superior to those who are watching television or washing the car instead.
Mick had disturbed me more than he knew.
These two hundred and thirty miles on the road should have been a time for strengthening bonds and for unifying our resolve, but I felt continually at cross-purposes with him.
The sermon did indeed make me feel superior: ‘I know what the preacher means by ‘the concept of the body in Romans 12’.
Mick doesn't.
He doesn't understand anything of value.
He doesn't understand what it is to have real purpose, or peace.
All he cares about are women and booze.
He only came to the Sahara to get a sun-tan and lose weight, so that he can put on his dark glasses and show himself off in the bars back home.’
I switched off the tape, realizing that I would have to listen another time to find out what the preacher was really saying.
Later that evening, when I was almost asleep, the sound of a crowd brought me back to full consciousness.
My head popped outside; five young men were bounding out of the darkness from a car on the road.
The headlights went off, doors slammed, and the driver chased after the others, who were almost at our tents.
From their sure-footedness over ankle-twisting rocks, they were obviously young, and they were  babbling in the manner of teenage boys with everyone talking and no one listening.
Their babble of French and Arabic made an awful din, but within just a few feet of us they quietened.
‘We would like oil, please,’ said one of them in French.
‘Oil or petrol?’
I asked.
‘Oil.’
‘Diesel oil?’
‘No, just oil.’
‘Bin 'em, Geoff,’ said Mick.
‘They need oil and you won't get rid of 'em till they've got it,’ I said.
‘Ohhhh Kaaay,’ said Paddy with a yawn, and there was the sound of opening zips.
‘He'll get you some,’ I said.
The strangers' faces were barely visible, but from ground level (where I was leaning out of the tent) I could see that three of them were wearing football boots.
‘Where are you going?’
I asked.
‘Béchar,’ replied the one nearest to me.
‘From Adrar?’
‘Yes.’
‘Been playing football?’
‘Yes, for our college.’
He explained that he was training to be a teacher in Bechar, a large town a little north of where I had begun walking.
It was the most southerly westernized town, the last in which we saw television aerials.
The young men had been playing football against a team from the small local college at Adrar, the town which was for me the end of tarmac and the beginning of the desert; for these city boys, it was the last outpost.
‘There's no oil in Adrar,’ he said with disgust.
‘There's nothing else, either,’ added one of the others.
They all laughed.
The one to whom I had been speaking was shivering audibly.
‘Will your friend be long?’ he asked.
Before I could answer, Paddy emerged flashing a torch in our direction.
‘Right, let's go to your car and see what you need.’
Two of the strangers stayed near me; one of them was dancing on the spot to keep warm.
The others clattered over the loose uneven rock following Paddy's understandable impatience.
I was propping myself up, still in my sleeping bag with only my head outside.
One of the two remaining asked me,
‘Are you American?’
‘No, English.’
‘Oh, ho!’ he said, dancing more vigorously and chanting, ‘Manchester City!
Manchester City!
Manchester City!’
‘I'm from Manchester,’ I said.
‘You have the best team.
We all follow English football.
My team is  Manchester City!
Manchester City!’ he said, continuing the chant which was so like those I had heard at Manchester's Maine Road ground that I marvelled when he said he had never been to England.
What I did not know was that English soccer was televised in Algeria.
Paddy returned, took the tarpaulin off the trailer, and gave them the engine oil.
The two who had been talking to me went with the others back to their vehicle.
For a moment, I could hear their indistinct voices and the faint sound of, ‘Manchester City, Manchester City…’
Their engine fired and as it droned down the hill, toots of thanks echoed round the canyon.
Paddy got into his tent and said, ‘I thought they'd have offered us something for it.’
‘Bastards!’ said Mick.
Soon after dawn, I set off, having packed away the sail and mast on the Land Rover.
The wind had taken more of my energy than it saved, and without the sail, the wheelbarrow was much easier to control.
The only disappointment was that, at nine o'clock, the advantage gained by climbing for two days was lost in minutes, like the slow, laborious winding of a stiff spring which snaps and releases its energy in an instant.
I had come to the top of a long hill, so steep that the wheelbarrow was almost wrenched from my hands as the descent began.
It was fun, all the same, hurtling madly downhill, too fast to stop.
There were no brakes, and if I had stumbled, then the bar that ran between the shafts behind me would have caught me in the back and either dragged me along or knocked me to the ground.
I tried to slacken pace but the slowest I went seemed to be faster than I had ever run before.
I was off-balance, falling forward, lurching with giant strides, certain that the next step would end in a nosedive.
Then, abruptly, there was only the plain ahead and, in the distance, two square mud houses with flat roofs, one on each side of the road.
I could just make out the figure of a boy, running from the house on the right, who was joined by a group of people from the other.
They were aroused, no doubt, by the rumble of the all-metal wheelbarrow, which was audible half a mile away.
They stood with their backs to what turned out to be a mud-built shack on the left.
‘Café’ was daubed in whitewash on the wall and beneath it a metal plaque advertising ‘Fanta’.
The group — all males — were wearing either knee-length shirts or what looked like the jackets and trousers left from the last church jumble sale.
I guessed they were from Ksabi, a village a mile off the road.
They viewed me with the same puzzled look as I later saw on the faces of nomads miles from civilization.
The questions of who I was, where I had come from and where I was going struck them with confusion.
I was as awesome as an  Arab raiding-party in a Yorkshire village.
They stared in silence: There were no murmurs of ridicule, no sniggers.
I put down the shafts and waved with my straw hat.
I wanted them to laugh, to surround me and ask for gifts.
‘Bonjour messieurs !
 Ca  va ?’
But they made no response, all except the little boy, who smiled and dusted the air with his hand.
It was less than an hour from dusk, and we would have camped there had it been left to me.
Instead, I moved on, leaving them leaning against the cafe wall.
We stopped for the night a mile down the road just out of sight.
Mounds of dirt, rock and sand — little hills engulfed by dunes — blocked our view so that we could see no more than half a mile in any direction.
We pitched our tents leeward of one of them
I took supplies from the Land Rover, according to our agreement, as if I were actually at the cafe.
Reloading was always lengthy.
Beforehand, the wheelbarrow had to be emptied, swept out and cleaned with disinfectant and detergent, as a matter of discipline and hygiene.
Then I packed sardines or beans and sausage for lunch, and meat pudding or sardines for supper, concocted a supply of the sickly breakfast mix, and restocked the medical kit, envelopes, masking-tape, notepaper, blank cassettes, toilet-paper and a plastic bag of clean clothes.
Finally, I did the laundry, cleaned the eating and cooking utensils and washed myself.
As was often the case when there was little wind and a bright moon, that night I sat outside in order to save batteries.
There was the loose lining of my denim cap to stitch, and a button to sew on my trousers.
Then there were envelopes to strengthen with masking-tape to carry cassettes and rolls of film.
Finally, I finished a recording for home and wrote up the log.
Sometimes, when preparing for a long haul, I would only manage four hours' rest, but that night I was asleep by eleven-thirty and did not rise till six.
Sunrise was unglamorous and cold.
Mick was up earlier than usual and we sat on jerry-cans, warming our hands on mugs of tea.
‘You know,’ I said, ‘I've got used to the chlorine in this water.’
‘We've not been putting any in.’
‘Then that's why I've got the craps.’
(There had been no pre-arrangement for the lads to put the purifier in the water.
They had done so the first time they got water for me and I had assumed they would continue.
For their part it was unnecessary as they only drank what had been boiled for tea or coffee, whereas I often drank water on its own or with fruit cordial.)
We were distracted by a lorry  appearing where the road slid out of the dunes.
The driver saw us and was stopping.
‘Go on,’ mumbled Mick.
‘We don't want you around.’
It moved on, as if the driver had heard.
I wanted to beckon him; whenever I met local people on the road, there was never time to talk.
Half an hour after leaving camp, I saw the same  lorry, pulled off the road beside a derelict shack.
A stocky, bearded Arab, wearing a khaki boiler suit and black head-wrap — yards of cloth wrapped round the head leaving a slit only for the eyes — jumped from the cab.
I walked to him and, as he pulled down the lower part of the head-wrap from across his mouth, he introduced himself as Idris.
‘Welcome,’ he said.
‘Would you like to stay and have some tea?’
‘No thank you.
I am a little late.’
‘One moment,’ he said, climbing up into the cab and sitting in the driving seat.
He pulled a jute sack onto his lap and pointed down at my face with a dagger.
‘Half for me and half for you.’
He took a large, flat loaf from the bag, sliced it across its diameter, and handed a piece down to me.
It was so fresh that it must have been baked that morning at Ksabi.
‘Thank you very much,’ I said.
‘How much do I owe you?’
‘Nothing.
On this road all men are friends.
Only the desert is the enemy.’
He tucked the knife behind his seat and climbed backwards out of the cab down onto the loose stones and sand.
He looked with half-closed eyes eastward into the wind.
‘The wind will be even worse,’ he said.
‘Stay and shelter here.
I have tea and bread.’
‘When will the wind stop?’
I asked.
‘About four o'clock in the afternoon.’
‘Then I must try to get further.
Thank you for the bread, Idris.
You are very kind.
See you later when you pass.’
‘Au revoir , my friend,’ he said, offering his hand.
‘Au revoir ,’ I replied.
I bent my knees a little to put on the shoulder-strap and left him watching me move back onto the road.
Before I had gone fifty yards, I felt a couple of grains of sand strike my left cheek.
I looked at the sky, as one might on feeling a spot of rain, and saw the red dust-clouds of a storm in the east.
Climatically, the desert is violent.
The temperature rockets through 50 degrees Fahrenheit between dawn and noon.
This causes massive expansion of air, and demonic winds churn up dust so that one seems to be walking on the bed of a murky sea.
Dust gets into everything: my white underwear became pink, and my ears were so full of it that my hearing was impaired.
The sky in the east was brown with dust, and the sun veiled.
Within minutes the brown patch of sky enveloped me, as a violent storm swept across the dunes.
Rather than turn back and shelter with Idris, I kept moving.
Half a day saved now would mean reaching Joan and Kano that much earlier.
Although I was tempted to think that such a short time would make no difference, I knew that when I got near to Kano, if I got that far, every minute would count.
To my left, the leeward side of sixty-foot dunes rose like a wall  alongside the road.
The wind was hissing loudly over them, whipping off their tops and spraying them into a conveyor-belt of sand, an opaque draught, streaming across the road and up and over the dunes on the other side.
My feet almost disappeared in it; it looked as if I were paddling in muddy water.
Above this moving carpet, the sand in the air reduced visibility down to a hundred yards.
I was ill-clad.
It had been impossible to wear the straw hat all morning because the wind caught it and pulled the chin-strap — improvised from a bootlace — into my neck.
Now I was in danger of losing the tightly-fitting denim cap.
My robe billowed, almost lifting me off the ground, and exposed my sunburnt legs to the stinging spray.
I had to hold down the wheelbarrow by sitting on it while taking off my hat, changing into my jeans, and putting on goggles and a smog-mask.
Then I was off again.
I was raced forward, pushed back, spun around and thrown to the ground.
Though there was no sail, there were thirteen square feet of cross-section for the wind to catch.
Much of the time, I could do no more than lie on the wheelbarrow to hold it down.
A white Volkswagen Beetle crawled towards me out of the fog and passed by on the left.
For a second the wind was blocked and the weight taken from my hands, only to come crashing back in double measure.
The shafts sprang into the air and I was dangled like a gymnast on parallel bars, before being tossed to the ground.
I was passing over a hill when Idris drove past me, hooting, and pointing to the valley where he was obviously going to wait for me.
I threw myself on top of the wheelbarrow to hold it down as he passed.
The desert boiled around his lorry while it rumbled down the slope.
Two more lorries followed and stopped behind his.
All three drivers jumped down, each adjusting his muffler to make a narrow slit across his eyes.
I met them leeward of the middle vehicle, where they lent a hand to tip the wheelbarrow into a stable position.
Grit swirled like drifting snow under the lorries and dropped from above, but at body height, behind the vehicle, it was much more calm.
‘Where did you say you were going?’ asked Idris on behalf of his friends.
I was embarrassed.
To tell the truth was to admit to being an idiot.
But I told them.
‘Where?’ they bellowed in incredulous unison, pulling their mufflers from their faces.
They hung their heads and shook them forlornly.
‘Pas possible !
Pas possible !’ they murmured, fingering the wheel's metal rim.
‘You'll not even get to Reggane and that's only a hundred and sixty kilometres into the desert.’
‘The piste is like this,’ said one of them kicking at the sand.
‘Pas problem,’ I said, not even convincing myself.
‘But it is difficult for a car!
You may die!’
‘I'm being followed by friends in a Land Rover.’
‘Then let them carry your wheelbarrow.’
‘I must carry my own supplies.’
‘But why?’
I tried feebly to explain, until they began to speak softly among themselves in Arabic.
‘We can give you a lift to Adrar,’ said Idris.
‘Thank you very much but I must walk,’ I said.
They stood wordless, like friends consoling the bereaved.
‘We must go,’ said Idris solemnly.
Mufflers went back across faces and they took turns to shake my hand.
‘God be with you,’ said Idris in Arabic and, as he climbed into the cab, he turned and added, ‘et bon courage !’
With the desert streaming from their wheels, they drove away my windbreak and I dived behind the wheelbarrow, now lying on its side.
I put on a jersey and jacket and lay with head and shoulders propped against a locker, eating sardines and mopping the oil from the can with fresh bread.
It was blustery and there was the constant peppering by grit, but I was well protected and enjoyed watching the storm.
Everything was in flux.
Stones danced across the road, bouncing like heavy rain.
The scene had the swirling vagueness of a painting by Turner, with the canvas a blend of sea, sky, fog and rain.
There were no outlines, just moving sand and mist.
The dunes were marching west.
More work for the road gang!
I lay for an hour until the wind subsided enough for a hill to show two miles away.
That evening, at nine o'clock, with the chores finished, I prepared for a celebration.
We were less than a hundred miles away from Adrar, and it was New Year's Eve.
After midnight, there would be a family get-together at my parents' house; I still wanted to take part in it, however far from home I was.
It had been held every year since I was five, and I had only missed it once, the year I was in Nigeria.
I took a mug of water to clean my teeth, shave, and take a bath.
I cleaned my teeth without paste, before pouring water into the miniature bowl and shaving.
Next, I bathed myself with a soapy cloth in the appropriate hygienic order.
With a change of underclothes and socks, and aromatic cream on my ears and nose, it was like childhood bath-nights, with clean sheets and ‘vapour rub’.
I set the alarm clock for a quarter to midnight, and settled down for a couple of hours sleep.
The clock failed to ring, but, inexplicably, I woke with thirty seconds of 1974 left.
I snatched my miniature of whisky and lifted it towards the raised glasses at home, before stepping outside to watch those stars to the left of Polaris which would be blinking over Manchester.
There would be hugs and kisses, wishes of ‘Happy New Year!’, pork pie and trays of drinks.
There would be somebody saying, ‘Well I'm glad to see the back of last year,’ and someone else wishing the new year to  be as good as the last.
There would be tales of family heroes, dead and gone, and there would be the quiet looking round the room wondering who would be the next to go.
And, as I stooped to get back under cover, I recalled that there would, even from the sanest, be a concession to superstition that would be gone by the morning, a belief that the beginning of the year foreshadowed the character of the rest.
I knew that it did not, and could not, but for the next week I found myself despairing as if it did.
Normally I am a good sleeper, but that New Year's Night I lay awake for hours, with cold, sexual fantasy or worry.
The tent might blow away, I might get bitten by a snake, or I might not be able to pay back the £1,500 I had borrowed to finance the trip.
I woke up frightened at having my knife and pill-bottles in the tent in case I should end my life during my night's sleep.
The first day of the year began with dispiriting hills and seven miles of slow gradient.
Every few minutes I found some reason to stop: to take off my sweater, to put on my robe, to change from boots to training-shoes and back again, to eat some oats, to take my temperature, to redistribute the load inside the lockers and, when I had no other excuse, simply to rest.
The slow gradient ended when the road climbed the steepest incline I had yet encountered.
The first yard took all the effort I could manage, creeping a toe's length at a time, my rubber soles slipping on the loose stones, as the wheelbarrow pushed me back to where I had been and we fell over.
I righted the wheelbarrow with effort, turned it round, and pulled it backwards up the same yard, but no further.
The only way forward was to zigzag.
I leaned almost horizontally into the harness, my nose two inches from the wheel.
At each turn of the zigzag, the wheelbarrow toppled, and when I was tacking into the wind, grit, picked up by the wheel was blown into my eyes and mouth.
Somehow, after half an hour, I was at the top looking back at the sign which warned ‘Rapide Descente 300 metres ’.
Morale always rose after a struggle; I would never have to go over the same ground again.
This time it seemed I was wrong; across the next valley was another cliff, except that the sign at the top read ‘Rapide Descente 500 metres ’.
Camp on New Year's Day was a trial, too.
The lads had pitched their tents behind some small dunes and it was a struggle to get there.
I cursed them.
Paddy was digging the rubbish pit, but sand kept blowing back into it like teeming insects.
Mick was heaping piles of spaghetti bolognese on to two plates.
I opened the lockers to pull out the kit but found that the top had come off a water container and half a gallon had spilt, soaking the tea bags and bursting the envelope which carried my documents.
Vibration was the cause.
It scoured cans and batteries and took the surface off the inside of the wheelbarrow, blackening food and  equipment with metallic dust.
Lids sometimes shook loose, and jumbled kit was powdered with salt, cocoa, oats, foot powder and sand.
When I had just erected the tent, Paddy laid aside his empty plate, strolled over, opened a locker and, with an expression of humorous disgust, peered inside and said, ‘What d'you keep in there?
Pigs?’
‘How'd you guess?’
I said, pulling my aluminium dishes from the wheelbarrow.
They were thick with dried food and grime.
Mick exclaimed,
‘Ugh, Geoff, they're evil.
I hope you're gonna wash ‘em.’
‘Can't spare the water, but by the time I've finished cooking they'll be sterile.’
‘No wonder you keep getting the craps.’
‘It would have helped’, I mumbled under my breath, ‘if I had been drinking chlorinated water.’
I put the dishes inside the tent and was half-way to following them when Mick asked, ‘Want some spaghetti bolognese, Geoff?’
I turned round in the tent mouth and sat down with my feet outside to take off my boots.
‘No thanks.
Got to keep to the rules.’
‘It'll get wasted,’ he said.
‘I'll have to bin it.’
‘Then it'll have to get wasted.’
‘If I left the can just over there you could say you found it.’
‘No thanks.’
I zipped up the flaps, not daring to show my anger.
I still do not know whether Mick's approach to the rules, trying to get me to break them one minute, and pointing an accusing finger the next, was a friendly tease or not.
The effect that evening was that it hurt, especially as my supper was delayed for over an hour by blocked jets.
Next morning, the jets, and my mood, were worse.
Before dawn, I was in the sleeping-bag, propping myself up on an elbow, Bible in one hand, torch in the other, flicking the beam periodically to the right of my legs, where the small aluminium pan and stove were struggling to boil water for tea.
Now and then the faint popping of the jet stopped and I restored the dim-blue circle with a match.
After fifty-five minutes there was the gentle tapping of bubbles.
Tea was almost ready.
I packed away my Bible in its plastic bag and, as it was now light enough to see, switched off the torch.
A tea-bag, a spoon of Marvel milk-powder, and the green plastic mug was steaming triumphantly by my side.
Paddy used to say that tea was a morale booster.
Indeed it was, especially in the morning.
It kept out the cold and gave strength and comfort beyond its natural powers.
While leaving it to cool, I reached over for the map; the mug was caught by my sleeve, fell forward with a gurgle, and emptied.
The sleeping-bag began to soak up tea from the steaming groundsheet, and I screamed, ‘Damn!
Damn!
Damn!’ as I beat my fist in the warm puddle.
‘Something the matter?’ asked a sleepy voice.
‘Yeah, Mick, Yeah.
I'm going round the bend.’
I did without tea — a case of having to.
Before setting off, when all had been packed away, I unwittingly slipped my clip-on sun-glasses into my back pocket.
As I lay under the wheelbarrow to tighten the grub-screws on the suspension, there was a sharp snap.
I hauled myself up, shouting abuse at my stupidity.
I pulled the now broken glasses from my pocket: one lens was split, so I fixed the halves in a crude frame of electrical tape.
Difficulties were always tempered by contact with people.
Whether it was talking to travellers or just listening to the lads, whether I felt warmth or animosity did not matter.
Attention was diverted from my ills.
The next twenty-four hours were especially rich in this respect.
By three-thirty, I had done eighteen miles and was hoping to manage twenty-two.
The going was easy and the temperature pleasant.
The hill that was waiting for me across the next two miles of nothingness was typical of those I had climbed that day — no more than a hundred feet high, with a gradual slope.
All the same, I had sore feet and was feeling sorry for myself.
In the middle distance, undulating sand hid the road, though not a tiny green Land Rover moving along it.
After a minute or two, the vehicle drew up and Manfred and Gloria, a German architect and his wife, jumped out.
They were stocky, blond and in their late thirties.
‘Happy New Year for yesterday,’ said Manfred.
‘We read about you in our newspaper.’
Gloria pulled a glossy magazine from their Land Rover and handed it to me.
I did not understand German, and was not interested in the photograph of myself at the top, but bottom left, was a small black-and-white snapshot of Joan and the children.
Joan was smiling, she had her hand on Susan's curly, three-year-old head, and Susan herself was trying to force a menacing kiss on little Sam.
Though I had  forgotten to bring any photographs with me, this one seemed empty.
It was a cold fossil; the people in it could have been  strangers.
I was suppressing my feelings, and was often to see the photograph in the evenings when I closed my eyes.
‘Is there anything you need?’ asked Manfred.
‘Could you post some letters for me?’
I handed back the magazine and gave him a bundle of mail.
‘How about some cigarettes?’ he asked.
I did not smoke but I hesitated to reply.
Mick was short of them and I was deliberating whether to get them for him.
‘I'm sure you can use them,’ Manfred said, as he thrust them into my shirt pocket.
They were typical of the many Europeans we met who were tired of conventional holidays.
Soon after Manfred and Gloria had gone, when I was hurrying to make up time, a second German couple jumped out of another Land Rover.
They were older, rounder and darker skinned.
Each fired an eight-millimetre cine camera at me from opposite sides of the road.
The man was excited and let out raucous laughter, sounding like a cross between a throaty American and a macaw.
I instantly disliked him.
I was in no mood to stop, and continued past as if I thought they wanted to film me from behind.
They ran after me, shouting, but I could barely hear because of the noise of the wheelbarrow.
The man's hand grabbed my shoulder and jerked me round.
They patted, pawed and shook me while they jumped up and down.
‘We write about you in de nyawspepper!
De first one!
De first one to do it!’
That was confidence — the first man to carry his own food and water across the Sahara, and I had not even left the main road yet.
I told them that I was late and walked off.
Four hours later, three miles on, the lads and I were in our tents.
I was eating supper in the dark to save batteries.
Food always tasted better when I could not see it.
Often, when I switched on the light to make sure that the dish was scraped clean, I was disgusted at the mess I had been eating.
Previous days' food and grime always made a meal look unappetizing, though it never affected the taste.
Mick spoke up from the other tent.
‘These fags aren't bad.
Decent couple Manfred and Gloria.
Better than the other two cowboys from Hamburg.
Did you see ‘em, Geoff?’
‘Yeah, but I got away as fast as I could,’ I said.
‘Manfred and Gloria said they'd met them and were trying to shake them off,’ Mick replied.
A gust of wind flapped the tents.
‘I can't believe this wind,’ Mick continued.
‘I've tried five organizations to get it to stop, including the Red Cross and the Salvation Army.
I'll have to try praying to Mohammed.
I've not got me bronzie.
All I've got is slant eyes to keep the sand out.’
‘Why not try a space blanket?’
I said.
‘I'll try anything.’
‘It should keep you warm.
They keep in 98 per cent of radiated heat.
I'm getting out for a pee in a minute, so I'll get one out of the Land Rover if you throw the keys.’
A space blanket, so called because it is a product of space research, is more efficient than an ordinary blanket.
It is a thin sheet of plastic, covered with a shiny coating of the metal alloy, virilium, and folds up to the size of a handkerchief.
Though it is meant to be used to keep out the cold, we had brought six of them to cover the tents and reflect away the  sun's heat, and to signal for help if needed.
We had never imagined we would put them to their intended use.
I went to Mick's tent, opened the zip and reached inside.
An orange circle of light, the beam from his torch, darted round the tent walls, there was the jingle of keys and I felt them cold in my hand.
There was enough light from the sky for me to see the padlocks.
I unfastened them and hooked the heavy, clanking chains to the tail-board to take its weight.
‘Throw me a bar of chocolate, as well, will you Geoff?
It's in a tin in the nearest carton on the left.’
I was envious.
Chocolate was part of army rations, not mine.
I wanted a space blanket even more, but I could not take anything from the Land Rover for myself until the next settlement.
I lifted the tail-board, secured the locks, opened the vertical zip of the lads' tent, and poked the goodies and keys inside.
‘Thanks Geoff.
If this wind doesn't stop, I'll go silly.
I'll get boozed out of my mind when I get to In Sha-la-la [Mick's name for In Salah].’
There was a noise of a parcel being unwrapped as Mick unfolded the space blanket.
After two minutes, he called out, ‘Hey Geoff!
This is good news — I'm warm already.’
The next morning, when I had been on the move for half an hour, I came across a shack to the left of the road, looking like two different sized cartons glued together side by side.
Four robed men were idling beneath the ‘cafe’ sign, which was daubed in white on the mud wall.
The proprietor, a young man, even skinnier and shorter than I, with bulging eyes and half a gold tooth, was standing in the doorway wearing an oversized European suit.
‘Have you any bread?’
I asked.
‘Yes,’ they replied in ragged unison.
The proprietor led me into the windowless gloom.
For a moment, until I took off my sun-lenses, I could see nothing.
The walls were unpainted and the ceiling had bits of flaking mud dangling from it.
There was no furniture, only a large mirror, once part of a wardrobe door, leaning against the wall.
A glass cabinet sat on the counter, crammed with dusty trinkets, leatherwork and tins of sardines.
I pointed to three red, leather bangles, decorated with turquoise beads — presents for my daughter Susan and my two nieces.
He put them on the counter and asked, ‘Tea or coffee?’
‘Coffee, thank you.’
He reached behind and took an aluminium teapot from a camping-stove and poured black coffee into a half-sized tumbler.
On the shelves behind were stringed instruments made from wood, leather, and large, hollowed-out seed-pods.
They, too, were dusty, and looked like exhibits from a museum.
‘What are those?’
I asked, expecting an Arabic name with which to impress my friends.
‘Guitars,’ he said.
‘How much?’
‘Five.’
‘Give me the one with the full set of strings, and two cans of sardines.’
There were voices outside and then two heavily-built Algerians came striding in, each wearing an astrakhan hat and a sheepskin car-coat.
There was much laughter, directed, I thought, at me.
I began to total up.
‘Two dinars each for the sardines, five for the guitar.’
‘Non !
Non !
Non !
Monsieur ,’ said the little man.
‘Not five but fifty .’
‘Too expensive!’
I said, and I pushed the instrument back and paid for the rest.
The two customers thought this hilarious; as I turned to leave, and saw myself in the mirror, I joined in the laughter.
I had been haggling like a nomad, while they, dressed like English salesmen, were ready to pay without question.
Still laughing, they shook my hand and bade me, ‘Bon courage , stranger.’
I stepped into the sunshine, forgetting the bread for which I had gone in.
MIND GAMES
A mile down the road from the cafe, my lower left shin began to hurt.
I was learning to shut out the daily discomforts, however, either by looking around, or by playing mental games.
Though the Sahara is often monochrome and denuded, it has the same topographical shape, river beds, mountains and plains as when it was fertile.
It is like a line-drawing in a children's painting-book, waiting to be animated with colour and detail.
Flat expanses of sand conjured up images of the savannah it had once been: giraffes picking leaves from high branches, an antelope grazing, and young zebras running in circles while their mothers eye a drowsy lion in the long grass.
The cliffs which had proved so difficult bordered a valley a mile or more across, the bed of what had once been a great, meandering river.
It put me in mind of the vast River Niger further south, which brings fish and game to villagers all along its course.
My mind games were not always concerned with the past; sometimes they involved transforming my surroundings into a fantasy landscape.
In the river-bed, islands of rock stuck up above the imaginary water level.
One, almost enveloped by a dune, became a dinosaur with spines down his back.
Newly-forming dunes broke the surface like whales rising to breathe.
The desert sand sometimes seemed to be made up of pellets of dried yeast, road-workers' grit, or face-powder.
I was beginning to feel at home in the desert.
From my previous life in England only dose family connections mattered.
I tried to recall friends' telephone numbers as an exercise, but astonishingly, though I had only been away from home for fifteen days, could only manage my own, my sister's and my mother-in-law's.
When I eventually did get home, though, I remembered most of those I had forgotten as if I had not been away.
That day, the stony, arid soil was uninspiringly flat and showed little sign of life, apart from posts every ten kilometres giving the distance to Adrar.
‘It's now five to ten,’ I thought.
‘From this post to the next is 6 ¼ miles.
At four miles an hour, the next one will arrive in 93 ¾ minutes, at 28 ¾ minutes past eleven.
Since I know from experience that a post is  visible from a mile and a half, it should appear in the distance at 61 minutes past eleven.’
Arithmetic not only took my mind off the leg, but also spurred me to keep up a pace of four miles an hour.
It worked well and the sighting and arrival were both within two minutes of the estimates.
On getting there I calculated when I would arrive at the next post, where I promised myself lunch.
At lunch-times, I was given to mental lapses.
I would sit down on the fishing stool, ready to eat, but then I would be up and down, in and out of the lockers, getting the fork I had forgotten, or the knife to peel the carrot, or even the carrot itself.
I might get up for one thing and put back another by mistake.
It rarely took less than seven minutes to organize the few things I needed, so that day I rehearsed mentally as I went along: ‘Choose the best place to stop.
Back down the camber.
Press the legs of the barrow into the sand but keep the wheel on the road so that it doesn't get stuck.
Take the wire fastener off the lid of the locker.
Walk round, take out matchbox and place fasteners in it for safety.
Replace matchbox.
Take out fishing stool.
Expand it and throw it onto the ground on the other side of the wheelbarrow.
Take out orange-juice container and fork.
Close left locker.
Walk round and open right locker.
Take out can of beans and sausage…
I rehearsed this over and over again, but when I stopped — and the story was usually the same — I relaxed and limped around, opening each locker several times in confusion.
That day, I not only forgot the can of fruit and the opener when I sat down to lunch, but was up and down, putting on more clothes and trying to find the most sheltered spot in relation to the wheelbarrow.
As usual, once I had put down the wheelbarrow, I had stiffened up and been able to think only of aches and pains.
Apart from what I felt, it seemed that my brain became dulled when I stopped moving.
I had been asked by Professor John Mills and Dr James Waterhouse of Manchester School of Medicine to record my temperature every waking hour.
They were using me as a guinea-pig to investigate the hourly variation in mental efficiency of those with irregular sleeping patterns, such as airline pilots or globe-trotting diplomats.
They were seeking to establish the link between blood temperature and someone's relative mental ability, whereby if you know one you can estimate the other.
Just before bedtime, until an hour after getting up, a person's blood temperature is low, and there is a resultant decrease in mental efficiency.
Even if a person stays awake all night, the pattern is unchanged.
Readings will be low during the night and higher during the day.
Shift workers and international travellers take several days for their systems to readjust, with the consequence that their low temperature when awake results in poor mental performance and a feeling of disorientation.
The researchers had given me an electric thermometer, a stalk of red plastic, to put in my mouth.
Before taking my temperature I was neither allowed to breathe through my mouth for ten minutes nor to take food or drink for half an hour.
The thermometer was connected by a spiral of red wire to a small meter in my pocket.
Though originally designed for the other end of the alimentary canal, it was ideal for my purposes; it was virtually unbreakable and gave accurate readings in half the time of an ordinary clinical thermometer.
Despite not strictly working shifts, I recorded abnormal temperatures, probably — though it is not proven — because I had missed so much sleep.
When I stopped walking, my temperature dropped below normal, which might explain my confused state.
Readings were only normal when I was walking, perhaps because of the tendency of exertion to increase body temperature.
At home my temperature had followed the expected pattern, but here readings were so low when I was resting, even at midday, that I often kept the thermometer in my mouth for fifteen minutes in the hope that it would rise.
That evening, after supper, I was too tired to write up notes, so I lay thinking over the day in order to make it easier to write them up in the morning.
My eyes were open, just able to discern the tent staked out over me.
I recalled an old man I had seen that afternoon, standing by a well.
I tried to remember if there had been a dog with him, but it was difficult to concentrate.
My ears were burning, and my left shin throbbed as if it did not know I had stopped walking.
It took an hour to sort out the jumble of thoughts.
It was always easier to listen to Mick and Paddy than it was to think.
They had been having their usual discussion about food.
Paddy asked Mick if there were any sweets.
‘I'm damned hungry.
Have we got any stickies?’
‘You're always the same.
You don't need all that food you eat.’
‘But I'm used to three big meals a day.
A good breakfast, dinner and tea, and here I'm only getting one decent meal a day.
I'm wasting away.’
‘You're like all squaddies.
Eat three good meals a day, give it the big lips at night and then go and eat a Chinese or fish and chips.’
‘No I'm not.
I'm not eating half as much as I did on camp and I'm starving.’
Conversation lulled for an hour until I was almost asleep, then Mick said, ‘D'you still feel hungry?’
‘Hungry?
I've told you!
I'm starving!’
‘Go and get a packet of biscuits out of the Rover will you?’
‘Oh, it's too cold.’
‘There's a tin of pork we could have as well,’ said Mick.
‘No, we couldn't, could we?
No, we couldn't waste it.’
‘It wouldn't be a waste.’
‘Ohhhh, I'll go,’ groaned Paddy.
There was the rustle of sleeping-bags and clothes.
Mick was getting out too.
‘Hey Geoff, here's a travelling chippy.
What do you want?
Hang on, he's out of fish.
Will you have a pie?’
‘What sort?’
‘Meat and potato or steak and kidney.’
‘Steak and kidney.’
‘Have you got any change?’
‘Yeah, hang on.’
I reached out an arm in the darkness and found my pile of loose coins, placed, as usual, to the left of the groundsheet.
I tapped them blindly to sound as if counting them out.
By morning, the slightest weight on the leg was unbearable.
I had what I suspected to be ‘shin soreness’, inflammation where the tendon meets the bone, and for which rest is the only cure.
To walk was to risk breaking it, but there could be no more than an overnight stop before Adrar, the end of the macadam and the last supply point before open desert.
I ambled intentionally slowly, hiding my wrist-watch in my pocket, in case I damaged the leg further through impatience and hurrying.
In spite of taking my time, the wheelbarrow fell over every couple of minutes, when balancing required the left leg to take the strain.
I was cold into the bargain, and when I was dropping my shorts, I overbalanced because of the painful shin, and soiled myself and my clothes with diarrhoea.
Back on the road, the pain in the shin was severe and only distractions, natural or contrived, kept me going.
I sang the  children's song ‘If you're happy and you know it, clap your hands’, which required hand-clapping and foot-stamping after each line.
The humour of letting go of the wheelbarrow while clapping, and of trying to stamp one foot while walking, without injury to the other, dulled the pain.
At other times, the surroundings helped to take my mind off it.
An Arab's flowing robes and racing camels gleamed white against the ochre dirt.
Then the road swung left of a forest of palms, where man-made trenches flanked the road and cradled young trees, and on past a mud-brick cafe, and the village of Sbaa, with its pyramid tower and mosque.
Despite the scenery, however, my shin felt as if it was in a red-hot clamp, with someone turning the screw.
I could not take any more.
I clambered onto the wheelbarrow, to pray for a healing miracle, laying aside my glasses and hat.
I put my head in my hands and prayed until  I felt right, but I knew that feelings would not buy God.
‘Forgive me,’ I prayed, ‘for trying to bribe you with emotion.’
There now seemed no need even to ask for help; my needs were known, so I waited for a cure.
I remembered Joan, as a nineteen-year-old student.
Just before the end of term she had strained her back at college.
The doctor had told her that she was unfit to travel, but she came home anyway.
The journey had made her worse, and when she reached my parents' house, she collapsed in pain on the settee, from where she was unable to get up.
After encouraging ourselves to trust God, we prayed, and she sat up, cured.
While I was thinking of this, there was a murmuring in the inflamed blood vessels, a surging as healing bubbled through.
‘Thank you,’ I shouted, and leaped with joy into the air.
I screamed with pain.
My legs folded, both knees hit the ground, and I scrambled, in a rage, back on to the wheelbarrow.
Having recognized that emotion does not buy God, I now fell into the trap of believing that the right method does.
‘I know where I went wrong,’ I thought.
‘I didn't rebuke the evil in the name of Jesus.’
With both hands gripping the shin I commanded: ‘In Jesus’ name be healed!’
I trusted God and leaped, but hit the ground in agony.
After ten minutes, I lifted the shafts in a temper and pushed off in more pain than ever, singing, ‘I just don't trust you any more, Lord.
Why did you cheat me and let me down?
I just don't trust you any more.’
Five minutes later, an Arab in a small blue van stopped and gave me a few kilos of tangerines.
They seemed to be a peace-offering from above, as if God were apologizing.
He seemed to be saying, ‘Listen Geoff, there are some things I can do for you and there are some things I can't.
Don't expect me to cover the sun, to flatten mountains and sand dunes or to heal your leg.
Some other time, yes, but not on this walk.
Believe me, I am with you and you will get to Kano, but not with the help of a God who cheats for you.
You know the golf sketch where the vicar prays and his ball is miraculously deflected into the hole.
Well, I'm not like that, so don't expect me to clear this course with my magic wand.’
In my job, I had expected the sick and the dying to trust God, and I had come to the Sahara hoping to discover whether I myself would keep the faith in adverse circumstances.
If God had removed all obstacles, I would never have known.
From then until the end of the trip, every time I thought I had had enough I would repeat, ‘This is what the trip's about.
This is what it's all about.’
In spite of rationally accepting hardship, I would have done almost anything to be rid of the pain, which by now dominated every thought.
I would have taken pain-killers but for the danger of numbing the leg and overworking it.
There were no bandages large enough in the wheelbarrow to make a cold compress, so I poured water on my sock where it  touched the inflammation, but the water filled my boot and left the sock barely damp.
I tried every trick to ease the pain, both shorter and longer steps, walking stiff-legged, then on my toes and then on my heels.
In fact, the way I had instinctively started to limp turned out to be the best: a short step on the left heel with the leg stiff and a long springing step on the right.
I tried running but gave up after two paces, and then went from meditation to mental arithmetic, calculating the length of each step by counting them for each revolution of the wheel.
Next, I tried thinking of cold drinks and old friends, but the pain hung on.
The joint and muscle were all right.
The inflammation was where there had been only skin and bone before.
There seemed no other explanation than a hair-line fracture.
Thoughts of gangrene and amputations terrified me until, after seventeen miles, I reached camp, where Mick was waiting to make me forget myself.
After dark, when I had eaten and was lying counting the throbs in my leg, we heard the hoot of a car-horn and roar of an engine.
‘If any of those Coventry supporters comes this way asking for petrol,’ shouted Mick, ‘I'll tell 'em where to go.
They beat us today.
And talking of supporters, you'd better lock your barrow.
Rangers beat Celtic and those Cath'lics will be on the rampage.
Hey, Geoff, d'you think the Chinese take-away in Adrar would deliver a couple of chop-sueys?’
(There was no restaurant, Chinese or otherwise, in Adrar, apart from the hotel dining-room.)
At dawn, with Adrar thirteen miles away, I set off to reach its safety without the wheelbarrow, using a six foot pole as a staff.
The lads would stay put and do their washing, though one of them would drive into town at lunch-time and bring me back if I had not already managed to get a lift back myself.
They wanted it that way in order to save making and breaking camp.
The following day, Monday, we would all drive into Adrar, I having already walked that section.
We would pick up supplies and I would continue with the wheelbarrow from where I had left off.
Walking was nearly impossible.
As hard as I tried, I could not make use of the staff, so I carried it, hobbling like a stage imbecile.
After half an hour, when the drone of an engine approached from behind, I had to bring every muscle into play to maintain a normal walk.
If the driver had seen that I was hurt, he would have stopped, and I was not up to explaining why I could not accept a lift.
I kept control until the car had overtaken and was out of sight.
Without the wheelbarrow, more styles of walking were possible and I even tried hopping.
The staff and right leg propelled me for forty yards until the leg gave way and the injured one, without a thought, took the strain and I ended up on my hands and knees ranting and raving.
I was  most comfortable using the previous day's shuffle but with an added stoop.
I tried to meditate to stimulate my faith but gave up.
As a way of dealing with a crisis this seemed repugnant — a bit like a child only turning to his parents when he or she wants something.
God was there and there seemed no need to pray or sing hymns either to transport me away from the present reality or to ward off danger by attracting God's attention.
So I made a joke-offering to God and sang satirically, with all the insincerity I could muster, the song which begins, ‘This world is not my home.
I'm just a passin' through.’
This led to a real Sunday morning's devotion, singing new stanzas to the song I had started a few days before: ‘Thank you for sore legs; thank you for the pain; I wanna thank you, Lord.
This is what it's all about; this is why I came.
I wanna thank you, Lord.’
I sang, pondering whether my thanks were as spontaneous as I had thought or whether I was just too scared to complain.
Another musical diversion was prompted when I saw electricity pylons striding towards, and then alongside, the road, like evenly planted trees.
They sent Respighi's music,Pines of the Appian Way , marching through my head, to which I gave bass accompaniment with my hat.
When I put the staff between the denim cap and the wind, the turbulence vibrated the peak with the noise of a bassoon.
While the leg craved attention, I strained to forget it, even using rubbish as a distraction.
With Adrar now five miles away, flotsam and jetsam were increasing, so I began to make a mental inventory of all I passed — six sardine cans, two bottles, the greater part of a tyre, too many small pieces of rubber to count, a five-litre can and the cylinder head from a car engine.
Finally, my mind was distracted by thoughts of home.
My watch showed that Joan would be in church, her eyes and ears on the preacher, her hands turning the pages of a picture-book for Susan and Sam.
Our children had brought us a lot of happiness.
We had adopted them while I was preparing for the desert.
Before learning about our infertility, we had already planned to adopt ‘hard-to-place’ children, and so, with little prospect of natural children, we applied for adoption all the sooner.
We fostered Susan with a view to adoption, knowing that there was a possibility of a tug-of-love.
Unless someone had been prepared to take the risk, she might have spent her childhood in institutions.
She was a year old and her mother had wanted her to be fostered while she got herself sorted out.
She hoped to get a new home and take her baby back.
When she visited us with her boyfriend and said that she would be able to take Susan in a few weeks, we had to disguise  our emotions.
Joan showed love and courage.
We knew that if the mother asked for her back, we would have to give her up cheerfully, even though Joan and Susan were inseparable.
The child was insecure and frightened, unable to let go of Joan for one waking moment.
Joan did the laundry, washing up, and housework holding her with one arm.
Susan was so frightened of being alone, that she would not go to sleep, in case we left her.
One night we did not sleep at all.
After six months, against expectations, Susan's mother requested adoption.
Before the legalities had been completed, early in 1973, I went to a local youth club to show slides of my work as a missionary.
Aided by nostalgia, I made up my mind, there and then, to return to Nigeria on foot.
Joan was not surprised.
I had been talking about it ever since our time out there.
I would walk north to south, with the wind on my back, and raise sponsorship for the sort of people I had met in Nigeria.
When preparations for the desert were under way, we were given another child, four-month-old Sam.
His mother asked to meet us and when she did, she held him and wept.
After a few minutes, she handed him to Joan and agreed to the adoption.
Two days before the hearing, she reversed her decision and asked for him back.
Two months later, she changed her mind again, in our favour.
When we got to court, we waited six hours in the corridor, to be told that the papers were not in order.
For the first time in the affair, Joan broke down.
No doubt the thought of my departure added to the strain.
The adoption went through a month later.
It was after I had been deep in thought for a long time, stooped forward, that I looked up and saw Adrar, like the celestial city, its towers and palms floating on the mirage of a lake.
The duller buildings blended with the desert, but others shone pink, blue and gold, edged with ornamental plasterwork in white.
The nearer I got, the slower the town seemed to come.
I was like a thirsty man watching raindrops fill a bucket.
And when it did arrive, I knew that Kano was still one thousand, seven hundred miles away over mountains and dunes, almost as far from me as Manchester, my home, where, as I turned ruefully north, I wished I had stayed.
Having reached the centre of the town, I hobbled back to the north of it, where I had seen vehicles waiting for the filling station to open.
They were still there and I was sure that one of them would be going my way.
Two of them later were, but ignored me.
I was expecting the lads soon, anyway, as they were coming to pick me up if I had not arrived by lunch-time and it was noon already.
It was too cold and windy to sit and wait, though, so I limped back the way I had come, embittered at having to walk unnecessarily.
To the right, there was open ground, with the circular mud walls of wells which were inexplicably ranged in a line at ten metre intervals.
Small boys used them as goal-posts, while a trail of adults crouched behind them among baked piles of excrement.
I walked on past a dead cow and the arrow markers for the airstrip.
By two o'clock, Adrar was three miles behind me and there was no sign of the Land Rover nor of any other vehicle.
I was cold and hungry — in eight hours I had only had three tangerines — and I throbbed from toes to groin.
A cyclist appeared over my right shoulder, struggling against the wind to reach me.
He was skinny, a little older than me, with his western-style clothes in tatters.
He was going to Sbaa on an old black bicycle, the sort English policemen used to ride.
Tied to the pannier with rough string was a small hessian sack, the week's rice for the family, and a loaf, their Sunday tea.
When he had dismounted, he broke me a piece, though I had not complained of hunger.
I am ashamed to say I took it, despite suspecting that his family might go short.
No one can teach the desert folk about kindness.
It was half-past two before he pedalled on but I could go no further.
I sat on a large stone, shivering and looked north appealingly, shouting, ‘Mick!
Paddy!
Where the hell are you?’
A bright-red saloon car zoomed past from the south and shot me to my feet with my arms waving wildly.
I fell over but carried on waving from on hands and knees and saw the car stop two hundred yards away.
I tried to run, desperately hoping the driver would wait but, even better, he turned to come back for me.
I stood leaning on the staff, grinning and throwing an arm in the air as he approached, but he and his companion never so much as looked as they sped back to Adrar.
It was, I concluded, someone having a driving lesson.
Back on the stone, I yelled ‘Stupid!
Stupid!
Stupid!’ as I drove the staff angrily into the ground between my feet with the action of a woman pounding corn.
I swung it round my head, brought it down savagely into the sand, and watched the wind carry off the dust.
A little calmer, I began to write on the ground with the stick, ‘Howard is a nut’, but was distracted by a tiny blue van in the south and was determined not to let it go by.
I stood in the middle of the road, conscious of my  affrontery , flagging it down with a bundle of banknotes.
The driver stopped and welcomed me aboard.
He wore a white T-shirt, jeans and black head-wrap.
A man in a grubby white robe was in the passenger seat.
I squeezed between them and turned round to greet a woman and six children in the back.
They and their dog were sitting cramped on sacks of flour.
‘Put your money away,’ the driver said, ‘Don't you recognize me?’
‘Yes, of course,’ I said doubtfully.
‘You gave me the tangerines.’
‘That's right, but I have been your friend for many days.
Do you ever hear vehicles honking at night?’
‘Yes, often.’
‘That's me, saying good-night,’ he laughed.
Twenty pleasant minutes retraced the morning's steps and I stood beside the Land Rover waving goodbye and listening to the blue van's familiar toots as it continued north.
I shuffled towards Mick who was standing twenty yards off the road by the rear of the Land Rover.
I paused for a moment to shout farewell to the driver, but when I turned, Mick had his back to me, leaning inside the rear of the Land Rover.
I felt like hitting him on the back of the head with a rock.
‘Where've you been?
You could have picked me up.
You said you'd come after lunch!’
I said, a good deal more calmly than I felt.
He turned round, offering me a hunk of bread and margarine with cheese on top — real luxury.
I had neither margarine nor cheese in my rations.
‘We thought you'd be having a job getting there so we gave you plenty of time.
We planned to come at four o'clock.
Hope the bread's OK.
We'll be eating properly later.’
‘It's fine Mick, thanks,’ I said, unable to feel angry any more.
I had reached Adrar, so I was able to accept help from the lads.
Paddy handed me a mug of tea and I sat down on a jerry-can.
‘Cheers, Paddy.’
‘Will you be doing your washing now?’ he asked.
‘Just as soon as I've finished my tea and had a bath.’
Without a word, he took the staff I'd been using, drove it into the ground with his sledge hammer, secured it with guy ropes and tied a washing line for me from it to the Land Rover.
Meanwhile, Mick was peeling potatoes, carrots and onions, which he had bought when he had made an advance visit to Adrar the day before.
I sat holding the mug, looking in the direction from which I had walked.
Along the horizon were the palms of Sbaa.
Nearer, just a few yards away, were our tents, their mouths pointing away from me, out of the wind.
I laid the sturdy Ministry of Defence plastic mug on the sand and then hopped round to the front of my tent to bring out my dirty washing.
The flaps were pegged half open to let the air into my sleeping-bag.
Other mornings it had been rolled up and put in a plastic case within minutes of my getting out of it.
As I stooped to reach into the tent, I paused.
Everything inside was covered in a quarter-inch layer of powdery sand, which the wind, contrary to its direction, had blown inside.
Incidents such as this, and there were many more than I have recorded, could have worn me down  had I not taken an almost fatalistic view.
I looked at set-backs as if they were predetermined, as if a fixed number of them were waiting for me and once one of them was overcome the number to come decreased.
Now that I had reached a town, there was an elaborate routine to undergo.
I would take a stand-up bath in Mick's washing-up bowl, wash all my clothes, clean every item of equipment, and wipe the wheelbarrow, lockers and the groundsheet with disinfectant.
There were reports and letters to write, tape recordings to family, schools and churches to finish.
It was not much extra work to sweep out and clean away the dust, but it did mean, yet again, dismantling the stove.
This proved to be a blessing, for this time I noticed a piece of fabric, like the backing of a sticking plaster, wedged in the tubing that connected the cylinder to the burner.
This had obviously been there since manufacture and had caused the blockages I had blamed on sand.
After removing it there was no more trouble from low pressure.
Cassette tapes and rolls of film had to be posted the following day in envelopes that were tough enough not to burst and yet could be easily opened by customs officials.
No envelopes that I had brought were suitable, so that night I made several of them, as I regularly did, strengthening ordinary ones with sticky tape, and making reusable fasteners out of wire from abandoned tyres.
After we had eaten, I lay half inside my sleeping-bag refixing the broken sun-lenses with tape.
The lads were in their tent, reading, when Mick broke the silence.
‘Are there any decent shops in Kano, Geoff?’
‘Quite a few compared with the one-eyed places we'll be going through.
You're in civilization when you get to Nigeria.
It's the richest black African country and Kano's got a million inhabitants.
There are hotels, a Barclays Bank, a Coca-Cola factory and loads of clubs.’
‘Can I get a decent suit there?’
‘I'm not sure.
They sell suits, but African tastes differ from yours.
I think you should be able to.’
‘If there's bandits along any of these sections,’ he said, ‘we'll skip 'em and you can tack on the extra mileage by walking round Kano a few times.’
I could never have agreed to such a plan, but was pleased at Mick's change of mood.
He was, at last, looking  forward to Kano instead of looking back.
As for me, I was apprehensive.
Tomorrow, I would have my first real taste of desert.
There was no tarmac beyond Adrar.
THE CRUCIBLE
By ten-fifteen the next morning, 5 January, we had loaded the wheelbarrow on to the trailer and were driving to Adrar, along the section I had walked the day before.
Mick had bandaged my leg an hour earlier and I was enjoying the comfort of the ride, my mind on the task ahead.
We had been told by travellers that the stretch of desert from Adrar to Reggane would be the worst part of my journey.
What would I be doing in a week's time?
Resting in Reggane?
Or catching the ferry for Gibraltar?
Those words of Idris, ‘Pas possible ,’ and his hangdog look would not leave me alone.
That was not all.
The two and a half weeks I had been away from home seemed like years.
The camels, palm-trees and sand were all commonplace now, as if all I had ever known was Algeria, as if Joan was only an acquaintance of my fantasies.
I wondered whether I had slipped out of her consciousness.
I was hoping to collect a reassuring letter from the post office.
Things had been tense between us throughout the two-year preparation period.
While I had been around, it had been easy to smooth things over, but now I was at her mercy.
Was she enjoying the release from all the strain?
Perhaps she was getting on a little too well without me.
It was this nagging feeling that was driving me to Kano and had increased my daily average to 19.6 miles.
It was this that had caused the shin injury, pushing me on when I could have taken things more slowly.
It was this that had prevented me from resting half a day here or there, from starting late in the morning and from stopping early in the evening.
Every hour mattered: I had to see her as soon as possible.
We had not seen a town to speak of for almost two weeks.
There was good enough reason, especially with the leg injury, to rest for a couple of days, but, with Joan in mind, my plan was to collect my mail, buy food, take on water, have a cup of coffee at the hotel, and be off towards Reggane.
Even such a short break would reduce my daily average to 18.3 miles.
From the Land Rover I could see the awful brown flatness.
I was sure I remembered the oil drum we had just passed.
Yes, and there was the  first of the three dead cows.
I thought it funny how I kept seeing dead cows but no live ones.
We passed the airstrip, wells and garage, drove into the town, along a street tarred down the middle but with sand for a pavement, and stopped.
Adrar was clean, and there were none of the African smells offensive to western noses — just the opposite.
The air was sweet with the smell of bread from the bakeries which seemed to be on every other street corner.
There were no beggars, no obviously destitute people, nor was there any decaying rubbish in back streets.
Everywhere was clean and tidy.
There was little to repel a European, yet it was with wide eyes that I saw a ‘Trans-World Tours’ motor coach taking its pale-skinned passengers through the town.
There was nothing here for the average tourist, nothing for my friends Jim and Mary, who go off every year on a package tour.
Where was the chemist's shop to buy a tube of sun-tan lotion or a sticking plaster?
Where could they eat steak and chips, buy their favourite drink, or be entertained?
There was a hotel, where you could buy an alcoholic drink, but there was only one variety of beer, which you would have to drink from the bottle at five times the English price.
The hotel restaurant — there was nowhere else to eat — could serve you with tea, coffee, bread, sardines, lettuce, carrots and potatoes, but nothing else, certainly not a meat dish — there was no fresh meat in Adrar.
As for entertainment, a Welsh village on a Sunday would have had more to offer.
Hooded Arabs and the occasional donkey gave the streets tourist appeal but such scenes were also common in the more picturesque oases further north.
Apart from the few ornamental buildings, it was an unattractive little town, built from mud.
There was a dull uniformity about the place.
Everything about it was grey-brown — houses, donkeys, sand and peasants' heavy robes.
Nor were there any colourful bazaars, though there was a market where I later bought fruit, vegetables, eggs and three small glasses, the sort from which Algerians drink their coffee.
We called first at the post office, set in a square edged by trees, wells and the concrete facades of offices flying the red, white and green national flag.
Mick went into the post office while Paddy walked along the square to the hotel.
I used up the film in my two cameras before following Mick inside.
The interior was a large, square room.
Two dusty fans, which I suspected had not moved since the French walked out in 1962, hung idly from the high ceiling.
There was neither a window nor a door open: customers and staff sweated visibly and there was the smell of a sports changing-room.
A notice on the left wall warned desert travellers to report to the police before embarking.
A broad counter divided the room but there was no glass partition between the solitary counter-clerk and the handful of customers.
There were no mothers with push-chairs and family-allowance books, no grannies collecting their pensions.
The customers were all men, heavily robed, standing in groups or leaning on the counter with no apparent desire to be served.
Only Mick, who had gone in ahead of me, looked eagerly over the counter towards the office staff doing their paperwork.
The clerk ignored him but now and then shouted in Arabic and a customer came forward to collect a form or a tattered bundle of money.
It was rumoured that banknotes were never withdrawn from circulation but simply frayed away.
While I waited, I took the films out of my cameras and put them in the home-made packets.
After ten minutes, Mick was asked for his passport and was then handed a sheaf of letters, all in the same size of envelope, all addressed in the same neat hand of his father.
The clerk turned to me and I gave him my passport and put down eleven packets and envelopes on the counter for posting.
After looking in a drawer, he handed the passport back.
‘Nothing for you.’
The Land Rover cruised out of sight at two o'clock.
Mick and Paddy had left me just south of Adrar.
They would wait five miles ahead, not daring to go further because of my leg.
It took a few minutes for me to balance the load.
Soon after I had moved off, a massive column of dust appeared in the east, headed by a battered green lorry, the sort the Eighth Army might have lost.
The lorry, which was coming from the local gravel-pit, drew up, and the Arab driver put out his head: ‘Where are you going?’ he asked in French.
‘Reggane.’
‘It's a hundred and sixty kilometres away!’
‘I know.’
He screwed his fingers against his temple and drove on.
Yet, as I moved forward, I began to think that I was not so stupid after all.
This was open desert, and there was not a dune in sight and it was firm underfoot.
There was hardly any sand, just a scattering of blackened stones over baked clay.
There was neither grass, bush, nor palm-tree.
There were no houses, no people, no hills, and not a rock bigger than a cricket ball.
This kind of desert is known as reg and covers vast areas.
The Tanezrouft reg, further south, is larger than Great Britain and Ireland together.
Firmness was all that could be said for it.
Vehicles had scored a shallow trench, a foot deep and as wide as a narrow road.
Tyres had thrown the dirt into parallel ridges, knee-high on either side.
The track was like a tin roof, with corrugations running across it at right angles six inches deep.
The wheelbarrow rose and fell with every step and occasionally became stuck in a hollow.
The rumble that had thundered from the wheelbarrow on tarmac was now replaced by a creak as it rose, and a thump as it fell.
I had tied a three inch strip of webbing between the shafts, which I used as a harness.
It ran across my chest, and over my shoulder, and I leaned into it to gain control.
The corrugations bumped the harness into my shoulder and sent the shock down to the shin, which was strained further because I was unable to tell at which angle to put down my foot.
In spite of this, the going was better than I had dared to hope.
Now that the leg was bandaged and had rested almost a day, it was not as painful, and I was able to manage the five miles to camp in two hours.
Though the landscape was flat, it seemed, both visually and from the effort it was taking to move the wheelbarrow, that I was continually walking up a hill, but when I looked back, it was as if I had just walked down one.
The earth curved up and around me wherever I went, as if I were at the bottom of a dish, and no matter how far I travelled I could get no nearer the rim — like a spaceman hurtling, as he thinks, towards the edge of the universe, only to find it unfolding before him and closing in behind, so that he is always at the centre.
Heavenly bodies taunted me, encircling the crucible, performing their daily stunts of scorching and freezing, and bringing about the oddest sights.
At mid-morning, when the ground became hot and the air wafted up in varied densities, the refracted light produced mirages: the horizon flooded in every direction so that the edge of the ‘dish’ was lapping with water.
Towards noon, the mirage drew nearer, to about half a mile, as if I were on an island trapped by the in-coming tide.
Later in the afternoon, it ebbed, and by about four o'clock it had disappeared.
More than once, a distant grey tower bobbed in the water.
It wobbled and contracted, becoming shorter and fatter, before trembling into the yellow shape of the Land Rover.
When it drove away over the ochre expanse, it broke into pieces and dissolved in the air.
Though mirages are natural phenomena, the illusion of my standing in a dish was an involuntary product of the imagination.
The desert was flat, mile after mile.
Its only feature was a scattering of red shale; as a reaction I began to superimpose pictures.
Just as someone deprived of sound, sight and tactile stimuli will invent wonderful and sometimes horrific experiences, so I could not prevent my imagination from running away with itself.
One minute I was a ploughman; the next I was scrambling to get out from under an interrogator's lamp.
I was sailing the Pacific, or a character in a surrealist painting; often I was walking over the red shale past one football pitch after another, with goal-posts stretching as far as the eye could see, like white crosses over the fields of Arnhem.
These inventions not only relieved the boredom but gave escape from pain.
At times I went almost mad, talking gibberish, pulling faces, and singing in mock Latin.
In the presence of Mick and Paddy, I acted  normally, but when I was alone, and especially in difficulty, the gates which allowed me to escape from convention were opened.
The corrugations of the track were half-filled with grit so that the wheel lost momentum in each hollow and at times I thought of myself as an engine-driver, pushing my train back to the station, always careful not to trip over the sleepers.
In saner times, I found myself watching the wheel.
Small stones, sticking to the rim, became dislodged and at one point were tumbling down the curve as quickly as the wheel was rising, giving the appearance of effervescence.
Now and then, I was brought back to reality by the bleached bones of a camel or a black coil of wire, the skeleton of an abandoned tyre whose rubber had perished.
Next day, to avoid the corrugations, I decided to walk parallel to the track but there were stones everywhere the size of golf balls.
These made the wheelbarrow bounce and unless I hurried, the wheelbarrow easily toppled.
I had to race to keep up the momentum but I was forced to rest five minutes in every twenty.
Just before noon, I began to feel ill and slumped exhausted over the wheelbarrow.
My head was turned sideways, cushioned on an arm, my heart beat loudly, and the sun was hot on my back.
Sweat trickled from my temple into my eye; I blinked and blinked again.
Something colourful hovered in front of me.
A butterfly was flapping around the wheelbarrow looking for a fragrance to match the colour of that great metallic flower.
I guessed that she had been blown far from her oasis, and now there was no landmark other than the wheelbarrow, not a tree, not a blade of grass, not a ripple on the plain, nor a rock bigger than my fist.
A moment later the wind lifted her away.
She went in wavering loops, following the interminable stream of sand towards the coast of Senegal, sixteen hundred miles away.
By five-thirty, I had met up with the lads and, content at seventeen miles, stooped in the twilight to hammer home the twenty-eight pegs.
I loved to stop for the night but dreaded the effort of making camp.
Out from the wheelbarrow came bundles and boxes to place inside the tent along the walls, leaving room for the sleeping-bag down the middle.
The tent-pole bag was torn, so I put it on one side with the sewing kit.
Off came my robe, straw hat and boots, and on went my sweater, jacket, denim cap and suede shoes.
I lay with my feet toward the open end of the tent, unfastened my canteen and boiled what was left of a cabbage I had bought in Adrar.
It went down well, with dry bread to mop up the water.
The food and rest gave me back my strength and I no longer felt ill.
I almost always cooked inside the tent, following the example of the Polar explorers — I figured that the danger was minimal.
Moreover, it took twice as long to cook outside, with the wind often blowing out the  light.
Inside, the stove kept me warm while I cooked or whenever I made a mug of tea which was three or four times a night.
When I had eaten the first course of cabbage, and the second of meat pudding, potato and carrots, I poured cold water into my used billycan and put it on the lighted stove.
I was about to prepare a dessert of mashed potato, flavoured with an Oxo cube.
Just then, Mick and Paddy, who were sitting in the cab of the Land Rover, saw amber headlights flickering behind the northern horizon.
They jumped out excitedly and I picked up my pen to record what they said.
‘It's at least three miles away,’ said Mick.
‘I think it's more,’ replied Paddy.
‘I hope it's Brits.
I'll bum some airmail envelopes from them.’
(Mick wrote to his parents every day and had brought insufficient airmail envelopes.
It was usual for him to  wheedle a few from any European who stopped.)
‘There's two vehicles, not one,’ he said.
The water was getting hot and becoming clouded with the residue of the last course, so I crumbled two Oxo cubes into it and stirred.
‘There's three, er, no.
It's a convoy!
It sounds like whoofers [diesel lorries]to me,’ said Paddy.
‘I hope it's not a military convoy after us,’ said Mick.
The labouring engines could be heard groaning like a battery of tanks.
My torch showed small bubbles in the murky water on the base of the pan.
The fragments of Oxo cube were dissolving into brown swirling streaks and the bubbles grew and began to rise.
‘One, two, three, four,’ Mick paused, ‘five, six.
They're cars,’ he added excitedly.
‘I'm going to put the Rover lights on.
I don't want 'em mowing down the tents in the dark.’
I stirred the potato powder into the liquid and would have begun eating but it was too hot.
The vehicles drew alongside and I could see their amber lights through the canvas and hear slamming doors and excited friendly voices.
‘Geoff, are you coming out?’ asked Paddy.
‘Some of these people would like to meet you.’
I put a lid on the dish, wrapped it in a towel and went out.
Cars and small vans, with only disrepair in common, were head to tail, headlights burning, a few yards away.
The party was French and German.
Young men and a couple of women, one of whom was over fifty, stood in small groups chatting.
Most were teachers bound for Gao in Mali.
They were getting there the cheap way and combining adventure with the bonus of having their cars with them at the end.
There was not a tent between them and some had no sleeping bag.
They either slept in a car or on the ground with a blanket, though in two days they would be far enough south for the nights to be warm.
Paddy introduced me to the leader, a man of forty who earned his living taking convoys across the Sahara.
I told him that we were leaving  the present trail at Reggane and going through In Salah and Tamanrasset.
‘I don't envy you going through Tam [Tamanrasset]in this weather,’ he said.
‘It's 1,700 metres up.’
‘It'll be warmer by the time we get there.
I've chosen that way because the longest distance without water is two hundred and fifty miles, compared with at least five hundred the way you're going.’
‘Any idea how far Reggane is?’ he asked.
‘Sixty-three miles.’
‘That will take us four hours, getting us in at midnight.
There's a wall there that we can shelter behind.’
Suddenly, the group burst into laughter.
A young man was pushing the empty wheelbarrow — and not very successfully.
The leader, anxious to press on, cleared his throat and shouted the order.
Mick, who seemed to have disappeared, got out of the driving seat of the leader's car and a young attractive French woman emerged from the passenger side to stretch her legs.
Mick's efforts had been rewarded.
He ambled towards us smirking, tapping a packet of air-mail envelopes on his palm.
When they had gone, I settled down to the potato and made a mug of tea.
We could hear the groan of their engines for so long that we thought more vehicles were approaching.
In fact, we saw no one else until Reggane.
I mended the tent-pole bag and listened to another sermon before switching off my torch.
I could not sleep but lay on my back staring at the blackness, listening to the wind and one of the lads snoring.
Darkness twisted things.
I was back in the post office at Adrar, empty-handed and imagining Joan to have died or to have found another man.
Sleep came in snatches.
I woke to manoeuvre a rock under the groundsheet, then to put cream on my burning ears, later to pull my knees up to my chin to get warm, then to eat some dates, and finally when I was called out by diarrhoea.
Long before dawn, I was propped on an elbow, with a warming mug of tea and a few verses of Romans.
Then, as I gathered kit and loaded up, I watched the sky, no longer black but grey, as it was heated gently from below.
Grey warmed into red like hot iron, then into pink, until the lower sky glowed like that above a blast-furnace at night.
When the sun finally appeared, the reds and golds dispersed, swallowed up in daylight.
It was one of the best days I was to have.
At the end of it, I was tired but glad, making camp after twenty-three miles, the farthest I had managed on or off tarmac.
It had been an unspectacular grind with little let-up.
My head had been thrust forward and eyes half closed.
I lived outside myself, trying to forget the shin, and think only of the post office at Reggane.
After dark, I got under cover to cook my supper.
Paddy was in the Land Rover cab and Mick was in their tent.
We had not seen another vehicle all day.
‘I can't stand all this traffic,’ Mick said.
‘We were stuck in a jam for an hour today.
I'm going to ask the Minister of Transport to have traffic-lights put up on this stretch.’
I heard Mick unzip his tent and get out.
Then there was the continuous splash of water on the ground.
‘I hope you're well away from my tent while you're doing that,’ I said.
‘Hey the Naffy wagon's here.
What d'you want, Geoff?’
‘Bottle of Scotch, please.’
‘They're out of Scotch.
Will gin do?’
Paddy was still in the cab.
He often sat there in the early evening to read a book or map.
Paddy and I shared the neurosis of spending longer than necessary calculating where we would be on what date if we maintained that day's speed.
This time, the cab-door creaked open, there was a crunch as his shoes hit the ground, and there was excitement and humour in his voice.
‘At twenty miles a day we should reach Tam by February thirteenth, and if you're not there by then, Geoff, we'll be there without you.’
‘What, only February thirteenth!
I should be there before then.
My visa for Niger begins on my birthday, February the twenty-second.
I want to be at the border by then and that's two hundred and fifty miles after Tam.’
Paddy climbed back into the cab and I unfolded a map.
Reggane was forty miles away, with a bit of sand just before it, but nothing serious.
I had to do twenty-three miles tomorrow and then, if I let the lads carry the wheelbarrow into Reggane on Friday, I could run the final seventeen miles.
When roads, buildings, telegraph-poles and trees are in view, it is easy to judge distances, but in the desert, where in the morning and evening there is not even a haze to  blur distant outlines, it is nearly impossible.
Sometimes, especially when the sun was low and blinding, I could not tell whether a dark shape was a rock a hundred yards away or a crag at three miles.
It was always disappointing to sight the Land Rover and anticipate being in camp in a few minutes and then have an hour to walk.
It was with the idea of learning to judge distances that I set out the next morning.
The plan was to look back at intervals after leaving camp to see how long it took for various features of the Land Rover to disappear, so that I would know how much longer there was to walk when they reappeared in the evening.
After five minutes, the Land Rover looked a hundred yards away, but must have been four hundred.
Every detail was clear except for the number-plate.
Ten minutes seemed to make little difference, with the  jerry-cans still discernible on the roof-rack.
After twenty minutes, almost a mile away, the fine details had disappeared.
It looked much smaller, but its outline and colour and the orange of the tent were still clear.
Thirty minutes and the tent had gone.
An hour and there was a speck of yellow on the horizon as tiny as an aphid.
One hour and twenty minutes and it had slipped over the curvature of the earth, or so it seemed.
By two o'clock, I had walked fifteen miles and was sitting on the wheelbarrow forking out the last sardine, when Mick and Paddy arrived.
Mick jumped down in his shoes and shorts, looking quite bronzed.
‘Piece of cake, eh, Geoff?’ he said, referring to the going underfoot.
Though it was easier than I could have hoped, my pride and self-pity would not admit it.
I managed to restrain myself from snapping back, ‘Piece of cake!
You try pushing this thing fifteen miles in a morning!
It's bouncing all over these stones and my leg's killing me, especially when I put my foot down unevenly, which is about every step.
I'm stinging all over with sunburn and I can't even move my head to look at my wrist-watch without getting cramp in my neck and shoulders.’
But I kept my thoughts to myself and said, ‘It'll do me.
If this is difficult, I should eat the easy bit after Reggane.’
‘How many miles d'you reckon today, twenty?’ asked Paddy, who was stripped to the waist and had a knotted handkerchief on his ginger mop of hair.
‘No, twenty-three.’
‘Well, you're doing the walking.’
‘See you about five, then,’ I said.
And they drove off into another amazing wall of water.
My task was ‘a piece of cake’, comparatively.
It was the best going I could hope to see, but just beyond that wall of water, minutes away, the ground became lacerated with gulleys, as if a maze of streams had scored the ground and had been filled with sand.
Within a yard, the wheel had stuck and sunk six inches.
The load, as heavy as three sacks of cement, seemed immovable.
Leaning forward into the harness and pushing with all my might, I could not move.
Eight miles further on were Mick and Paddy — I had two and a half hours before sunset to reach them.
A sustained push was useless.
I tried rocking the wheelbarrow back and forth, then jerking.
Finally I had it.
With an almighty tug-of-war heave, with my back almost horizontal and shoulders pressed hard into the cross-bar, I crossed the first patch of sand.
Then we rumbled over ten yards of hard ground to the next.
Time and again: Stuck!
Stuck!
Stuck!
The land was not flat now but  undulating, rising no more than a few feet in various shades of brown and gold as far as the eye could see.
Every few yards there were depressions filled with sand, each of which took minutes to cross.
Between them, the slightly higher ground was firm and unbroken.
For navigation, I had been lazy and followed the piste , which was now a trench of sand.
After a while, it forked and pursued parallel courses.
The worse the surface became, the more the piste divided, each trail trying to seek out better ground.
The hard shale was now gone and the flat lake had become a choppy sea of sand and rock.
The piste disappeared and I stood lost in a maze of tyre-tracks, which shot in every direction.
I left the wheelbarrow, stood on a bulge of rock and shielded my eyes.
To the east, across miles of barren brownness, there were dunes floating in an azure sky — another spectacular mirage.
And yes, to the south, among the sand and rock, there were tyre-tracks converging.
I made my way towards them, and found two trails running side by side through the sand.
The one on the left seemed best.
Lorry wheels had dug furrows in it, uncovering rock at the bottom.
That lasted only a minute though, so I tipped the wheelbarrow on its side and hauled the dead weight to the second track, which proved even worse than the first.
I could never tell how good the ground was until I had tried the wheelbarrow on it.
After an hour, I hurt all over.
I wanted to lie down and die, but the thought of the situation at home was caught like a hook in my brain, pulling me against my will towards the post office at Reggane.
By four o'clock, I knew from the morning's reckoning that I should have been able to see the Land Rover.
The ground became firm for a few hundred yards and I ran, my eyes taking in every dot on the horizon, looking for that familiar yellow speck, but I missed seeing a sandy hollow right under my nose.
I tripped and toppled into the dust.
There was sand everywhere between the knee-high crags, so I climbed on one of them for a better view.
The evening ‘tide’ had gone out and I could see for miles.
The track fizzled to nothing ahead and there was no sign of the Land Rover.
I was lost!
THE REAPERS
In September 1974, there were no gowns to be seen in Cambridge.
The students were not due for another month, though the streets and cloisters were crowded with tourists, who were outnumbered only by their cameras.
I was walking a little quicker than the flow, past Bermuda shorts and floral shirts, making my way, with my briefcase, to the University Department of Biology to see John Larmuth, Director of the Desert Research Trust.
The trust was researching into the possibilities of alleviating famine through cultivating desert.
John Larmuth had tentatively offered the use of the trust's Land Rover for my trip and I was going to discuss this with him.
He was in his mid-thirties, tall and thin, with searching eyes and hair cropped like a Buddhist monk.
Around his room were rock samples, a blackboard, office furniture and a tray of soil which was ‘baking’ under a fierce light.
After introducing myself, I walked over to it.
‘Simulating the desert?’
I asked.
‘The soil looks pretty poor.’
‘You know, seedlings survive better in stony soil.
They're kept cooler and don't dry out as quickly,’ he said.
He strolled over to the blackboard.
‘Moisture retention is a key factor,’ he said.
‘The desert and the sea have more in common than poetic imagery.
In the sea, living things fight to keep water out.
In the desert, the problem is keeping it in.
You've seen a gerbil haven't you?’
I nodded.
‘Well, it gets all its moisture from seeds and dew.
If its breath were as humid as ours, it would die within days.’
He made a drawing of a gerbil's mouth.
‘The roof of the mouth is hard and rippled,’ he went on.
‘As it breathes out, the water vapour condenses on the cool, horny tissue.
When it breathes in warm, dry air, the moisture on the roof of the mouth evaporates and is inhaled.
The evaporation cools down the mouth in readiness for breathing out.’
‘Well,’ I said, ‘I don't want to take too much of your time, so how about the Land Rover?’
He motioned with his arm to the middle of the room.
‘Have a chair while we talk.’
We sat in two old, well-upholstered armchairs.
‘What would you do if you couldn't get the Land Rover back because of floods?’ he asked.
‘Floods!
Now that's hardly likely, is it?’
‘You'd be surprised.
When it rains, it rains!’
I had no answer, and began to sink lower into the chair.
Though I had worked out every detail for me and the wheelbarrow, I had not given much thought to the Land Rover.
‘I'll tell you what,’ he said.
‘You can borrow it if you can find a guarantor.
The Land Rover doesn't belong to me and I've got to make sure that those who've given money to the trust don't have it wasted.’
‘I can't give that sort of guarantee.
If we had anyone who could put up the money then we'd buy our own and resell it at the end.’
As we talked, I felt that if I had pressed him he would have loaned it to me anyway, but the Land Rover was necessary for the research programme and it would have been irresponsible to put John's work at risk.
The remainder of my time with him was spent picking up tips on desert survival.
‘The chief thing to remember,’ he said, ‘is that when you lose your fear you're in real danger.’
Now, after I had been walking for only seventeen days, I had almost forgotten those words.
Having seen taxis north of Adrar, and then a couple of days ago, a convoy which had not so much as a compass, I had begun to think the desert not so terrible after all.
I had become slack.
Because of the track, navigation had been easy and I had been leaving my sextant in the Land Rover.
This sort of complacency could have cost me my life.
Furthermore, the best map I had for this region was twenty-two miles to an inch.
Though I had small scale maps at three inches to a mile for some areas they are not produced for all the Sahara, nor could I have afforded the hundred pounds they would have cost if they had been.
At four-fifteen, there was one hour of light left and still no sign of the Land Rover.
The fatigue had been flushed away by fear.
Fifteen minutes earlier, I could hardly walk; now I was running.
I charged over rocks and taking a run at sand, found that the wheel would skate for short stretches.
I drove hard, never allowing the momentum to drop.
On and on, instinctively south, south-west, one eye on the ground, and the other on the angle of the sun.
The last eight miles had been the worst up to that point, and yet I had gone faster than ever before.
I had food and water for days and Reggane was only twenty-five miles away, but I was terrified, with no control over my body.
I was tired and thirsty and my shin was ablaze, but I could not stop: on, on, on — through a pool of sand — past one dead cow and then another — race across shingle to hit more sand and sink deep — turn backwards — heave, jerk, shout — firm ground again — race into sand — kick the wheelbarrow for its stupidity — stop, heave — trip and fall — get up and heave again — fall face down — spit sand — up and on again.
And there was still no sign of the Land Rover.
The map showed Reggane to be off the main piste .
Paddy would have seen the trail better than I. He often rode ‘shot-gun’ on the roof-rack.
I was terrified that, while he had taken a branch off the piste towards the town, I might now be heading towards Mali, a waterless eight hundred miles away.
The desert was cut in all directions by sandy scars, and there were tyre-tracks everywhere but with no hint of general direction.
I was now moving south-west, dazzled by the low sun.
I refused to pray, telling myself that doing so would demonstrate a lack of confidence in God.
This was no more than bravado since I charged blindly on.
The ground was soft but fear ploughed the wheel through it, until at last I saw the Land Rover, silhouetted on a spit of amber.
The danger had passed; I no longer needed the overdrive.
Muscles sagged.
Blood drained from them.
It had been impossible to stop my body from charging but now it was impossible to fight off the fatigue.
Though I was floundering, I did not much care.
My legs dithered weakly and I was breathless.
Sweat was dripping from my nose and chin and streaming from under my arms.
It seemed odd that my skin could be so wet and my mouth so dry.
I drank three pints of water and then eased the wheelbarrow backwards onto firm ground and trundled on in the certainty of my safety.
As I drew nearer, however, I was nagged by a feeling which was soon confirmed.
What I could see was not the Land Rover but a rock.
This time I could not have cared.
There was no fear, only exhaustion, no flush of adrenalin, just acceptance.
The sun hung dazzlingly low, casting deceptive shadows.
I could barely see ten yards because of the glare, and it was no use trying to look far ahead.
I picked my way forward waiting for the sun to set.
I would then pitch my tent and have the night to weigh up the situation.
Suddenly, I stumbled across flat, hard ground, a track so firm that it might have been paved.
I did not see it until I was standing on it.
Then, a few moments later, at twenty-five minutes to five, the trail dipped steeply for thirty yards, and there was the Land Rover at the bottom.
It was the usual evening of preparation before reaching a town — wash, shave, letters and tape-recordings.
Mick was on form.
He was getting into his sleeping-bag when he yelled, ‘Oh, I've burnt my bum today…and if that fish and chip wagon doesn't come I'll tell him what he can do with ‘em.
Come on Sally Army!
I want my hot pies!’
At seven-thirty next morning, I put on my running shoes and green  army jeans and began jogging the eighteen miles to Reggane.
It was a steeplechase over rock and sand, like crossing mussel beds when the tide is out.
To make matters worse a kilogramme of oranges and documents bounced in the pocket on my left thigh, reviving pain in the shin which had almost healed.
At nine o'clock, after twelve miles, I came to a slippery escarpment, a cascade of sand tumbling five hundred feet to a plain which, in spite of a slight haze, I could see stretching some sixty miles south and west.
Below, in the middle distance, buildings and palms lay in clusters several miles apart.
Ahead, to the left, tin roofs glinted on another plateau, which rose at a distance of eight miles away.
Pylons strode down from it, past a settlement and a water-tower on the plain due south of me and lost themselves in the haze to the west.
After glancing at the military map and checking with the compass, there was no mistaking Reggane.
It was the tin roofs on the other plateau.
I skidded down the escarpment in high spirits and made a bee-line for the town.
The valley floor was sand embedded with coloured stones.
Here and there logs surfaced from it like the inclined hulls of sinking ships.
I stopped to dislodge one of them, hoping to carry it and make a camp-fire that evening.
When I got my hands under the protruding portion I realized there was no point in heaving.
I simply fingered the bark and examined the end grain.
The colour was perfect, the bark wrinkled and grooved, but to the touch it was unmistakably stone, a monument to the savannah that once had been.
As the plain rose towards the plateau, I saw two poles in the ground; with a rag flapping from each they looked like wind socks.
Drawing nearer, I realized that warm air had twisted their outline — they were two men using scythes, no, garden rakes.
The two young Tuaregs wore the voluminous light-blue ganduras or smocks, baggy green trousers, indigo head-wraps and the long swords of their tribe.
The Sahara is home to the Tuareg and they can be found right the way across it from Algeria to Nigeria.
They have the reputation of being fearsome warriors.
I had seen them in Kano clutching their swords as they slept in shop doorways where they were employed as night-watchmen.
They were said to be fearless swordsmen and able to shoot a man between the eyes at a hundred paces.
Here they were dragging pebbles off the sand into small heaps.
They had neither transport nor water-bottle.
‘Bonjour ,’ I said.
‘How are you?’
They did not say a word but looked me up and down.
If they viewed me with suspicion then I was much puzzled about them.
It was the way they put me on the right track that made me wonder — guiding angels in the Bible have a habit of appearing as two young men.
‘Reggane?’
I questioned, pointing to the plateau.
The taller of the two took his weight off his rake and pointed in the other direction.
‘Reggane,’ he said.
‘No, Reggane,’ I retorted, wishing to be sure and pointing to the plateau.
He was irritated by my disbelief and pointed forcefully in the same direction as before, shouting, ‘Reggane!’
I followed the direction of his arm, and by ten-thirty, had arrived and was standing in an empty square of faceless mud buildings.
Nothing moved.
There was something odd.
The men gathering stones and then this awful stillness.
Out among the dunes, quietness could be tranquil, but here it was as eerie as an empty theatre.
I fancied I could hear the cold laughter of market traders and the chant of children's games.
Five pied wagtails landed silently on the white-hot sand on the far side of the square.
Then the breeze caught a red and green flag on the Ministry of Agriculture to my right.
Perhaps the two men I had met worked from there, harvesting stones!
Next to it was the post office and the door was wide open.
I dashed, almost ran, inside but there was no one there.
It was a small, dusky room and everything was wooden and old.
Cardboard folders of stamps lay haphazardly within my reach.
I could have helped myself.
I leaned across the counter and tapped with a coin.
‘Pardon!’
I shouted.
Out across the square, two men appeared and went into a doorway opposite.
Could they be the ones I had met?
Fear often played tricks with my perception and now it seemed as if I was losing my grip of reality.
Suddenly, the ‘other-worldliness’ vanished as a cheerful young man dressed in white shirt and trousers bounced in as if on springs.
He clasped my hands and bowed rhythmically while greeting me in Arabic.
‘Are you in charge?’
I asked.
‘Yes,’ he said, releasing his grip.
‘Have you any mail for me?’
I asked, handing him my passport.
He began to read it page by page, showing amusement, but remaining on my side of the counter.
Another man, unshaven and somewhat older, came in, his over-long robes trailing on the floor.
The younger said in Arabic what I assumed to be, ‘Hey, have you seen this?’
Together they thumbed through it.
I was in no mood to stop them so long as I got my mail.
A third Algerian wearing European dress walked in and stood behind the counter.
His hooked nose and moustache looked like the plastic variety that would have come off with his thick-lensed spectacles.
He never smiled, and moved slowly as if ill.
‘Monsieur, what do you want?’ he asked.
It transpired that the other two had nothing to do with the post office and knew hardly any French.
The clerk held my passport four inches from his face and strained to read it.
‘Excuse me,’ I said.
‘It's upside-down.’
He pulled a drawer from under the counter and, taking letters from it unhurriedly, held each one up to his eyes.
‘Nothing for you, Monsieur,’ he said, putting the last letter back in place.
My envelopes for posting were lying in a heap on the counter.
I scribbled on the back of the one to Joan, ‘Reggane 10.1.75 — still received no mail.
Hope to arr' In Salah 18.1.75.’
Reggane was a soulless place, little more than a hamlet inhabited by a handful of people and the wind.
There was a bar with no booze and a store, of sorts, where we bought some of almost every item we recognized, including carrots, processed cheese and chocolate, which tasted like cocoa-flavoured sugar.
Reggane's salvation was its bakery, petrol-pump and water supply — an eighteen inch diameter hole with a stream at arm's length below.
By now Mick and Paddy had arrived and we took turns, along with an old man and a little girl, to scoop out basins of water.
The Land Rover dropped me off on the edge of the town, surprisingly on a tarmac road, and I arranged to meet the lads nine miles further on.
It was a pleasant afternoon and my thoughts were on In Salah one hundred and eighty miles away.
There are two chief routes south through the Algerian Sahara, each about two hundred miles from the other.
One begins at Algiers, and the other at Oran.
Reggane was on the route from Oran, and we were about to transfer to the route from Algiers, along a one hundred and eighty mile dog-leg.
Using sections of two routes made the journey longer but minimized the distance between wells.
In Salah would be the biggest town for a thousand miles.
There we hoped to buy fruit, meat, sugar, sand-ladders and inner tubes.
At In Salah we would leave the north-easterly dog-leg, no longer with the wind in our faces, and join the trans-Sahara route from Algiers, along with tankers for Tamanrasset, and tourists for West Africa and beyond.
It was a beautiful thought and we spent hours talking about it.
The sand took up many different colours to the right, while high up on the left was a cliff-face — the wall of a plateau — where the rock had been whitewashed and hollowed out as someone's home.
I trundled along the valley, keeping the curve of the plateau to my left and watching the distant Land Rover, which seemed to be going too far south.
According to the map we were supposed to leave the road and take an easterly track up the plateau.
Since the scale was twenty-three miles to an inch, it was possible that a deviation of two or three miles would not be marked, but that could not account for the tarmac.
We had been told there was none on our route.
Another mile revealed a track going up to the plateau and a sign pointing straight ahead to ‘Hamouda’— a village which was not on any of the maps.
I guessed that in the absence of a sign to In Salah the lads would have kept going towards Hamouda, so I followed.
To the right, there were placards in French saying, ‘Keep to the road.
Military exercises in progress.’
Beyond them, two grey Land Rovers chased each other in clouds of dust.
To the left, barbed-wire coils enclosed a deserted barracks.
I was contemplating going back to Reggane, but if the map was wrong, then that would mean that I would have to walk back this way.
Just then, a tanker drove up from the south and the driver confirmed my suspicions.
I was going through a military zone towards the  Tenezrouft route and Mali.
The track I wanted was unmetalled, three miles behind me.
It branched off opposite a small village, a satellite of Reggane, almost where I had begun walking.
As I turned back, I regretted not having asked the driver if he had seen our Land Rover.
There was not much hope of sending a note with a southbound traveller.
The tanker was the only vehicle I had seen all day.
The first sign of the village was the graveyard.
There were no walls, just rough stones the size of dinner-plates marking each grave.
No flowers, no marble vases, just empty plastic buckets and washing-up bowls.
Beyond the graveyard was a jumble of dwellings and a school, a rectangular building with a tin roof.
On the other side of the road, a sign nailed to a wooden stump pointed up the escarpment and read, ‘In Salah’.
It was easy to miss, especially with the village to divert one's attention.
I trudged over the soft earth, in among the houses, and stopped outside the one-room school, where a crowd of boys had gathered.
There was a moped leaning against a mud wall a few feet away.
‘Whose is that?’
I asked.
There was a brief silence.
‘Don't you speak French?’
‘A little,’ said a small voice.
‘But look, our headmaster, he speaks it well.’
Along came a young, athletic black African in a red track suit and white plimsolls.
Instead of explaining what I was doing, I gave him details of the expedition typed out in French.
He sat beside me on the wheelbarrow, smoking a cigarette and reading.
Then I told him that my friends had gone off in the wrong direction and that I was willing to pay the owner of the moped for taking a message to them.
It took a long time for us to reach an understanding.
He wanted to know how I knew that they were nine miles towards Mali and seemed to be bothered that I was only guessing.
‘What happens if they are not there?
Is he to drive on and if so, how far?
Does he get paid even if he doesn't find them?’
Eventually, we came to an agreement and the headmaster sent a boy into a nearby house to get the owner of the moped.
He was a slightly-built student called Abdulla, here on teaching practice.
His clothes were better suited to the air-conditioned discotheques of Algiers.
After a brief conversation with the headmaster, he zipped up his brown  leather jacket and pulled his head-wrap across his face.
A few moments later, he was pop-popping south with a note for Mick and Paddy in the back pocket of his corduroy jeans.
I had suggested in the note that, as it was then three-fifteen, rather than their breaking camp, one of them should drive back and take me to where they were for the night and back to the village next morning.
I sat on the wheelbarrow and sank my teeth into a fresh loaf.
Dry bread was the norm.
The hungry-eyed children pushed nearer.
‘Give me a present,’ said one of them.
The words were scarcely out before one of his taller companions clamped a hand round the back of his neck and with a dusty, unshod foot kicked his buttocks, exposed through his torn shorts.
The bully threw his victim to the ground and shouted arrogantly,
‘Give me a present.’
‘What sort?’
‘Money.’
Then others joined in.
‘A pen, please.’
‘Sir, a pencil.’
‘Some bread.’
‘A book, please.’
‘Yes, a book.’
I jumped off the wheelbarrow and pulled out the only literature I had to spare — details of the expedition in English.
‘These are all I have, but they are in English.’
They snatched them from my hands while the boy who had asked for bread asked again.
I gave him a fist-full.
‘Please sir, a pen,’ said another, followed by a chorus of the same cry.
I had one ball-point pen with me and a few in the Land Rover.
I took the pen from the wheelbarrow and pointed with it to a pylon by the road, a hundred yards away.
‘The first boy to reach that pylon gets the pen.’
Only three boys understood and I got them to explain in Arabic to the rest.
Each stood at the ready, one eye on the pylon, the other on my raised arm.
Suddenly, a man, as if mad, ran among them like a fox among chickens, snatching and swiping the air with hands and feet.
The children dispersed in seconds and the man, breathless, pulled his hood back over his head and turned to me.
‘I'm sorry about the children,’ he said.
‘They're a terrible nuisance.’
‘But I like them,’ I protested.
It took several minutes to gather them back and put them under starter's orders.
A heavily-built boy without shoes shot into the lead in his red nylon socks.
He kept ten yards in front of the pack, his robe inflated to twice his size.
Then, proudly and smiling, he slowly walked back for the presentation, his friends dancing round him patting him.
‘Merci, Monsieur ,’ he said, removing the pen's blue top and writing on his palm.
‘Give me a pen,’ asked the bully with a scowl.
Just then, the Land Rover caught our attention and we all turned towards the road.
I was not angry or upset so much as concerned by the lads going so far in the wrong direction.
Not only had it been obvious from the map that they were ninety degrees off course but they had been on tarmac for nine miles after being told that the track in In Salah was dirt from its start.
Mick still seemed to be looking for an excuse to return home, so I chose not to make an issue of the blunder.
In any case, next day we suffered a blow which almost put a premature stop to the walk.
We had driven back to the village and had just turned off the road on to the In Salah track.
Mick and I were sitting beside Paddy, who was driving, when there was a loud bang.
We were thrown forward against the dashboard as the Land Rover crashed to a halt.
Paddy jumped out and seconds later leaned into the cab through the open doorway.
‘It's the rear off-side wheel.
There's an eighteen inch split in the inner tube and,’ he paused, ‘you're not going to like this, the bolts holding the split rim have all sheared.
The wheel's clean in two.’
‘What does that mean?’
I asked.
‘The wheel's made in two parts and bolted together so that you can change a tyre without levers.
All the bolts have snapped.’
Mick and I jumped out and joined Paddy, who was by now crouching meditatively over the broken wheel.
It looked like a simple repair job to me and I thought the gloom on Mick's face was part of his act.
‘It can be mended, can't it?’
I asked.
‘No,’ said Mick.
‘Not without high tensile bolts and we don't have any.
I think we're gonna have to bin it.’
‘No,’ Paddy snapped.
‘We don't bin anything until In Salah on the return trip.
It'd be suicide to drive without a spare.
We can fix it temporarily but it'll take an hour.’
Some of the children came running over from the village.
Mick turned, waving his arms wildly at them.
‘Clear off!
Buzz off!
Get lost!’ he shouted.
They had failed to understand my French but they understood his English and ‘buzzed off’.
Including those on the trailer, there were seven intact wheels.
With Mick's help, Paddy set about removing one bolt each from five of them and bolting together the sheared rim.
Having five instead of six bolts on some of the wheels was a risk we did not like taking.
The roof-rack alone carried half a ton of water, fuel and spares, and the Land Rover was fully loaded inside to the extent that the leaf springs were flattened.
Mick and Paddy were careful drivers and it was hard to imagine what further precautions they could take to prevent the even weaker rims from shearing again.
It was unthinkable to begin walking before knowing the repair was complete, so I sat glumly on the wheelbarrow which we had lifted off the trailer.
It was half past ten in the morning, twenty-four hours after arriving in Reggane and I had not yet left.
A day longer to wait for a letter!
A day longer to Kano!
The army had said I would manage no more than fifteen miles a day.
I secretly hoped for twenty-one.
In spite of only thirteen miles on the first day, nine on the second, a day's rest at Adrar, and another here at Reggane, the average was still eighteen.
I ate three small carrots and was half-way through a can of sardines when I noticed a sea shell in the sand almost beneath me.
A tourist probably dropped it, I thought, but when I looked closer there were more of them, far too many to have been left by a traveller.
I was excited at the thought of finding fossils eight hundred miles from the sea, but I  chastised myself for being so stupid.
In an area with such rapid changes in temperature as to erode hard rock into sand, soft shells would not have survived.
For a few moments, I wondered if the sand and shingle had been brought from the coast to be used as a road surface, then I doubted my sanity in thinking that anyone would bring sand to the Sahara.
Besides, other than tyre marks, there was nothing man-made about the track.
I strode well away from the Land Rover but there were cockle shells everywhere and a few needle whelks, like minute unicorns' horns less than half an inch long.
When I arrived back at the Land Rover I met Abdulla, the student teacher, who had been attracted by the breakdown.
He was in the most Arab of all poses, sitting on his heels, his feet flat on the ground and his arms folded across his knees.
‘Abdulla,’ I said, pointing to the ground, ‘who brought these shells here?’
‘Nobody,’ he said, not taking his eyes off Mick working on the wheel.
‘They are everywhere.
This area was under the sea.
Later it was forest.
Not like it is now; it's not rained for twenty years.’
His voice wandered on in the dull, matter-of-fact tones of someone describing his own environment.
He was far more interested in Mick working on the wheel.
He sounded as enthusiastic as I might have been if talking about paving stones in Manchester.
The last time that sea had covered that area was between a hundred and a hundred and thirty million years ago.
I picked up a shell to take a closer look.
It looked as if it had just been brought home by Susan from Blackpool.
My mind wandered.
If those shells had been preserved then the sand and shingle in which they lay could not have been eroded by the sun and wind.
If that had been the case then the much softer shells would have disintegrated first.
The sand, shingle and shells were a prehistoric beach, preserved somehow over millions of years — and it took a breakdown for me to discover it.
THE OMEN
It was a still, warm Sunday morning on 12 January, the twentieth day of my walk.
The low sun touched the gentle white curves of the plateau with gold and bathed them in undeserved serenity.
The wheelbarrow was on its side, half the contents spilled out, and I was picking myself up.
It was the eleventh or perhaps only the tenth time I had fallen that morning.
‘Let me give up,’ I screamed to heaven.
‘Why won't you let me give up?’
Yet it was not God that kept me going but my critics.
I could hear one of them, an old paratrooper who had fought in the desert.
‘You'll never make it.
You've no idea!’
I had to prove him wrong.
Yesterday, after the breakdown, those fourteen miles had been bad, but this was worse.
It looked good to the eye, it felt firm underfoot, the Land Rover had no problems, but the wheelbarrow seemed designed to plough a furrow.
It looked like shingle but it was a sprinkling of pebbles on compacted sand.
I was part way across a basin between two outcrops of rock.
The wheelbarrow had been stuck, almost to the axle, but when it came free I toppled with it.
I tried to dust the grit off my forearm where it adhered to the sweat.
Then I swung on the end of the shaft and righted the wheelbarrow.
The way ahead was over a mound of sand.
I waded over it, trying to drag the four hundredweight on its side, and when all else failed, I beat it with my fist, kicked and cursed and pleaded with it to try harder.
I was whipped on against every natural instinct.
It was all the harder because I could have given up at any moment.
I was not a man fighting to live but I was a boxer on the ropes, praying for a miracle that would save him from almost certain defeat.
To throw in the towel would mean the end of misery, a shower, clean sheets, good food and reunion with my family after the months I had spent in training camp.
But I doggedly believed that things would change, that they could only get better, yet when I reached the outcrop I wailed with despair.
Exhausted and confused, I came, cap in hand, busking for help and half sang, half cried ‘What a friend we have in Jesus’.
On the other side was another dust bowl identical to the last.
I had to retrace my steps and double back around areas that proved too soft only to find that everywhere else was as bad.
My method was to look ahead as far as the eye could see, work out the route mentally, then, leaving the wheelbarrow, test the ground in small sections and mark the way with my feet.
This meant that I walked further than recorded.
For the most part, the Land Rover milometer was my measure, but there was never a day when I did not walk more.
In trying to keep the wheelbarrow upright as I walked, I moved along a wavy line.
Furthermore, I often took detours to avoid sand which the Land Rover had gone through using its four wheel drive.
On one occasion, when the Land Rover was only half a mile away, I had to go three miles to reach it.
Perhaps this was rough justice for my having ridden that one mile on the workmen's lorry on the sixth day.
It took an hour to cross the basin, jerking the wheelbarrow backwards along the maze I had marked out.
When it was easy enough to push forward, I was almost horizontal, with my nose an inch from the wheel, which paddled sand into my face.
On soft ground, the familiar rattle was replaced by the occasional noise of tearing metal.
Sometimes the wheelbarrow was stuck so firmly that the aluminium honeycomb began to rip from the rim as I pushed.
When I got to higher ground, I sat on a long, flat slab of white rock in a salmon-pink sea.
A green bush billowed from a crack in it like a sail.
I and my tracks were the only sign of life.
The piste , marked by oil drums, was completely out of sight, over a mile away to the north.
I peeled a carrot and opened a can of sardines.
Sunday was the only day when Joan's routine was sufficiently fixed for me to know what she was doing.
As I began to eat, her lunch would have been in its final stages and Susan, our three-year-old, anxious to leave the table.
A mince dish with potatoes and fresh vegetables!
Apart from the tins of Hunter's puddings, I had not tasted meat since I started the walk.
Sweat began to dry and strength seeped back into my limbs.
I was relaxed and much recovered when a nomad appeared from behind a crag fifty yards away and looked down on me.
By now I was eating some of the bread from Reggane.
It was rock-hard and dry as a biscuit.
Bread never went mouldy in Algeria, which meant that so long as I was prepared for a good chew, I could always buy enough to last to the next village.
The nomad was standing quite still, looking down on me.
I was expecting his camels to follow him and understood that he would not come further before they were in view.
He seemed familiar, so familiar indeed that it took time to sink in.
He wore a white robe and hat like mine, a little odd as they were of Nigerian design.
Something prickly crawled up my spine to the back of my neck, and my stomach tightened.
Metal-frame spectacles!
Puma training shoes!
Moustache!
It's me!
I slapped my face and pinched my thighs till they hurt.
The wraith turned slowly to his right and disappeared behind the crag.
I put down my lunch and followed him in frantic pursuit.
The sand where he had stood was undisturbed, and there was neither sight of him nor his camels.
Having felt pain, I knew I was not dreaming, and I wondered if I had gone mad, though the fact that I had hallucinated, and had shown myself to have such a naive view of God, would be sufficient proof for some.
After the shock, I was warmed by the idea that the visitor was Jesus or an angel, and then terrified by the thought that it was an omen of my death.
Whether the ground actually became firmer or whether I was spurred on by fear I do not know, but I began to make better progress.
I picked up reasonable speed and had just about regained my composure when a hand appeared on my left shoulder from behind!
The wraith had caught me up.
I gathered my courage, and turned, prepared to look myself in the face.
Instead, I saw a smiling, though breathless, New Zealander.
‘You walk at some speed,’ he said.
‘What a job I've had catching you.
We read about your trip in the paper before we came on holiday and now we're on our way back through Reggane.
Your friends told us to follow the piste and we'd be sure to meet you head on.
We'd gone miles, then saw your tracks going in the opposite direction, so we doubled back.’
‘Yeah, the piste was too churned up.
I've been south of it all day.’
‘I stopped just behind you but before I could get out of the car you were well away.
I shouted but you didn't hear, so I had to chase you.’
‘Would you mind doing a deal?
I'll give you two oranges if you let me take your photo.’
‘Yes, but you don't have to give me the oranges.
You can take the picture anyway.’
‘Come to think of it I'd have given you the oranges even if you'd said no.’
He pointed over his shoulder with his thumb.
‘My camera's in the car.
I'll only be a minute.’
A minute or two later he drove up in a battered English saloon car with a bumper and two door handles missing.
His wife, four-year-old son Nicky, and baby were inside.
I would never have risked travelling with a family in such a car.
‘It's not mine,’ he said, getting out.
‘Mine's too good for the desert.
I've swapped it for a couple of weeks.
Mine's up north with a friend.’
His attractive wife got out wearing too little for my ease.
Looking in her direction was an embarrassment.
Every time she spoke, I was forced to look and was conscious of staring.
Nicky held a beer bottle out of the rear window.
‘Look what I've got,’ he said.
‘A vase.’
I had seen hundreds, perhaps  thousands, just like it, sticking out of the ground, but I had never stopped to look at them.
Dark-green and pear-shaped, it was shiny on the side that had been buried, but the exposed parts had been ‘frosted’ by the blast of sand.
Moments later they had taken my picture and were on their way.
Their danger was greater than mine.
Engine failure north of Reggane and they might not be found alive.
By the yellow light of weak batteries I wrote: ‘Today maximum effort, minimum progress.’
It had been a relief to reach camp but had taken all the will-power I could summon to put up the tent and cook a meal.
I had wanted to curl up in my sleeping-bag on the ground.
The fact that food and water were running out due to slow progress, demoralized me still further.
There was no chance of supply before the village of Aulef el Arab, forty-two miles away.
When the jobs were done, I switched off my torch and lay on my back listening to a gerbil skidding up and down the tent under the fly-sheet.
Mick and Paddy were rummaging in the back of the Land Rover.
‘Shine that torch over here, will you?
It's like Slack Alice's side-show.
Roll on In Sha-la-la.
I'm gonna give it the big lips when I get in those bars.
I wish that Watney's van would hurry up.’
‘Never mind your Watney's van!
Where's my Penthouse ?’ moaned Paddy.
I was in no mood for jokes either.
The vision of my ghost was playing on my mind.
I was uneasy in the dark and would have turned on the torch except that after only one fifth of the journey I had used half my batteries.
I would buy candles at In Salah.
I was comforted by the little natural light that seeped through the canvas.
I could just see my hand when I held it out.
I rubbed it over my face, fingering the stickiness.
With only two gallons of water left there was no chance of washing and I would have to cut my consumption by half.
I would eat tinned vegetables, being sure to drink the water in which they had been canned, and I would conserve body fluid by eating little or no protein.
No sardines, meat, beans or oats until Aulef.
Even after Aulef, the only food I had with any meat content, the meat puddings, and beans and sausage, were down to a dozen tins each.
That would mean more wretched soya protein and oats.
I slept badly and had a dream that was to confirm my fears about the ghost.
I was arrested for riding a bicycle without a rear light; I woke as an enraged policeman took me by the throat.
Psychic awareness ran in my blood.
It was an affliction rather than a gift, and I was to be healed of it two years later by what I believe was the power of Christ.
In the past, when members of my family had dreamt of policemen, it had meant that someone was going to die.
It was  significant that the policeman had gone for my throat.
It seemed that a malevolent spirit was out to get me.
I wondered if I were going mad.
God seemed remote but I appealed for his protection and received a measure of assurance, though I felt that I was followed by an evil presence.
It was as if I were surrounded by snarling dogs held back by chains.
There was always the fear that a chain would snap or that I would step too near.
I got up feeling bilious and with a burning headache, wobbling from the previous day's struggle, as if I were finding my legs after a long illness.
I cut through shallow, sandy hills, but the struggle was anaesthetized by day-dreams.
I was pushing the wheelbarrow in our church's annual street parade, the ‘Whit Walks’.
In front of me, two teenage boys were carrying a floral tableau with the words ‘God is Love’ written in pink carnations, and little girls dressed like bridesmaids were holding the ribbons attached to it.
At the head of the procession, the Burnage Silver Prize Band was playing ‘Onward Christian Soldiers’.
I was still conscious of the desert upon which this scene was superimposed.
My parents and Joan were on the crowded pavement near an ice-cream cart and a streamer seller.
Near them, one of our neighbours, with her hair in curlers and wearing her pinafore, leaned on her broom.
‘You're doing very well,’ she shouted, ‘but don't you think you've had enough?
We're all very proud of you.
Why don't you give up?
Four hundred miles isn't bad.
No one can call you a failure.’
‘Don't listen to her,’ cried Terry, the young bus-conductor from next door.
He was at the kerbside, in uniform, ticket-machine and all.
‘Keep going for Heaven's sake.
Don't give up now.’
My conflicting thoughts argued with each other from pavement to pavement.
‘Why don't you come home?’
‘Get a move on!
Get those knees up!’
‘Are you all right?’ asked a quieter, more immediate voice.
‘Can I help?’
Two Frenchmen were standing on the sand beside their little van.
‘I'm OK, thank you,’ I said.
‘Your friends asked me to measure how far you have come.
Nearly five kilometres,’ said one of them.
I remember little about him except that he had a black beard flecked with grey, and gave me oranges.
As he was driving away I noticed a bottle jutting from the sand near where his van had been.
I pulled it free and found it to be sand-frosted and pear-shaped, like the one Nicky had shown me.
A present for Joan.
By then the worst of the day was over and things became easier, as I later recorded:
Frenchman stopped.
Black/grey beard, kind eyes.
Told me I'd come 5 kilometres.
Three miles in three hours.
Sang ‘Hallelujah Chorus’ and  the Rolling Stones' ‘You can make it if you try’.
Stopped at 1100 for dates and an orange.
Nothing to drink all morning as yet.
Approaching the crags we've seen for a couple of days.
Undulating scenery, sandy patches.
Occasionally would hear the cart rumble as the ground became firm.
Thanked God I could see all my friends, relatives, all the old ladies, Joan and the kids in my daydreams.
Felt v. contented but tired.
1230 lunch, carrots, dates, dry bread.
Boys drove past 7¾ miles in 5 hours.
I said make it 14.
After lunch going progressively easier, went back on to piste , sandy but rocky at bottom of tyre-tracks.
For an hour huge cloud came and covered sun.
Whose prayer was that?
Collected four sand-frosted bottles.
Shoulder chafed by strap.
Also difficult to look down at watch.
When I move my head awful neck cramp.
Socks and shoes full of sand.
Kept on stopping to empty them.
Came between two crags, blackish sand.
When I saw L.R. today at finish I yelped for joy.
Arrive at camp 1545 but completely knocked out.
Opened can of mixed veg, used water to steam the pudding Paddy gave me at Reggane.
Now using same water to heat veg' and carrots.
Will now drink it.
Glad of arriving early, need light for writing.
Thankful that worst is over.
Should reach Aulef day after tomorrow…
Diarrhoea embarrassing.
Written letters and report.
Long chat to Mick thr' tent walls.
Says they've enough food.
Now try to sleep.
2200 hours.
I woke at two o'clock lying on my kit and again at half-past three, doubled across the tent.
Diarrhoea, which I had now had for five days, finally drove me from my bed at six-thirty.
The day was the easiest since Reggane and I came to camp after twenty miles feeling strong, with Aulef only two hours away.
Mick was standing naked drying himself, his yellow washing-up bowl at his feet.
‘Don't do that to me,’ I said.
‘Get some clothes on.
I've not seen the wife for a month.’
‘I couldn't give two monkeys,’ he said, making ballet leaps out of sight behind the Land Rover.
After putting up the tent, I sat outside, took the bandage off my shin for the last time, and undressed, before washing myself with a mug of water.
Sweat had made my skin sticky, and had glued rivulets of sand to my spectacles.
It had so impregnated my string vest that when it had dried I almost succeeded in standing it up like a birdcage.
It was twilight and a brilliant new moon was gliding down the bright end of the sky, followed by a cascade of stars.
Everything — wind, sand and stray paper bags, disappeared over that western horizon.
Just my luck to be travelling east.
At dawn, the canvas hung still.
I had just woken and could hear my pulse.
The red second hand was coming up to six-thirty, 14 January, and  I was counting thirty-eight beats a minute, slower than ever, half the rate of two years ago.
I had never been fitter or stronger.
Within half an hour of breaking camp, I came over the brow of a hill — compacted earth with pockets of drifted sand.
On the other side, the track dropped sharply for a quarter of a mile where, to its right, was a dome of sand about 150 yards in diameter.
Around its base, palm-trees were growing and there were a few houses built of clay.
A sign by the side of the piste showed it to be Timoken, an unmapped hamlet, though there was no sign of any people.
Soon afterwards, I stocked up with the sweet-tasting water of an oasis, the banks of which were encrusted with salts and shaded by palm-trees.
The most difficult leg this side of the half-way mark was over.
As I walked, I began to dance and improvise a song: ‘They said you'd never make it, la, la, la.’
It escaped my notice, and was to my embarrassment, that the Land Rover was driving alongside.
Paddy's ginger mop was poked out of the window.
‘We'll go into Aulef,’ he said.
‘You carry on towards In Salah and we'll see you between half-eleven and twelve.’
The Land Rover turned right and after half a mile disappeared under spinach-green palms.
I followed tyre-tracks north for a couple of hours until they fizzled out.
The traffic that had caused the furrows a mile back could not have come this way.
I checked the map against what I could see.
It seemed to tally.
The plain was composed of salmon-coloured powder.
It gradually rose to my left, but remained level ahead as far as distant, hazy mountains.
I went on, confident of my compass, but becoming less so, and found myself in the middle of a disused airfield, among landing markers, gutted buildings and a wrecked radar scanner.
It was already half-past twelve and unlikely that the lads had taken three hours buying bread.
I had lunch and then sat on the wheelbarrow swatting flies, neither willing to go further out of my way, nor to return, just in case I was on the right track.
Had I been in a vehicle I could have gone back, but on foot it was not worth risking the wasted energy.
Half-past one and the breeze carried a faint vibration, almost too low-pitched to be heard.
I surveyed every inch of the horizon but the sound died, leaving me to pin my hope on every rustle of the wind.
The faint drone returned.
It was like the sound of a tractor ploughing on the next farm.
I shook my sand-filled ears by the lobes and listened.
Nothing, except the hum of a dozen flies.
I popped the red plastic thermometer in my mouth and sat checking the map.
Being sure I was on course did not convince me I was going the same way as everyone else.
That was one of the problems of using the piste and a sextant.
The desert routes were well worn and usually easily followed.
Navigation by  the sun and stars almost always took the same course as the tyre-tracks.
Now that they appeared to diverge a problem had arisen.
I was not, at that moment, too worried about being lost.
I could have navigated to In Salah, regardless of the piste , unless I stepped on a cobra or got my throat cut, but it was no use getting there alone.
I yelled at screaming pitch, ‘Mick, Paddy, where the hell are you?’
Inactivity fed my anxieties.
There had been sufficient hardship to take my mind off Joan, but as I sat there alone and well rested, I could not help worrying.
For a few seconds, the wind picked up, stirring the dust.
A tangled ball of dried grass raced back towards Aulef like a whippet bound for home.
The noise returned and grew louder.
The Land Rover was pitching and rolling over the southern brow like a small seagoing craft.
Paddy jumped from the cab, his knotted handkerchief white against his reddened skin.
‘D'you reckon we're on the right track, Geoff?’
‘We're going in the right direction but I don't know where the piste has got to.’
‘We can't be far off.
Let's bash on.
You've done thirteen.
How many more?’
‘Six.
Anyway, what kept you?’
‘The law,’ said Mick.
‘We had forms to fill in,and he touched us for fags into the bargain,and we had to get water from the well.’
The piste soon returned.
In fact we had never lost it.
There had been such a wide expanse of firm ground that a trench had never been worn.
Having reached Aulef and taken on water, that night was a pit stop.
My grease gun had broken, so Paddy used his to service the wheelbarrow.
I washed my billycans for the first time since Reggane, and cleaned the kit and groundsheet with disinfectant.
By ten-thirty I was in the tent mending my shorts.
‘You should have seen the depth of that well today.
Must have been a couple of hundred feet deep,’ said Paddy from his sleeping bag.
‘Yeah,and we had to fork out fags for the water.
I can't wait to meet an Arab on the Underground asking the way to go.
I'll tell him.
I've gotta get my own back.
I did it once with a Kraut I met on Piccadilly Underground.
I was just home from Germany and he asked me the way.
I sent him right in the opposite direction.
I know it was silly, stupid and childish, but, boy, I got a kick out of doing it.
Roll on In Shal-la-la.
Where's that fish and chip wagon?
This is the second time he's missed.
D'you reckon we'll hear anything about the visas at In Salah, Geoff?’
‘I doubt it.’
‘NFI!
NFI!
I wish those buggers at Bulford would pull their fingers out.’
‘They said they'd send the visas to Tam, but what bothers me is how they can do that.
The visa has to be stamped in your passport, and they can't do that while you've got it.’
‘NFI!’
‘What's NFI mean?’
I asked.
‘The ‘N’ stands for ‘not’and the ‘I’stands for ‘interested’.
Please yourself what the ‘F’ stands for.
Anyway, if there's no visa I'm gonna live it up for a couple of days, then put me foot down and not take it off till I get to Gib.
What's Tam like anyway?’
‘Never been, but they say there's loads of hotels, bars, Turkish baths and that sort of thing.
Americans fly in, have a shilling camel ride and go home saying they've done the Sahara.’
We talked until the early hours, and consequently I overslept.
I set off to the sound of Mick trying to tune into his sports programme.
All he could get was jamming noises.
Things went well for me, though.
It was my best day for a week across wastes of compacted sand and grit.
There was no sign of life or vegetation, though the evenness of the landscape was interrupted here and there by low hills and crags.
The going was good and in the morning an Arab gave me a soft fresh loaf the size and shape of a strong man's forearm.
The afternoon was cool and easy under a patterned lace curtain of cloud.
It would have been perfect if half a gallon of water had not leaked into my rolled-up sleeping-bag.
That evening, when I was putting up my tent and preparing my meal, Mick was singing and seemed exceptionally cheerful.
‘What about that then, Geoff?’ he said.
‘City drew two-two with Manchester United in the League Cup semifinal!’
I was unable to share his joy, not particularly because my home team had been held to a draw, but because I fell headlong into the tent, throwing a pan of boiling rice everywhere.
The following day took me over more stark hills and across empty plains and plateaux.
When I was half way up an escarpment, I saw a signpost at the top, too distant to read.
It was the free-standing sort that might have stood outside a country pub.
In getting to it, even using the zigzag technique, I fell repeatedly.
Time after time my boots lost their grip and the load pushed me backwards down the scree.
The robe had tripped me each time I had stooped low enough to exert sufficient force, so I had taken it off.
The sun took advantage of my bare skin and drew from me rivers of sweat.
If ever I needed a country pub it was now.
Yet, as I inched forward, the sign became clear.
It read, ‘The White Horse’.
I was reluctant to trust my senses but the sign was unmistakable.
I would order a pint of cold beer.
As I came over the brow, there was nothing but a windswept plateau.
Some joker had daubed the pub sign on the reverse of a notice which looked back the way I had come.
It read in French, ‘Dangerous Cliff’.
I smiled, mopped my face, and sat on a rock to toast myself with two  pints of chlorinated water.
Roll on In Sha-la-la!
I could hardly wait to get in those bars.
The plateau was a vast wilderness of sand.
There were many tracks all going the same way, each searching for a firmness absent from the rest.
In the quest for solid ground, I struggled from one parallel route to another until I was stuck, north of them all.
The going looked even worse ahead, so I left the wheelbarrow and scouted around.
I felt liberated without the load, as if I could fly, and I found the cruel surroundings suddenly beautiful.
In the hot, quivering air, the bright-peach floor was rippling like canvas, and the sun was bouncing like heavy rain at my feet.
No longer the rattle of metal.
Every scratch and whisper was loud like the crackles in the silent moments of a film.
Whistling nostrils, the gentle swish of the robe and a crunching like snow beneath my boots.
As I turned to go back, the wheelbarrow was far away, perhaps half a mile, the black and yellow stripes just discernible.
It had been painted that way to make it stand out — the opposite of camouflage.
A tiny, forsaken insect.
Behind it, across an empty mile, a ridge looked at itself in a mirage lake.
Beyond that a cloudless sky.
Suddenly I felt all alone.
My metal companion, my life support, was no longer beside me.
Just me and open space.
The vastness was closing in, choking me like asthma.
It was agoraphobia but felt like claustrophobia.
I jogged, sprinted towards my inanimate friend and when I got there I was so relieved I wanted to cry.
Camels, vehicles, even wheelbarrows give equanimity in the desert.
Without them there is little to which to relate.
There are many tales of madness overcoming travellers whose cars have broken down or whose camels have died.
After two hours, I reached firmer ground but became concerned that I could not see a four hundred foot escarpment which, according to the map, should have been less than a mile ahead.
All I could see was the blue sky and miles of undulating grit scored by tyre-tracks.
When the Land Rover drew up, Paddy was looking perplexed.
‘Where's this escarpment we're supposed to be approaching?’ he asked.
‘I did wonder,’ I said, ‘but it won't be the first time the map's been wrong.’
‘With a scale of twenty-two miles to an inch, the escarpment should be massive,’ he added.
‘I know,’ I said.
‘It should be filling the skyline.
The other map shows the piste dipping south through a village.
No sign of that either.’
‘Nothing much we can do, except bash on,’ he said.
‘How's the craps, Geoff?’
Mick chipped in.
‘About the same.’
‘I've got ‘em,’ he added, ‘and Paddy was sick during the night.’
‘Well, there's plenty of pills in the Land Rover.’
‘I'm OK now, thanks,’ said Paddy.
‘We'll push off and see you in a couple of hours.’
Ten minutes later the escarpment was at my feet.
I was not at the bottom of a cliff but at the top, looking down across another dusty plain four hundred feet below.
It stretched for miles and became lost in blue haze and mirage lakes.
The symbol for the escarpment on the map was as small as a greenfly and easy to misinterpret but we would have to be more careful in future.
The track switchbacked and twisted down the escarpment to the valley below.
I ran, letting the wheelbarrow have its rein.
It was a clattering, perilous descent, during which the wheel rim became seriously loosened, and the kit thrown into a jumble.
Salt, oats and water-containers lost their lids and disgorged their contents among my clothes and papers.
To add to my injuries that day, Mick was in a sombre mood — Norwich City had been beaten by York.
Next morning it was unusually still and warm, with a light covering of cloud.
The piste was crossed now and then by gullies of sand and ran along the foot of the escarpment, which towered several hundred feet above it to the left.
Provided I could hit the patches of sand quickly enough and keep the momentum, the wheel would skate across.
I charged at them, yelping encouragement to the wheelbarrow, and patting it when it had done well.
The stillness at dawn had been but a prelude.
Mid-morning, we were overrun by a storm.
The wind, like a deluge of muddy water, lashed grit and small stones from the cliff above.
I went on, protected by goggles, smog-mask, gloves and thick clothing.
I was making heavy weather of it but dared not rest for the cold.
We were under the shadow of flying grit, the sun no more than an aura of gold.
At one o'clock, without warning, the wind dropped, dust settled, and I was under a pleasant sky.
The driver of a passenger lorry stopped to give me some bread and carrots.
In return, I gave him one of twelve tiny mouth-organs that Hohner had given me.
He puffed at it, producing not a discernible tune but a catchy rhythm, while attempting a dance not unlike the Irish clog variety.
Ten or more passengers — all men, some in western dress and others in robes — gathered round singing and clapping.
I told them I was late, picked up the shafts and left them to it.
Half an hour later, I was in a forest eating the bread they had given me.
Stone pillars, a yard thick, lay scattered and broken, like fallen Greek columns.
The prehistoric trees looked as if they had been felled the day before, but they were as sterile as hot bricks from a kiln and  probably one hundred and thirty million years old.
I sat on a log among the shadows of creatures now extinct and others long since departed for pasture in the south.
The next day took us past the quarter-way mark, and brought us within seven miles of In Salah.
From camp we could see the silhouette of its palm-trees, framed by dunes on either side, which, as daylight faded, were decorated with pin-points of silver light.
Mick shouted above the noise of the petrol stove.
‘Look at that view!
Roll on In Sha-la-la.
I wish I was in those bars tonight.’
I could not wait to leave this north-easterly dog-leg either: no more walking into the wind; no sand for five hundred miles.
Instead, the rocky tourist route to our half-way mark, Tamanrasset — the end of backwater villages, and, I hoped, of the long silence from home.
The next morning, 21 January, the tent was wet with dew, the first time for weeks.
I had worked until one in the morning, finishing reports and letters, writing a shopping list, and packing films and tapes.
It had blown a gale in the early hours and I had been up with my torch at three o'clock to attend to the guy-ropes and check that the washing was still on the line: it was, but it had become red with dust.
I had not slept much and was up before dawn.
After drinking a mug of tea, I packed away the tent and set off, watching the trees float nearer as the pale sun thawed the earth.
As trite as it sounds, I had forgotten what greenness was until I saw those palms.
The desert had been sterile, free from odours, except my own, and void of sounds, except those of the wind and the wheelbarrow.
But now a donkey brayed and the faint chant of women drifted with wood smoke from the town.
The track forked with no sign to show the way.
I chose the deep shade of the palm grove where the high foliage sprinkled drops of sunlight on the path.
The air was still, warm and damp, as thick and scented as molasses, rich with the smell of plants and animals.
A stream bubbled along the side of the track, watering shaded plots of carrots and onions.
Women, dressed in black, like nuns, were on hands and knees at the water's edge collecting fodder for their livestock into baskets, singing as they worked.
Boys and old men drove donkeys, which carried baskets of sand from where it had blown into the town at one end, to be taken off by the wind at the other.
Birds chattered among the vegetables and splashed in the water.
Too soon, I was out on the other side, dazzled, like a man leaving a cinema in the afternoon.
Just a few yards away were dunes spiked with palms.
In the safety of the oasis their beauty was overwhelming — a tour operator's paradise.
By comparison, the town was drably monochrome.
It was different from Adrar only in that a main street, with post office and government buildings, replaced the square, but otherwise the sepia buildings were less than my expectations.
The post office was the grandest building.
It was the same square room as in Adrar, the same crowd of mustachioed Algerians, with their sallow skins and monks' habits.
At nine-fifteen, a middle-aged counter-clerk appeared.
He ignored the customers and began totting up cash and postal orders.
Mick had arrived before me and was almost at the front.
We had nodded to each other, but the near silence and the many people standing between us would have made conversation impolite.
Was there a letter from Joan?
What might be in it?
I was trembling a little, more anxious than if I was going to have a tooth out.
The hands of the wall clock seemed to stand still.