

ENERGY SUPPLY AND DEMAND THROUGHOUT THE WORLD
THE UNITED STATES
The United States is the world's economic behemoth.
When Wall Street has indigestion, the world's market economies are checked out for coronaries.
When US interest rates rise, industrial growth prospects from Paris to Hong Kong and from Bangkok to Bogota are threatened.
When the US economy booms, the rest of the world is pulled along in the slipstream.
The strength or weakness of the dollar dominates the ebbs and flows of world rates of currency exchange.
Energy and the world economy are equally inseparable.
Crude oil is the world's most important commodity and crude oil is priced in dollars.
One of the main foundations upon which the gigantic economic growth of the US during the twentieth century was built, was its abundance of cheap onshore oil.
In 1938 America produced 60% of the world's oil.
Even in 1950 more than half the oil the world needed came from America.
By 1980 though, the US contribution had fallen to about one sixth, America's day of being an oil exporter was long gone and oil dependence on the Middle East had begun.
But even though America is no longer the world's leading oil producer she remains the dominant consumer.
In 1950, America consumed half the world's oil; by 1960 this fell to 44% and by 1970 it was less than one third.
Yet even today America is responsible for one quarter of world oil consumption and almost half the non-Communist world's petrol consumption.
In 1983 America was responsible for one quarter of the world's consumption of primary fuel, 25% of the oil, 19% of the coal, 32% of the gas and 34% of the nuclear power generation.
Where America is heading in economic and energy terms is central to any view of the world energy future.
Economic growth averaging some 3% per year is likely to the end of the century, despite current measures to curb the huge budget deficit and the probability of periodic banking crises as financial institutions, many of them over-extended by loans to energy producers, go to the wall.
Continuing energy efficiency gains will be effected however, which will hold energy demand growth down to slightly less than half the level of economic growth.
This means an increase of some 30% in energy consumption by the year 2000.
The main feature of the demand increase will be a fall in the share of demand accounted for by oil and gas and a rise in coal and nuclear power consumption.
Nuclear will increase by 120% (a far lower level than previously projected — see Nuclear Power), coal use will grow by some 70% while gas consumption will register a slight fall.
Oil demand will grow by less than 10% and make up about one-third of consumption in the year 2000.
The aspect of energy consumption which is most fundamental to American economic well-being and is also the most sensitive area in geopolitical terms, is energy imports.
US oil production over the past decade has failed to match consumption on an annual basis by amounts varying between 217 million tonnes in 1982 and 400 million tonnes in 1978.
Although actual imports have fallen from 337 million tonnes in 1980 to 246 million tonnes in 1983 due to lower domestic consumption, between 1983 and the year 2000 average yearly net oil imports will rise by 100% to over 400 million tonnes.
This increase will be largely due to a 30% fall in US oil production.
This is despite efforts to increase indigenous oil production.
Currently US proven reserves represent only eight years' production.
It has been estimated that two-thirds of all undiscovered oil and gas are to be found offshore and one of the first acts of the Reagan administration was to accelerate the process of offshore leasing in the Gulf areas, the California coast and also the North Atlantic coast.
This programme should help to slow down the yearly fall in production.
A field discovered following the controversial opening up of the Santa Maria basin off California could turn out to be the largest discovered since the Prudhoe Bay field in Alaska but the most stringent efforts will do no more than mitigate an inevitable production decline.
The USA's increasing dependence on foreign oil supplies would be far worse without the energy efficiency improvements which will take place, particularly in the transportation sector.
In 1982 nearly two-thirds of US oil  production was used for transportation.
Although an increase of some 30% in car usage is predicted for the remainder of the century, energy efficiency improvements will be responsible for an improvement of some 80% in miles per gallon of road vehicles.
The USA, which well within the memory of the majority of its inhabitants, was the world's leading oil supplier, does not like being dependent on imported oil, particularly oil imported from areas of the world where political unrest means that a loss of supply — for instance through a closure of the Strait of Hormuz — is always a possibility.
Between 1980 and 1983 America was able to reduce its oil imports from the Middle East by 73% and its imports from North and West Africa by 73% and 50% respectively.
This was possible because demand went down by a quarter and new supplies were available from the UK North Sea.
Oil imports from Latin America (largely Mexico) were maintained at the same level.
To meet the level of demand likely in the year 2000, imports from Mexico will be considerably increased but, with exports from the North Sea declining, higher dependence on the OPEC countries is unavoidable.
Although the ratio of gas reserves to gas production in the US is slightly better than that for oil, a decline in gas consumption will occur.
The US has the longest tradition of natural gas use of any country in the world.
Gas was used in houses and for street lights from the early nineteenth century.
A pipeline network in the 1940s brought about significant growth in usage, and, aided by government restrictions on gas prices to the consumer, consumption increased ninefold between 1945 and 1973.
In 1954 wellhead gas prices also came under government control.
The original purpose of this measure was to bring order to the gas industry but these controls subsequently had an adverse effect on exploration activities and in the 1970s, demand began to exceed supply.
The Natural Gas Policy Act introduced in 1978, which decontrolled some categories of gas and allowed the price of most others to rise in a controlled manner, caused an increase in exploration activity.
However, the decline in oil prices in 1982 left gas prices uncompetitive with other fuels and a surplus of domestic supply over demand followed.
There has been fierce debate over whether or not gas prices should be totally decontrolled and the price allowed to find its own level.
The situation was extremely complex because of the different pricing systems being applied to gas according to supply source and age (i.e. when the gas was discovered).
In addition the gas industry had been investing in expensive pipeline and other transportation systems to import gas from Canada, Mexico and Algeria, in anticipation of a continuing supply shortfall  which the Natural Gas Policy Act effectively removed, in the short term at least.
Looking ahead, over the next decade gas demand is likely to fall as a result of supply shortfall, despite the current supply surplus.
Even to meet this level of demand, some 25% of production in 1990 must come from new discoveries and a growing level of imports from Canada and Mexico will occur.
There will be no shortage of gas in either the residential or commercial sectors, the reductions occurring in electricity generation and industrial boiler heating uses.
Gas imports will reach some 70 MTOE by 1990 but grow more slowly subsequently as gas supplies from Alaska increase.
Despite the political unacceptability of increased dependence upon OPEC, the massive increase in production of synthetic oils manufactured from tar sands, oil shale, very heavy oil, alcohol and coal, which was expected prior to the fall in world crude oil prices, will not materialise during this century.
The viability of various mega-projects was dependent on significant projected oil price increases.
The ‘volte-face’ over synfuels was emphasised in May 1984 by the Reagan Administration's plans to ask Congress to dock some $8 billion from the $14 billion in aid available to help proposed synthetic fuel plants.
Despite the talk in US government circles only three years ago, of synfuels being what would save the US from OPEC oil dependence, the programme has become unpopular and seems likely at the time of writing to become an offering to appease fears of further growth in the federal budget deficit.
The coal contribution to US energy consumption will grow and exports will rise to over 100 MTOE by the end of the century.
The main area of increase in usage will be electricity generation, accounting for four-fifths of demand increase.
The share of total energy usage accounted for by nuclear power will rise from 4% to 7%, a far lower level of increase than might have been achieved but for the Three Mile Island incident.
Yet, in the longer term, there can be no doubt that within nuclear expansion, increased coal use and the resurrection of the synfuels programme resides the US's only chance of reducing imported oil dependence, which will inexorably increase over the rest of the century.
With the tightening of world oil demand which will come in the 1990s and the beginnings of a ‘catching-up’ programme of crude price increases, it is to be hoped that measures will be taken in good time to counteract what could be a politically unacceptable and potentially debilitating economic dependence on imported energy, for the US and for the rest of the Western world.
THE USSR
In the late seventies there was a great deal of fearful speculation that Soviet oil production would peak in 1980 and that the Communist bloc would soon become a net importer rather than a net exporter of oil.
This would set the scene for a super power scramble for the Middle East's oil resources, the Soviet Union being driven to desperate measures by its lack of hard currency.
In fact the USSR's oil production did not peak in 1980 and a production level higher than the Jeremiahs of the late seventies predicted, was achieved.
It may be that the USSR exportable oil surplus did peak in 1980.
However, even if the USSR does feel it necessary to reduce oil exports, any foreign exchange gap created should be filled by growing gas exports.
But in considering how much oil and gas the USSR will produce, how much it will use at home, how much it will export to its Communist neighbours and how much will come to the West, it is important to remember that this is a totally controlled economy.
This exported oil or gas is not, as it is in the West, that part of production which is surplus to domestic requirements; it is a quota which a decision has been taken to meet in order to fulfil a particular objective.
With oil and gas exports, the objective is to get foreign currency with which foreign goods can be purchased and the domestic economy's energy requirements are organised so that they are able to manage on the fuel which is left.
Or put another way, the economic growth objectives are planned so as to be practicable without recourse to that part of oil and gas production which has been designated a foreign currency earner.
Foreign currency and the goods it buys are very important to the USSR and events since the second oil shock will certainly have increased the Soviet economic planners' enthusiasm for gas.
In 1982 oil made up about 60% of the Soviet Union's hard currency income.
Some 62 million tonnes of oil brought in about $ 16 billion.
It is estimated that a fall in oil prices costs the Soviet Union about $500 million per dollar off the price of crude.
Gas exports through the new trans-Siberian export pipeline from Urengoy have helped in the past and will help in the future.
For example, contracts with France and West Germany alone for 20 billion cubic metres of gas could bring in $2.5 billion per year.
However, this would depend on demand in Europe, and on price — too much Russian gas into Europe too soon would certainly depress a currently over-supplied market.
Gas exports are central to the USSR's strategy, which appears, quite sensibly, to be geared towards conserving home-produced oil by the  substitution of other fuels and maintaining the influx of foreign exchange through the increasing export of other fuels — particularly gas.
The strategy depends on increased nuclear, coal and gas use in the home market, increased gas sales to the West, the practice of conservation and more effective exploitation of hydrocarbon resources.
The USSR has both resources and problems in developing them to dwarf those of the rest of the world.
Everything — the resources, the distances, the climatic conditions, the costs — is extreme.
The Soviet Union is the world's largest oil producer (22%) and the world's largest gas producer (33%).
It has 10% of world proven oil reserves, second only to Saudi Arabia, and in terms of probable oil resources holds about one-seventh of the world's potential.
In terms of coal reserves, the USSR has 25% while in terms of gas, with its massive Siberian reserves, it has 40% of the world total which is a uniquely dominant share of a single energy source.
The Urengoy field, which lies in Western Siberia, inside the Arctic circle, is believed by the USSR to hold reserves of gas bigger than those of Holland, Canada, Britain, Mexico and Algeria combined.
Currently the USSR is the world's second largest energy producer and consumer.
By the year 2000 it will overtake the USA in terms of production and account for one-fifth of the energy produced in the world.
In 1983 oil was the major fuel for the USSR both in terms of production and consumption, followed by gas and coal.
The major development over the next 20 years will be the 90% growth in gas consumption and the 80% rise in gas production.
In the year 2000 gas will make up 40% of USSR energy production.
Oil production will fall by about 5% to make up 26% of total production while coal production will increase by 60%to make up a proportion of energy production similar to 1983.
Despite the abundance of reserves, coal production in the USSR has not been increasing at any significant rate.
It is the technical and transportation problems of moving coal from Siberia where most of the reserves are to be found, to the main areas of use, which have and will restrict development.
To be really competitive coal must be near its market and where the distances are thousands of miles — far enough to use up most of the coal being carried just to keep the coal train going — gas pipelines make more sense, especially when there is also a significant export market at the end of the line.
Coal as an export commodity is to some extent a casualty of the shift in the economic mix of the Western industrialised nations away from energy intensive ‘smokestack’ industries and towards higher added value, higher technology industries.
Moscow has attempted, for example, to enlist  Japanese help to develop Yakutia and Eastern Siberia with a view to exporting both LNG and coal.
A decade ago huge sums were invested in the construction of the BAM railway to provide an infrastructure for exports to Japan and the US.
A number of large projects were discussed, but only one of the Soviet-Japanese projects has gone ahead — the open cast Neryungri coal mine.
The mine is to become operational by 1985 but the cost of producing the coal in conditions where the hydraulic systems of the excavators freeze and burst in the intense cold is such that only by CPE (Centrally Planned Economy) economics would the project be viable.
The mine will produce 9 million tonnes of coking coal and 4 million tonnes of steam coal annually of which 5.3 million tonnes of coking coal will be exported to Japan.
This involves a rail journey of approaching a thousand miles — Neryungri being, by Russian standards, relatively close to the sea.
Coal will not be a major export for the USSR this century with a probable 20 MTOE per annum by the year 2000.
Gas exports on the other hand will, by the end of the century, be approaching those of oil at almost 100 MTOE per year.
A significant contributor to this will be the Urengoy export pipeline.
This is a true mega-project which has faced gigantic technical problems.
It is 4,451 km long and crosses 150 km of perma-frost, 700km of swamp and over 500km of mountains.
Although the 56-inch diameter pipeline has received great publicity it is, in fact, one of six similar lines being laid along the Urengoy ‘energy corridor’, totalling 20,000km in length.
The pipeline, was built far more quickly than the trans-Alaskan pipeline, largely because of the 2,200 separate state and federal permits and construction sanctions needed by the oil companies involved in the US project.
Gas pipelines are an excellent investment for Russia.
As well as increasing export earnings they also add to the pipeline network supplying the home market.
The overall length of gas pipeline in the USSR was planned to reach 300,000km by 1984 — enough to stretch to the moon and back.
The pipeline could export 40 billion cu. metres of gas per year (16.6 MTOE) but weak demand in Europe means that orders are currently less, at some 32 billion cu. metres (13.3 MTOE).
A further pipeline from Urengoy was originally planned for 1986–90 but may be deferred because of the market situation.
The USSR has announced that it will make increased use of gas as a petro-chemical feedstock rather than flood the market while demand is weak.
Whether or not the USSR will increase oil exports and whether it can do so have long been areas of heated debate.
It has been suggested that the USSR will need to finance imports of food, high technology and machinery  to the value of $42 billion between 1984–1987 and would therefore need to increase energy exports to the West to about 150 MTOE per year.
This would mean a 70% increase in energy exports.
Most experts do not believe that the USSR can increase oil production much above the present level due to cumbersome bureaucracy, failure to find new reserves and shortage of sophisticated drilling equipment.
For example in 1981 1,100 exploration wells were drilled in the USSR while in the USA 12,000 were drilled.
There are frequent reports, some of them in the Soviet press, of bungling and inefficiency in both exploration and production, yet expert opinion on what the Soviet oil industry can achieve has been shown over the past few years to be wildly wrong.
If anything is demonstrated by the USSR's record on energy over the past decade it is that the resources, the equipment, manpower and the money do exist broadly to achieve whatever the mighty planning and executive mechanism dictates.
A job may take longer than planned, but if the project keeps its importance and its relevance to Soviet needs amid the shifting equations of economic growth and need for foreign exchange — then it will be done.
The marshalling of technical capital and human resources which will make the USSR the world's leading nuclear nation by the year 2000 is a case in point (see Nuclear Power — A Tale of Two Systems).
Nuclear power will help to save oil — the most vital of the USSR's energy resources, yet a great deal more will need to be done to change Soviet energy structures if domestic oil supplies and supplies to other Communist countries are not to come under extreme pressure in the late 1980s and 1990s. there will still have to be a reduction in supplies to the Communist bloc and a considerable reduction in the proportion of Soviet energy demand which is met by oil.
Measures underway to effect this are; increased substitution of gas for oil in industrial complexes and combined heat and power (CHP) schemes, but it is still reckoned that the USSR is a million miles behind the West in terms of energy efficiency.
It has been estimated that up to 300 million tonnes of oil a year could be saved in the USSR by cutting waste, substituting gas for oil in industrial complexes and making more use of the vast coal reserves, but whether this will be achieved to any significant extent outside the essentially capitalist ethos where cost saving is an easily learned lesson, is doubtful.
For the USSR much will depend, ultimately, on world oil prices, on world gas prices and on just how much foreign currency the USSR needs if energy exports really do account for 60 to 80 per cent of hard currency earnings.
It  seems fairly certain that oil exports to the West must fall, due to domestic and COMECON needs.
However, if oil prices do harden in the latter part of this century the $2.5–3.5 billion lost following the 1982 price fall could be recouped with interest.
CANADA
The Federal Department of Energy, Mines and Resources stated in the ‘National Energy Program: Update 1982’, ‘Canada's energy problem is oil.
The National Energy Program seeks to reverse the trend towards growing imports.
This will not be an easy job, for conventional oil reserves in Western Canada continue to decline’.
Ironically the trend towards growing imports of oil was being reversed at the time.
The second oil shock and soaring US interest rates following years of overheated demand caused a huge fall in GNP of nearly 5% in 1982, the first decline in a decade and the biggest since the 1930s.
Energy demand fell in 1981 and 1982 with oil consumption shrinking from 90 million tonnes in 1979 to 66.5 million tonnes in 1983.
But with the return to economic growth in Canada, keeping down oil imports will not be so easy despite conservation gains and efficiency improvements.
For the remainder of this century the Canadian economy is likely to grow at approaching 3% per year with energy demand increasing at just over 2% per year.
This means a further 120 million tonnes of oil equivalent per year by the year 2000.
Meeting this level of demand from indigenous energy resources is not a problem in Canada, currently a net energy exporter and certain to increase its exports of gas and coal in the future.
Canada also has the advantage of having the highest proportion of hydro-electric power of any major industrialised nation.
In 1983 HEP accounted for 27% of energy demand.
Exports of electricity are a good foreign earner — a single agreement early in 1983 meant US $4 billion of electricity to be supplied to 64 New England utilities.
Canada has the eighth largest coal resources in the world and the eighth largest gas reserves.
In addition the country can boast a successful nuclear programme based on the Candu reactor — a heavy water reactor (HWR)— in which the moderator is heavy water (water containing a substantial proportion of deuterium atoms).
Quadrupling of nuclear power consumption, doubling of gas and coal consumption and a forty per cent increase in hydro-electric power generation will be necessary to meet the projected increase in Canadian energy demand by the year 2000.
By then nuclear energy should be contributing more than one-fifth of electricity generation.
Gas will become, along with hydro-electricity, the largest single energy source.
In Canada, gas resources are not a limiting factor.
Continued natural gas consumption growth depends on the maintenance of price levels well below oil.
Exports of natural gas to the US  by pipeline and LNG exports particularly to Japan, are likely to increase to some 30 MTOE by the year 2000, and even higher levels of export, particularly to the US, are quite possible.
Coal exports will also increase substantially.
In the domestic market coal use will be concentrated largely on electricity generation and steel manufacture.
Metallurgical coal is the major export commodity but thermal coal exports will take up an increasingly large proportion as the huge coal resources in Alberta are developed.
A huge new project is currently being completed in British Columbia at a cost of C$2.5 billion.
Two mines are being developed to export 8 million tonnes per year to Japan on a 15-year contract with a five-year renewal.
The project includes a railway line, a new town and a 12,000 tonnes per year coal dock at Prince Rupert.
However, it is in keeping down imports of oil that major problems for the National Energy Program (NEP) exist.
The NEP's objective is to be oil self-sufficient in 1990.
Can it be done?
The problem is that since the NEP was first put forward the nature of the game has undergone considerable changes.
For a time the decline in Canada's conventional oil reserves was to be met by the development of Western Canada's gigantic oil sands deposits.
But the fall in oil prices and the stupendous costs of the synthetic fuels projects involved, such as the Alsands synthetic oil extraction project and the Cold Lake heavy oil extraction project, which between them were to cost C$30 billion caused the cancellation of the projects.
This increased the importance of exploration and development projects in frontier areas.
Work is going on in the Beaufort Sea on the West Coast and also off the East Coast where a significant discovery — Hibernia — has led to disagreement and a legal dispute between the federal government and the province of Newfoundland concerning sovereignty over offshore fuels.
The extent to which new finds will eventually ease Canada's problem will of course be dependent not only on the nature of the finds but on the level of demand.
Not surprisingly, for a country which is second only to Russia for the scale of its distances (and second to no country but Norway on a per capita energy consumption basis) motor fuels make up the largest element of oil consumption.
One consequence of this fact is that even when Canada cuts its imports to nothing which, in net terms occurred in 1983 — there is nevertheless a large national deficit on the oil account because heavier oils are exported while higher value lighter oils are imported.
In 1982 Canada's deficit fell to C$750 million,(from C$3.8 billion in 1981) leaving a very useful surplus on total energy trade of C$6.3 billion.
It  is probable that oil demand in Canada will fall no further but by conservation and energy efficiency may be kept at its present level to the end of the century without inhibiting economic growth.
But if self-sufficiency in terms of cash is to be achieved at this level of demand then major discoveries in the frontier areas off Nova Scotia or Newfoundland in the Atlantic or in the Mackenzie Delta off the West Coast, will need to be made.
Otherwise the only solution would be the resurrection of the synfuels mega projects and, barring the unexpected, oil price projections for the rest of the century appear to rule this out.
JAPAN
Just as Japan, a country dependent for 60% of its energy on oil, was a major sufferer when prices doubled in the second oil shock of 1979, so it has been a major beneficiary of the subsequent fall in crude prices.
For example during 1983 the oil import bill fell by over a billion yen.
In addition the fall in energy costs benefit industries and economic output and help to make the Japanese current account surplus even larger.
That a country can achieve a current account surplus of $20 billion with negligible energy resources and a daily bill for oil alone of well over $ 100 million, is testimony to Japanese industrial strength and flexibility.
One major reason for Japan's success in coping with the high cost energy environment since 1979 has been the remarkable reduction in oil (and total energy) use without sacrificing economic growth.
Between 1979 and 1983 energy consumption in Japan has fallen by 8%.
Oil consumption has fallen by over 20%.
However, during the same period the Japanese economy has been growing at about 3% per year.
How has this remarkable reduction in the energy co-efficient been achieved?
One of the main factors has been a shift away from energy intensive industries and an increasing concentration on low energy, high technology sectors such as integrated circuits and computers.
This same change of emphasis has occurred in the industry of all the Western industrial nations.
The sufferers have been petrochemicals, textiles, and all the traditional ‘metal bashing’ and smokestack industries.
Their contraction in the face of higher energy and other raw material costs, and undercutting competition from the developing world, have been an easy if painful recipe for energy conservation.
Yet in Japan this has not been the only reason for being able to use less energy to do the same job.
Japanese industry has made a real effort to reduce energy use and particularly to cut oil consumption.
Japan's large, integrated steel mills have switched from coal to oil as well as implementing stringent energy efficiency improvements.
In 1983 Japan was importing well over four-fifths of its energy requirements.
This will fall in the years to the end of the century to about three-quarters, due to a quadrupling of nuclear power consumption and a small increase in hydro power.
With oil consumption contracting to one-third of energy requirements by the end of the century the main weight of meeting increased demand will fall on imports of gas and coal and the increase of indigenous energy production  through nuclear power.
The attractions of a large nuclear contribution are obvious for Japan despite the unfortunate historical associations.
By the year 2000 nuclear should be contributing one-fifth of Japanese energy needs — some 45% of electricity generation.
However, the achievement of this is dependent on reducing construction costs of nuclear stations and on establishing a full fuel cycle to include reprocessing.
Japan's indigenous fossil fuel resources are the smallest of any major industrial power.
For the remainder of the century Japan's oil and gas fields and coal mines will contribute no more than 2% to meeting energy demand.
Coal imports will double in Japan over the next twenty years or so with coal becoming second only to oil as an energy supplier, at about one-quarter of demand.
The imports will be of both metallurgical and thermal coal.
The steel industry will remain the major coal consumer but growth will be the greatest in thermal coal for electricity generation, with coal meeting about a quarter of requirements by the year 2000.
Despite its cost advantages, growth in coal use will be slower than that for gas.
Costs of switching to coal, the need for expensive handling facilities, the expense of pollution controls and storage problems are all limiting factors.
Gas consumption in Japan will almost treble by the year 2000.
The main use of the imported LNG will be electricity generation.
Gas-fired power station capacity will increase from about 16% in 1983 to a quarter of total electricity generation by the year 2000.
In addition, gas will continue to replace oil in households and in industry.
Despite switching to other fuels, oil will remain Japan's major energy source for the rest of this century.
The difficulty will be maintaining the momentum of switching to more expensive alternatives when oil prices are falling in real terms and surveys in 1983 indicated that investment in energy saving might already have peaked.
CHINA
China suffered a stagnation of energy production and economic growth during the 1965–1975 period when Mao's Cultural Revolution was destroying the economic fabric of the country.
Five years under Deng Xiaoping appears to have started the mighty machine rolling in the right direction again but, in energy terms there are a number of problems to be overcome which are mainly to do with lack of adequate capital investment and resources management.
China is currently an energy exporter and has large coal and oil reserves.
Coal dominated the Chinese energy economy in 1983 accounting for nearly 80% of consumption and coal will remain China's energy staple.
Coal production in China fell between 1979 and 1981 and although growth has now begun again the level of production in 1983 was below the 1979 peak.
This was due to inadequate planning for maximum utilization of reserves, over-exploitation of existing mines, poor safety standards, lack of new exploration and poor equipment.
One way around the problem is joint developments with foreign partners.
A good example is the $600 million joint venture with Occidental Petroleum to develop what could be the world's largest open-cast coal mine.
The plan involves a 15 million tonne a year strip mine at Antaibao in the Pingshuo district of Shanxi province, 500 km west of Peking.
The intention seems to be to export the mine's coal — most of it to Japan.
During the remainder of the century there will certainly be other similar developments using Western money and expertise.
Railway and port facilities will be needed and higher levels of mine mechanization if coal production is to achieve levels which not only supply 70% of energy demand but afford an opportunity for exports.
Perhaps the most immediate energy problem for China is its electricity supply industry and fears have been expressed that, in the short term, supplies may not be sufficient to sustain economic growth, even at a minimum level of 4 per cent per year.
Between 1952 and 1981 electricity generating capacity grew by over 14% per year.
However, cuts in capital investment and fuel supply problems have reduced capacity growth to something around 3% per year.
It is now probable that despite conservation measures — China budgeted $895 million on this in 1981 — there will be shortages until 1985/6.
The problem is that China's generation and transmission technology is  some 10 to 20 years behind the West with significant power losses at both the generation and transmission stages.
Additional generating capacity will be mainly coal-fired or hydro with some nuclear.
Coal-fired plants are being built at Shentou (1,300 MW) Datong (1,200 MW) Jinshou (1,200 MW) and Douhe (800 MW).
China is regarded as possessing the largest untapped hydro potential of any country and projects to a capacity of over 6,000 MW are currently under construction.
A massive scheme for the Hong Shui River in Guanxi province has been under study since the 1950s.
This scheme would call for 10 hydroelectric plants along a 1,000 km stretch of river and would be one of the largest ever hydro-electric undertakings.
There is also a nuclear power programme; a 1,800 MW station costing $3.2 billion is to be built in Guangdong province at Daya Bay near Hong Kong.
This is a joint venture between Hong Kong and Chinese interests.
Some 70 per cent of the station's power is to be sold to Hong Kong to bring in foreign exchange and service the Chinese debt.
The project should be completed by 1989 and there is a possibility of a second station on the same site.
China plans to build 12 nuclear power stations by the year 2000 and has indicated a willingness to join the International Atomic Energy Agency and abide by US safeguards and inspection conditions.
Contracts to US companies could be worth $25 billion.
When President Reagan visited China in April 1984 a nuclear co-operation agreement was initialled and a similar agreement has been concluded with West Germany.
For a country accustomed to oil self-sufficiency the need to import could have a damaging effect on China's ambitious economic plans.
Although there was an exportable surplus of nearly 30 million tonnes in 1984 the approaching threat to self-sufficiency has been recognised.
A report on China's economy by the World Bank (May 1983) suggested that 4% to 6% annual GDP growth could leave China needing to import up to 32 million tonnes of oil a year by 1990.
Although this contention was disputed by Mr Zhao Ziyang, the Chinese Premier, China's onshore production currently appears to have, at least, plateaued and both China and a host of eager Western oil companies are looking offshore.
The geological structures of the South China Sea (and the Yellow Sea) offer the potential of massive oil resources of anything between 2 and 20 billion tonnes and at least thirty companies are bidding for blocks.
At the time of writing BP has failed to find oil and Exxon has made one discovery but this does not mean that oil will not be found.
The areas involved are very  large and it will take the oil companies a great deal of time and money to cover them.
By mid-1986 some 10 or 12 rigs should be operating in the South China Sea and by then expenditure on Chinese offshore oil could be running at around $1 billion per year.
The South China Sea is considered by geologists the one reasonably accessible area in the world where a major new oil province could be found.
As such it is of great interest to the oil companies but for China the discovery of a province as big as the North Sea province or the Alaskan province would be of inestimable importance.
If oil in these quantities were to be found China's production could be double today's level by the end of the century with a consequent addition to government revenues of something of the order of $10 billion per year.
Without this and despite China's coal and hydro-electric potential, energy could well prove a constraint on China's economic growth plans.
WESTERN EUROPE
Much has changed in the European energy picture over the past decade and much will change over the next two, yet one central preoccupation persists and will persist, and that is Europe's dependence on imported oil.
In 1973 oil represented 60% of European energy demand.
Two oil shocks reduced that to 48% in 1983 and this, combined with the rise in North Sea production, has reduced imported oil as a percentage of total demand from 58% in 1973 to 34% in 1983.
Yet the situation is not as healthy as it appears.
A number of factors helped the move away from oil.
First and foremost was the rise in the price of oil and its products which provoked both more efficient usage and switching to other, cheaper fuels.
This was encouraged by governments and energy agencies, keen for both strategic, economic and political reasons to reduce the heavy dependence on a fuel where the bulk of reserves are concentrated in the Middle East, in the hands of a cartel awaiting only a tightening of supply to raise prices to 1979 levels and possibly above.
In consequence, markets and supply infrastructures were established for alternative fuels and incentives provided to use them.
Yet, within the worsening over-supply situation in the oil market, characterised by falling crude and product prices, exist the seeds of the destruction of the ‘away from oil’ policy.
Without the prime incentive of price, no consumers, whether governments, companies or householders, will continue with the same vigour the switch away from oil, the practice of conservation, and the development of alternatives.
A fall in oil prices lowers all energy prices and encourages economic growth but if it also re-establishes the dependence which made the two oil shocks so effective in curtailing growth, then nothing useful has been achieved.
In energy the long-term view must be taken.
Energy demand growth depends on economic growth in that it is unlikely to occur when negative economic growth exists; however the relationship between the two has changed considerably.
Economic growth will not be great in Europe during the 1980s and 1990s.
In the 1960s it averaged almost 5% per annum, in the 1970s this fell to just under 3%.
Between 1983 and the year 2000 the growth rate will probably be even lower at something around 2.5% per annum.
This low growth will result from such factors as inflation, energy costs, environmental constraint and low population growth.
In 1973 the ratio of economic growth to energy growth in Europe was about one to one.
Looking ahead the likelihood is that for every percentage  point of economic growth, energy demand will grow by half a percentage point.
Thus energy demand in Europe will increase by around 1.25% per annum to the year 2000 resulting in a 34% increase in total consumption over 1983 by the end of the century.
However, this level of energy demand increase assumes a 20% improvement in energy efficiency and whether this will in fact take place in an atmosphere of lowering energy prices is one of the uncertainties surrounding the projection.
The effect of energy efficiency improvements will have a major influence on the changing pattern of demand in the years to the end of the century.
Transportation, the most buoyant sector since 1960, will lower its share from some 18% in 1983 to 17% as a result of further progress in fuel efficiency improvements and slower growth in car ownership.
The lowest level of growth will be in the household and small consumer sector.
Savings in home heating will be the main reason (see energy efficiency section).
The proportion of demand will fall from 25% in 1983 to 22% in the year 2000.
Although significant volume growth will occur in industrial production the level of energy demand will not increase in proportion due to a 25% improvement in energy efficiency.
The sector of demand registering a significant increase — accounting for 34% in the year 2000 as opposed to 29% in 1983 — is covered by conversion losses, mainly when a fuel is transformed into electricity.
The expansion of this sector is attributable to the growing rôle of electricity in meeting final consumer energy needs.
The European Commission has made electricity generation its main target area for reducing oil use.
In 1973 solid fuels and nuclear power accounted for 50% of electricity generation in the EEC.
In 1982 this rose to 70% and by 1990 this is expected to be comfortably exceeded.
For energy planners in Europe in the early 1980s one of the main problems is that there is no immediate problem.
All fuels are in abundance.
Of the fossil fuels gas consumption between 1973 and 1983 grew most.
In 1983, nearly 80% of the gas consumed was indigenous, the major import being USSR gas together with smaller amounts from Algeria and Libya.
During the 60s and 70s consumption increased mainly due to gas production in the Netherlands and Norway.
By the year 2000 production will probably be some 10% below the 1983 level mainly due to the decline in Dutch production, while consumption should increase significantly — by some 50%.
Gas usage will increase particularly in the home-heating sectors and in industries requiring clean fuels.
Gas is the only fossil fuel without environmental problems and this will prove a significant advantage, as will  the growing pipeline supply network from the USSR, the North Sea and Africa.
Coal consumption in Europe is forecast to increase some 38% by the end of the century and the increased demand will be met by imports rather than indigenous production.
Some 70% of the growth in coal use will be in the generation of electricity.
The remaining growth will be in industry — mainly the cement industry.
Use of metallurgical coal will grow only marginally because of the poor prospects for the steel industry while a decline in coal use for direct home heating will be balanced by an increase in that used for district heating systems.
The trend towards concentration on the efficient, low-cost parts of the European coal industry and the shut-down of loss-making pits, will continue, opening the way for a trebling of coal imports into Europe by the year 2000 (see coal section).
Nuclear energy will be the main growth area in the energy sector increasing its percentage of the market from 6% in 1983 to 16% by the year 2000.
Electricity demand is likely to grow by between 2% and 2.3% for the remainder of the century and by the year 2000 nuclear energy should be contributing some 40% of demand.
Oil demand in Europe will probably fall by some 7% between 1983 and the end of the century, reducing its share of total energy consumption from 48% in 1983 to 35% in the year 2000.
As has been the case since 1973 it is heavy fuel oil which will bear the brunt of the fall in oil demand.
This is because it is chiefly used for steam raising in power stations and industry and, particularly in the former, it will continue to be replaced by coal and nuclear power.
Growth will come in some oil product areas.
Turbo/kerosene will experience growth as a new generation of aircraft is introduced but the growth in turbo-fuel demand will be partly offset by a decline in the use of kerosene for home heating.
There will also be increased demand for naphtha — the building block of the petrochemical industry — while motor gasoline and distillate (including diesel, home heating and other ‘clean’ industrial fuels) will decline slightly but increase their share of total demand.
‘Speciality’ products — asphalts, lubricants and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) will experience some growth.
In the year 2000 share of demand will be distillate 34% (1980 32%), fuel oil 22% (1980 33%), motor gasoline 18% (16%), speciality products 13% (10%), naphtha 7% (5%).
The European refining industry will continue to be bedevilled by chronic over-capacity in primary distillation.
Despite planned closures, the continuing decline in demand will  continue to generate spare capacity.
Even the plant which cracks heavy into light products is currently in surplus.
Despite a reduction in indigenous oil production, the projected fall in demand should ensure that net imports will diminish by nearly 10 million tonnes between 1983 and 1990, then rise slightly by the year 2000.
Even with oil accounting for only 35% of total demand, net imports of oil will still be over 400 million tonnes per year by the end of the century and including coal and gas imports the actual amount of energy imports will rise between 1983 and the year 2000 by some 200 million tonnes to represent 45% of consumption.
Thus the imperatives for Europe are and will remain, to lower oil dependence, to achieve a better balanced diversity of supplies, to make the most of indigenous supplies where they are economical and to continue the drive to greater energy efficiency.
THE UNITED KINGDOM
Energy, the means of providing it and how it should be priced, are social and political minefields, particularly, in democracies.
Although no country would choose to be without indigenous energy resources, a number of countries lacking access to significant gas, oil, or coal resources have avoided much of the divisive and damaging controversies which have afflicted successive UK governments in their efforts to make the best of being an island built of coal, surrounded by oil and gas and one of the pioneers of nuclear engineering.
Since 1973 UK energy demand has fallen by 14%.
It has fallen for a number of reasons.
The oil price rise of 1973 was the first.
The sudden increase in energy costs and the resulting recession caused a 10% fall in energy demand between 1973 and 1975.
By 1979 energy consumption was almost back to the 1973 level but this trend was abruptly curtailed by the second oil shock which contributed to the worst recession in the UK since the Second World War.
Between 1979 and 1981 energy demand fell by 12%.
This was not only caused by the lower level of economic activity.
At the same time a change in the industrial mix had been in progress with traditional energy intensive industries in decline and service-based, high technology industries on the increase.
And in addition many of the conservation measures adopted following the first oil shock began to come to fruition.
Over the decade since 1973 the main features of the energy demand reduction are the 36% fall in oil consumption, the 66% rise in gas consumption and the 80% increase in nuclear power consumption.
Coal consumption has fallen by 16% while its share of total demand has remained largely static at 34%.
The share of UK demand accounted for by oil has fallen from 50% in 1973 to 37% in 1983.
The main loss of oil consumption has been in heating and electricity generation.
Coal has gained the electricity generating markets but lost its domestic markets while gas has made vast gains in domestic and industrial heating markets.
The 1984/85 miners' strike temporarily changed the whole energy demand picture with oil offtake for electricity generation returning to the peak levels of the early 1970s.
On the supply side of the energy picture, the rise of UK oil production — from 14 million tonnes in 1975 to 114.9 million in 1983 with the UK moving from importing well over 100 million tonnes of oil a year to being an exporter of approaching 50 million tonnes a year — dwarfs all else.
Oil production overtook coal production in 1979/80 (in thermal value terms) for the first time in UK history and in 1983 exceeded it by more than 70%.
But while the UK has become suddenly and significantly a net exporter of oil it has  gradually lost its self-sufficiency in gas.
From importing 10% of demand in 1978 the level of imports increased to almost 30% in 1983.
Increased nuclear power production has taken up part of the electricity generation market lost by oil but the expansion of nuclear power has been far less significant than was planned for and predicted throughout the 1970s.
Currently the UK has three major problems in facing the energy future.
The most immediate is what to do about the coal industry in the face of weak demand, uneconomic pits and fundamental disagreements between, on the one hand, the miners' union (NUM) together with much of the trade union movement, and on the other the National Coal Board (NCB) and the government.
The second problem is the means by which booming gas consumption is to be supplied — whether by hugely increased imports from the Norwegian sector of the North Sea or by greatly accelerated development of the UK's North Sea gas resources, or by both.
The problem hinges upon fundamental areas such as price — how much British Gas should pay its UK suppliers — and also on what is the real nature of the problem.
Could the UK achieve self-sufficiency in gas without recourse to Norway's Sleipner field by merely developing existing discoveries in the UK sector?
Are both measures necessary?
Should the UK be looking to supplies from the Netherlands or USSR rather than Norway?
Should the British Gas Corporation be attempting to boost its share of the UK energy market when it plans to import high cost foreign gas in order to achieve it?
The third problem is how to maximise the period of the UK's oil self-sufficiency.
There are other problems also: one is how to overcome the environmental objections and the contracting and technical failures which have so far stunted the growth of nuclear power in the UK, and another is how to keep up the momentum of conservation (or energy efficiency improvements) in the absence of the price increases which have proved the prime motivation towards energy saving.
Coal
The UK's coal reserves are abundant at some 109 BTOE, the sixth largest in the world.
In early 1983 the then NCB Chairman Norman Siddall stated in the Coal and Energy Quarterly that since the current intensive exploration programme began in 1974 — new reserves of 3.8 billion tonnes (2533 MTOE) have been proved — an amount 40% larger than the UK's proved oil reserves.
But availability of coal resource has never been the industry's problem — the essential difficulties are lack of demand and high cost of production.
Despite its price advantage coal is not an easily marketable fuel to industrial users.
In 1981 a £30 million government scheme was launched to encourage industry to switch from oil and gas to coal-fired boilers.
By the end of 1982 only £766,000 had been allocated.
Visions of the industry's future vary wildly.
A House of Lords European Communities Committee in January 1983, envisaged coal demand at not exceeding 100–120 million tonnes (64 MTOE) by the end of the century.
This may be compared with an NCB estimate of 113 to 142 million tonnes a year and the NUM's stated belief that appropriate policies could raise demand to 170 million tonnes per annum.
The ‘Plan for Coal’ of 1974, very much at the centre of the case put forward by the NUM, was intended to produce over 40 million tonnes of new and modernised capacity to meet the expected increase in demand and to offset the exhaustion of old capacity.
Demand has in fact decreased since 1974.
The other problem is that, while the UK coal industry is producing more than UK demand, the surplus it produces cannot be sold economically to other buyers because it is too expensive to produce.
This is because a large number of collieries in the UK are continuing to produce coal despite the fact that their unit operating costs greatly exceed the proceeds obtainable at price levels both in the UK and elsewhere.
The consequence of this has been that the Coal Board has been forced to borrow substantial sums from the National Loans Fund, and from other sources under Treasury Guarantee, to finance the new and redeveloped capacity considered necessary by the NCB.
In 1981–82 the NCB borrowed £902 million and in 1980–81 £586 million.
The External Financing Limit (EFL) proposed for 1983–84 was for £1,130 million, easily the largest for any of the nationalised industries.
In the interim report of the Tripartite Coal Industry Examination in 1974, the NCB, the unions and the government accepted the elimination of ‘a broad average of some 3–4 million tonne capacity a year’.
This has not been achieved.
Thus in 1981/82 for example South Wales pits averaged a £13.2 per tonne operating loss, Scottish pits a £5.5 per tonne loss, North Eastern pits £3.8 per tonne and only North Derbyshire and North Nottinghamshire pits made operating surpluses.
In 1982 the coal industry recorded a loss of £111 million and an overall deficit of £486 million (after taking into account the government's deficit grant).
In the process the NCB exhausted its reserves and became technically insolvent.
When Ian MacGregor became chairman of the NCB in September 1983, there was also a stock-pile of 56 million tonnes of coal — a large and solid testimony to years of over-production.
On October 31st, 1983, an indefinite overtime ban was called in protest against pit closures.
On January 11th, 1984 the NCB revealed the main aspects of a new version of the ‘Plan for Coal’: the stabilisation of output at around 100 million tonnes; the closure in the near future of 8 million tonnes of high cost capacity and a continued policy of high wages and high redundancy payments.
On March 6th, 1984, the NCB announced the planned closure of 4 million tonne capacity with an estimated job loss of 20,000, and all Yorkshire and Scottish miners began strikes.
By November 1984 the strike had cost 55.5 million tonnes of coal in lost production.
The essential facts of the NCB case were:
UK deep mined coal, although the cheapest in the EEC is twice or three times as expensive as US deep mined coal or Australian mined coal, or South African coal;
without significantly increased indigenous demand for coal there can be no expansion of the industry's level of production in line with the original ‘Plan for Coal’;,
the virtual monopoly that UK coal enjoys in its home market can only be maintained by government protection of that market and cannot be maintained on the basis of price;
in the face of uncertain demand at home, and no markets abroad there can be no justification for keeping open the 10% of pits which (according to the Monopolies Commission Report of June 1983) were responsible for £300 million of the NCB deficit.
In the past the CEGB had been criticised for its lack of foresight in building high operating cost oil-fired stations and expensive nuclear stations in the face of cheaply fuelled coal-fired stations.
The existence of substantial oil-fired capacity together with the non-compliance of Nottinghamshire with the strike enabled the NCB to avoid succumbing to the NUM's demands and the strike collapsed in March 1985.
Oil and nuclear capacity in the UK is able to meet 50% of total peak demand (70% of base load).
Should it be perceived that no lasting peace is possible with the mining industry, measures such as a swift expansion of nuclear capability (perhaps using the PWR) and possibly more electricity links with France may be adopted to avoid the risk of another strike.
The link with France which is due to open in 1986 will have capacity equivalent to a 2000 MW power station.
Six more would remove the need for all but Nottinghamshire and North Derbyshire coal.
In looking to the future of coal after the strike this study considers that demand will be little higher in the UK in the year 2000 than in 1983 and that roughly 10% of demand could well be supplied by imported coal.
Looking further ahead, coal use is likely to rise significantly only when its use is necessitated by demand for synthetic natural gas or chemical feedstocks currently acquired from oil.
Gas
Although all the UK's gas needs are met from the North Sea, since 1977 an increasing proportion has been supplied from the Norwegian, rather than the UK, sector.
In 1983 this rose to 30%.
Gas demand has remained robust throughout the recession and is likely to continue to grow.
Currently the domestic sector is nearly 60% supplied by natural gas and this is likely to increase during the remainder of the century as it becomes more widely available.
Generally speaking those homes which do not use gas, use other fuels only because gas is unavailable.
Given this favourable outlook and the marketing efforts of the British Gas Corporation, an expanding market must be supplied.
How it is to be supplied is however a matter of controversy.
It is estimated that British Gas's contracted supplies from the North Sea will start to run down from 1984 and by 1995 will meet only one-third of UK needs.
The Corporation wished to meet the shortfall by 1 billion cubic feet a day from the Norwegian Sleipner field.
Some of the oil companies operating in the UK disputed the British Gas view of the future suggesting that abundant reserves exist in the southern part of the North Sea and maintained that the reason a shortfall was in prospect was British Gas's disinclination to pay suppliers the same price for UK produced gas as for imported gas.
For example, gas from the older UK fields sells for as little as 6p a therm while some European gas is priced at over 30p a therm.
However, UK producers are not allowed to export their output to more lucrative European markets.
In a paper given at the Hydrocarbons 1983 conference in March 1983, BP propounded the view that the supply shortfall towards the late 1980s could be met by the development of UK reserves, and identified 50,000 billion cubic feet of recoverable new gas — two-thirds in discoveries and one-third in undrilled geological prospects.
British Gas holds to the opinion that it will need discoveries from both the Norwegian and UK sectors to meet future demand and that it will need to  buy some 12,000 billion cubic feet of new supplies by the end of the century — some one-third of the amount British Gas projected it would sell.
In terms of recoverable reserves the UK government estimates that there is sufficient gas in the UK sector to meet UK demand for some 17 to 35 years.
Discovering and developing the gas, though, is another matter.
Norway has far greater gas reserves than the UK and, with little domestic need, is keen to sell, but Norway is by no means the UK's only supply option.
The Netherlands offered to provide an alternative supply in early 1984 from the Groningen field.
This desire to export gas is the second major change in Dutch energy policy.
Twenty years ago the Netherlands was keen to capitalise on the giant Groningen field as swiftly as possible, fearing a short-lived market for gas.
Ten years ago, the realisation that gas demand was not going to go away, gave rise to a policy designed to conserve gas resources, and all new export contracts were stopped.
In the early 1980s, re-appraisal of Groningen caused a return to the gas market.
In addition Russian supplies from the Siberian pipeline are also swiftly becoming available.
The European mainland is connected by a vast network of pipelines with potential supplies available from north, south or east.
To the south the Trans-Mediterranean pipeline connects Europe, through Italy, with North Africa where both Libya and Algeria have huge unexploited reserves of gas.
From the east the Siberian pipeline has twice the capacity of the gas already contracted for, while to the north, Norway holds the largest North Sea gas reserves.
Currently the UK's only gas pipeline to a non-UK gas source is the Frigg pipeline to the Norwegian sector.
A pipeline link between the UK and the Netherlands would make the UK part of the European gas grid.
The British Government rejected the Sleipner gas deal and whether or not alternative import arrangements will be made remains to be seen.
Meanwhile, despite supply uncertainties, British Gas continues to attempt to expand the UK gas market.
As well as domestic markets, increased sales to industry for steam raising instead of fuel oil have been sought by a succession of major advertising campaigns.
Interruptible gas supplies undercut the cost of fuel oil considerably.
Gas is also competing directly with coal for the heavy fuel oil market.
In 1983 gas overtook oil as the leading fuel in industry (other than power stations).
The convenience of gas if it can stay price-competitive is likely to lead to further penetration of all heating markets.
Oil
The UK economy has been totally transformed by North Sea oil.
The fact that the country has become a major exporter means a boost to the balance of payments of something over £7 billion per year in 1984 as opposed to a debit of some £4 billion ten years ago.
Additionally some £10 billion per year is currently being received from North Sea taxes and duties, more than 100,000 jobs have been created and British industry has benefited by taking the lion's share of the orders for North Sea supplies and services.
The essential question is how long the UK can continue to enjoy these benefits.
Prior to the 1983 budget there was widespread public pessimism as to oil self-sufficiency being maintained even into the 1990s.
This was due, not to lack of discoveries but to a disinclination by the oil companies to invest the huge sums necessary to develop discoveries because of the onerous terms of the UK fiscal regime.
The tax and royalty changes announced in the 1983 budget brought a change of atmosphere with a significant increase in new developments and in exploration and appraisal drilling.
During 1983 ten oil, gas and pipeline developments were approved, and six new offshore oil fields, one condensate field and three gas fields were under development.
In addition 128 exploration and appraisal wells were started and 21 significant discoveries made compared with nine in 1982.
It was also interesting to note that the 1984 ‘Brown Book’, produced yearly by the Department of Energy to review ‘Development of the Oil and Gas Resources of the United Kingdom’, increased its estimate of ‘remaining recoverable oil reserves’ in the UK North Sea from 1220–4220 million tonnes at the end of 1982, to 1410–5280 million tonnes at the end of 1983.
This was taken by a number of experts as showing that earlier estimates had been purposely conservative and that ultimately there will turn out to be far more oil in the North Sea than currently estimated.
Past world-wide experience does seem to show that there is almost invariably more oil in oil discoveries (see Oil Reserves section) than is originally supposed.
This is only partly attributable to technological improvements.
At the current level of production, remaining recoverable oil reserves in the North Sea would last for between 12 years and 46 years.
At a ‘self-sufficiency’ level of production this is increased to between 21 and 79 years.
Production from the North Sea is likely to peak either in 1985 or 1986, plateau, then curve downwards towards the end of the 1980s.
Production from the 40 or so fields currently either producing or under development, will fall to around the 20 million tonnes per year level by the end of the century.
This means that if the UK is to stay self-sufficient, some 40 million tonnes of new production a year must be achieved by the year 2000.
This new production will come mainly from existing discoveries not yet developed.
In a mature oil province like the North Sea, most of the large fields have certainly been discovered and the fields of the future will be nothing like the size of the giant fields of Brent, Ninian and Forties.
Ninety new fields will probably be necessary by the end of the century if oil self-sufficiency is to be maintained.
Even so self-sufficiency would not be possible without a fall in oil demand by the end of the century.
Oil demand is likely to fall by around 12% to some 64 million tonnes per year, largely due to continued reduction in the use of oil for heat and steam raising.
Surprisingly though, even in what has been in recent years the most buoyant sector of oil product demand — petrol — there is likely to be a gradual lowering of demand despite increased usage of cars.
This is because of continued improvements in fuel economy performance and also due to growth in use of diesel-engined cars.
The most buoyant sectors of fuel demand will therefore be in non-petrol transportation fuel — such as diesel and aviation fuel — and in speciality products such as bitumen, chemical feedstocks, and lubricants.
The nature of UK energy supply and demand by the end of the century is chiefly dependent on the longer-term policy implications of the 1984/5 miners' strike.
In view of the NUM's capitulation this outlook assumes that coal will stay the main power station fuel with demand increasing marginally over the 1983 level by the year 2000, with production probably falling slightly as a result of closures of high-cost pits and delays in bringing in new low-cost capacity.
Some 10% of demand is likely to be met by imports by the end of the century.
Coal is likely to make up the largest part of UK energy demand in the year 2000 at 32%, slightly more than oil at 30%.
Assuming the UK fiscal régime remains benevolent to new production and the 90 new fields necessary are brought on stream in time, then the UK will still have a net self-sufficiency in oil by the year 2000.
Two-thirds of the 90 new fields could in fact be gas producing and, in the view of this study, this is a pre-condition of the UK continuing to supply some 70% of indigenous demand from its own fields.
The remainder will probably come from the Norwegian sector of the North Sea.
Gas demand is likely to increase by 25% over the remainder of the century with saturation being achieved in domestic markets and increased penetration occurring in industrial and commercial markets.
Nuclear power will continue to register the highest level of growth and will raise its share of electricity production from today's level of some  18–20% to approaching 30% by the year 2000.
The UK economy is likely to grow at something approaching 2% per annum for the rest of the century with rate of growth in fuel use far less, at about 0.6% per annum.
Though ongoing structural change to less energy-intensive industries will be partly responsible for this, the continued practice of energy efficiency improvements will also be required.
So the newly established Energy Efficiency Office will have an important contribution to make in ‘selling’ energy efficiency particularly should rapid rises in energy prices not provide the prime incentive to economise.
FRANCE
The French nuclear power programme is, in terms of magnitude of achievement, comparable with the UK's development of North Sea oil and gas resources.
From supplying 0.2% of France's electricity in 1960, nuclear in 1982 supplied some 40% and by 1990 this will increase to 70%.
At the time of writing 36 nuclear plants have been installed, 28 of which are PWRs, and 23 further PWRs are under construction.
Including nuclear plant currently planned, potential nuclear generating capacity, excluding 6 gas-cooled reactors and 3 fast breeder reactors (2 under construction), France's potential nuclear generating capacity is some 65,000 megawatts.
Among the major industrialised nations, France has traditionally been one of the most dependent on fuel imports, lacking substantial indigenous reserves of both fossil fuels and hydro-electric power.
The solution was to build their own major energy source — nuclear power — and launch the most intensive construction programme in the history of nuclear engineering.
At its zenith the programme was embarking on 8 new projects per year and, despite a slowdown from the breakneck pace of the late 1970s, by 1990 France will have about 70 operating nuclear installations.
The effect will be that by the year 2000 nuclear energy should overtake oil as France's main fuel, with oil consumption falling by 26%, representing a considerable reduction in the cost of importing energy.
The nuclear programme was embarked upon against a background of rising oil and energy prices.
The French government succeeded in carrying through their plans for three reasons — because the more centralised legal and planning structure made it less easy for pressure groups to hinder progress, because, to a large extent, the government's arguments — that it was a straight choice between nuclear power and penury — were both heard and largely accepted and, finally and possibly most important, direct and immediate financial benefits were offered.
For example E de F (Electricité de France) offered large advance tax payments to the municipalities around a site.
In addition, cuts in electricity tariffs for residents in a 10km radius were made and opportunities for local service industries were promoted.
As well as the success in managing to circumvent, persuade or buy off the opposition to nuclear power plants, France has also established a formula for building PWRs quicker than anyone else.
The 1,300 MW PWR at Paluel, for example, which was, at the time of writing, about to become operational, was constructed in 6½ years.
As a result of this and other successes, Framatome, the PWR construction company, has orders from  Belgium, South Africa and South Korea as well as the design contract for the proposed 1150 MW Sizewell B PWR in the UK.
There has however been a slowdown in the French nuclear programme though not for the usual reasons of safety problems and public opposition.
The French nuclear programme as well as the other elements in the French energy system have been affected by the economic recession of the past four years and by the more recent fall in oil prices.
Between 1970 and 1983 total French energy consumption fell by 6% with oil consumption the main element of the fall (— 24%) partly as a result of the replacement of oil by nuclear power for electricity generation.
Even following recession, energy demand is not expected to return to the levels of growth originally predicted.
A study prepared by a working party set up by the Planning Ministry reported in 1983 that France would need to slow its nuclear growth, cut coal production and adjust foreign gas supply contracts.
The study recommended that no new nuclear plants should be ordered before 1987 or 1991 (depending on whether one favoured a pessimistic or optimistic view of economic prospects).
It also stated that no new coal-fired power stations need to be ordered before 1990 or 1994.
Amid protests from the powerful nuclear lobby and from other political groups the government renewed its commitment to nuclear power by agreeing to order five new plants by the end of 1985.
Investment in the coal industry however was postponed and Draconian cuts are planned.
In May 1984 Charbonnages de France (C de F), the state-owned coal company, announced that between 25,000 and 30,000 jobs would be lost over the following five years.
French coal production is likely to fall by nearly 40% by 1990 and to halve by the year 2000.
This, according to C de F, is inevitable because of the coal's low quality and high cost to mine.
In 1983 the average cost per tonne of French coal was FFr 633 (£54) against an average imported price of FFr 450 and a British production cost of FFr 506 per tonne.
This follows two attempts to boost coal production in France — in 1973 following the first oil shock and in 1981 when the Left took power.
The Socialist government however, soon realised that the level of subsidy needed in view of hugely rising losses had to be stopped.
This followed a rise in the average loss on each tonne of coal from FFr 101.64 in 1980 to FFr 195 in 1983 while state aid increased from FFr 3.9 billion in 1980 to FFr 6.5 billion by 1983.
The proposed solution, announced in March 1984, involved halving the 57,000 workforce over a five-year period (with a 6,000 cut in 1984), the maintaining by the government of the FFr 6.5 billion subsidy for five years and the agreement of E de F to increase coal purchases and employ 1,000 C de F employees per year.
Meanwhile an intensive modernisation programme will attempt to lower production costs.
Coal consumption will fall from 13% of energy demand in 1983 to 11% in the year 2000.
Gas consumption on the other hand, is likely to increase slightly as a proportion of total energy demand, with new supplies contracted from the USSR, Algeria, Norway and the Netherlands.
These contracts, concluded before the recent fall in French energy consumption predictions, guarantee a higher level of supply than France is likely to need.
The softening of the energy market has also made gas contracts seem less attractive than formerly.
France has agreed to purchase between 6 and 8 billion cu.m per year of Russian gas from the Siberian pipeline under a 25-year contract.
The contract has a floor price of $5.50 per million BTUs — the equivalent of about $32 a barrel — far above the level at the time of writing.
Oil consumption in France will decrease by some 26% by the year 2000 — a considerable easing of the burden on the balance of payments (in 1982 France's oil bill totalled FFr 131 billion).
French oil production is minimal and although some encouraging results have been obtained from wells in the Paris Basin and drilling has taken place off the Riviera, there appears little prospect of significant discoveries.
France will never be a net exporter of fossil fuel but the success of the nuclear programme could bring energy export revenues.
If, as seems likely, France is able to maintain a position as Europe's lowest-cost electricity producer, while home demand remains sluggish, the growing trend towards inter-country electricity links could enable an even quicker payback of France's massive nuclear investment.
When first conceived the 2000 MW electricity link with the UK was envisaged as an energy swopping device to take advantage of the different patterns of peak demand in the two countries.
Highly competitive prices on the French side of the Channel could lead to one-way traffic and the link serving as an extra power station in the comparatively under-supplied South of England.
WEST GERMANY
West Germany is Europe's largest energy consumer despite a fall in energy demand of 13% since 1979.
Over the same period oil demand fell by 25% and its share of consumption from 51% to 44%.
However it is the rôle of coal in the West German energy economy which has, for some time, been the main issue.
Coal, West Germany's only significant indigenous resource, has enjoyed two drastic changes of fortune over the past twenty years or so.
During the 1960s and 1970s output plummeted in the face of cheap oil.
However, following the two oil price shocks it was decided that the country's vulnerability (as Europe's largest oil importer) to crude price rises meant that a policy which made more use of the country's abundant coal resources and reduced oil dependence should be followed.
This policy meant substantial central and local government financial support — some DM 6 billion per year including investment subsidies and the costs of restructuring.
The resurrection of the coal industry slowly got underway.
In 1981 at Bergkaman in the Rühr the first major new mine for 17 years was opened.
Unfortunately for the West German mining industry, the reports of resurrection were exaggerated and demand was weak.
This was mainly caused by the decline of the German steel industry and the consequent dramatic reduction in coking coal demand but the general contraction in energy markets due to recession and conservation also contributed.
As a result over-capacity was running at some 10 million tonnes a year and coal stocks (including the 10 million tonne national coal reserve to safeguard West German energy supply) were reaching levels of well over 30 million tonnes.
Steps were taken to reduce capacity: shifts were cut and shod time introduced but these measures did not go far enough to balance supply and demand.
Decisions were made to close the Rin pit late in 1983 and other closures are believed to have been planned.
The government remains committed to continuing to subsidise the industry, though not to increasing the subsidy.
This means that German coal producers can expect DM 550 million as coking coal aid and DM 184 million as investment help in 1984 but the government has expressed a disinclination to subsidise exports, which it plans to phase out.
The German Mining Union, for its part, has called for curbs on imported coal in order to increase indigenous coal sales to the electricity generating industry — some 10 million tonnes of cheaper foreign coal came into Germany in 1982.
In fact long-term contracts with the utilities, which run to 1995, assure German coal a growing electricity market.
This market is heavily subsidised through the ‘Kohlepfennig’, an extra tax German electricity users have to pay to bolster domestic coal production.
The coal industry in West Germany is under attack from many quarters because of the costly protection it enjoys from cheaper imports.
Although stocks have fallen from their earlier high of 32 million tonnes due to an upsurge in the steel industry, at the end of June 1984 stocks still stood at 18 million tonnes.
At the time of writing the signs are that West Germany could well adopt a national energy plan involving considerable cutbacks in the loss-making and heavily subsidised coal industry.
A decline in coal demand would benefit either the nuclear or gas industries.
Between 1973 and 1979 there was a significant increase in West German gas demand of almost 20 MTOE per annum.
Since 1979 however, demand has fallen slightly more than total energy demand so that the proportion of total energy demand accounted for by gas in 1983 was marginally below the 1979 level.
This uninspiring performance is despite the fact that West Germany supplies about one-third of gas demand from indigenous reserves.
In addition considerable potential growth still exists within the domestic space-heating and small industry market.
Nor is there any lack of potential supply.
In 1983 34% of West Germany's gas came from the Netherlands, 15% from Norway and the remaining 20% was supplied by the USSR.
West Germany's first contract with the USSR caused a considerable furore with the US which objected on strategic grounds.
By 1990, however, the proportion could rise to 30%, under a new contract to be supplied through the almost completed Siberian pipeline.
The contract is between Rührgas, the leading West German gas distribution company and Soyuzgasexport of the USSR, and will run until 2008.
However, perhaps to counteract accusations of being overdependent on Soviet gas, a deal has also been concluded with Denmark for gas from the North Sea, although the contract is not a large one.
Starting the gas industry on the expansion path again is likely to depend on the kind of pricing deals Rührgas is able to strike and how competitive with oil products these prices are.
In 1983 nuclear power accounted for 6% of total energy consumption, increasing its share of total demand from 3% in 1979 to 6% in 1983.
Despite spirited opposition the nuclear programme in West Germany is moving ahead inexorably.
One sticky point — the need for a reprocessing plant — has been overcome with the agreement of the Premier of Lower Saxony to the building of a plant at Dragahn near the East German border.
Additionally the controversial fast breeder and high temperature reactor projects are being re-examined.
At the end of 1983 West Germany had 16 nuclear power stations with a total capacity of 11,110 MW, making it the world's fifth nuclear nation.
A further eleven are under construction with a  combined capacity of 11,908 MW and another eight are planned with a capacity of 10,547 MW.
The current government in Bonn is firmly in favour of nuclear power to provide cheap base-load electricity and silence complaints from German industry of high prices.
Also VDEW (Vereinigung Deutscher Elektrizitatswerke), the association of German utilities, points out that electricity is gradually increasing its share of the industrial market and total consumption is growing more quickly than energy consumption.
So, at end-1984, therefore, the nuclear industry is looking more bullish than for many years, despite the fact that the environmentally committed Greens are strongly represented in state and federal parliaments.
Oil remained easily the main fuel in West Germany at 44% of demand in 1983.
Although consumption has fallen by 25% since 1979, in 1983 West Germany still imported over 100 million tonnes and remains Europe's biggest energy importer and consumer.
The oil industry is still accommodating itself to its new size following the 1979 price hike.
Despite huge cuts in refinery capacity those remaining were still 40% under-used in 1983.
Service stations have also been pruned drastically with numbers halved between 1969 and 1982.
In recent years there has also been an increasing trend towards imports of products rather than crude oil which has not helped the domestic oil industry.
Looking ahead, nuclear power has the best growth prospects, increasing its share of demand by the year 2000 to 17% from 6% in 1983.
Coal demand is likely to fall by some 10% from loss of heating and industrial sales, balanced by some increase in supplies to the electricity industry.
Imports are likely to grow as loss-making capacity is reduced.
Gas should increase its penetration of domestic markets though not quite achieving the level of consumption enjoyed in 1979.
The share of demand for natural gas should rise to some 17% by the year 2000.
Oil consumption will continue to decline due to efficiency improvements and switching to cheaper, cleaner power supplies such as electricity and gas.
It should also be stated that changes in political thinking over the past three years have changed the complexion of the West German energy future.
Coal has become unpopular and, paradoxically, in view of the Greens' increased influence, nuclear power has experienced a resurgence.
Gas supplies are also very much a political football in view of the high level of USSR supply but here the situation is less unstable because of the length of supply contracts involved.
Significant opposition from the Miners' Union over high cost capacity cuts, new escalation of anti-nuclear hostilities, worsening relations with the Soviet bloc: any of these factors could significantly affect West Germany's energy future.
ITALY
Other than 174 billion cu.metres of natural gas under the Po Valley Italy has little or no indigenous fuel resources.
This means a great deal of money is spent on fuel imports — particularly oil.
The cost in 1983 was L 38,354 billion.
Oil currently represents some 78% of imports (thermal value) and 64% of energy demand.
Worse, some 60% of Italy's electricity is oil generated.
Not surprisingly, in October 1981, the Italian Parliament stated in its National Energy Plan 1981–5 (NEP) that the intention was to reduce Italy's dependence on oil by developing alternatives of nuclear power, coal and gas.
In 1983 gas, coal and nuclear power accounted for 16%, 9% and 1% respectively of energy demand and it is gas which is establishing itself as the most significant oil alternative.
In 1982 roughly half of Italy's gas consumption was domestically produced, 18% came from the Netherlands and 32% from the USSR.
A significant rise in gas demand is planned by 1990 with gas's share of total energy consumption rising from 16% in 1983 to over 20% by 1990.
It is the completion of the Trans-Mediterranean pipeline in June 1984 which makes this expansion possible.
The pipeline begins at the Hassi R'Mel gas field in Algeria.
Italy has contracted to take 7 billion cu.metres by September 1984 and a further 9 billion by September 1985.
The 1500-mile pipeline, financed and constructed by Italy, cost $3 billion.
Unfortunately when the gas began to be available to Southern Italy there was not sufficient consumer infrastructure and so Enel, the Italian electricity utility, was asked to use the surplus for electricity generation until the necessary distribution network is established.
Italgas is implementing a huge programme to extend Italy's gas network with the objective of connecting up 3 million more homes by 1990.
About L 9000 billion will be spent over the coming decade to bring gas to 440 centres in the south and 420 networks in the north and centre of the country, so that by 1990 76% of the population will have access to natural gas.
Extra supplies over and above what has been contracted from Algeria will be necessary over the next decade, partly due to increased demand and partly due to possibly reduced supply from the Netherlands, this contract running out in 1992.
To fill the gap, imports from the Siberian gas pipeline are envisaged.
There are two advantages to this arrangement.
Firstly, Russian gas could be cheaper than Algerian gas and this could be a useful bargaining counter with the Algerians when the three-year contract expires in 1985.
Secondly, there is hope that a further trading connection with the USSR could revive the strong export trade which formerly existed between Italy and USSR.
Another option  to bring more gas into Italy would be to import Algerian gas above the 12 billion cubic metres (bcm) per year which is the capacity of the present pipeline.
This could be achieved by installing more pumping stations.
Looking ahead, Italy's reserves of some 174 bcm will continue to supply a similar proportion of domestic consumption.
By 1990 Italy is likely to be receiving one-third of its gas from USSR, 28% from Algeria and 10% from the Netherlands.
By the year 2000 over 40% of Italian energy demand could be supplied by gas.
A certain amount of controversy has been generated by use of gas, a ‘noble’ fuel, for power generation.
This is a necessary expedient in view of the lack of infrastructure but there is also an environmental benefit, gas being the ‘cleanest’ of the fossil fuels.
The place of coal in the NEP appears to be to generate electricity instead of oil, although whether it has a long-term future in this rôle or is merely a useful stopgap is unclear.
In 1983 imported coal (domestic production is minimal) made up 9% of total energy demand.
The NEP called for a rise to 18.4%by 1990 but this is unlikely and the actual figure will probably be about 13%.
The plan was originally for 17,000 MW of coal plant but this was reduced to 11,300 MW and the level of construction at the time of writing suggested that this objective may not be achieved.
Currently Italy has only 3,800 MW of coal-fired power plant under construction but authorisation of a 2,560 MW coal plant at Gioia Tauro in Calabria is an indication of improved prospects while the virtual standstill of the nuclear programme could also encourage further coal-fired power generation developments.
Nuclear power accounted for only 1% of demand in 1983 yet there is no lack of enthusiasm for its development.
Financial incentives, L 24 billion to the region and L 6 billion to the communes having the nuclear power stations, have helped to encourage many regions to request one.
Currently three nuclear plants are in operation, while at Montalto di Castro, two 1000 MW plants are due to begin generating in 1989.
Awaiting approval are three 2 x 1000 MW plants in Piedmont, Lombardy and Apulia (with the addition of two 1000 MW plants in the future).
Enel ‘s latest 5-year plan is to reduce electricity generated from oil to 20%.
This plan, and the plan to achieve 50% oil dependence by 1990, are heavily reliant on the swift development of alternatives.
The coal and nuclear programmes are currently performing unimpressively but this could change.
There will however by no shortage of gas, with Italy becoming a confluence point of African, Soviet and European gas streams.
Gas has all the potential to become the balancing fuel in Italy, both in electricity generation and domestic and industrial heating markets, but the expansion will depend on gas remaining price competitive with the oil it is meant to replace.
If all goes to plan, oil should account for some 50% of demand in 1990 and 38% in the year 2000.
SPAIN
Spain ‘s essential energy problem is that over 60% of her energy needs are supplied by imported oil.
The 1978 National Energy Plan (NEP) proposed a speedy expansion of the nuclear power programme with 10,500 MW of nuclear capacity by 1987.
A year later the emphasis of the NEP was switched from nuclear to coal.
This was probably a consequence of the Three Mile Island PWR failure which caused uncertainty, gave rise to new safety regulations and was formidable ammunition for anti-nuclear lobbies.
In late 1981 the plan was revised again.
The essence of the plan is, as it always has been, to reduce oil dependence but the specific objective — oil supplying 50% of demand by 1985 — seems unlikely to be achieved.
In 1983 the proportion was 61%.
The Socialist government of Sr Felipe Gonzalez saw lower consumption forecasts due to lower levels of economic growth as offering the opportunity to establish a better energy balance.
The 1981 revised NEP envisaged a 44% growth in energy demand between 1981 and 1985.
The Socialist government revised this forecast down to an increase of only 23% (over the 1981 level)— i.e. around 90 MTOE in 1990 with nuclear capacity restricted to 7,500 MW and oil use reduced by increased coal and gas consumption.
The extent to which increased reliance on coal and gas will create a real improvement in the Spanish energy economy is, however, open to dispute.
Spain has large coal reserves but the coal is of poor quality.
Considerable investment in the Spanish coal industry is underway but even so most of the increased supplies needed to meet projected levels of demand, will have to be imported.
By the year 2000 coal demand in Spain will probably be some 50% higher than in 1983, of which about one-third will be imported.
Gas accounted for some 3% of energy consumption in 1983 and the first energy plan projected increasing this through more LNG imports from Libya and Algeria and possibly a direct pipeline link with Algeria — the Segamo project.
Subsequent to the first plan being drafted, three Spanish gas fields were discovered — the offshore Gulf of Cadiz field, the Sabinanigo field in the Pyrenees and the Gaviota offshore field near Bilbao.
Although initial estimates were for far more, production from these fields is likely to come to no more than 1600 million cu. metres per year (1.4 MTOE)— sufficient for about a quarter of 1984 gas use.
Currently, most imported gas comes from Algeria and Libya as LNG and Spain has, in the past, failed to take as much as was contracted, leading to disputes with suppliers.
There is no doubt that as Spain industrialises there will be a steep rise in gas consumption.
By the year 2000 this is likely to be approaching 10% of demand, bringing Spain closer to the average level in European industrialised nations but still with considerable potential for further expansion.
In 1983 Spain's indigenous oil production almost doubled to nearly 3 million tonnes, most of which came from the Casablanca field; however, there is no potential for Spain to be a significant domestic producer.
Increases in consumption of all energy sources but oil over the next fifteen years should reduce Spanish oil dependence to some 52% by 1990 and to 41% by the year 2000.
The proportion of energy imports, however, will fall very little so that any economic improvement resulting from Spain's lessening of oil reliance will be dependent on the market prices of imported gas, coal and crude oil.
THE NETHERLANDS
The Dutch energy planners went on a journey that began and ended with gas.
The discovery of vast quantities of gas in Groningen province transformed the Dutch economy and also caused the oil companies to look to the North Sea as a possible source of hydrocarbon.
The Netherlands swiftly became the largest gas exporter in the world and despite importing almost all its other fuel, managed to become a net energy exporter and even occasionally to make a profit on the energy account.
There is no doubt that gas has proved to be of great benefit to the Netherlands but as in the case of the UK, with its North Sea oil bonanza, various consequences of hydrocarbon wealth, such as a strengthening home currency, tended to precipitate industrial decline in some sectors of the economy and in the case of the Netherlands, the costs of developing a gas infrastructure outweighed the return for some years.
In neither case have the revenues been heavily channelled into replacing defunct and stimulating ‘sunrise’ industries.
Twenty years ago the intention was to exploit the Groningen gas as quickly as possible while there was a market.
Ten years later the 50% State-owned Gasunie announced that, with exports running at more than half of production, it was time to call a halt and all new export contracts were stopped.
This was when it was decided that the massive Slochteren field in Groningen province should be seen primarily as a reserve for the future.
Emphasis then shifted to the discovery and development of offshore fields and the Netherlands began to import gas.
The new policy was to conserve indigenous gas for higher added value uses — e.g. not in power stations — and hold a large reserve of gas as an insurance policy against some undefined future energy crisis.
But, as is generally the case, governments think along far shorter time scales than energy planners.
So a budgeting shortfall today was regarded as more important than an energy shortfall tomorrow.
Selective gas use was abandoned, extra gas supplies committed to power stations and the policy of diversification away from gas dependence was slowed.
In 1982 49% of Dutch gas production was exported, 47% to West Germany, 19% to Belgium, 16% to France and 15% to Italy.
In 1983 production increased from 58.3 MTOE (1982) to 61.5 MTOE and the Netherlands proposed to Britain that Dutch gas could replace Norwegian should the two parties be unable to reach an agreement on Sleipner as subsequently proved to be the case.
It was originally thought that either coal or nuclear in combination, or coal alone, should be developed to  meet 80% of total electricity production by the year 2000, the remaining 20% being supplied by oil.
The problem with coal however, which supplied 8% of energy demand in 1983, is that it is too expensive when compared with gas.
Gas prices in the Netherlands are linked to the price of heating oil and have fallen due to the generally over-supplied nature of the oil products market.
Nuclear power remains a very sensitive area in the Netherlands and little expansion is probable for the rest of the century beyond the current power stations at Dodewaard and Borssele.
This is partly because little new capacity will be needed this century due to the low level of increase in electricity demand.
In 1982 8% of gas production went to power stations (16% of inland use) and this will increase.
Meanwhile two coal-fired power stations have been scrapped over the past two years — a 600 MW station at Dordrecht and a 500 MW station in Amsterdam.
Originally it had been planned to convert five oil/gas-fired power stations to coal but this programme has been cut to three.
In 1983 oil demand in the Netherlands fell to 291 million tonnes, nearly 30% down on the 1979 level and representing 43% of total energy demand.
There is likely to be a further fall in the proportion of consumption accounted for by oil by the year 2000 — some 35% of demand in that year.
Part of the policy of reducing gas and oil dependence which still remains is the discovery and development of new hydrocarbon resources.
Commercial oil has been discovered offshore.
Production from the Helm, Helder and Hoorn fields should achieve some 25,000 barrels per day (1.2 million tonnes).
Two other projects are at the development stage and there are a number of other prospects being evaluated.
Fields already declared commercial are likely to produce at 100,000 barrels per day (5 million tonnes) and it is predicted that by 1990 the Netherlands could be meeting some 20% of its oil requirements.
In April 1983 the Dutch government estimated oil reserves at 41.5 million tonnes of which 18.5 million tonnes was proven and 23 million tonnes probable.
Further increases are likely.
In addition new gas discoveries are still being made — in 1982 five new offshore and three onshore gas fields were discovered despite the maturity of the province.
By the year 2000 gas will be supplying a slightly lower proportion of energy demand than in 1983 but consumption will rise slightly.
It is likely, however, that at least 40% and possibly more of gas demand will by then be imported but as with oil the Netherlands will continue to benefit from being at the hub of European energy supply.
Rotterdam has a major rôle in export refining and supply of products.
Every year the Netherlands imports about 40 million tonnes of crude oil and over 30 million tonnes of refined  products of which about 40 million tonnes per year of refined products is exported.
As with all other European refiners however, the Netherlands is suffering from chronic over-capacity caused by utilisation of less than 60% of capacity.
The Netherlands will be a major energy importer by the year 2000 with oil and gas imports probably accounting for over 40% of total demand.
Coal imports will also increase considerably probably reaching some 20% of demand by the year 2000.
Considerable interest exists in alternative energy supply systems in the Netherlands.
Not surprisingly wind power is regarded as having considerable potential.
The General Energy Council estimates that 10% of the country's electricity could be generated by wind power before the end of the century — a 10 MW wind farm of 30–40 turbines is planned.
Combined heat and power (CHP) is also highly regarded: currently Dutch CHP capacity totals about 1,500 MW.
Additionally, the Netherlands (together with Belgium) is likely to become the distribution centre for a European LPG network.
Liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) consists of light hydrocarbons — mainly butane, propane and ethane — and its main uses are as a premium heating fuel, as a feedstock to the petrochemical industry and as a motor fuel.
The Netherlands views itself not only as a trader and distributor of LPG but as a major user.
Most Dutch filling stations already supply LPG and there is a considerable market for its use as an industrial heating fuel.
The increased availability, from the North Sea and also from the Middle East and Africa, will almost certainly mean a considerable increase in its use throughout Europe over the next decade.
As in the case of the UK, the Netherlands must plan well ahead how to accommodate to the loss of its ephemeral hydrocarbon bonanza.
So far neither are demonstrating much recognition of their respective energy apocalypses just around the corner.
NORWAY
In terms of per capita income Norway has the second highest standard of living in Europe.
In terms of its energy exporting capacity it is the European equivalent of Saudi Arabia, exporting, in 1983 84% of its hydrocarbon production — over 40 MTOE.
As well as a small population (4. 1 million) and this embarrassment of hydrocarbon reserves (715 tonnes of oil equivalent, for every inhabitant of Norway), Norway also has an abundance of hydro-electric power.
In 1983 this, the cheapest of all electricity sources, accounted for 75% of energy consumption.
Norway's preoccupation is therefore not how to meet its own energy demand, nor will it be for many years, but how best to exploit its hydrocarbon wealth.
Only a quarter of Norway's oil production is used indigenously and none at all of its gas.
There is considerable upside potential for both oil and gas exports.
In Statfjord, Norway has considerably the largest North Sea field, and production, even before its full complement of platforms has been completed, comfortably exceeds that of the Shell/Esso Brent field — the largest field in the UK sector.
Norway's gas reserves are greater than its oil reserves (about 60/40) and its current preoccupation is to negotiate supply contracts so that a number of huge undeveloped fields may be exploited.
During the coming decade output from the Statfjord, Frigg and Ekofisk fields will decline and replacement revenue earners are therefore vital.
The Sleipner field has reserves of roughly the same size as the depleting Frigg field,(some 200 billion cu.metres (222 MTOE ), with the addition of 250 million barrels of condensates.
A deal, worth some £20 billion was tentatively agreed in February 1984 between Statoil, Norway's state oil company and the British Gas Corporation.
Deliveries would begin in 1990 and last for some 15 years.
A proposed 40-inch pipeline would run from Sleipner to St Fergus in North East Scotland and the shortfall in supply projected by British Gas could be met.
The deal however, ran into severe problems with the UK government.
Whitehall asked for a slower offtake of the gas, a guarantee that UK companies would share in the development of three platforms in 1990, 1992 and 1994, and that the natural gas liquids (NGLs) from Sleipner should go by UK pipelines to Flotta in the Orkneys.
The Sleipner partners (Statoil 50%, Esso 40%, Norsk Hydro 10%) wished to send the NGLs along a Norwegian pipeline to a Norwegian-owned plant on Teesside.
The latter two conditions proved severe stumbling blocks such that the Norwegians were  looking towards alternative means of marketing their hydrocarbon reserves to keep up the revenues to which the Norwegian economy has grown accustomed, well before the Sleipner deal was called off.
Oil field developments have the advantage that a contract and a buyer need not be established prior to development.
Gullfaks, an oil field east of Statfjord, could provide the revenue lost from Sleipner.
The second phase of Gullfaks would involve the exploitation of the eastern part of a large field of which the western part is due to come on stream in 1987.
Another, mainly oil, field Oseberg is scheduled to come on stream in 1989.
Oseberg has recoverable reserves of about 1 billion barrels (136 million tonnes).
Norway's biggest gas field of all — Troll — is intended to supply the European market but at the end of 1984 no agreements had been concluded.
Troll is a technological challenge since it lies in 340 metres which is 150 metres more than the deepest producing well in the North Sea, on the BP Magnus Field.
Troll is huge by any standards — reserves are estimated at 1580 billion cubic metres (1,422 million tonnes)— big enough to supply all the UK's gas needs for 35 years or so.
Currently, hydrocarbons account for a third of Norway's gross exports, 15 per cent of revenue and 17 per cent of Gross National Product.
By the end of the century oil and gas are likely to account for 20–25 per cent of GNP.
Norway's goal is to be producing 80 MTOE by the end of the century.
To achieve this the Troll field must be developed but Troll gas will of course be in competition with Soviet gas, so, much will depend on price and also perhaps on the influence of strategic considerations.
EASTERN EUROPE
The Comecon countries of Europe other than the USSR — Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, the GDR, Hungary, Poland and Romania — are part of Russia's bulwark against the capitalist West.
Their economic survival is therefore a central element of Soviet policy.
Yet as Comecon's major source of hydrocarbons the countries have felt in recent years the strain of cutbacks in Soviet oil exports as well as what they consider to be unfair trading terms caused by rising costs which they lack the economic freedom to renegotiate.
As a block the countries have the advantage, as compared with most other industrialised countries, of a low level of dependence on oil.
This stood at 21% of energy demand in 1973 and was at only 22% in 1983.
Gas demand has increased from 12% to 16% of total energy consumed over the same period but the major energy source remains coal at nearly 60% of demand in 1983.
Imports of oil and gas into Eastern Europe were 24% of demand in 1983 but this was partly balanced by rising coal exports from Poland.
Poland accounts for nearly 50% of Eastern Europe's production while the GDR and Czechoslovakia are both major producers.
Oil production within these countries in 1983 made up some 20% of oil demand: 80% of the production is in Romania.
Apart from Poland, with its substantial coal resources, there is little scope for any large indigenous energy production increases in the Eastern European countries.
Economic growth in Eastern Europe has been slowed by Soviet refusals to increase oil exports and by the lack of hard currency to buy oil on the world market.
For the same reason an ambitious nuclear power programme has been considerably slowed.
The USSR is constantly tempted to divert oil from Comecon countries to the West to earn foreign currency and this is a threat which concerns these countries.
The USSR wishes to substitute gas for oil for its European satellites.
Currently some 40% of gas is imported, much of this from USSR, which is now planning to construct a further trans-continental gas line to supply Eastern Europe during the later 1980s.
The pipeline would run 2,914 miles from the Yamal peninsula.
The problem is to create the demand for the gas by the time the pipeline is completed.
The USSR wishes its allies to invest in Soviet energy projects.
Nikolai Tikhonov, then Soviet Prime Minister, told a three-day conference of Comecon leaders in Cuba that in exchange for this the USSR would expand its gas and electricity imports to member countries.
He also said however, that, although they would continue, there would be no increase in Soviet oil exports to  Comecon.
In addition the USSR left open the possibility that its oil supplies to Eastern Europe might be cut again following a 10% fall since 1982.
At the same meeting Nikolai Baibakov, head of Soviet planning, stated that long-term investments of some Roubles 5.5 billion (£52 bn) would need to be made in Comecon industries, particularly the energy industries, with the main priorities — nuclear energy, coal, gas and energy conservation technology.
It was predicted that Comecon would be generating 20–30% of its electricity by nuclear means by 1990 (see USSR section).
Czechoslovakia is the chief manufacturer of nuclear power equipment and uranium in Eastern Europe and ambitious plans are in hand to increase generating capacity to 10,500 MW a year by 1990.
Bulgaria also has a significant programme.
30% of Bulgaria's electricity is currently nuclear generated and at Belene on the River Danube the first of four 1000 MW PWRs is expected to begin electricity generation in the 1990s.
Hungary's first nuclear station — at Paks — came on stream in 1983 and on the same site three further sets are scheduled for completion by 1987.
Poland, with the worst financial problems within Eastern Europe, has had to delay construction of its first nuclear station at Zarnowiec which will have a total capacity of 4880 MW.
Poland's financial problems were reduced by increased coal output and increased electricity sales to other East European countries.
The GDR's response to Soviet oil cuts was to increase lignite production and coal refining.
Romania, easily the main oil producer within Eastern Europe is seeking to slow its production decline by enhanced recovery methods and is hoping to find further oil in the Black Sea where a strike was made in 1979.
Although conservation measures are understood to have been rigorously applied and economic growth has been sluggish or negative over the past few years, neither energy consumption nor oil consumption has fallen in any significant way in Eastern Europe.
THE THIRD WORLD
The ‘developing countries’ of the third world will account for about 90% of the world's population growth to the year 2000.
During that time these countries' share of world energy consumption will rise from just over one-fifth to almost one-third of total consumption.
This makes them the most important new market for the world's energy industries.
Although production of energy within the LDCs will also increase and this will reduce dependence on imported oil, nevertheless total energy imports will rise by some 2% per annum.
But for this to be achieved there are problems which must be overcome.
These are the problems which the industrialised countries with their skills and financial resources have been able to combat — by making their energy resources stretch further — and the measure of their success is the widening gap in energy efficiency between the industrialised and the developing worlds.
Some 121 countries may be designated ‘developing’ and of this 121, 17 countries account for more than four-fifths of energy consumption.
The developing countries may be divided into the energy exporters, dominated by the OPEC countries and the energy importers, which number about 45, which may be considered as ‘middle income’, as in the case of Argentina, Israel, Kenya, the Philippines and Turkey.
There is also a ‘low income’ grouping of some 40 including such countries as India and Pakistan whose problems are well known and a large number of seldom publicised countries such as Benin, Mali, Chad and Togo.
The highest level of energy demand growth — some 170% — between 1983 and 2000 — will be in the countries of South East Asia, Brunei, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan and Thailand.
A number of these countries are those where the first stages of industrialisation — the establishment of heavy industry and low cost manufacturing of relatively low added value products — are well underway and a firm base of markets within the industrialised world has been established.
Significant increases in energy usage — of some 140% — will occur in Africa and South Asia, the areas where the poorest countries are to be found.
This high level of growth is largely attributable to the current extremely low level of industrialisation.
The problems which affect all these countries to varying degrees, but  particularly the energy importers, relate to the difficulties of adjusting to higher energy prices.
They have lacked both the technical and the financial resources needed to adapt quickly to the energy cost hikes of 1973 and 1979.
At the Munich World Energy Conference Chancellor Schmidt used the example of Costa Rica.
In 1972, 28 kilogrammes of bananas bought one barrel of oil.
In 1980 a barrel of oil cost 420 kilogrammes of bananas.
The developing countries have three needs: to acquire the techniques of energy efficiency, to improve their usership practices in transport, manufacturing industry and agriculture, and to exploit fully their indigenous energy resources.
It has become evident since the second oil shock that the major incentive to energy efficiency is a pricing policy where price is directly related to real cost and value, in other words passing on the rising cost of oil and its products to the end consumer.
Although this has generally happened in the energy-importing less developed countries (LDCs), in many of the energy-exporting LDCs it has not.
Unrealistic prices not related to the long-term supply price of any energy source lead inevitably to excessive and inefficient consumption while rational pricing policies are one of the most important elements in making users accommodate to the harsh realities of the high energy cost environment in which all of us must live.
There are however other elements in the energy efficiency equation.
Users need the knowledge and sometimes the financial incentives to be more efficient.
Thus education, training and easily available technical resources are also necessary.
To impose new patterns of use at government level may, of course, be politically difficult.
According to the World Bank in its report on Energy Transition in the Developing Countries (1984), energy supply has the potential almost to double in the years to 1995 provided that available resources both financial and technical are strategically deployed and realistic pricing policies are established and maintained.
During the remainder of the century some one-third of the increase in energy consumption in the LDCs is likely to be accounted for by oil which means a reduction in its proportion of consumption from 55% today to 43% by the year 2000.
To achieve this will require a significant increase in exploration, mainly in the oil exporting LDCs.
This in its turn requires that the countries concerned make exploration attractive to the oil companies.
LATIN AMERICA
Primary energy demand in Latin America will increase by some 80% between 1983 and the year 2000 with oil remaining the major fuel.
Oil accounted for over 60% of demand in 1983 but this proportion will fall to some 55% by the end of the century due to the faster rate of increase in demand for gas and coal.
Coal will remain a relatively small contributor however at under 10%.
Much of the growth in energy demand will be in the oil exporting countries, particularly Mexico and Venezuela.
The energy exporters are likely to account for more than half the growth in demand to the year 2000 and their share of consumption will increase to almost 50%.
The four major energy importers, Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Colombia, will account for about 40% of the growth in energy demand to the end of the century.
The other countries in Central America and the Caribbean will account for less than 10% of total energy demand growth.
Gas production will grow from some 50 MTOE to around 100 MTOE in Latin America with the largest increases in Argentina, Mexico and Trinidad and about 15% exported mainly from Mexico to the US.
The main contributor to coal production demand will be Colombia as the Cerrejon mine comes on stream.
Nuclear energy will grow considerably but from a low base accounting for some 3% of total energy demand by the year 2000 from programmes underway in Brazil, Argentina and Mexico.
In terms of production Mexico and Venezuela are the energy giants of Latin America.
Mexico was the world's fourth largest oil producer in 1983 while Venezuela was the eighth.
The only other significant oil producer in Latin America has traditionally been Argentina but this has recently been changed by the exploration successes in Brazil.
Brazil is Latin America's largest, most indebted, and most swiftly industrialising country.
Its growth however has been constantly threatened by the size of the oil import bill.
In 1982 crude oil accounted for more than half the total cost of imports.
Brazil is now, however, heading for oil self-sufficiency in the early 1990s and output has tripled since 1979.
The major success of the development of the Campos Basin has made Brazil the third largest oil producer in South America at some 25 million tonnes.
According to Petrobras the state-owned oil company and largest corporation in the southern hemisphere some $8.7 billion in dollars and cruzeiros have been invested in the Campos Basin alone and there are signs that the state may be taking a similar line in developing  Brazil's gas resources for energy.
These to date have been used in small quantities as chemical feedstock.
A project for a 3000 km pipeline to carry gas from the Western Amazon jungle to the industrial south east is under consideration.
Not surprisingly Brazil has the best hydro-electric power potential of any country in the world estimated at over 200,000 MW or around four times the capacity of the UK's national grid.
The Itaipu hydro-electric power project on the Parana river is the largest of its kind in the world and the most expensive, having cost $15.3 billion (£ 12.75 billion).
A joint venture between Brazil and Paraguay it began transmission late in 1984 and has the capacity to produce 12,600 MW with a flow of water through the 18 turbines which is 150 times that of the River Thames.
It is however a controversial project because of the cost of its electricity and the question as to whether it is needed at the present time despite electricity being the main growth area in the Brazilian energy demand picture.
Mexico has the seventh largest oil and gas reserves in the world but the country's comparatively recent admission to the hydrocarbon élite has proved a mixed blessing in the face of the fall in crude prices and a massive debt burden caused by extravagant, ill-managed and grandiose schemes to kick a Third World country into the twentieth century.
Mexico was a net oil importer in 1974 but is currently the world's fourth largest producer.
Oil provides 70% of Mexico's export revenues ($ 16.6 billion in 1984) and is vital to the country's economic health and to the servicing of its massive $96 billion foreign debt.
US customers take some 50% of Mexican oil exports.
Although Mexico was not an OPEC member in November 1984 it cut exports in line with OPEC reductions to help maintain prices and has generally taken care not to step out of line, though it has stated that it would act unilaterally to defend its market position.
In per capita terms, Venezuela's long history as an oil exporter — between 1929 and 1969 it was the world's leading exporter — has made it the richest country in South America.
Venezuela too has serious debt problems which were largely caused by OPEC production cuts and falling prices but has the distinction of being the only Latin American country to reschedule its foreign debt without an IMF loan.
Under Venezuela's five year plan for 1984–1989 the profile of debt payments allows for annual growth of 2.5 — 5.5% but whether this can be achieved is highly dependent on oil prices and quotas since oil accounts for over 90% of exports.
After Itaipu Venezuela's Guri hydro-electric scheme is the largest in South America.
The dam on the Caroni River has a 9,000 megawatt capacity and is intended to supply 60% of Venezuela's electricity by 1986.
SOUTH ASIA
The countries grouped under the title ‘South Asia’— India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka — are developing countries without exportable energy resources.
This region is the poorest in the world as regards per capita commercial energy consumption.
In terms of recoverable energy reserves India has the tenth largest coal reserves in the world while Pakistan has gas reserves almost as large as the UK, yet economic growth in both countries is hampered by recurrent energy shortages — particularly electricity — while the cost of importing oil is a severe drain on weak exchequers.
Between 1979 and 1983 this region experienced the highest level of energy consumption growth of all among the Third World regions as considered in this study (Latin America, Africa, South East Asia, Middle East) and between 1983 and 2000 the level of increase will be exceeded only by South East Asia.
The reason for this however is that the base is low and unless population growth is strictly controlled this increase will result in little or no per capita benefit.
In the region as a whole coal consumption (much of it in India) accounts for more than half energy consumption.
India's large, well used coal reserves produced some 120 million tonnes in 1984 and it is planned to increase production by more open cast mining.
It is however to oil production that India is looking.
In 1983 oil production rose by 24% to almost 26 million tonnes, thus meeting 65% of India's oil requirements with consequent benefit to the trade balance.
India's aim is oil self-sufficiency.
The main oil fields in production are the Bombay High off the west coast and some onshore fields in Gujerat and Assam but with consumption expected to rise at some 6% per year this aim is unlikely to be achieved without significant new discoveries.
Accordingly a huge onshore and offshore exploration and production effort is planned but finance may prove a problem.
India also has gas reserves off Bombay and it is planned to lay an 1800 km pipeline which will supply six fertiliser plants costing $3 billion — which are to be built with international support.
Despite its energy resources India still has electricity generation problems with many parts of the country frequently hit by power shortages.
10,000 MW of nuclear power to provide 10% of capacity is planned for the end of the century.
Pakistan, despite its gas resources, has an ongoing energy crisis.
A study in 1983 suggested that unless new investments were made in natural gas the gap between supply and demand could be as large as 40% by the mid-1980s.
Over 40% of Pakistan's energy needs are supplied by gas, 36% by oil, 16% by hydro electricity and 5% by coal.
The 10 million cubic feet of gas represents easily Pakistan's major energy resource but substantial investments will be required in compressors for the Sui field if production is to meet demand.
Similarly large investments are also necessary in electricity generation.
The problem here is that neither of Pakistan's options — coal or nuclear — are particularly attractive.
The coal is of poor quality while the proposed second nuclear station at Chasma would cost some $2 billion.
To pay for it Pakistan would certainly require Arab support.
Power generation problems, which have a damaging effect on industrial growth are endemic within South Asia.
Bangladesh, suffering a 15% per annum population migration to the cities, coupled with a population which has grown from 75 million to 90 million over the past decade is a further example.
Here it is reported that in cities whole neighbourhoods illegally tap overhead lines, part of the reason for the fact that some 40% of gross energy output disappears and revenue always lags well behind billings.
SOUTH EAST ASIA
The countries considered under this regional grouping are Brunei, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan and Thailand.
South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Thailand and Singapore are high growth countries without significant developed energy resources while Malaysia, Brunei, Indonesia and the Philippines have rapidly developing economies and substantial energy resources.
The high level of economic growth means that, for the remainder of the century, this region will record the highest level of energy demand increase of any Third World region.
During this period the contribution of oil will fall significantly from 73% of demand in 1983 to 51% in the year 2000.
The fuel which will make the largest contribution to energy demand growth will be coal though there will be significant growth in both gas and nuclear power consumption.
Where no significant indigenous coal is available (and this applies to Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan and South Korea) the emphasis will be on importing coal.
Coal will be the primary source of electricity generation within the region though in Malaysia and Thailand gas will be significantly used for electricity generation since this represents a more cost effective option than importing coal and exporting LNG.
Since Taiwan and South Korea have neither indigenous coal nor natural gas, nuclear power will be the favoured electricity generation path.
Taiwan will also be a major importer of Australian coal.
As well as developing gas for local use, Indonesia, Brunei, Malaysia and Thailand will also export to Japan, South Korea and Taiwan.
The region's oil production is accounted for by Indonesia, Malaysia and Brunei.
After meeting domestic needs any surplus will tend to be exported to Japan.
Malaysia has the fourteenth largest gas reserves in the world at some 926 MTOE.
The export of LNG to Japan began early 1983.
This marked the completion of the country's largest industrial project, costing some $2 billion, the Bintulu LNG project and over the next 20 years five Malaysian LNG tankers will be built.
Malaysia also has indigenous oil though reserves are not large.
Crude production in 1982 was some 15 million tonnes with demand at 8 million tonnes and oil provides some 93% of commercial energy needs.
Indonesia has significant coal reserves and large oil and gas reserves.
It is the world's largest LNG exporter and Asia's main oil exporter.
Indonesia's  oil industry has suffered from the fall in crude prices and the reduction in demand for OPEC oil.
Gas export earnings however have grown with increasing exports to Japan and South Korea though oil remains the main export earner at some 60% of export revenues.
The dangers for Indonesia are further reductions in the OPEC oil quota and swiftly rising domestic consumption — increasing at some 10% per year.
Indonesia also has a large electrification programme underway involving hydro-electric and thermal power station projects but these and a number of large oil and petrochemical projects are threatened by balance of payments problems.
Thailand's onshore oil and comparatively recently discovered offshore gas hold the prospect of energy self-sufficiency as well as providing a tremendous boost to the country's already high level of industrial growth.
In 1983 gas supplied 8% of energy demand and this is anticipated to rise to over 20% by 1990 by which time dependence on imported oil and gas is planned to fall from 83% in 1983 to 52% in 1990.
In the Philippines the aim is to reduce the heavy dependence on imported oil.
Indigenous oil discoveries proved disappointing and efforts have been directed towards hydro-electric power, nuclear and geothermal energy.
Other renewable options — biomass and solar power — are also being explored.
In Brunei oil and gas accounts for well over 90% of exports.
With its small population, proven gas reserves of some 182 MTOE, and significant oil reserves, Brunei has the characteristics of a Middle Eastern oil state and in per capita income terms is among the richest nations on earth.
AFRICA
Africa is characterised by rampant population growth, uncontrolled urban expansion, declining irrigated land resulting in food shortages and progressive deforestation, some of which results from use of wood as an energy source.
The overall level of per capita income and energy use is among the lowest in the world but huge differences exist between countries, largely based on energy resources.
Comparatively speaking the level of oil dependence is low, at 42% in 1983 but the picture is distorted by the high level of coal consumption in South Africa (one of the largest energy consumers) and for most countries oil dependence is high.
Energy consumption will increase by some 140% in the years to the end of the century with oil's proportion falling to just under 30% mainly through increasing exploitation of Africa's under-utilised gas reserves.
There will also be an increase in the proportion of total energy demand accounted for by coal.
Over 80% of Africa's proved oil reserves lie in the four OPEC countries Nigeria, Algeria, Libya and Gabon and these countries will account for over 50% of oil consumption in the year 2000.
Although Africa's gas reserves are far larger than Europe's, African production is less than one-fifth of European production and in 1983 indigenous consumption accounted for less than 10% of energy demand.
Proved gas reserves are largely concentrated in the three major oil producing countries, Algeria, Libya and Nigeria and, for these countries, offer great potential if an infrastructure can be developed.
Algeria is one of the world's leading LNG exporters today and as crude oil reserves run down and domestic consumption increases, gas will become the major export commodity.
Algeria also has the Trans-Mediterranean pipeline to northern Italy, but exports by both methods have been hit by contractual wrangles and by the European gas glut.
As a major oil exporter — Algeria is OPEC's tenth largest producer — the country has been adversely affected by the fall in crude demand.
However the fall in crude production has been partly mitigated by an increase in condensate output and in overseas sales of LPG.
Algeria is responsible for 70% of Africa's gas production but in 1983 oil production at just over 40 million tonnes was double gas production.
This proportion will change with gas becoming the major energy export in the early 1990s.
Algeria is the only African country using natural gas significantly at home where it supplies over half the country's energy needs.
Nigeria was Africa's main crude producer in 1983 at 61 million tonnes, 40 million tonnes less than at its peak of 114 million tonnes in 1979.
With  its large population and massive dependence on foreign exchange from oil exports Nigeria is regarded as the most vulnerable of the OPEC countries and has constantly battled to increase its production quota above the 1.3 million barrels per day laid down by OPEC.
As stated above production has almost halved since 1979 and at the same time the price of its premium Bonny light crude has fallen from $40 per barrel to $28.65 and is always threatened by the North Sea producers.
Since oil still accounts for over 25% of foreign exchange earnings and some 65% of total revenue the effect of the past five years has been almost cataclysmic.
Nigeria's proved oil reserves are some 1.1 billion tonnes with a further 0.9 billion tonnes in the probable category.
Proved gas reserves are some 1.2 BTOE and the gas resource base could be far higher.
These huge reserves are largely unexploited — and hardly any infrastructure exists, though a planned $ 1 billion gas gathering system to transport gas from Escravos to a new power station near Lagos is planned.
Currently vast amounts of associated gas are being flared when development could transform Nigeria's energy position and economic prospects.
The exploitation of Nigeria's natural gas is particularly important in view of the threat to oil exports posed by increasing home consumption.
Libya was Africa's second largest crude producer in 1983 at just over 50 million tonnes, half the 1979 level.
Libya is OPEC's sixth largest oil producer and holds significantly the largest reserves in Africa (the eleventh largest in the world).
Oil accounts for more than 50% of the gross domestic product and more than 90% of export revenue.
Like Nigeria, Libya has been badly affected by growing North Sea production as has the development of its oil industry.
Additionally the political atmosphere has not been conducive to encouraging oil companies to engage in active exploration and development though this still continues despite the pull-out of Exxon and Mobil.
Egypt has the second largest population in Africa (after Nigeria) and in 1983 was the fourth largest oil producer.
Proven reserves of oil are some 650 million tonnes with modest proven gas reserves of 90 MTOE while oil production in 1983 was approaching 40 million tonnes.
Of this some one-third is exported, mainly to Israel and the USA.
This earns some US$ 2.3 billion per year but the problem is that domestic consumption is rising at about 12% per year and this is threatening exports.
The problem is exacerbated by the fact that consumers pay only about 15% of the world price, due to huge government subsidies, the reduction of which would be politically delicate.
Two courses of action to remedy the situation are therefore being attempted.
The first is to increase production through new discoveries — the  second is to encourage alternative fuels.
The official plan is for oil's share of consumption to rise from its present 50% or so to 60% in 1990, then to drop back to 40% by the year 2000 through increased use of natural gas both in the home and for electricity generation.
In addition eight nuclear power stations are planned to reduce further the need for oil fired stations.
Africa's main energy consumer is South Africa which accounts for about one-quarter of oil consumption.
South Africa is one of the world's major coal provinces and a significant coal consumer.
The country's political isolation and lack of indigenous oil has made coal liquefaction a major technology.
The world oil glut has had an adverse effect on South Africa's grandiose ambitions as a coal exporter and also on its synthetic fuels business.
South Africa is nevertheless one of the world's major coal exporters with exports of over 30 million tonnes.
Fuel production outside South Africa, African OPEC countries and Egypt is small.
Oil has been discovered in Benin, Chad, Niger, Ivory Coast and Sudan but exploitation is in its infancy.
Considerable undeveloped coal reserves exist in Botswana, Niger and Tanzania but production is negligible.
Kenya epitomises the African problem with transport, industry and electricity still 80% dependent upon oil.
In addition high usage of wood for fuel is a major cause of deforestation accounting for 75% of 1983 energy consumption.
In 1983 some 22 million tonnes of wood was used.
With imported oil absorbing 40% of foreign exchange, energy is, with the related problem of population growth, the major barrier to economic growth.
Kenya is looking to hydro and geothermal energy to ease the problem but the difficulty is to fund expensive projects.
Kenya's hydro-electric resource potential is some 700 MW but construction of the 140 MW Kiambere dam has been delayed by lack of finance and will not be available until at least 1988.
But such projects and a successful geothermal programme which now accounts for more than 10% of Kenya's electricity will do little to reduce the oil dependence which helps keep Kenya and many other African countries caught in an energy trap.
THE MIDDLE EAST
The Middle East is the most energy rich region of the world, possessing over half the world's proven oil reserves and a quarter of the world's gas reserves.
With oil consumption in the Middle East accounting for only 3% of world demand, or 15% of home production this region remains the world's major energy exporter as well as being OPEC's power base, through Saudi Arabia, Iran, Iraq and Kuwait.
Largely through these four energy giants but with a significant contribution through the United Arab Emirates, the Middle East accounts for proven reserves of 50.4 billion tonnes of oil and the gas equivalent of 20 billion tonnes of oil.
As well as being oil rich the Middle East has other advantages.
The geological formations mean that the production rate per oil well is very high, and this in conjunction with the proximity of the wells to deep water marine terminals, means that transportation and production costs are low.
The Middle East accounts for about one-third of Western Europe's imports, just over 10% of the USA's, 65% of Japan's and 39% of Latin America's.
A large proportion of these vital exports pass through the Straits of Hormuz, yet despite attempts by the participants in the Iran-Iraq war to restrict or even stop the movement of tankers this has not occurred and the earlier fear of a serious disruption to supplies has largely abated.
Energy demand is likely to increase by some 90% in the Middle East over the rest of the century as industrialisation continues in the major oil exporters.
Oil will remain the major fuel but the most significant growth will be in gas consumption as more use is made of what has traditionally been a vastly abundant and wasted fuel.
Saudi Arabia, accounting for almost half of the Middle East's proven oil reserves and over a quarter of world proven reserves, has the power to insist upon its rôle as OPEC's swing producer.
Despite its huge revenue reductions in the years following 1979, and a budget deficit second only to that of the US, Saudi Arabia's major projects continue.
The Master Gas System (MGS) seeks to use Saudi Arabia's associated gas reserves and gas is used to fuel power stations, desalination plants and new hydrocarbon based industries.
The second phase of the MGS was completed in 1982 at a cost of $10 billion with a capacity to process gas associated with output from the huge Ghawar, Abquaiq, Berri, Damman and Harmaliyah fields.
From the approximately 3 billion cubic feet per day of sour gas produced, the MGS can make 375 million cubic feet per day of ethane to be used as feedstock for petrochemical projects, 2 billion cubic feet per day of methane for fertilizer and methanol plants as well as fuel for basic industries, power  generation and water desalination, 350,000 b/d of natural gas liquids (NGL) and 3,700 tonnes per day of sulphur.
Saudi Arabia is the leading exporter of LPG.
In addition Saudi Arabia has three joint ventures for the export of refined products involving refineries at Yanbu, Jubail and Rabigh.
On completion these three projects will triple Saudi Arabia's export capacity.
At the same time Aramco's refinery is undergoing an $85 million modernisation.
The importance of gas to Saudi Arabia's industrialisation prompted a major search for non-associated gas in the early eighties.
Some sources have stated that sufficient non-associated gas will be available by 1986 to supply all Saudi Arabia's gas needs even if there were no oil production (and thus no associated gas).
Iran is the second largest of the Middle Eastern countries in terms of total proven hydrocarbon reserves.
Third largest in terms of oil, it has easily the largest gas resources in the Middle East being second only to the USSR on a world scale.
Iran's oil production from a high of 295 billion tonnes in 1976 reached a low of 65.8 million tonnes in 1981 but by 1983 had risen to 122.4 million tonnes or 2.465 million barrels per day.
Iran has consistently produced more than its quota, securing exports by discounting below the OPEC release price and though it has benefited in terms of revenues in the short term, has certainly been partly instrumental in weakening the cartel.
Iraq's oil production is some 1 million barrels per day less than Iran's but its war effort has been supported by aid from Saudi Arabia and Kuwait both by direct practical aid and by gifts of oil, sent out from Saudi and Kuwaiti ports, but marketed by Iraq.
Iraq has suffered from the closure of the oil pipeline across Syria which deprived the country of some $5 billion per year in revenue.
Kuwait, with its huge oil reserves is second only to Saudi Arabia's and because of its limited domestic needs has moved significantly into ‘the downstream’ part of the business through the Kuwait Petroleum Corporation (KPC).
Set up in 1980 to turn Kuwait's oil and gas interests into an international company, the company has bought up most of Gulf Oil's European assets.
The rationale is to secure markets for Kuwait's oil production and refined products.
With Kuwait's refinery capacity going up to 664,000 barrels of oil per day by the end of 1986, KPC's policy is to look for further outlets.
The United Arab Emirates, notably Abu Dhabi, Dubai, and Sharjah (there are seven emirates) have not been much affected by the Iran/Iraq war.
Combined production in 1984 was some 57 million tonnes — about the same  as Iraq's.
Abu Dhabi has major oil reserves which account for some 8% of
Qatar, which produced some 20 million tonnes of oil in 1984, and exports steel, fertilizers and petrochemicals, plans to spend some $4–6 billion over the next seven years on a project to export liquefied gas from its vast North Field.
Discovered in 1972 and containing 110–112 trillion cubic feet, the field is one of the biggest in the world.
The Sultanate of Oman produced about the same amount of oil in 1984 as Qatar.
Oman is not a member of OPEC but is a member of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) and is thus sensitive to the interests of other Gulf nations like Saudi Arabia.
Oil hydrocarbons account for 96% of exports and 80% of government revenue in Oman.
AUSTRALASIA
Australasia, comprising Australia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea and the South West Pacific Islands is dominated, in energy terms by resource rich Australia.
Australia has major coal, gas and uranium reserves but is less well endowed with oil.
Between 1983 and the year 2000 the Australian economy will grow at around 3% per year and energy demand by between 3% and 4%.
The proportion of oil will decrease significantly however due to an increase in coal usage to make coal the country's main fuel by the year 2000 and there will be a huge increase in gas consumption.
Oil demand will, however continue to increase at between 1% and 2% per year.
In a country as large as Australia the need for transportation fuels is paramount and even to keep growth down to this level will mean continuing efforts at economy by use of smaller cars and the replacement of oil-fired by coal-fired power stations.
Australia is some 65% self-sufficient in oil, 90% of which comes from the Bass Strait field.
Even to maintain this level of self-sufficiency a major exploration and production effort will be required with the drilling of some 250 wells a year costing some A$1 billion.
A major discovery was made at Jabirn in the Timor Sea in 1983 but it has been estimated that similar discoveries on a yearly basis would be necessary if increasing oil imports are not to be required in the future to maintain present levels of consumption.
Significant exploration and development is underway to exploit Australia's substantial gas resources.
The country's largest energy prospect is the A$11 billion North West Shelf gas venture off the coast of Western Australia and potential is said to exist for further large gas and liquid discoveries in the Cooper Basin which involves the development of 14 new gas fields and 6 new oil fields.
Australia could become a sizeable gas exporter and part of the North West Shelf venture involves the supply of 6 million tonnes of LNG to Japan.
Australia is one of the world's major coal provinces and exports will increase significantly during the rest of the century.
Currently the export trade has been hit by lower prices for both steam coal and coking coal but this has not prevented a number of large and expensive development projects aimed at significantly increasing output.
New Zealand's lack of indigenous oil together with heavy transportation fuel requirements meant an oil import bill of some NZ$1.3 billion in 1983.
A large exploration programme both on and offshore is in progress, though  the level of activity has varied considerably.
Large gas resources have been discovered and this has encouraged the oil search.
The first commercial oil was discovered at the McKee onshore field in 1980 and production of some 5000 barrels per day is hoped for in 1985.
On the liquids front condensate is being produced at the Kapuni on-shore gas field.
An interesting and ambitious solution to the oil import bill problem is to substitute synthetic petrol made from natural gas.
A US$ 1700 million synthetic fuels plant is under construction which will make use of a new process by which natural gas is converted to methanol using a catalyst.
This is then made into a gasoline which existing car engines will be able to use without modification.
In addition cars are being converted to run on compressed natural gas (CNG) and it is hoped that 200,000 will have been modified by 1990.
Most of New Zealand's electricity is produced hydro-electrically and New Zealand is also at the forefront of geothermal energy utilisation where steam and hot water are used to generate electricity and also for direct industrial application.
In Australasia as a whole, gas is the fuel of the future, its contribution to energy demand rising from 15% to 33% by the year 2000 while the main challenge is to reduce the need for imported oil by increased exploration and by the substitution of more abundant fuels.
FUTURE ISSUES
ENERGY — HOW WE USE IT
THE essence of any energy system is the conversion of energy from one form to another.
By means of photosynthesis, plants convert the radiant energy of the sun into chemical energy.
Thus the burning of coal formed as it is of vegetable matter, is a stage in the conversion of solar energy.
The First Law of Thermodynamics basically states that energy has never been observed to be created or destroyed.
Thus, when one energy form is converted to another, output is the same as input.
However, some forms of energy are more useful than others.
The heat energy within a kettle of boiling water is not lost when that kettle is poured into a bath of cold water but the water in the bath is not hot enough to make tea (it is ‘low grade heat’).
The energy, once transferred to the bath is in the form of low grade heat and therefore virtually useless.
Conversion efficiency as a percentage is therefore usually expressed as: or the proportion of the useful energy produced to the energy content of the fuel that produced it.
The conversion efficiency of the process of electricity generation using fossil fuels is between 30% and 40% when at its most efficient.
This means that for every 100 units of energy in the coal which heats the boiler that makes the steam that drives the turbo generator only 30 units of energy in the form of electricity are produced.
Making electricity is, in fact, the main use of the primary fuels — accounting for a third of the world's total energy input — the main fuels used being coal (29%), oil (26%), hydro (22%), gas (13%) and nuclear (10%).
By the year 2000 coal and nuclear will be the two leading fuels for electricity generation, accounting together for about 65% of the total.
But electricity generation is only a stage in the energy chain; the electricity is then used in industry and in the home for lighting, heating and powering machinery.
The electricity generated, however, due to the amount of heat lost in the process of generation (mainly at the stage of converting heat energy of steam into the mechanical energy of the turbine) only represents about 30% of the energy used in the power station.
Even more is lost during the transmission process; the lower the voltage the more energy is dissipated.
Combined heat and power schemes attempt to use the heat wasted in the process of electricity generation but this is a difficult process because the heat is low grade heat.
Despite the considerable losses of useful energy in the conversion process, electricity is indispensable for its flexibility of use.
The main final use of energy is in the industrial sector where 37% of all energy use occurs, while transport accounts for 33% and the domestic/commercial/agricultural sector 30%.
The difficulties involved in reducing the world's oil dependence are clearly seen in the fact that the transport sector is almost completely oil fuelled.
The large amount of oil still used in power stations is more easily reduced since many alternatives are possible.
CONSERVATION
Still the fifth fuel or an idea whose time has gone?
It was huge rises in energy costs following the oil shock of 1973/4 that made conservation and energy efficiency, ‘ideas whose time had come’.
But since 1981 oil prices have weakened.
Have the arguments for energy saving weakened too?
A look at the last ten years or so, clearly demonstrates the magnitude and the velocity of the winds of change that have blown through the energy business.
But how has the notion of conservation been affected?
Before the first oil shock of 1973/4 when prices quadrupled — conservation was a seldom used word with little media appeal which meant curbing our voracious appetites for energy, to slow the depletion rate of finite and diminishing fossil fuel resources.
Following this, conservation became an economic imperative, a way of coping with massive cost increases, and the effects were startling.
The measure of conservation is the amount of energy required to produce a single unit of economic growth.
Until the early seventies this relationship, known as ‘energy coefficient’ was regarded as a ‘lock step’relationship — a certain level of economic growth required a certain amount of fuel consumption — but recent history has disproved this.
The major, Western industrial nations are today using 17% less energy per unit of economic growth than they were in 1973.
This is a vast amount of energy saved, sufficient to justify conservation being referred to as ‘the fifth fuel’.
The reduction in energy intensity resulted from energy efficiency improvements (performing the same task using less energy), energy conservation measures (making do with less energy) and shifts in the mix of goods and services produced to favour those which require less energy input.
Steel and shipbuilding have been replaced by low energy industries — electronics, microprocessors, information technology and various service industries.
It was the rise in world crude prices which brought energy conservation seriously into view.
It is therefore logical that energy efficiency and reduction of oil use have become inseparable.
Oil is the most versatile, flexible and valuable of the primary fuels and part of the process of improved use of energy over the past decade has been for users to switch to other fuels to generate heat, thus saving oil for the  transportation and speciality uses for which there are no cost effective substitutes.
Since 1973 oil consumption has decreased by some 40%.
On the other hand consumption of petrol has actually increased.
Although the Yom Kippur War triggered the first oil price shock, this was not the cause.
The cause was oil supply being overtaken by demand and excessive dependence on one particular geographical location — the Middle East — for that supply.
The message of the first oil shock was driven home by the second, when the Iranian revolution caused a further doubling of world crude prices.
Since 1979, a number of factors have combined to create a situation in the oil business which is the opposite of that in 1973 — a glut of oil on the world market and falling crude prices.
The factors which caused this ‘volte-face’ were: the world economic recession, the increase in energy supplies from outside OPEC and the effect of energy conservation measures.
The original thinking behind conservation — those economic imperatives to be more efficient with energy and use less — was based on an outlook of steeply rising prices.
Where does this leave conservation in 1985?
Energy conservation has changed.
In the first instance it was exemplified in the title of the campaign introduced in the UK in 1977 called ‘Save It’.
The emphasis was on using less.
This ascetic approach to fuel saving, is, of course, fine during times of shortage, but more difficult to promote during times of plenty.
An approach more suited to the present day is advocated by the UK Energy Efficiency Office which promotes the view that greater efficiency in energy use can play a major rôle is raising industry's profitability.
When launching the Energy Efficiency Office, UK Energy Secretary, Peter Walker said Britain could save £7 billion per year through greater efficiency in energy use.
His contention was that £100 million per day is being spent in the UK on fuel, £20 million of which is wasted.
Such figures are not fanciful — the example of the motor car is a useful demonstration of the vast effect of a single range of efficiency improvements.
A decade ago, a small car was regarded as highly economical if it was capable of averaging 30 mpg while a large family car was regarded as having acceptable fuel consumption at 20 mpg.
Today, small cars are claiming 50 mpg and more.
Such huge improvements in fuel economy have been achieved through greater engine efficiency and reduction of air resistance.
Looking ahead, engines with a high degree of electronic control through microchip technology, built of lighter materials and to low drag designs using CAD techniques will certainly lower consumption significantly further.
Being more competitive in industry is not the only reason for being energy efficient.
Although prices are falling, in absolute terms energy is still expensive.
Although there have been recent price falls it should be remembered that in 1973 crude oil cost $2 a barrel.
Neither can the oldest conservation arguments be ignored.
There is the future to consider.
It makes sense not to waste what is irreplaceable.
Conservation gains have become integral to long-term planning cycles.
Further energy efficiency improvements are vital to the achievement of acceptable levels of economic growth throughout the industrialised world.
Between 1983 and 1990 the industrialised countries are expected to make an efficiency gain equivalent to more than ten times the present yearly energy consumption of the UK.
In other words, without continued energy efficiency improvements, Europe, North America, Japan and Australasia would need the equivalent of an extra 1,300 million tonnes of oil over the next 7 years.
Conservation or energy efficiency is still the fifth fuel.
The figures are big enough to put potential (and expected) savings on a par with actual consumption of the other four primary fuels — coal, oil, gas and nuclear.
But so far it is primarily energy price increases which have provided the incentive to use less rather than the opportunity to cut costs.
Market related pricing has shown itself to be effective in ensuring that consumers are aware of the real value of the resources they use, not only as it affects energy consumption but also in the realms of energy efficiency investment.
The problem is that short-term falls in the price of energy can decrease the pace of investment in long-term energy savings.
This would be a mistake.
The potential savings are gigantic.
It has been calculated that if every driver in the United States reduced petrol consumption by 5%, and every family lowered its central heating temperature by 6 degrees and raised the air conditioning temperature by the same amount, the saving would be the equivalent of the total oil consumption for the continent of Africa.
The major industrial nations have been lowering the energy intensity of their economies since the 1970s; the degree to which this will continue is  central to any energy consumption projection.
Further reductions in energy intensity will take place, the actual level will depend on energy prices, the changing balance of energy intensive to non-energy intensive industries in the industrialised world and simply the changes in the habits of energy users and their consciousness or otherwise of the potential of ‘the fifth fuel’.
In the annual review (July 1984) of the members of the International Energy Agency,(which was the body established to co-ordinate the response of the industrialised, non-Communist countries to the 1974 oil shock) it was stated that, ‘long-term prospects for meeting energy requirements and maintaining energy security are now better than at any time since 1973.
There has been a substantial improvement in the efficiency with which energy is used in most IEA countries.
It would however, be premature to conclude that there can be a relaxation of efforts.’
Energy intensity in the IEA countries has fallen by 30.4% between 1973 and 1983.
However it was reported that member countries considered oil and energy problems less urgent than in the past.
This resulted in a movement away from some conservation/efficiency programmes.
There were, for example, fewer applications for government aid under retrofit and oil conversion programmes and there was also an identifiable trend back towards bigger, more powerful cars in many countries, particularly in the US.
Further evidence of slackening efforts was the reduction in a number of countries' energy efficiency budgets.
For example the decision in Austria to stop subsidies for industrial conversion from oil and LPG to non-oil energy sources; the termination of the West German home retrofit programme; the Netherlands' exclusion of owner-occupied dwellings from eligibility for financial assistance with energy saving in 1982; the reduction in the US of funding for energy conservation programmes.
There is however another side to the picture: Australia, Canada, Japan, Luxembourg, Portugal, Turkey and the UK have increased their fuel efficiency and oil substitution budgets or, alternatively, launched new policy initiatives.
In Australia the scope of the national energy conservation programme has been broadened to include not only petrol saving but the conservation of all forms of energy.
In January 1983 a new law came into effect in Austria to promote district heating and combined heat and power generation.
In Belgium tax deductions for industrial conservation investments were raised in 1982, while Sweden has increased a 25% investment subsidy for changing from oil to peat burning.
A new bill in Italy will provide incentives for conversion and fuel switching.
The success of conservation measures has varied considerably.
According to a Review of Member States Energy Policies prepared for the European Economic Council of Ministers, the UK, Ireland and Greece were the three least energy efficient nations in Europe, the two best energy savers being France and Denmark.
For example while Denmark had saved 30% and France 25% of energy in the industrial and housing sectors the UK had managed only 17%.
Energy conservation success in France is attributed to a high level of investment in energy saving as a result of a clear and highly visible policy and, as with nuclear power, centralised responsibility.
Energy conservation is and should remain the fifth fuel.
Along with the gradual movement away from fossil fuels and the refinement of nuclear technologies and the development of effective renewable energy strategies it is the only rational course for the future of energy supply.
TRANSPORT
A quarter of the world's energy (excluding Communist countries) is used for transport.
90% of this energy comes from oil and the main usage sector is road transport.
This means that over 20% of the world's oil consumption is burnt in vehicle engines while in industrialised-countries the proportion is far higher.
Increased world usage of motor cars is an inevitable consequence of the industrialisation of the LDCs.
Present ownership levels in developing countries are very low compared to levels in industrialised countries.
In Canada and the United States there is roughly a car to every two persons, in Japan six persons, in Brazil 15 persons, in Colombia 32, Indonesia 207, India 786 and Bangladesh 1,981.
Reducing oil consumption in the heating and electricity generation sectors is straightforward in that other fuels may be substituted.
With the use of oil as a transport fuel for cars, things are not so easy.
In the face of inexorable increases in the demand for transport for the domestic user as a consequence of economic growth and population growth, three methods of reducing oil consumption present themselves.
First and most radical, a new means of propulsion other than the internal combustion engine might be considered.
Secondly, new fuels for the internal combustion engine which do not involve the depletion of vital and limited energy resources.
Thirdly, continuing to use oil fuelled internal combustion engines to drive cars but making the engines more efficient.
(A further alternative would be the abolition of personal private transport but since the flexibility offered by private transport is obviously much prized in all societies this alternative is not considered further.
The energy saving advantages of rail transport, particularly when electrically powered, are, by virtue of numbers carried, obvious.)
The great advantage of an engine fuelled by petroleum is the high energy density of the fuel.
Where particularly high energy fuels are a necessity — for example in aircraft — the only practical fuel is kerosene (natural or synthetic).
For surface transport, although an equally high energy density fuel is unnecessary, an effective method of energy storage is vital.
The following methods of energy storage have been tested — compressed air, fly wheels, heat energy in molten salts or hot refractory oxides, and rechargeable batteries.
A number of these methods can be eliminated if conditions such as a minimum range requirement, ease of recharging and safety of operation are demanded.
Compressed air does not have sufficient energy density for  useful range: a flywheel would have to rotate at too high a speed for safety to ensure adequate range; storing heat energy is limited by the temperature of the working fluid and by losses due to conduction.
Rechargeable battery driven cars have attracted publicity for many years, particularly since they are in regular use in businesses where a great deal of starting and stopping is necessary.
Electricity driven vehicles fulfil all the basic requirements of the consumer except that, so far, no battery offering a range comparable with that of a car has yet been made.
Using lead/acid or nickel/iron cells a range of 100 kilometres between rechargings cannot be exceeded without using batteries with too high a weight as a ratio to total vehicle weight.
However, even in the present stage of battery technology and without recourse to any of the many new battery types under test at present it is estimated that due to the preponderance of short trips (this is in an industrialised country equivalent in size to the UK) 70% of present fuel consumption in cars could be substituted by use of battery vehicles.
One significant advantage of electric vehicles is that their widespread use would make far better use of off-peak electricity.
This is because electricity generation is far more efficient when demand is consistent and the fact that recharging would take place at night plus the fact that peak transport demand is generally in summer, would mean that more generating plant could operate consistently at full load thus lowering the unit cost of electricity.
A further advantage of electric vehicles is their lack of effect on the environment.
If we look far enough ahead electric vehicles are eventually likely to replace the internal combustion engine but this will probably be far in the future for a number of reasons.
Firstly battery vehicles are much inferior in performance and range to internal combustion (IC) vehicles.
Secondly the changeover would require such vast investment in new manufacturing and refuelling infrastructure that the incentive of a huge increase in fuel costs for IC vehicles would be necessary to render the switch economically viable.
The use of electric vehicles this century will be very limited.
Turning to the use of fuels for IC vehicles which do not use up vital oil reserves or which may be used when oil is no longer available, the use of hydrogen has been suggested as one of the answers to future transport fuel needs.
As a constituent of water, resources of hydrogen are virtually inexhaustible; the problem however is extracting it.
Produced by electrolysis too much energy would be used up in the process to make it economic while the other method suggested by supporters of the ‘hydrogen economy’— thermal dissociation of water from the heat output of a nuclear reactor is neither a tried nor tested technology.
Methanol could well become a significant fuel for transportation and is already being produced from natural gas in New Zealand.
It has been predicted by motor industry scientists that by the year 2000 only half of cars will still use petrol, with methanol the next largest power source followed by diesel, liquefied petroleum gas and alcohol produced by biomass.
The main means of producing methanol suggested is from coal.
Diesel cars have many advantages over petrol driven cars in that they use less fuel, have a longer working life, and are more reliable and cheaper to maintain.
Diesel usage growth has however been restricted by the lack of performance in terms of acceleration as compared with petrol driven cars.
Although this obstacle is being eliminated by improved technology, the diesel car market requires the onset of higher oil prices to reach its full potential.
Since 1981 for example penetration of the new car market in the US has fallen from 4.4% to 1.5% in 1983.
The growth of synfuel industries during the latter years of the twentieth century and the gradual increase of the contribution to oil demand made by these oil shale, tar sand, coal based fuels mean an extension of the life of the IC engine probably well into the mid-21st century.
Thus the IC car will certainly still dominate private personal transport, in the year 2000 but changes will be seen in the nature of the car — in its size, efficiency and economy.
Changes in aerodynamics, lighter alloys in engines and leaner fuel consumption will be the main features.
In the area of economy the microprocessor will have a growing effect, enabling engines to be programmed for optimum performance under different driving conditions.
There will also be changes to accommodate the use of synthetic fuels.
Car fuel systems and carburettors must be redesigned for alcohol driven cars, which require fuel tanks double the size of petrol driven cars.
Efficiency improvements in cars are likely to be responsible for significant conservation of fuel in the next 10 years.
In Western Europe it is estimated that new cars will become, on average, 2% more fuel efficient per year to 1990, Europe's motor manufacturers having given the commitment to governments to improve the fuel efficiency of their 1985 models by 10% over the 1978 efficiency level.
In addition to improvements in fuel consumption by means of improved design, computer control, weight reduction and increased engine and transmission efficiency, fuel is likely to be conserved by the more efficient use of vehicles.
This may be achieved through better driving habits, improved traffic flow systems and road networks and car pooling.
ENERGY AND THE ENVIRONMENT
Since 1980 a new environmental public enemy number one has replaced nuclear power.
‘Acid rain’ has been identified as the cause of a pollution threat to forests and lakes throughout the industrialised world.
‘Acid rain’ is reckoned by many to be caused when the gases from fossil-fuelled power stations, oil refineries, car exhausts, smelters and factories — sulphur dioxide and the nitrogen oxides — combine in the atmosphere with moisture to form sulphuric and nitric acids.
All rain is naturally acidic.
Acidity is reckoned on the pH scale of acidity and alkalinity such that distilled water scores 7 at the neutral extreme and battery acid scores 1.
Any water with a pH of below 5–6 is usually reckoned as an acid.
In West Germany rain with a pH of 4.0 has been recorded with a 2.8 in some of the ground water and even higher acidity has been recorded in Scandinavia and North America.
It has been reported that in Canada and the USA literally thousands of lakes and rivers are no longer able to support fish or plants.
One politically unfortunate aspect of the problem is that often the generator of the pollution is not the country suffering it.
Half of Canada's acid rain is said to come from US power stations.
However the largest single source of the pollution for Canada is thought to be the nickel and copper smelting plant at Sudbury, Ontario which emits over a million tonnes of sulphur dioxide every year.
Similarly Norway claims that less than a quarter of its acid rain is home produced, the main culprit being the UK though this is disputed by the UK Central Electricity Generating Board.
The problem is that to stop gas emissions is very expensive.
‘Scrubbers’ which must be installed in new West German power stations, will, it is claimed cost £1.5 billion — and this effort has been described as pathetic by both the Ecology party and the Social Democrat party.
Much of the pollution in West Germany is blamed on France.
In the UK a pH of 2–4 has been recorded in Pitlochry in Scotland and a study commissioned by the Department of the Environment found high acidity readings in Yorkshire, Lincolnshire, East Midlands, Cumbria, the West Central Highlands of Scotland and the Southern Uplands.
Acid rain has also been recorded in Wales and Northern Ireland.
In energy, as opposed to environmental, terms the most serious potential consequence of acid rain could be on coal as a power station fuel, a fact which led the IEA in a study published in November 1983 to recommend governments to increase basic research on acid rain pollution.
One problem is that although the phenomenon of acid rain is not in doubt the actual cause has not been firmly established.
The National Coal Board and the Central Electricity Board in the UK in 1983 commissioned a £5 million research programme.
This was partly in response to a recommendation from the EEC to cut sulphur emissions to one-third the present level, a step which it has been estimated, would cost £4 billion in flue gas desulphurization equipment adding £700 million a year to the CEGB's operating costs.
As well as the cause of acid rain the magnitude of the problem has also been disputed.
It has also been suggested that the dumping of small quantities of limestone in affected lakes — a measure being pursued in Sweden — could be a solution to the problem involving less than one hundredth of the cost of desulphurization at source.
Pressure is however increasing for measures to cut sulphur emission.
The OECD stated in late 1983 that acid rain damage represents 3 to 5% of the European Community Gross National Product — or between £33 billion and £44 billion per year while the first joint step to combat air pollution in the European Community came in March 1984 when Environment Ministers agreed that new industrial plants could not be built without authorization relating to specific limits for industrial emissions.
The limits are to be negotiated and the new agreement will take the form of a directive timed for 1987.
In conclusion, though there is no denying the seriousness of the problem, many questions still remain unanswered.
It has been reported for example that the UK has been identified as the main European culprit as far as sulphur emissions and the killing of Norway and Sweden's lakes is concerned, yet the UK's sulphur emissions have been in decline since 1970 while acidification has not.
Whatever the final conclusion to research underway may be, it is ironical that perhaps the best solution to the problem is the increased use of that other much environmentally criticised energy source, nuclear power.
SYNTHETIC FUELS
Synthetic fuels or ‘synfuels’ are liquids or gases which may be substituted for oil products or natural gas.
The raw materials may be derived from coal, very heavy oil, tar sands, oil shale or from vegetable matter.
Resource is therefore not the problem with synthetic fuels and the progress or lack of it in the industry is a function and a consequence of the price and availability of hydrocarbons.
The fall in crude prices since 1980 coupled with the diminution of oil availability fears has meant a progressive down-grading of forecasts for the future contribution to world energy supply of synthetic fuels as project after project, megaproject after megaproject, has been closed down.
Not only have expectations of the future of oil prices been progressively lowered thus making most synfuel projects appear more expensive but investment cost estimates of these huge projects have also risen inexorably as the industry has reached a more exact comprehension of the real engineering costs.
The projects must generally be gigantic to be cost effective.
For instance, with tar sands and oil shales, surface mining is the most economical method of recovery.
A single operation might be three miles long and half a mile wide and would crawl across the landscape at about 700 feet a year, digging up the shale or sand and beginning the processing which will turn it to oil.
Two further contributory factors to the decline of the industry have been: the lowered earnings of energy companies giving rise to spending cutbacks; and the dampening of government enthusiasm for the projects because of the abundance of crude oil.
Nevertheless, despite these problems there will be growth in synfuels production through to the end of the century and beyond with most of the growth resulting from new projects supported by governments or from already established programmes.
Synfuel production will remain concentrated in a relatively small number of countries.
A number of different synfuel projects are likely to continue in the US including shale, coal, gas, coal liquids, alcohol and very heavy oil.
The synfuel contribution in the US is likely to increase from about 6 million tonnes of oil equivalent (MTOE) in 1983 to 20 MTOE in 1990 and perhaps 40 MTOE in 2000.
This is despite the considerable problems of the Synthetic Fuel Corporation.
Set up to reduce US dependence on imported oil following the Iranian revolution and with authority to spend $13.25 billion on synthetics  projects, during its first four years the corporation provided only $740 million in aid to two quite small projects.
The latest project to help reduce the US dependence on oil imports is the Cool Water Coal Gasification project.
The plant, in the Mojave Desert, aims to use the US's most abundant fuel — coal — as a ‘clean’ energy source for power generation by gasifying it.
At the plant electric power will be generated in two ways — from excess heat that is drawn off as gas is cooled, and from gas itself.
The gas is cleaned prior to burning and the sulphur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide, thought to contribute to acid rain, removed.
Although some consider that this method of electricity generation offers one of the synthetic fuel industry's best options, the project has stirred up much opposition from those believing its contribution — 4,300 barrels of oil daily — a drop in the ocean.
The objectors point out that the Synthetic Fuel Corporation was created with the aim of developing large-scale projects producing the equivalent of 500,000 barrels of oil per day by 1987 and 2 million barrels by 1992.
Elsewhere, in Canada, there is likely to be VHO production from the Suncor and Syncrude plants and from VHO pilot plants only.
The Alsands and Cold Lake projects may be deferred until well into the nineties.
Volume production will increase from some 8 MTOE in 1983 to 15 MTOE by the year 2000.
In Venezuela a major ($18 billion) VHO project for the Orinoco region has been deferred due to economic problems but this is likely to be resumed before the end of the century.
In New Zealand a natural gas to petrol plant should begin production by 1985 while Australia could become a major source of synfuels by the end of the century.
In Brazil the use of alcohol made from surplus sugar as a petrol additive continues to increase though the pace has slowed.
The contribution by the year 2000 could be up to 15 MTOE.
In South Africa the government is expanding the production of oil from coal, conscious of its vulnerability to oil supply disruption in a hostile world.
Four Sasol plants could be producing 10 MTOE by the year 2000.
On a smaller scale, synfuels projects exist, elsewhere in Latin America, in Europe and the Far East.
BEYOND THE YEAR 2000
The Renewables
A ‘renewable energy source’ is one which does not depend on finite reserves of either fossil or nuclear fuels.
The energy upon which the various renewable sources draw is the sun, in the case of solar energy, wind energy, wave energy, biomass and hydro-electric power, while in the case of tidal energy the source is the moon, and the earth's rotation.
All of these renewable sources but solar power (when used directly) and biomass, involve the generation of electricity.
Biomass — energy derived from vegetable matter — is the only renewable with chemical application.
Although the energy source is not in the strict sense infinite, geothermal and fusion power are also generally defined as renewable sources since there is no prospect of either source running out.
The only one of the renewable sources currently commercially exploited on a significant scale is hydro-electric power which in 1983 contributed about 7% to world energy supply.
Hydro-electric power will still be the main source of renewable energy in the year 2000 and will also be responsible for most of the growth in usage of renewable sources mainly by virtue of projects in South America.
South America has the largest hydro-electric resource due to the potential energy contained in its rivers by virtue of their altitude and volume.
The largest hydro-electric scheme in the world is at Itaipu on the river Parana in Brazil (see South America section).
Most of the Western world's best sites have now been developed but potential still exists in less developed countries; Zaire, for example, contains half of Africa's hydro-electric potential.
The advantages of hydro-electric power are its high conversion efficiency — more than 80% as compared with efficiency rates of 30% or so in thermal power stations.
Also HEP schemes generally involve dams which may be useful as flood barriers and for irrigation schemes, particularly in developing countries.
The main disadvantages are the cost of HEP projects and the fact that generation is dependent upon volume of water available, thus other generating capacity must always be available to cope with times of drought.
Hydro-electric power, though renewable, has a finite limit to its development potential unlike some of the other renewables and will never contribute a great deal more to world energy supply than it does at present.
The renewable energy sources must eventually dominate world energy supply.
The speed with which this will occur depends primarily upon the speed at which the prices of conventional fuels rise.
Prices will be decided by such factors as the supply/demand relationship, the cost of recovery as the search for fossil fuels moves to less and less hospitable regions and as the shift to more highly processed secondary fuels such as substitute natural gas and synthetic liquid continues.
Expenditure on renewable energy sources in Europe is, with the exception of fusion power, very low.
The leading EEC country in expenditure over the five years 1974–1978 was France followed by Germany and Italy with UK a poor fourth.
The UK's efforts on the renewable front (excluding fusion) are currently channelled mainly into wind and geothermal energy.
Renewable sources of energy generally require larger investment than conventional energy except in the case of high temperature geothermal and some types of bio conversion.
Production costs for the renewables and, even more so, for synthetics are far higher than for coal, oil or gas.
Despite the sophisticated techniques involved in enhanced recovery of oil and recovery of heavy oil, both investment and production costs are lower than for tar sands, oil shale and for the renewables.
Nuclear power has long lead times (particularly in the US) and requires a higher investment than many synthetics.
However its energy production costs are lower.
Wind Power The power of the winds, worldwide, may be estimated at three or four times total world energy consumption.
However, it will never be practicable to convert more than a small percentage of this into useful energy.
Nevertheless, a project is under consideration in the US for some 300,000 windmills spread across the plains which would supply some 200,000 MW of electricity, more than half the present US installed capacity.
For most parts of the world, however, the most convenient and effective sites for wind generators would tend to be coastal or offshore where winds are stronger and space is not at a premium.
The major factors governing the use of wind generators are as follows.
Power available from the wind obeys the ‘rate of the wind speed’ by which a doubling of wind speed increases the power available by a factor of eight.
This means that higher wind speeds must be sought — one reason for the choice of coastal and offshore sites.
The second point is that power available is proportionate to the square of the propeller diameter.
Thirdly, output increases with the height of the blades since, lower down, wind speed is reduced by friction.
The largest wind generator in operation is probably the NASA MOD 1 at Boone, in North Carolina (sponsored by the US Department of Energy) which has a 200 foot diameter and is capable of generating two megawatts of peak power.
Modern computer technology renders generation more efficient; a microprocessor predicts wind behaviour and adjusts the wind generator to maintain maximum performance.
What is reputed to be the most sophisticated and expensive windmill in the world is to be built at a cost of £10.5 million in the Orkneys.
This will generate at a cost of 10 pence per kilowatt-hour but the Department of Energy has stated that 20 to 30 such aerogenerators could produce electricity for one-third of this cost.
At Richborough in Kent the UK's CEGB is to construct a 4 MW turbine with a span of 90 metres.
This may be expanded into a ‘wind farm’ of ten units.
The generation cost of 10p per unit compares with an estimate of 2.5p for the proposed PWR at Sizewell.
One advantage of wind power is that it would tend to generate best when weather is bad which is also the time of peak need for electricity in many countries.
However, as with other renewables the lack of control over the matching of electrical output to demand is a disadvantage.
Increased usage of renewable energy sources, most of which will mainly convert energy into electricity, will necessitate better methods of storage of electrical energy than at present.
Possibilities include the use of surplus electricity to compress oil into huge reservoirs, the electrolysis of water into hydrogen and oxygen and pumped storage (see Electricity section).
According to a Swedish study of the economics of wind power in 1979 recommending the construction of 700 offshore windmills, the total cost of generation by this method was comparable with that of AGR generation at a ratio of 1 (nuclear) to 1.2 (wind power).
Although capital and operating costs of the wind generators were higher, the disparity was reduced by the absence of fuel costs.
(Estimated nuclear 1.70 p/Kwh — wind 2.00 p/Kwh).
A large aerogenerator programme is at present underway in the Netherlands where it is hoped that wind will be supplying about one quarter of Dutch electricity demand by the year 2000.
However, this will necessitate some 5,000 aerogenerators and strong environmental objections are expected.
As the renewable energy sources develop they will inevitably quickly lose their present quaint, pastoral image and the concepts of noise and horizon pollution will assume as significant a rôle in the public bestiary as do atmospheric and nuclear pollution today.
The level of noise pollution from one of   the larger aerogenerators which during high winds would achieve supersonic speeds at the end of the blade would certainly be of formidable proportions.
In the Altamont Pass in California some 2000 microprocessor controlled windmills have been erected to supply commercial electricity.
Where climatic and environmental factors make land-based aerogenerators impossible, costs would be high.
According to an assessment commissioned by the Department of Energy the cost of the support structure alone for one offshore wind turbine (excluding the turbine) would be £3 million while one machine would cost £34,000 per year to maintain.
The support facilities on shore for a 200-machine 600 MW cluster of wind generators would be around £25 million while transmission costs were estimated at four times that for a conventional 600 MW power station (all at mid-1979 prices).
It has been estimated that the capital cost of a 1,000 MW installation on the UK coast could be comparable with the cost of a conventional power station of the same capacity but this does not take into account the amount of R & D necessary both to develop a 2MW, 100-metre diameter aerogenerator and to design the kind of structures and transmission systems to withstand the rigours of the ocean.
Energy from the Sea
Wave energy conversion offers huge amounts of power but demands a great deal more new technology than wind energy.
Wave power offers a higher energy reward than wind power — the sea acts as a gigantic energy storage battery for the energy of the wind.
In the UK where a comparatively large amount of research has been carried out into wave power it is estimated that with wave generators along the 1,450 kilometre coastline, 50% of the UK's electricity requirements could be supplied.
(The power flow from Western Atlantic waves is around 70 kilowatts per metre of wave front.)
The problem is to develop a device which as well as demonstrating a high degree of efficiency in converting wave energy into electricity, is also robust enough to stand up to the buffeting and corrosion of the sea.
The Salter's Duck, designed by Stephen Salter, converts the bobbing motion from which the name derives into the rotation required to drive a generator.
The Cockerell Raft, invented by Sir Christopher Cockerell, undulates with the waves and energy is converted via hydraulic compressors, to the generators.
In 1978 it was claimed that these devices  could not produce electricity at a cheaper rate than 20 pence per kilowatt hour (as opposed to the Central Electricity Generating Board's 2.7 pence per kilowatt hour) but this has now been reduced to 10 pence per kilowatt hour while Dr Salter maintains that the Duck could achieve 4 pence per kilowatt hour.
A further promising device is the Kaimei which uses the changes in air pressure in a tube caused by the rise and fall of water, to drive an air turbine.
Any of these devices could obviously offer more attractive price incentives were they mass produced but at present fairly small amounts are being spent on wave energy research, which has, so far, not caught the imagination of large investors whether government or private, in the same way as, for instance, nuclear fusion.
There are also other ways of deriving energy from the sea.
OTEC (Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion) exploits the temperature differential between different depths.
A low boiling point liquid such as ammonia is vaporised by the warm surface water.
The expanding vapour drives a turbo generator while the ammonia is reliquefied in a condenser by cold water pumped from as deep as 3,000 feet in a self-contained operation.
A number of demonstration OTEC plants are operating at present.
The OTEC system, although low in output, has the advantage of generating at a fairly constant level.
Wave conversion devices will vary in output according to the power of the waves and where effective storage of energy is impractical, wastage must ensue.
The UK experience of wave power is not encouraging.
When the UK renewable energy programme began this was regarded as being the most promising alternative method of electricity generation and eight separate teams worked on different methods.
However, none of the scaled-up versions of the models on test could survive the strength of the waves whose energy they sought to exploit and the conclusion reached was that the modifications needed to make them sufficiently strong would render them cost uncompetitive.
It was therefore recommended that no more money be spent on wavepower which has been largely abandoned, in the UK at least, though some work still continues.
Tidal schemes have the advantage of regularity, an integrated electricity system could organise itself according to high and low water.
Tidal power systems operate by filling a single basin or river estuary at rising tide through sluice gates then emptying it during falling tide through turbines.
There are, in fact only a limited number of sites in the world with sufficient tide range to make such schemes cost effective.
The largest tidal ranges are found in  areas such as the Bay of Fundy (16 metres) in Canada, the UK's Severn Estuary (13–14 metres), the Rance Estuary in France (12 metres) and sites in the White Sea and the Sea of Okhotsk in the USSR, the Yellow Sea in Korea and the Kambay and Kutch bays in India.
The only commercial size plant in operation at present is at La Rance.
This has a capacity of 240 MW, between a quarter and one-eighth the size of the capacity of a large power station.
Schemes are, however, being considered at the Bay of Fundy, which has 37 sites suitable for tidal power schemes, and the Severn in the UK, although the economic viability of the latter is still uncertain.
Solar Power
In one way or another almost all the world's energy resources derive from the sun.
The sun directs 100,000 BTOE worth of energy at the earth per year, a quarter is reflected back and 75,000 BTOE is absorbed but only 30 BTOE is stored.
This 30 BTOE is transformed by photosynthesis into the chemical energy of plants.
Over the 400 million years while vegetation has existed 7,600 BTOE of energy from plants has been converted into fossil fuels (at a rate of about 16,000 tonnes per year).
The part of the sun's energy absorbed by the earth's atmosphere creates the winds and the waves on the sea.
Of the 75,000 BTOE of solar energy which reaches the earth, only 2.3 BTOE is converted to useful energy by man — 71% is used for food production, 24% goes on the burning of wood and agricultural waste and 4% on hydro electricity.
The direct harnessing of the sun's energy — solar power — is, along with nuclear fusion, the renewable energy sector which has attracted the most interest.
world's total fossil fuel reserves.
Solar energy is produced by the thermonuclear reactions which are constantly taking place in the sun which has a temperature of 20 million degrees centigrade.
There are many ways in which solar energy may be directly exploited by man.
The main disadvantage to direct use lies in the fact that supply reaches its maximum at the same time as demand is at its minimum.
The simplest way of conversion is by flat plate collectors in which a fluid, usually water, may be heated.
Focussing collectors are more sophisticated devices which produce more concentrated heat.
The Odeillo solar furnace in the Pyrenees achieves a temperature of 4,000 degrees Centigrade while larger furnaces are being  developed, again at Odeillo and in Sicily, capable of a 1 MW capacity.
For these types of convertors heat conversion is direct and storage is difficult.
When solar power can be converted directly into electricity it becomes much more usable.
The photovoltaic cell is, at present, the object of a great deal of research and investment but progress must yet be made in the chemistry of certain materials, particularly silicium, to bring down the cost fiftyfold before this method becomes economical.
A further area of solar energy research uses the difference in potential are what are known as heat batteries or thermo-ionic cells.
However these also will require many years of development.
The most ambitious scheme of all for the harnessing of solar energy is the SPS (solar power satellite)— an idea devised (and patented) by Dr Peter Glaser.
The whole scheme would involve the placing of a ‘solar sail, 10 kilometres by 5 kilometres in size, in geostationary orbit 23,000 miles out from the earth where the sun would never be out of sight.
The power of the sun would then be harvested by an array of silicon or gallium arsenide solar cells and then beamed back to earth by microwave and converted into low-frequency, alternating current electricity and fed into the USA's grid.
The electricity output of one SPS would be 5,000 MW, bigger than any single power station in the world.
The cost of one SPS according to the US National Aeronautics and Space Administration was in 1979 put at $25 billion while $30 billion would be required to set up the project.
Had the system been accepted the first commercial power satellite might have been in operation by 2010.
The SPS will probably never be attempted but its theoretical viability is suggested by the fact that NASA took three years and spent $16 million on assessing the concept.
In weighing the cost of the venture it should be remembered that 2.5 million people were employed and $25 billion spent on the project to land a man on the moon in the 1960s.
Less grandiose is the scaling up of the solar furnace idea.
In a device called the heliostat or ‘power tower’ gigantic mirrors are focussed upon a central, elevated boiler.
However, to generate 100 MW of electricity — one-tenth the capacity of a large power station — the sunlight falling on 3–5 square kilometres would have to be caught.
The technology for the effective use of solar power to produce heat exists today and, could, in the right climatic conditions, save a great deal of fossil fuel with widespread use, either to produce low temperature or, when focussed, high temperature industrial or domestic heating.
However, the economics of such systems are not viewed with very great enthusiasm.
The  use of sunlight to generate electricity is being vigorously pursued — a great deal of money is being invested in the improvement of photovoltaic cell technology.
In France the government is backing a FFr 1.4 billion five year investment programme into photovoltaic technology and the view has been expressed that photovoltaics could become a $10 billion a year industry worldwide by the end of the century.
Currently world sales of photovoltaic equipment are worth some US$ 100 million.
Looking to the future however some significant studies in the storage of electricity must be made before solar generation — or any of the other renewable techniques which cannot produce power on demand — will really come into its own.
Biomass
The immense amount of solar energy which growing plants capture by photosynthesis and convert into chemical energy — some 30 BTOE per year or more than four times the world's yearly total commercial energy consumption — is a renewable source of energy which offers great potential.
The proportion of this energy conversion accounted for by agriculture however, is small, but even this is not exploited.
The most obvious exploitation of biomass is the manufacture of alcohol by fermenting surplus or specially grown crops — e.g. sugar, corn, bananas (see Latin America and Synthetics sections).
This is particularly important since biomass is the only renewable energy source which does not offer energy either as direct heat or electricity.
Merely considering biomass as the exploitation of waste shows great unused potential.
A study by the UK Department of Energy's Technology Support Unit (ETSU) at Harwell revealed that about 60 million tonnes coal equivalent of energy — 18% of total UK energy consumption — was thrown away every year as waste.
This was made up of the organic residues of farms, forestry, industry and domestic refuse.
Many countries of the world could not only make better use of wastes, but increase agricultural production of the crops of which surplus produce could best be used to manufacture fuels.
Although alcohol is the most obvious example of a biomass fuel others would include methane from sewage which could be used in the internal combustion engine as well as a chemical feedstock.
In the UK methane gas from a London rubbish dump, which has almost half the calorific value of natural gas, is being used to fire bricks at a nearby factory.
Brazil and the United States are the main exploiters of biomass energy but Canada, China, India, the Philippines, Australia, New Zealand and South Korea all have demonstration or pilot projects.
Geothermal Power
Geothermal energy is based on the increase in underground temperature which is, on average, 1 degree centigrade per 30 metres of depth but in certain areas faults at plate boundaries allow higher temperatures at shallower depths.
There are basically three methods of recovering geothermal energy.
The first is to drill for and locate hot water (having first mapped the geothermal gradient of the ground since conditions vary considerably).
A large number of wells are then sunk into the hot water deposits, thus allowing circulation.
The water rises, the heat is transferred to heat exchangers and the water then returns below ground to be reheated.
This system may exploit water at temperatures of between 60 degrees centigrade and 12 degrees centigrade and is widely used today in France, USSR, Hungary, Iceland and many other locations.
One of the best known sites is at Villeneuve-la-Garenne, Paris, which has been converted from oil to geothermal heating, with an annual saving of 3,400 tonnes of oil.
In Reykjavik, Iceland, geothermal water provides almost all heating.
The second method of exploiting geothermal energy makes use of high temperature steam — in essence an attempt to domesticate the geyser — to drive turbo generators and produce electricity.
One such plant has operated at Laredello near Florence since 1905 while the largest present application is at Geysers Falls, California.
However, such sites are extremely rare.
The hot rocks technique holds out the best hope for exploitation of geothermal energy.
The problem with hot water is that the heat is low grade and in addition suitable sites must be explored for, like oil.
Drilling down to where rocks are at high temperatures, excavating a large cavity, then pumping down a fluid which could be vaporised and used to generate electricity, could give geothermal energy a wide application but involves the development of new technology.
An experiment to establish the feasibility of this technique is now in progress at Los Alamos in New Mexico, where suitable rocks are within 2,000–3,000 metres of the surface.
Although on a world scale the geothermal energy contribution is low, more than 50 countries are at present engaged in research into methods of exploiting it.
Worldwide more than 2,000 MW of electricity is generated from geothermal source — the output of one large fossil-fuelled or nuclear power station.
However, far more use is made of geothermal energy for direct heat.
In iceland for example some 70% of the country's energy needs are met from geothermal sources.
In the UK the Department of Energy has committed £11 million to geothermal energy for three years of work and by 1986 Britain will have spent £21 million on ‘hot rocks’ research.
The aim is to reach 6,000 metres and heat water to 200 degrees centigrade but this is unlikely to be achieved before 1988–89.
Nuclear Fusion
Nuclear fusion — the process which powers the sun — is the Holy Grail of energy production.
The fuels which the fusion reaction would use are deuterium (a common isotope of hydrogen) and lithium and the energy potential exists to supply the world with energy for at least 5,000 years.
The large scale release of fusion energy has so far occurred only in stars and in the hydrogen bomb.
In the fusion reaction atoms of hydrogen are fused to make helium and, in the process, a huge amount of energy is released.
Controlled fusion has fewer obvious negative aspects than fission.
There are no serious long-term spent-fuel reprocessing or waste problems nor is there a potential for the large scale release of radioactivity.
However, the controlled fusion reaction has not yet been achieved experimentally.
The difficulty lies in heating the fuel to temperatures of about 100 million degrees centigrade and in containing any substance heated to such a temperature.
At this temperature atoms form a ‘plasma’ which carries an electric charge and can thus be kept away from the walls of the container by a magnetic field.
So far, experiments in the USSR and the USA have not managed to create a reaction in which the energy output exceeds the energy input.
There are two types of vessel under consideration for the containment of the controlled fusion reaction — the  doughnut-shaped tokomak or torus and a cylinder-shaped container.
In the past the torus has been more in favour as its plasma containment is more efficient.
However, the cylinder shape is  easier to heat (a machine at Livermore, California has achieved 150 million degrees centigrade).
At present the US has a $335 million annual budget for fusion research (magnetic).
A $226 million fusion furnace is to be built at Livermore while a $294 million device is nearing completion at Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory in New Jersey.
Neither of these are intended to achieve more than the ‘break-even point’ at which energy input to heat the fuel is equalled by output from the fusion reaction.
The fusion reaction has in fact technically been achieved at the Princeton Tokomak fusion test reactor which operated successfully for 50 milliseconds.
Although no energy was produced this demonstrated the technical possibility of the process and a serious commercial reactor is envisaged by 2020.
The world's largest nuclear fusion experiment at Culham in the UK was commissioned in July 1983.
Jointly funded by the EEC the Joint European Torus (JET) had then cost £175 million.
The total cost of the project is put at £450 million which alone makes fusion by far the most generously funded of all renewable energy sources.
Experiments will last until about 1991.
JET is not an attempt at a commercial fusion reactor.
This is far in the future.
The cost of the next stage after JET has been put at five times the cost of the Culham experiment and this would suggest the need for even wider collaboration.