

‘The ideal introduction to discussion and debate at parish, deanery and synod level.
Any parish that wants to take the impending discussion on women's ordination with real seriousness and responsibility will want to make this booklet widely available.’
Richard Holloway, Bishop of Edinburgh
Contents
FOREWORD by Bishop Richard Holloway
INTRODUCTION
‘It's sure to happen sooner or later, so why all the fuss?’
What does the new legislation say?
1 EXPERIENCE
‘It all feels so right, so natural…’
2 THE BIBLE
What does the Bible say?
3 THEOLOGY
How can we find out God's will?
4 UNITY AND MISSION
Unity: What we all desire
CONCLUSION
Why bother?
DISCUSSION SUGGESTIONS
How to achieve constructive discussion
Aids to discussion
Notes
FURTHER INFORMATION
Useful addresses Further reading
FOREWORD
The authors of this booklet have achieved a rare and difficult thing.
They have made their case for the ordination of women with obvious conviction, backed up with arguable facts (in my opinion)— but the whole argument is delivered in a studiously temperate and fair way that will impress even those who disagree with it.
It will make the ideal introduction to discussion and debate at parish, deanery and synod level.
Any parish that wants to take the impending discussion on woman's ordination with real seriousness and responsibility will want to make this booklet widely available.
The Rt Rv.
Richard Holloway Bishop of Edinburgh 
INTRODUCTION
‘It's sure to happen sooner or later, so why all the fuss?’ 
Perhaps YOU have asked that question.
If so, we hope this booklet will explain why the issue of the ordination of women to the priesthood is both important and urgent .
WHO DECIDES?
In the Church of England important decisions are made by the General Synod — after it has listened to the views of all its members.
In February 1990 legislation to allow women to be ordained as priests was approved and sent to all the dioceses to be discussed and voted on.
So all church members are being asked to think about the issue and make up their minds before it comes back to the General Synod for the final vote.
People tend to become emotional when the subject of the ordination of women is raised.
That is because it touches on many aspects of life that are deeply important to us:
our understanding of the Bible
our hopes for unity
our heartfelt desire to find out what God's will is for the Church today
all that the Eucharist means to us
our whole sense of ourselves as male or female human beings: especially men's feelings about women: women's feelings about themselves; the feelings of all of us about our mothers
our faith that all human beings are loved equally by God and our desire for all to know God's love in Christ
But we need to look at the issue calmly , listen to others who have different perspectives and then sort out our own priorities.
We hope that this booklet will help you do this, by setting our clearly the various aspects that you will need to consider.
TO HELP YOU TO MAKE UP YOUR MIND YOU WILL FIND HERE:
a summary of the legislation
an account of the arguments that are commonly put forward on both sides
suggestions for the best way to set up discussions in your parish or deanery
questions — you will find lots of these at the end of each section: they are included mainly to stimulate your own reflections as you read, but they could also be drawn on when group discussion — at a meeting in a parish or deanery or diocesan synod — is being planned
advice on where to go if you need more information
FIRST, SOME FACTS
The Anglican Communion begins the 1990s with:
over 1500 women priests in eight provinces: Brazil, Canada, Cuba, Hong Kong, Kenya, Puerto Rico, Uganda, the USA
2 women bishops
The Church of England begins the nineties with:
1200 women deacons
7 women canons
2 women rural deans
80 women deacons in charge of churches
many women deacons working as chaplains — in education, prisons, hospitals, industry.
BUT:
NO women priests 
NO women bishops 
—in spite of the fact that opinion polls show that increasing numbers of Church members support the ordination of women to the priesthood .
(For example, in December 1989 the Sunday Times reported that a MORI poll showed that 75% of members of the Church of England supported the idea of women priests.)
I remain of the conviction that the ordination of women to the priesthood ought to be construed as an enlargement and extension of the historic Christian ministry.
For a number of years I have done my best to present the ordination of women in the Anglican Communion to Orthodoxy and to Rome in terms of development rather than revolution.
Theological arguments can justify and indeed increasingly require the ordination of women to the priesthood.
It cannot be irrelevant to evangelism that so many unbelievers think the place we give to women is frankly absurd.
ROBERT RUNCIE, ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY, GENERAL SYNOD, NOVEMBER 1989
What does the new legislation say ?
The important first clause of the Priests (Ordination of Women) Measure is short and simple:
It shall be lawful for the General Synod to make provision by Canon for enabling a woman to be ordained to the office of a Priest.
The measure does not cover the consecration of women as bishops.
Then follow safeguards, to help those who in conscience cannot accept women as priests or as the ‘head’ of local churches.
BISHOPS 
A bishop who is in office at the time the Canon becomes law may declare that in his diocese no woman is to be ordained priest or (with minor exceptions) minister as a priest.
If he does this, his suffragan bishops will also be bound by his declaration.
A new bishop who is appointed to a diocese after the Canon has become law will not be allowed to make this declaration.
PARISHES 
A PCC will be able to pass a resolution that it will not accept the ministry of a woman as a priest and will not accept a woman as incumbent, priest-in-charge or team vicar.
CATHEDRALS (other than parish church cathedrals)
The Administrative Body may pass a resolution that it will not accept the ministry of a woman as a priest in the cathedral, or that it will not accept a woman as dean, or both.
Q What if one of these bodies has reached a decision (for or against) and wants to change its mind?
A It can do so at any time .
Q What if a parish or cathedral already has a woman in priest's orders on its staff?
A She will not lose her job.
In this case it will not be possible for the parish or cathedral to pass the resolution referred to above .
Q What about the Sex Discrimination Act passed by Parliament?
A The ordination of women as priests is specifically excluded from its provisions, as is giving women permission to minister as priests and appointing them to certain offices that only priests may hold .
Q What will happen to any clergy who decide to leave the Church because of their opposition to the legislation permitting women to be ordained as priests?
A A separate Measure makes financial provision for them, which depends on factors such as age and length of service .
These laws are not perfect and will not satisfy everyone in the Church, but they will achieve provision for women to be ordained as priests — and at the same time seek to respect the consciences of those opposed .
They do not seek to drive anyone out of the Church.
They do not give anyone a notice to quit.
They aim to make it possible for those opposed to remain in the Church and be able to operate.
But the legislation does make it clear that they will be operating in a Church which has declared that it is right to ordain women to the Priesthood and does so ordain them .
The legislation also recognizes that some clergy and others may feel bound to resign from ministry or employment with the Church in those circumstances and aims to mitigate the financial hardship they may suffer.
I believe women ought to be ordained to the priesthood.
I believe it is for the fundamental reason summed up in the idea of Christ's inclusive humanity.
I believe that truths which were there from the beginning in the Christian faith can lie dormant until the social and psychological conditions are right for them to be perceived.
And I affirm that the time has come to express this truth in the life of the Church, and that is not going to go away.
JOHN HABGOOD, ARCHBISHOP OF YORK.
MOW AGM.
YORK MINSTER, 1988.
1 EXPERIENCE
‘It feels so right, so natural…‘ 
These were the words of an ordinary parishioner and they reflect the attitude of many others in parishes where there is a woman deacon on the staff.
My whole attitude is male in outlook…
I've just never known a woman priest…but with someone as good as her, one gradually gets over the prejudice.
The speaker is Stephen, another ordinary member of the Church of England.
In Christ humanity is restored to its proper glory.
A woman priest presiding at the Eucharist is a powerful symbol of this good news.
This time it is the voice of a prominent theologian, David Edwards.
What is YOUR experience of priests, ministers, clergy?
Probably, like Stephen, you have ‘just never known’ anything other than a male priest and so you may, very naturally, find it hard to imagine a woman in that role.
But there was a time when women as doctors, judges, engineers, police or newsreaders seemed unimaginable.
And yet now all these are a normal part of everyday life.
Experience in those Anglican provinces that already ordain women — and in the Free Churches — shows that, when people receive the ministry of a woman, the sense of strangeness soon goes away.
What matters — in addition to the importance of the priest as a symbol — are her particular pastoral and spiritual gifts, exactly as with a male priest.
ARE WOMEN INFERIOR?
Most of us would strongly reject any such idea — yet the image of Eve has exercised a powerful influence on the way women have traditionally been regarded.
Eve led Adam into temptation, so Eve was a source of sin — and all other women are the same.
This is the view — not always openly expressed, but there in the background — that has produced a deeply established sense of women as both inferior and dangerous.
Therefore it has been seen as right that they should be kept under male control.
Until recent times women were more or less owned by men — not allowed to vote or to own property (if they were married), or to enter higher education.
It was only rarely that women were able to occupy (outside the home) any position of authority.
In the past women were also seen as unclean — especially during menstruation and after childbirth — and therefore unsuited to perform any religious rites.
Traces of this feeling still linger today, though usually they are not talked about openly.
DEPENDENT CHRISTIANS OR STRONG CHRISTIANS?
All of us, both men and women, in our early years, had to separate ourselves from our mothers.
Therefore, many of us — but especially men — have fears, lurking in our subconscious minds, of being dominated again by a woman.
As adult Christians we believe that we are dependent for everything upon God — so if the priest in some sense ‘represents’ God for us, then he tends to bring out feelings of dependence.
Therefore the idea of a woman priest can arouse anxiety, for being dependent on a woman is the very thing that is feared.
(For the same reason, men are often frightened of the feminine side of their own natures.)
Most clergy, however, discourage such dependency on themselves as human leaders and instead aim to empower and enable others — especially the lay people in the congregation.
The existence of women priests alongside men will help to discourage unhealthy dependency and encourage us all to stand on our own feet.
VIVE LA DIFFERENCE!
We might find it hard today to agree on a description of the differences between women and men — and perhaps they are less marked than we used to think.
In any case, most women are less interested in being ‘like men’ than in discovering and using their own gifts.
They want to find out what it would be like to be a woman freed from all those age-old taboos.
Today we are moving towards more equal and mutual ways of arranging our lives, but it is still too soon to be able to see clearly how this may change our ideas of ‘masculinity’ and ‘femininity’.
Each woman brings her own particular gifts to whatever she does — which may or may not be those that are commonly labelled ‘feminine’.
Certainly wherever women and men work together in partnership there is the possibility of great enrichment.
Those who oppose the ordination of women believe that God intends them to have a different role in the Church from men — though an equally valid one.
They maintain that the wish for women to be ordained derives, at least partly, from an overemphasis on the ‘importance’ of the priest.
They would like to see the Church re-discovering the proper (equal-but-different) role for women.
They think that the Church would then become less dominated by priests.
Also they do not believe that our experience (as, for example, that a woman's ministry feels good and appropriate) is a reliable guide to what God may want for his Church.
WHAT MAKES A PRIEST?
Evidence from all over the world suggests that women have all the gifts needed to be effective and caring priests: to bring the love of Christ to those who do not know him and to be enablers of others.
They are less  likely to dominate than are men, because they have such painful first-hand experience of what it feels like to be oppressed by those in authority.
In our day many women are being called by the Holy Spirit to this hard vocation of priesthood — but at present the Church of England does not allow their vocations to be tested, as it does in the case of men.
Questions to think about 
1.
What experience have you had of women in positions of authority? or in jobs involving caring for people?
2.
What is (or was) your relationship with your mother? or with your father?
Do you think these might have a bearing on your feelings about a woman as your parish priest?
3.
What do you think are the most important differences between men and women?
4.
How would you describe the ‘calling’ of a priest?
What do you see as ‘different’ about a priest?
The Primate of the Episcopal Church in the USA thanks God for ‘the gifts ordained women have brought to our church and the wholeness that has come to its life’.
The Primate of New Zealand (where a woman has recently been consecrated as a diocesan bishop) speaks of women priests bringing ‘an overwhelmingly positive contribution’ to the life of the church.
The Primate of Canada has said: ‘Our experience with women priests has been gladly received.
The more fully the priesthood reflects the whole range of humanity, the more fully we see the implications of humanity as created in the image of God.’
2 THE BIBLE
What does the Bible say ?
The fundamental message of the Bible, with its portrayal of the love of God for every individual and of the unity of those who are ‘in Christ’ through baptism, suggests that there ought not to be any distinctions in Church rules on grounds of gender.
Those opposed to the ordination of women believe that there is no authority for it in Scripture.
They feel, for example, that St Paul's restrictions on women's activities — in the early Christian communities to whom he was writing — are to be seen as regulations applying in all situations in the Church for all time.
But the whole tenor of the Bible makes it unlikely that God has built into the Church for ever the limitation of a male-only priesthood.
HOW CAN WE BE TRUE TO THE TEACHING OF THE BIBLE?
Each of us has to decide how we understand the ‘authority’ of the Bible.
Christians have differing views on this.
But most would agree that the Bible gives us principles — rather than precise rules — and that we have to work out how to put these in to practice.
George Carey, Bishop of Bath and Wells, writes:
It is important to maintain a proper balance between the finality of Christian revelation as contained in Scripture and its openness to new possibilities in Christ.
HOW DO BIBLICAL PRINCIPLES APPLY TODAY?
One such principle is ‘good order’ in the Church (1 Cor.
14.40).
Today the practice of this principle should lead the Church to apply the standards of fairness that are now accepted in society and this means being seen to value and use to the full the vocation and gifts of women.
Another principle is that ‘headship’, as seen in Jesus, means not domination but self-giving.
Today we see that women who have the right qualities can exercise authority equally with men, but we are also coming to a fresh recognition that Christian leadership should always be seen as service.
Yet another principle is that we are to be ‘subject to one another out of reverence to Christ’(Eph. 5.21) and this applies to each of us — men as well as women — whatever our particular calling in the Church may be.
JESUS AND WOMEN
Jesus treated individual women with a degree of seriousness and love that was unusual at that time.
The Gospels give us many stories of his encounters with women among his group of special friends.
But he accepted the social framework of his day and the status and role of women within it.
It is likely that he chose a group of men to be his special disciples — apostles — because at that time a women would not have had the freedom to become travelling evangelists — to go round preaching and teaching.
BUT WHAT IF GOD CHOSE THAT TIME AND PLACE AND THAT PATRIARCHAL SOCIETY ON PURPOSE TO EXCLUDE WOMEN?
Those opposed to the ordination of women find a particular significance in the time and place of the human life of Jesus Christ:
We expect Jesus to be in the right place at the right time, therefore his choosing of male apostles was quite deliberate, which must have theological significance and definite implications for the ministry today.
I do find it extraordinarily difficult to see how it [women's ordination as priests]is consonant with the time and place that God chose to be incarnate.
He chose a patriarchal society.
It wasn't an accidental time…
It was a place and time of deliberate choosing and he chose also to be incarnate as a man.
But there are many other possible reasons why first-century Palestine may have been the ‘right’ place and time, such that the good communications in the Roman Empire would be helpful in the spreading of the Christian message after the resurrection.
We cannot be sure that, in choosing a place and time, God was making a point about gender.
In any case, not all Christians would accept that God's mind is likely to work in this kind of way.
There is no such thing as Jew and Greek, slave and free, male and female: for you are all one person in Christ Jesus .
GALATIANS 3.28
PRIESTS IN THE NEW TESTAMENT
The apostles were not given a priestly role by Jesus and he left no instructions about how the Church was to be organized.
There is no clear identity between the apostles and the priesthood, which did not develop until after the New Testament period.
But Christians believe that God acts in history, so the Church always has to try to respond to the leading of the Holy Spirit in each age.
In doing so, the Church has to take into account ‘the Tradition’— the consensus of teaching and practice down the centuries.
Until very recently no women have been ordained as priests, but we need to ask ourselves why this has been the case.
Has it been a result of clear theological arguments?
Or has this issue never previously been on the Church's agenda because the majority of women did not — until our century — have the education, the freedom or the position in society to enable them to take a priestly role?
A VISION OF PARTNERSHIP
Now that society is at last recognizing and developing the full range of women's abilities and now that women are seen to have, with men, full ‘human rights’, many people conclude that it is time for the Church of England to embody in its official ministry the biblical vision of equal partnership between women and men.
Then God said, Let us make man in our image, in our likeness, and let them rule…over all the earth…
So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he them; male and female he created them.
(Gen 1.26, 27)
Questions to think about 
1.
In what ways do you find that the Bible can help you in your everyday life — what is its ‘authority’ for you?
2.
If you are a woman, what do you feel about Jesus having been a man?
If you are a man, what do you feel about Jesus having been a man?
Does Jesus being a man tell us anything about the nature of God?
Or about priests?
3.
Do you know what different kinds of ‘ministry’ are described in the New Testament and who carried them out?
What connections do you think we can make between these and decisions about who should be a priest today?
4.
In your experience, what are the problems and what are the benefits when women and men work together?
Do you think there are any spheres which should be closed to either men or women?
3 THEOLOGY
How can we find out God's will ?
We need to listen — and to go on listening — to the Bible and to later spiritual writers and preachers; we need to give due weight to tradition and also to try to discern the movement of the Holy Spirit in our own time.
Man must learn to distinguish between those things which are given and which he must accept as part of his creatureliness, and those conditions which, exercising his responsibility towards creation, he must seek to change.
CHANGE — AND THE CHURCH
Over the last 2000 years the Church has thought it right to make many changes: in patterns of ministry, in liturgical forms, in ethical emphasis, in doctrine.
These have been seen as appropriate developments from the teaching in the Bible.
They have been suggested by people's changing needs and growing understanding of how the gospel can be worked out in human society.
The Archbishop of Canterbury, Robert Runcie, speaking in the General Synod debate in November 1989, gave his view that the ordination of women is a legitimate change of this kind:
The ordination of women to the priesthood ought to be construed as an enlargement and extension of the historic Christian ministry.
The Archbishop of York, John Habgood, has explained that:
Truths which were there from the beginning in the Christian faith can lie dormant until the social and psychological conditions are right for them to be perceived.
I affirm that the time has come to express this truth in the life of the Church.
ARE WOMEN PRIESTS A LEGITIMATE DEVELOPMENT?
Those opposed to the ordination of women to the priesthood maintain that it cannot be seen as a legitimate development because it is ‘closely related to the central doctrines of the Christian faith’.
To reject the ways of Christianity up till now because we think we are more enlightened, is to begin to throw doubt on our belief that God does speak through the Bible and the teaching of the Church.
We might  just as easily suggest leaving out other bits of the Bible or the Creeds that seem not quite to fit modern (and probably passing) ways of thinking.
We see here a tendency to equate any change with ‘reductionism’, whereas those who want to see women ordained as priests believe that this change will bring about an enrichment of the traditional pattern of ministry, without in any way altering its essential features.
A fear is also sometimes expressed that if women priests are allowed this will open the door to ‘liberal’ theology in other areas.
But it is better to look at this issue separately, on its own merits — and in fact we find that theologians of all schools are among those who support it.
WHAT DOES A PRIEST DO AT THE EUCHARIST?
Many Christians believe that one important role of the priest is to ‘represent’ Jesus at the Eucharist.
Some hold that it follows from this that the priest must be male:
A priest is there to be for us a specific and bodily reminder of the man Jesus at the Last Supper.
If women try to play this particular role within worship, this visual link with Jesus is broken and we easily sink into thinking of him as only vaguely human, as a nice idea in our minds that we can mould as we will.
But is it right for those in the congregation to regard the priest at the Eucharist as ‘a specific and bodily reminder’ of Jesus?
The priest is indeed a ‘sign’ of God to them, but it is the office of priest that matters, not the particular gender — nor any other physical characteristic — of the individual.
The priest may be black or white, fair or dark, old or young, good-looking or ugly, male or female…for the priest is a symbol , which is quite different from a picture — the representation attempted by an artist.
In the different sense of the priest ‘representing’ the people to God in worship the role is more that of an intermediary or go-between — a role more akin to that of a Member of Parliament who understands the needs of his constituents and represents them to the Government in Parliament.
No one thinks that a female MP cannot represent both the men and the women in her constituency just as effectively as a man.
Similarly the priest acts as a ‘representative’ to God on our behalf as human beings rather than as women or men specifically; so it seems appropriate to have both women and men performing this representative role.
WE ARE ALL CHRIST'S AMBASSADORS
All Christians are called to be ambassadors for Christ in their own lives: to represent or show Christ to their neighbours.
Jesus can clearly be seen in Mother Teresa and in countless other people of spiritual strength who live close to God.
In this sense Jesus can be as well represented by women as by men.
(We may notice that in the Baptism Service there is no suggestion that women are second-class Christians who cannot represent Christ.)
ALL HUMANITY CAN BE REDEEMED
But there is a more fundamental point.
In the Incarnation, it is the humanness, rather than the male gender, of Jesus that is important.
We believe that the risen and ascended Christ is unconfined by gender.
We believe that Christ has made possible the redemption of all humanity — of men and women equally.
Is it possible for the Church of England to proclaim this redemption with integrity and conviction in our day unless it ordains women as well as men as priests?
Questions to think about 
1.
In your own life, how do you try to find out God's will?
How do you think the Church can do so?
2.
Do you think the Church ought to be open to change?
Or is its main role to give stability to society?
3.
How have you experienced God working through people?
How does God work through priests?
In what way do you think gender comes into it, if at all?
4.
What would be the difficulties — and the strengths — if a priest was also a mother with small children?
5.
What does the Eucharist mean to you?
What part does the priest play in it?
The theological question is not Can a woman priest represent a male redeemer ? but Can an exclusively male priesthood represent human redemption ?
MICHAEL PEERS, PRIMATE OF CANADA
4 UNITY AND MISSION
Unity: What we all desire  
We welcome you into the Lord's Family.
We are members together of the body of Christ; we are children of the same heavenly Father; we are inheritors together of the kingdom of God.
We welcome you.
How moving are these words with which the congregation welcomes the newly baptized into the family of the church.
But the painful reality is that there are many splits within the Christian family.
Some groups in the Church cannot even live peacefully alongside each other or listen to each other, but find it necessary to throw insults — or even bombs — at their sisters and brothers in Christ.
UNITY MEANS THE HEALING OF ALL WOUNDS
Both those who are working for and those who oppose the ordination of women to the priesthood fully support the ecumenical movement.
The Revd Cathy Milford, Moderator of the Movement for the Ordination of Women, believes that:
the movement towards the unity of the Churches and the movement towards the ordination of women are both aspects of the movement towards wholeness.
The healing of the wounds between women and men is as important as the healing of the wounds between churches.
TALKS CONTINUE
Christians of different denominations feel much closer together now — at the parish level — than they used to even a few years ago.
It is often suggested that the issue of the ordination of women is a major obstacle to progress.
But there are more fundamental reasons why unity with either Rome or the Orthodox is still a long way off.
In spite of difficulties — and of the fact that eight Anglican provinces already ordain women — official discussions about unity continue.
Even though the policy of the Roman Catholic Church is at present against the ordination of women, many individual members of the church would like to see it happen.
The Orthodox Churches have started to have some discussions of the  issue, which suggests that they are not necessarily completely closed to the idea.
All the main Free Church denominations have women ministers, who have exactly the same role as the men, which includes blessing the sacrament.
If we believe that they are, with us, part of the ‘One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church’, then our relationship with them is important.
Here it is the failure of the Church of England to ordain women that causes strains.
HOW CAN WE WORK FOR CHANGE?
A General Council of all the Churches does not seem to be a realistic possibility in the foreseeable future.
It is necessary, therefore, for each part of the universal Church to act ‘as it believes the whole Church should act in obedience to Christ’.
Each part of the church has the authority — and the responsibility — to act according to its honest perception of God's will.
In the long history of the Church this is usually how change has come about.
TRUE COMMUNION
Close fellowship was achieved during the Lambeth Conference of bishops of the Anglican Communion in the summer of 1989 — the first at which women were allowed a voice.
Our differing views and practices need not destroy our deepest communion with each other as Christ's followers.
UNITY WITHIN THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND
Most church members want to see women ordained as priests.
Those on the fringe readily accept the idea and wonder what all the fuss is about.
There is a minority who feel that they could never accept women priests.
The legislation protects their consciences, and in charity makes financial provision for the few priests who will feel that they must leave.
Many who hold the minority view accept that they must recognize the mind of the Church, just as the majority realise that they have a duty to respect the consciences of those who disagree.
But the ever-increasing majority of church members who want women to be ordained as priests have consciences too: they are hurt by the slowness of the Church of England's response and feel bound to follow what they see as a movement of the Holy Spirit in our time.
Questions to think about 
1.
How close do you feel to Christians you know who belong to a different denomination?
How can genuine unity come about?
2.
Have you talked about women priests with members of the Free Churches?
With Roman Catholics?
Members of Anglican Churches overseas which do (or don't yet) have women priests — and women bishops?
3.
Do you think it would help in commending the Christian gospel to others if we had women priests?
CONCLUSION
Why bother? 
There are those who think that the ordination of women is bound to come in the course of time and wonder why it is necessary to campaign for it.
HOW LONG?
But women have been actively asking for ordination for more than sixty years and their patience is running out.
A GOSPEL ISSUE
And now the whole Church is realizing that our preaching of a gospel of love and justice for all people cannot be convincing while our visible structures deny these values.
Men as well as women are now realizing that the issue of the ordination of women to the priesthood is a gospel issue .
THE DECADE OF EVANGELISM
We are now entering the last decade of our century and of our millennium, which has been declared a ‘Decade of Evangelism’.
We all have a deep longing to see the Good News of Christ's love spreading throughout the world.
The present imbalance in the Church's ordained ministry is getting in the way.
That is why we must bother.
YOUR INFLUENCE
AS A MEMBER OF THE CHURCH YOU CAN USE YOUR INFLUENCE — IN DISCUSSION AND BY THE WAY YOU VOTE.
It is the hope of the writers and publishers of this booklet that they may have helped you decide how you should use that influence.
DISCUSSION SUGGESTIONS
How to achieve constructive discussion 
If you attend a discussion in your parish or at a synod :
1.
Learn as much as you can about all aspects of the issue beforehand.
2.
Aim to go with your mind open to new ideas.
Try to listen to and understand others, even if you find what they say uncongenial or hard to follow.
3.
When you speak, stick to your own experience and your own views.
It may help if you use a notebook to write down the point you want to make.
Then when you speak you won't ramble or get confused.
4.
Don't make up your mind which way to vote until you have had time to think over the arguments again, quietly and prayerfully.
If you are responsible for setting up a discussion :
1.
Aim to build an atmosphere in which people can trust, respect and be open with each other.
Call it a ‘workshop’ or ‘discussion’or ‘exploration’(rather than a ‘debate’).
2.
Suggest that participants should make themselves familiar with the main issues beforehand — perhaps by reading this booklet or other books on the list on pp. 23–4 — so that the discussion will be based on adequate information.
3.
In a large gathering — anything over fifteen people — plan the meeting along these lines:
Time of prayer for the guidance of the Holy Spirit.
Introduction by Chair.
Brief opening remarks by each speaker stressing the importance of particular points.
Discussion in small groups of not more than six (see below for discussion questions).
After twenty minutes the groups would be asked to formulate a question to put to the panel.
Plenary session in which these questions from the groups are explored.
End with a summing up by the Chair and a time of prayer.
4.
When choosing guest speakers, look for people with an ‘open’ rather than an ‘adversarial’style.
You will need someone to take the chair who is able to keep his/her own views in the background and is experienced in handling emotive discussions.
5.
Some ways of keeping the discussion calm and rational:
The Chair should be firm in not allowing people to interrupt each other.
The following could be tried: ask each speaker to repeat the previous speaker's point of view, to his/her satisfaction, before going on to make their own point.
This both demands listening and gives the experience of being listened to.
It may slow down the discussion but improve its quality.
The chair should encourage people to put forward their own views or to argue against views that others have actually expressed, rather than against hypothetical stereotypes (e.g. ‘these feminists say…‘).
6.
If there is to be a vote, arrange for it to be taken at the next  meeting,not  immediately after the discussion .
Aids to Discussion 
If a large meeting breaks into small groups for part of the time, any of the following ideas could be used:
a)
Each person in turn is asked to say what experience they have had that might help in thinking about this issue.
(For example, they might say that they have a woman deacon in their parish, or that they have chosen a woman — or a man — as their doctor.)
b)
Each person in turn is asked to say how they have reached their present view (whether firm or tentative).
c)
The group considers which aspect of the issue they feel is most important (for example the guidance in the Bible, unity, tradition, etc.).
or you could use one or more of the questions that appear at the end of each section of the main text of this booklet.
FURTHER INFORMATION
Useful addresses  
For further information contact:
Movement for the Ordination of Women (MOW)Napier Hall Hide Place Vincent Street London SW1P 4NJ
Women Against the Ordination of Women Mrs Brown Luckhurst Mayfield East Sussex TN20 6TY
Both these organizations publish free leaflets on various different aspects of the issue.
A WIDER VISION
by Dr Mary Tanner
Until women are ordained as priests it is difficult to see how a balance can be given to the leadership of the Church.
But the ordination of women does not stand or fall on that, rather it is related back to our understanding of God and of men and women created and redeemed in that image.
Bishop Oliver Tompkins has written:
Christian priesthood is called to be fully human if God is to be known as fully God.
Here is the central issue in the debate over the ordination of women.
It is not primarily about rights for women.
It is not a political issue about women sharing a function hitherto assigned to men.
It involves at one and the same time our understanding of the nature of God, of the nature of humanity, and of the real depths of the life and unity of the universal Church.
It is a search for wholeness in life which expresses, reflects and is grounded in the wholeness of the Triune God and a transformation of our Christian system.
The key question is: Can the churches open themselves to receive that vision?
Can they open themselves to this source of energy, this fresh spring of water, this new wine, this ‘women spirit rising’, and change and be changed in the process?