

SCREENS
A Conversation about Contemporary Television
ROSALIND BRUNT KAREN JONES TESSA PERKINS
ROSALIND BRUNT, Tessa Perkins and Karen Jones, who all work in the Centre for Popular Culture at Sheffield City Polytechnic, talk about women both sides of the screen.
RB
All three of us teach and research in media studies — an area mainly dominated by men.
Do we, I wonder, study television differently because we're women?
TP
I think one of the ways gender operates for us is that we are both women researchers and women audiences.
And the way that, say, television news addresses you is as a particular type of person.
So a female researcher is more likely to recognise, and pick up certain cues, or pick up the ways in which she's not actually being addressed, than a male researcher necessarily.
RB
I was very aware of that when I was watching — and partly researching — the 1987 General Election on television.
I had ‘flu’ at the time, and perhaps that made me rather jaundiced.
But I watched, out of a sense of duty admittedly, most of the election news programmes, feeling all the time, these are not relating to me in any way.
In the same period Brookside was running a story about the effect of unemployment on Billy Corkhill.
He went berserk with his car, ploughing up his neighbours' lawn and yelling, ‘I'm only a doley, I'm only a doley.’
And in EastEnders Arthur Fowler had just come out of prison after getting into deep money trouble.
I felt the soap operas were raising issues about how you survived and coped in the late eighties that both addressed political issues and also involved me emotionally, whereas nothing about the formal election coverage got to me at all— apart from the Labour Party Political Broadcast, the first one in history to be repeated by popular demand!
I don't agree with people who say it was just a leadership personality cult effort.
For all its yukky presentation of the leader and his wife as Mr and Mrs Extremely Normal and Nice, it was also getting at how politics is a process, how someone becomes political through a network of direct social relationships and lived experience.
But everything else about the electoral coverage left me cold because it had such a restricted view of politics as a game with rules that don't actually touch people.
TP
So actually the policies disappeared out of the campaign as well?
RB
Well anything that touched the everyday.
I wanted to know how the parties' policies actually affect people's daily lives.
I didn't want the election dealt with ‘electorally’ in terms of party advantage and opportunism.
When a number of us here did a study of the 1984 Chesterfield by-election, where Tony Benn was standing for the first time, and asked constituents themselves what they felt about the broadcast coverage, they repeatedly used the word ‘bias’ to describe it.
But what they were getting at wasn't so much that the coverage was favouring one party over another but that it simply didn't relate to them, the actual voters in the constituency.
They saw the election coverage being presented predominantly in competitive terms, like a horse race, with predictions about likely winners and losers.
KJ
In a programme last year about the selection of candidates for the Staffordshire by-election it was again like what we found in our Chesterfield study.
The presenter treated the election in the same detached and cynical way, assuming that the candidates were players in some electoral game.
And I was struck by an enthusiastic review of the programme by a male press critic which really emphasised for me how both political and media discourses are implicated in addressing audiences/voters in patriarchal terms that are outside most of our experience.
TP
I saw a programme recently about the selection of women parliamentary candidates.
Implicitly, it seemed to me, this was addressed to men, because there was this interesting object, ‘A Woman’, being ‘looked at’, ‘investigated’ and selected.
So although I'd assume a potential audience of mainly women who'd be interested in this topic, the programme actually distanced that audience by addressing a hypothetical man who'd think it rather ‘odd’ to select women candidates at all.
So there's often a contradiction as to whether programmes are addressed to their actual or potential audiences or to a hypothetical audience, which in current affairs and news broadcasts is usually assumed to be a male viewer.
KJ
But it happens in a whole range of programmes.
Take music programmes, for instance.
They seem to run the gamut from what you might call the ‘tabloid television’ of Top of the Pops and The Hit Man and Her , via the ‘serious’‘quality’programmes like Rock Steady or Big World Café , to the more lefty ‘alternative’programmes, of which The Tube was the prototype, like Channel 4's Club X .
These tend to have different ways of positioning women presenters and viewers.
If you take something like The Hit Man and Her , presumably a lot of the viewers are in fact women, or more specifically young women, because they are the ones who buy Smash Hits , they are the ones who watch Top of the Pops ; yet the presenter, Pete Waterman, implicitly assumes that the viewers are male — he greeted the audience at the beginning of one programme with ‘Cor, boys, have we got a load of crumpet here tonight!’
And although he co-produces with Michaela Strachen, she is clearly positioned as his — she's the bimbo who goes along and enthuses about the dancers, whereas he knows where it's at musically, because he is, after all, a famous producer — he is the man with the knowledge.
That's also replicated on Top of the Pops , in which predominantly male DJs present the programme; women presenters are there as enthusiastic bimbos.
I think it's interesting the way that somebody like Muriel Gray tried to break with that when she co-presented The Tube with Jools Holland and Paula Yates.
Paula Yates is positioned as the fluffy bimbo, and Muriel Gray is the one who stalked through the set being rather rude to the bands and deconstructing the whole female persona; I think she's trying to do the same now with the chat show.
RB
I think ‘deconstructing’ is the right word for Muriel Gray because she's quite spiky; she's very clear about her own views as a Scottish Nationalist and as a feminist; she's unconventionally dressed and she did ‘deconstruct’television very effectively, albeit often quite didactically, on The Media Show .
I think it's a shame she then made the ‘career move’ to a chat show format because she's much more interesting in her own right than anything she elicits from her guests.
Whereas someone more conventional, like Sue Lawley, who describes herself as a ‘post-feminist  woman’, is actually much better at drawing out chat show guests.
It's interesting who get to be the ‘authoritative’ women in television.
The first women newsreaders had a difficult time because they were constantly ‘filtered’ through their sexuality.
And to make a successful television career, Sue Lawley has had to tread a very careful path of being acceptable (mainly to men) as both a woman and a ‘professional’.
TP
It's perhaps interesting that women newsreaders haven't been presented as ideal mothers instead — especially as male newsreaders are sort of father figures, greying at the temples, reliable and impartial in their authority.
Women newsreaders have tended to be younger and much more ‘sexual’.
But that sexuality is a problem.
It doesn't fit with a newscasters' tradition so it has to be tied down.
And we really don't get a sense of male sexuality in non-fictional or non-entertainment media, do we?
Even in sports reporting where it's predominantly men — I mean, they're far from sexy!
KJ
I'm just trying to think of music shows which attempt to break with existing sexual stereotyping.
For instance, on Big World Café they had a new and young Black male presenter (Hawkeye Cherry) teamed up with a more experienced White woman presenter (Mariella Frostrup), so there was a kind of playing-off of inequalities, if you like, of gender against those of age and race, presumably to try and break with the hegemony of young(ish) White males in the area of music programming.
Though it was still Mariella Frostrup, rather than the male presenter, having a cosy chat with the singer Kim Mazelle about her clothes and make-up, and exchanging details about their designer suits.
I'm not saying that it is necessarily trivialising to talk to interviewees about their clothes, it's just that you don't find the male presenters on Rock Steady talking to Phil Collins about his suits!
In a way Channel 4's Club X was more self-consciously innovative, in that it attempted to get away from the conventions of the ‘arts programme’ by having a mixture of live performance art, music and interviews in an informal club setting with space for audience participation.
The presenters on Club X tended to distance themselves (rather too successfully!) from the role of the ‘expert’ arts presenter sharing the rarefied cultural universe of (usually) his subjects.
They also broke with the gender conventions of male expertise and female beauty in that the three main presenters were a White male, a Black female, and a (male to female) transvestite.
There was also a rather anomalous, enormously fat woman called Foo Foo, who unfortunately has since died, and who appeared to be there to provide little joky episodes between the more serious artistic elements.
The programme didn't work particularly well, it was pretentious and chaotic, and the audience was so noisy you couldn't hear the performers or the presenters, but it did try to get away from conventional gender roles as well as subvert the arts programme format.
RB
What about more recent programmes — all the new format programmes like Def II ?
All the ones that Janet Street Porter has been involved in, developing that area of youth television for teenagers who are the audience who watch television least.
Haven't there been more interchangeable men/women roles on those?
KJ
Well I think one of the most successful ones was Snub , the independent music show, which did not have a presenter on screen at all.
This was mainly for financial reasons, as the show had such a tiny budget, but it worked quite well.
You had an anonymous female voice, which I assume belonged to Brenda Kelly, the producer, occasionally asking a question or providing a short commentary, but usually the people who appeared on the programme spoke for themselves, to camera, about their music.
I think this is genuinely subversive.
You don't have to engage with questions of gender stereotyping, you just don't have the presenter there at all!
Other shows have gone even further in that direction.
The Chart Show just has a succession of videos with graphics in between.
This is perhaps a rather dramatic solution to the problem of how you treat gender on television!
Of course you can't do that with everything; it would be difficult to have a chat show host or hostess who was a succession of graphics.
Having said that, there's a programme called Star Test , where the interviewer is a computer, albeit with a female voice, and interviewees are invited to select from alternative questions flashed up on the screen!
RB
It seems to me that music television, like sports programming, mainly assumes that its audiences live in the same world and share the same expertise.
Whereas other types of programme have the professional broadcaster take on a sort of translating or ‘brokerage’ role between the experts and the public.
KJ
Take the whole area of gardening programmes.
Some use an unseen ‘expert’, who talks about the best way of propagating plants with polysyllabic Latin names.
But then there are other gardening programmes which very much perform that kind of mediating role you're talking about, where one of the presenters goes along to a real person with an actual garden and asks the gardener how he or she sets about creating this garden and quite a number of those presenters are women.
In fact there have been a lot of famous women gardeners and not-so-famous women gardeners.
I think that does give such programmes genuine mass appeal when you have ordinary people talking about their gardens — not huge grand gardens, quite often the kind of suburban gardens that a large number of the audience are familiar with.
TP
It's true, on the one hand, yes, you have a surprising number of women experts who are gardeners — usually that's a class-related thing.
They're often upper-class British women, sometimes slightly eccentric.
But  despite the place given to women, most of the programmes are organised around a male presenter who ‘manages’ the women and brings them in to contribute their bit of knowledge.
And whether it's Gardeners' Question Time or Muck and Magic , the central person is a man who seems like the ultimate expert.
It's nearly always a woman who talks about house plants; it's nearly always a man who talks about the real vegetable garden and has the gnarled fingers.
I think that we're talking about different spheres of television, and within academia, of course, we tend to separate out these spheres.
You know, some of us specialise in soap operas and some of us in news.
But, of course, for audiences, in terms of their experience of representation of gender in the media, television works across those spheres.
So I think in academic work, we must begin to read across television programmes.
It's not just that we're going to write articles about EastEnders , but what we're interested in is EastEnders ,The Bill ,Brookside , because a lot of people actually watch these programmes, and there is clearly a way in which programmes do seem to be referencing each other and dealing with similar topics.
If you start looking across the week's or month's programmes you'll see the same issue being brought up in a number of different areas, and that's what we've got to start theoretically thinking about.
RB
Are you also saying that soap operas, in particular— it may be other programmes as well — are picking up on and creating a space for discussing topics that really are preoccupying people, and rendering conscious a lot of issues that are ‘out there’ already?
TP
Yes, I think that an insight feminists have had about soap operas, about the real contributions they make, is that they're a way of starting conversations about important topics, either in the family or with colleagues at work or whatever.
Soap opera watchers don't just stick to some sort of naive interest in characters and plot.
There's something about the soap opera form that really does encourage discussion because it spells out and gives you lots of time to consider these moral or personal dilemmas.
It does focus on the person in a way that perhaps a crime series doesn't.
In EastEnders you really are concerned with whether or not Sharon should be trying to find her mother, or whether her mother should really have treated Sharon like that, and whether Michelle should have told Sharon that her mother was pregnant.
And we have a lot of time to think about this and discuss it.
As you said, it's creating a space for discussing topics that really preoccupy people.
So the same topic comes up in different forms in different soap operas.
For instance, this whole issue of parenthood — whether it's Dallas or Dynasty there's the issue of who's the real father, or children who are suddenly discovered, or sisters that were abandoned: are they real sisters?
Can that be resolved by blood tests?
So those issues about ‘blood’ relations as ‘natural’bonds have been  dealt with in some grand, melodramatic way in the American soaps and are now also coming into the British soaps, in less melodramatic forms, but it's significant that there's a lot of concern, not around motherhood but actually more around fatherhood.
I think the rights of fathers is what is being investigated in the narrative now.
RB
You're quite right that it's been dealt with in an extraordinary number of soaps because, in Brookside , Tracey Corkhill has had an abortion and the story's been tied in with fatherhood — with Barry, her lover, losing out on fatherhood.
A number of different positions were taken there and nothing was clear-cut but it was paralleled by the story of Terry finding out that his wife, Sue's baby is not ‘his’.
And then really ‘overdetermined’ with Barry's mother, Sheila, confiding her lifelong secret to Terry and Billy Corkhill that Barry's father was not, as everyone thought, her first husband!
So what you say about the rights of fathers is also about who is the ‘real’ father — the biological father or the man who cares for the child?
At the same time,EastEnders confronted the identical issue of the contested fatherhood of Cindy's child.
What's going on here?
KJ
Are soaps in a sense the subconscious of patriarchy — where patriarchy is reflecting on itself via these various problematic issues which are unresolvable within the terms that patriarchy sets?
That's why there are no solutions and the characters endlessly go around in circles in discussions.
But what is a father is essentially a problem for men, isn't it?
RB
But it has material consequences for women, doesn't it?
As we've seen with Terry in Brookside .
After the fatherhood revelations he threw out his wife and child and became violent and aggressive.
And the issue spilled into the tabloid press and the TV Times with readers asked to judge between the rights and wrongs of Sue keeping quiet and Terry's hurt pride.
TP
I think, though, I'm always disappointed the way it seems to be that soaps raise this issue but then come back and resolve it by saying the real father is the blood father.
It seems to be that soaps are endlessly doing that, they want to say maybe nurture is actually more important than blood, but then they pull back and keep reasserting the importance of blood ties.
I think, in fact, if I'm right about soaps becoming more conservative in this way, then does this mean that feminist arguments are no longer seen as relevant for a mass audience?
That feminism as a movement has lost any real impact in popular culture?
KJ
Couldn't you argue that the reverse is true, looking on the optimistic side?
That there is precisely all this debate about fatherhood because feminism has made it problematic?
TP
I think that's why there's the debate, but what worries me is this new phase.
The form it's taking is not extremely reactionary, I wouldn't want to say that, but it does seem to me that it's shifting away from progressive  forms of narrative resolution that were available a few years ago.
Maybe soap has had its day as a place where those more progressive arguments are being investigated.
They've shifted into other areas like the police series.
KJ
There's been a very interesting episode of The Bill which is about wife battering and makes all kinds of progressive points that wife batterers are not, in fact, the sort of British lower-class people of the stereotype.
In fact, the nastiest wife batterer — who was presented as somebody quite chilling — was a graduate (I'm not sure what that says about graduates) and it did end with his wife actually leaving him.
Having gone through all the arguments such as‘he doesn't really mean it’, and ‘he loves me really’, she finally leaves with the support of the police, particularly the WPC.
OK, that's an isolated episode, but had a feminist film crew gone out to make a documentary about wife battering I don't think it could have been done more successfully.
TP
The Bill 's interesting, I think, because they do have quite a few isolated episodes, like that issue of wife battering, which can be quite progressive.
But in terms of the discourse of law and order they're incredibly reactionary so they're really contradictory texts.
KJ
But is that contradictory?
I think that what links those two apparently contradictory aspects is precisely a concern with morality.
I think that soaps and crime series are two of the few arenas where moral questions are debated.
Certainly you don't get them debated in current affairs programmes, that's the public sector, the realm of strategy, the realm of knowledge and expertise.
Whereas it's civil society — as represented in the soaps — where you've got debates around morality and culture.
And perhaps it's the case that police series are uniquely able to take over those questions because of the traditional link with crime.
But in the process, they're actually slipping away from the traditional law and order discourse.
When crime series started it was quite clear who were the goodies and who were the baddies.
Now the bounds are becoming blurred and they take on rather broader questions of the social good and morality, personal and public.
RB
But then take a hospital series like Casualty which has been quite explicitly set in the context of a decaying health service.
There's that key body of staff, who have romances and do conventional hospital drama/ Emergency Ward 10 type things, but in addition they are fighting against stereotypes and taking on contemporary issues.
I think Casualty was very much engaged with what it was like to live under Thatcherism.
TP
Casualty had a very clear anti-Thatcher perspective that The Bill didn't.
KJ
But you can see the same ideological contours behind it, in that here are a body of professionals who are trying to shore up a crumbling system.
They are dealing with problems created elsewhere.
TP
But take something like South of the Border , a detective series with two women detectives and a woman lawyer as the three central characters.
What I think's different about this series is that whereas Casualty and The Bill are about the state sector, what South of the Border seems to be about is the impossibility of the state ever actually doing anything right.
And so the state sector isn't in the fiction at all, and things are worked out from the outside by slightly maverick women, sorting out the problems created by the state — whether it's in terms of poverty or wife bashing.
KJ
I think that was much truer of the first series.
The second series really went off the boil because there was much more emphasis on the woman lawyer.
In the first series the emphasis was all on the very street-sussed young women who went out and solved all kinds of crimes, problems and so on.
Now I think that the woman lawyer has been foregrounded as if the law actually does have a part to play.
The law may need a bit of help round the edges but that is absolutely essential.
Also, in terms of relationships between the characters, in the first series I think there was definitely a lesbian sub-text in the relationship between the two detectives.
That's completely gone, and now with the emphasis on the woman lawyer the interest is in her relationship with her cute young male assistant lawyer.
So it's actually changed its focus.
TP
I certainly find South of the Border still one of the most attractive things actually available on television for women.
I find at the moment there is very little I actually want to watch, that I'm actually disillusioned, I'm getting very little pleasure!
RB
But on one pleasure note, I want to make a plug for the Making Out series.
Making Out sounds most unpromising — about a group of women workers in a clapped-out Manchester electronics factory.
But its appeal is that it's so over-the-top in every aspect, from the breathtaking plot lines to the flashy glamour clothes the women delight in wearing.
Dressing up to the nines is seen as ‘making out’ with the men but it's also about declaring their independence as women — including economic independence from men.
And that's an aspect that often gets excluded from soap opera precisely because of the emphasis on the domestic.
But Making Out highlights how important it is for women to have a job and be with other women workers — often in very crummy circumstances, but actually being very resilient with a lot of humour and girl talk.
The women talk endlessly about men and wanting men.
But at the same time, they're absolutely clear-eyed about what men can ‘deliver’: namely, a route to children, a bit of sex and some social security.
But apart from that, these women are having most enjoyment from being together as women.
TP
What I like about Making Out and South of the Border is how they celebrate aspects of femininity — a celebration of excess.
I think Making  Out is vulgar and that's wonderful.
Making Out and South of the Border have an immense amount of energy that maybe soaps are now lacking.
RB
Making Out does remind me, though, of strong women like Bet, Rita and Deirdre in Coronation Street .
But I think you're right about soaps recently getting sidetracked into men and men's problems.
And maybe we're looking in other places now for where that energy among women, that excess is appearing.
TP
Yes, because actually thinking about it across the board, those energetic women in soaps have been married off or calmed down.
Pat in EastEnders and Bet in Coronation Street who were both, I think, wonderful before they got married have really become very boring now that they've got husbands, and Rita, of course, has been through the terrible chastening and disempowering experience of a ‘film noir ’femme fatale .
But if these strong women have been suppressed in soaps, it's reassuring that elsewhere in television they're erupting and ‘coming out’ as it were.
Independent Women
VICKY GRUT
IN 1989 I was working for a community video project called Women's Media Resources.
Today I no longer work in the grant-aided sector and a great number of women who were my colleagues and contemporaries have moved on to work in broadcast or cable television.
Seen at the level of individual choices there is perhaps nothing remarkable about this shift from fringe to mainstream.
What is significant, however, is that few of the grant-aided organisations that we came from still exist today.
In London the Women's Film and TV Network, Converse Pictures, Women in Sync and Aphra Workshops have all lost their funding and closed their doors in the last few years.
The national network of community-based media workshops is being decimated and little has emerged to replace it.
I spoke to a number of women who started their working lives in the grant-aided film and video sector, to find out whether the personal choices they had made could be given any wider significance.
Have the political and creative aspirations of the sector been abandoned in the climate of new realism’, or is this simply the beginning of a new phase?
Can the aims of non-hierarchical, collective, equal opportunities practice, and the encouragement of diverse political and cultural perspectives be translated into mainstream practice, or were these simply unworkable ideals?
Was it all a heroic failure?
Not all that long ago the term ‘independent sector’ described a broad but distinct territory of critical practice in film and video.
In 1979 Rod Stoneman (now a commissioning editor for Channel 4) could argue confidently for increased subsidy for alternative networks of film exhibition and distribution because
the independent film movement aims to understand the cinema not as a profit-making machine confined to the realm of ‘mass entertainment, but  as one of the central means whereby a society consciously speaks to and thus understands itself…
British film practice, to fulfil its potential function, must be more than a business enterprise.
A couple of years later, introducing the first season of ‘New Independents’ on the newly launched Channel 4, Alan Fountain wrote of the flowering of a new dimension of British film culture from the late sixties onwards, which ‘recognised the need for a more imaginative, more politically responsive and aesthetically daring British Cinema’, linking this movement with the radical film-making tradition of the thirties.
In the same pamphlet, Jeremy Isaacs, then Chief Executive of Channel 4, proclaimed that the channel was ‘determined to fulfil its brief of bringing new voices, new forms and new areas of subject matter to British television.
We look to the independent film-makers’ movement to help us do that, and we welcome their work to the screen.
The independent film movement, broadly speaking, grew out of an art tradition.
Initially the main focus was on experimental production but, as the movement gained ground, questions of audience and of access to technology and skills became increasingly important.
The late seventies saw the establishment of the first women's film/video distributors, Cinema of Women, followed, some years later, by a second distributor, Circles.
Women-only production groups like Leeds Animation Workshop made films about childcare and sexual harassment.
The Women's Film and TV Network was set up to link women working in the industry and to encourage training and employment opportunities for women in the media.
Cinewomen in Norwich began their annual women's film festival: in independent cinemas and community centres, projects like Women's Media Resource Project established regular slots for exhibiting women's work in both film and video.
With the advent of affordable and easy to use video equipment in the early eighties, community access workshops burgeoned, and local authorities and education authorities were added to the Regional Arts Association and the British Film Institute as sources of funding.
Many of these workshops were run by and for women only.
With a growing network of access workshops, independent cinemas and video screening facilities, and the increasing prevalence of home video recorders, there was a real prospect of a non-broadcast alternative to the mainstream media.
Tapes could be made for specific campaigns, for use in education, or simply to cater for communities of interest too small to be considered by the broadcasters.
Into this climate came Channel 4, set up with a percentage of advertising revenue from ITV and a remit to provide for ‘minority’ audiences.
They too put funds into a network of franchised workshops — some of them specifically Black or women-only workshops — to encourage new perspectives on the  small screen.
Women, the working class, Black and ethnic minority communities were at last to be given access to the language and the medium of the twentieth century.
Today, deep into a third term of Conservative government, the hopes and phrases of this time have the ring of a bygone era.
Subsidy is no longer allocated on grounds of long-term benefit, nor to give voice to disenfranchised ‘minorities’, nor to promote media literacy or experimental practice.
The Greater London Council and Metropolitan County Councils have been abolished and local authorities are reeling from the cumulative effects of government interference, rate capping, and the poll tax.
The British Film Institute and the various arts associations are showing an increasing reluctance to take risks with what funds they have left.
With deregulation, the broadcast industry faces pressure to abandon any concept of a ‘public service remit’ for the artistic policy of the market-place.
The privatisation of Channel 4 means it too will have to enter the ratings war, competing with an increasing number of channels for a decreasing pool of advertising revenue.
The ideology of enterprise culture has finally permeated the remaining institutions of British cultural life.
So where does this leave the independent sector?
Caroline Spry, the Channel 4 commissioning editor responsible for series like Out on Tuesday and Women Call the Shots , thinks it's no longer possible to use the word in its old sense any more; most of the other women I spoke to agreed with her.
Once it meant political independence and freedom from commercial pressures, but given the increasingly prescriptive and bureaucratic nature of grant-aid that has become a dubious notion.
Today, in the climate of deregulation, the term ‘independent’ is generally used in the purely economic sense, to refer to the growing number of smaller commercial companies operating outside the BBC/ITV duopoly.
For Caroline Spry, what has happened to the women's film and video sector must be seen in the context of the dissipation of the broader women's movement.
She was involved in the London Women's Film Group and the setting up of Cinema of Women in the late seventies; then there was a sense of a political project, opportunities for women to meet and discuss ideas and motivations.
Today, she says, the issues are still there but the analytical context isn't.
A far greater number of women work in television than did ten or fifteen years ago, but, as far as the industry is concerned, women and women's issues are off the agenda; non-subjects.
Surely, however, the women who do make the transition from the grant-aided sector to the mainstream bring with them a history of political and creative experience which must make itself felt in the long run?
Most of the women I spoke to felt that, though perhaps not direct, there was a relationship between the grant-aided sector and the mainstream.
Karen Hamilton used to work for a community video workshop on the Isle of Dogs and is now a  freelance director.
She points to a growth of interest in access TV and says that there is an awareness, ‘in certain pockets of the industry’, that people from the grant-aided sector bring useful experience in working with a wide variety of people and communities.
Until recently Jo Neylin was organising subsidised script-writing courses and development initiatives for women through the grant-aided Aphra Workshops.
Now she sees many of the ideas being picked up by the commercial companies with which she had dealings because they believe it brings new talent into the industry.
Nicola Field, once a member of the first lesbian and gay production group, Converse Pictures, now working as a freelance researcher, has been able to maintain her focus on sexuality and lesbian and gay politics in a way that might have been more difficult five or ten years ago.
She feels that the old-style independent sector, like the wider political movements of which it was part, was important in creating a climate of interest, a sense of the possible without which, she believes, programmes like Out on Tuesday could not have been made.
Boundaries between the ‘fringe’ and mainstream media have blurred, but for many women this appears a selective process of appropriation, a plucking of ‘useful’radical ideas from their political context.
Whatever the long-term effects, there are great advantages in working in the mainstream: access to vastly superior resources and a huge potential audience; the pay is also infinitely better, albeit insecure if you are freelance.
What you lose, however, in the transition from the grant-aided sector is a degree of control.
You have to fit into the industrial model of working based on hierarchical divisions of skills and responsibilities.
For many women who come from an experience of collective or cooperative working, this is hard to accept.
For Nicola Field: ‘As you go on working you learn and you gain more experience and you start to get frustrated with being a side-kick and having your ideas continually being taken up and used by someone else.’
Greater specialisation can also narrow horizons: ‘For me, the highest pinnacle of achievement now is to be the director of a broadcast production.
Before, the highest pinnacle of achievement would have been to make something that would change the world.’
Siobhan Cleary is a member of Despite TV, a co-op who have recently completed their first broadcast commission,Battle of Trafalgar , a documentary on the Trafalgar Square poll tax riots.
The tape was made collectively, and Siobhan still sees herself as part of an alternative to the mainstream.
Like most women who have worked in it, she is critical of the grant-aided sector but despite the failures, she believes that the original aims were worthwhile.
On collective working she says
People didn't realise it was an ideal.
You will keep failing in a society based on hierarchical power but that doesn't mean you should stop trying to build a structure in which you all have the opportunity to be part of the  editorial and creative process…
Hopes and opportunities, that's all they represent, these ideals, but I'd like to keep on trying to achieve them.
Siobhan resents the fact that the mainstream broadcasting industry is presented as the only way of working.
One of the cons of the mainstream is the industrial process and that's what you choose to join or not when you have the necessary skills.
The reason it ends up swallowing and eating everything is that it's seen as the only choice.
It's an industry that isn't any different from producing sausages.
The reason that it's able to hide that fact is the idea that it's a creative industry.
Karen Hamilton, as a director, feels that it is still possible to work collectively within a hierarchy, given the right working relationships and circumstances.
People do sit down to discuss and pool ideas, but in mainstream broadcasting boundaries are more rigid between technical and conceptual areas and she misses the opportunity to use her technical skills: ‘If you see a shot that you really like you can't just grab the camera and say, ‘Oh, can I have a go.’
It can be quite frustrating.’
It is also in the technical field that women are noticeably absent.
Many more women seem to have entered the industry as researchers, producers and directors than in the technical grades of lighting, camera or sound, despite all the schools' career information days and the campaigns to train women in non-traditional skills.
As a young director working with all-male crews, Karen has had to confront a high level of overt sexism, something the grant-aided sector doesn't necessarily prepare you for.
‘You can challenge that but you have to pick your moments’, she says.
‘You can't keep challenging it all the time because otherwise they just stop listening to you.
You get pigeon-holed.’
Andrea Newman and Susannah Lopez are two women who have chosen to remain exclusively in the grant-aided sector and who are struggling to maintain that working practice as an option for other women.
They run Cinestra Pictures, the only subsidised women's video co-op left in London.
Cinestra offers a regular training programme, and for the past few years has operated a highly successful bursary scheme for new video makers which also offers practical production experience for the women they train.
As co-op members they also retain the right to work on projects of their own, rejecting the ‘professional’ distinction between ‘workers’and ‘clients’that funding agencies try to impose.
‘Places like this were set up for disenfranchised groups’, says Susannah Lopez, one of the two co-op members.
‘Andrea and myself, as a working-class woman and a Black woman, come from those groups, and feel we should have the chance to express our ideas as much as anyone else.’
Even though financially the future is insecure, Susannah and Andrea are  determined that, whatever happens Cinestra will continue in some form.
They see secondary schools undertaking some of the work that the community-based workshops once aimed to do.
GCSE and A level media studies courses which give students a basic practical and theoretical knowledge of film and video are now available.
Cinestra is currently collaborating with the London Women's Network of Media Resource Officers to support work in schools.
Ultimately, much of the debate comes down to the question of choice , the word that the Tories have so successfully colonised in rhetoric and so often failed to deliver in reality.
With her experience in the grant-aided sector, Karen Hamilton was able to choose to move into mainstream broadcasting and, on a personal level, it's been a very positive experience for her.
On the other hand she regrets the collapse of the grant-aided sector because other women like her may not have the same opportunities in the future.
At the moment she sees the mainstream industry benefiting from the wealth of new perspectives, the risk-taking and experimentation that the grant-aided sector encourages, but for how much longer?
Equally, women like Susannah and Andrea have chosen to continue their work in the grant-aided sector but at some point that option may no longer remain open to them.
For Caroline Spry the most important things that the grant-aided sector offered were the opportunities to learn, to experiment and, if necessary, to fail.
The sums of money involved in broadcast television will always stifle the impulse to take risks.
However, she concedes that there will probably always be people who choose to work outside the mainstream, though they may not be formally organised or funded in the future.
Siobhan Cleary agrees:
There is the whole cam-corder culture that isn't funded at all…a revolution under people's noses.
People are becoming visually literate.
There are exciting new developments all the time as the technology becomes more available.
She believes we will see a new politics emerge, in which pleasure and individual responsibility will no longer be subjugated to the ‘correct, collective line’; though the institutional landscape is changing, a radical, independent sector will continue to exist.
I feel a little less optimistic.
For all its failings the grant-aided sector represented a coherent attempt to bring new people and new perspectives to the media.
As one woman, newly employed in a TV production company put it:
In the grant-aided sector we used to sit around in our meetings thinking of ways we could open things out and get away from things being dominated by White middle-class people.
Here we just all are White and middle class.
It's never mentioned.
It's just taken for granted.
As for informal movements, they may be more creatively productive but they also tend to exclude those who are less confident or advantaged to begin with.
If equipment or projects must be subsidised from individual pockets, if there are no resources for creche facilities or disabled access it's difficult to envisage genuinely equal opportunities.
I can only hope I am proved wrong: things have gone too far to turn back the tide.
Susannah Lopez should perhaps have the last word:
It sounds posey perhaps, but Althusser says something along the lines of when there are breaks that's when you have a chance to change things, a chance to nip in through the cracks and grab the moment.
We can't stop the change, I'd rather become part of it.
I for one hope they will be.
Children and TV: Exploring Gendered Reading
GEMMA MOSS
In this article I look at differences between the way girls and boys talk about television, using data collected from single-sex groups of seven and nine year olds in a suburban state primary school with a predominantly White and middle-class catchment.
I want to take issue with the idea that children are in any simple sense appropriating gender roles from the texts they consume, and argue instead that we should pay more attention to the social process which structure gendered readings.
Women Read Women Readers
Feminist attention to popular texts with a predominantly female readership, such as the romance genre, soap operas or magazines, is changing.
Angela McRobbie's early piece, ‘Jackie : An Ideology of Adolescent Femininity’, used textual analysis to generate an account of a powerfully coercive text, profoundly influencing susceptible readers.
(McRobbie 1978) Subsequent work has challenged the view that political effects follow straightforwardly from the reading of particular genres and suggested that, in according texts all the power, and readers none, much of the debate about women readers is dangerously misogynist in tone:(Light 1984), Moss 1989b):
Feminists must baulk at any…conclusion which implies that the vast audience of romance readers (with the exception of a few up-front  intellectuals) are either masochistic or inherently stupid.
Both text and reader are more complicated than that.
(Light 1984)
A more positive view of women readers has been suggested by, for instance, analysing what girls say about their reading (Frazer 1987), or by examining the ways in which they incorporate its models into their own writing.
(Moss 1989a) A view of all-powerful texts exerting ideological effects on a vulnerable readership has been replaced by a more complex understanding of the relationship between text and reader in which texts appear more contradictory and readers able to answer back.
This shift in emphasis to an active readership has been echoed elsewhere in media studies, with a considerable increase in the amount of empirical audience research.
Yet here, too, much of the most influential work continues to be produced by feminists, about genres associated with a female readership.
(Hobson 1982, Ang 1985, Radway 1984, Brunsdon 1986) Perhaps women have most to gain by refusing to identify with the implied passive reader suggested by the ideological model.
They may be more aware of the contradictory nature of their actual relationship with the texts they read.
Feminists need a more dynamic view of reading, one which maintains a political perspective, but which at the same time concedes that there is room for manoeuvre between text and audience.
Reading and Politics
Paying attention to real readers is certainly one productive way of breaking out of the view that the text alone determines audience response, but it is not without its difficulties.
On the positive side, work in audience studies has made interesting links between individual viewing patterns and their social context.
(Brunsdon 1986) By paying attention to actual audience behaviours, some myths have been dispelled, and some new insights have been gained.
(Palmer 1986, Radway 1984) But at the same time, such research raises many questions; not least, how to make sense of the accounts readers give of their activity as they read.
Janice Radway's Reading the Romance , a detailed study of compulsive romance reading, is a case in point.
At the back of Radway's enquiry into women's romance reading lies a question about the political impact of such activity.
Is reading the romance a politically progressive or politically reactionary move?
Yet the women Radway interviews are not presented explicitly with this question.
The questions Radway asks about the romance focus on form, to the exclusion of broader political questions.
These women are not being asked to give their views on the position of women in society, abortion rights, state funding for  crèches , etc.
They are being asked directly about their leisure time reading.
Inevitably what they have to say about texts looks apolitical.
They have not  recognised the hidden agenda.
To extrapolate what they might say about women's experience under patriarchy on the basis of comments about the reading material they choose is quite a leap.
No one asks male thriller readers questions about their reading and extrapolates from that to their political state of health.
Why is it that women readers, whether of the romance, the soap or girls' magazines, are so often used in this way?
This quest for political certainties leads to a mismatch between the researcher's and the interviewees' agenda.
Far too much attention goes to the final judgements readers offer on the text, not enough to the context within which such remarks are generated.
Answering the question ‘why read romances?’ by picking the statement, ‘Because I like to read about the strong, virile heroes’, is likely to be interpreted as the reader's view of masculinity, rather than a comment on the textual function of the male hero in the romance.
Commentators need to be clear about whether they are enquiring into interviewees' reading or their politics.
This is not to say that reading happens outside of the domain of politics, but that we can't easily conflate the two.
A Social View of Reading
The view that texts simply impose their meaning on readers has long since crumbled in the face of the evidence, as audience studies have pretty conclusively shown.
Indeed it is now uncontroversial to talk of texts as a ‘polysemic potential of meaning’ rather than as carriers of a single message.
(Fiske 1987, p. 67) By stressing that more than one meaning is available, that complete closure of the text is rarely achieved, a space opens up between text and audience.
In the reader-response tradition this space is then filled according to individual sensitivity.
There is no room for social, political or historical questions, just an individual free-for-all in choosing which meanings to make.
Within media studies, on the other hand, the temptation is to see a pre-given social identity of race, class, gender limiting the possibilities of infinite variety, so that readings are not so much ‘produced’ in particular settings as assumed to be the product of a fixed exchange between the reader's social position and the text.
I want to argue, however, readers use their knowledge of reading as a socially differentiated practice to make sense of texts.
What it means to be a reader varies according to how the text is circulated, what kinds of attention are paid to it, in what social setting.
Reading Data
To explore what I mean further, I want to examine some data collected as part of a larger project looking at children and television.
This data is apposite because, like women, children are often treated as a particularly vulnerable audience, at risk from the material they consume: whilst, like the romance, television is often seen as a particularly potent source of ideological contamination.
The data (interview transcripts) raises clear issues of gender difference.
Each interview was with a single-sex group of girls or boys, and I began by asking them to choose their favourite character or person on TV and tell me a bit about them.
Next I would lay out pictures of a variety of TV people and characters, ranging from presenters like Cilla Black or Philip Schofield, through soap characters such as Bobby from Home and Away or Todd from Neighbours , to puppets such as Edd the Duck, who appears alongside the presenter in children's BBC television.
The children would be asked to choose someone they liked to talk about, and then someone they disliked.
This process would be repeated until we ran out of time, cards or interest in what we were doing.
By looking in detail at the different responses this process elicited, I want to raise some questions about reading as a specific social activity.
Edd the duck (BBC)
Reading the Context
Interestingly, this activity set up references to two different reading contexts: reading television, the context in which the characters originally appeared; and reading pictures, the format in which the characters were presented.
So Katie made the following comment shortly after she had picked up a card showing Mitch from Baywatch :
He's a hunk…
That's all I've got to say.
[She laughs.]
Whilst no boys used the term ‘hunk’, several of the girls used it, always in relation to two particular images: Mitch from Baywatch , and Todd from Neighbours .
The picture of Mitch shows just his bare head and shoulders in close-up.
He is apparently emerging from the sea, as he is dripping wet and in the background there are waves.
He is grinning straight at the camera.
Todd's picture is more restrained.
It is a studio portrait which is vaguely reminiscent of formal school photographs.
It does not show him in character.
But it too is a close-up showing only head and shoulders, with Todd gazing straight at the  camera.
(None of the other photographs shared this particular composition, though some were of personalities who could be thought of as ‘hunky’ men — Philip Schofield, for instance.)
The way these two photographs were organised (the pose, in close-up; the look, directly at camera) indicates neither the role these two actors play in their respective dramas, nor abstracted qualities of masculinity, but locates these images firmly in the context of a particular social practice: girls looking at pin-ups in teenage magazines (one of these runs a ‘hunk of the week’ slot).
The girls showed their recognition of the generic form by describing these two images as ‘hunks’.
To be labelled a hunk is to be the kind of image that girls can talk about, laugh at and giggle over together.
Indeed Katie's group, when I'd pushed them into talking about Mitch a little more, spent most of their time examining his picture and finding fault with his appearance.
(That this is very much a familiar routine, a group activity of question and answer, becomes obvious in listening to the tape by the amused yet ironic tones in which Katie rushes to supply answers to her own questions.)
Ashwina:
Do you like his teeth?
They're wonky.
[Katie giggles.]
Mitch from Baywatch 
Katie:
Do you like his shoulders, they're too big, no they're too big.
Do you like his eyes?
No.
[Laughter.]
Danielle:
He's got big shoulders.
Ashwina:

[demonstrates a sloping line]No, they're weird, his shoulders go, they don't square up like shoulder pads, they go .
Todd from Neighbours 
In talking about the image of Mitch as a hunk, the girls construct a female gaze which mocks as it dissects.
Together they laugh at and take to pieces these images of masculinity, rather than sexualising and adoring them.
In the process of reading the images they construct themselves as a particular kind of audience.
The pleasures stem from reading together in this way.
Taking up Positions as Readers
Knowledge of the ways in which texts circulate colours reading.
Without recognising that knowledge of this kind is in play, we may misinterpret what is said about particular texts.
In the discursive space in which reading takes place, readers can decide what kind of attention will be paid to the text, and what kind of audience to be.
In talking about Mitch's picture the girls are invoking a view of themselves as readers.
What they have to say is not the result of a private negotiation between self and text, nor is it an unmediated response of gender identity to a representation of masculinity: it is mediated by the position they take up as readers.
Here knowledge of material practices and social understanding combine to enable them to read the text in specific ways.
The position a reader will take up certainly cannot in any simple sense be read off from the text considered in abstract.
Mitch's image alone does not make clear that he will be mocked rather than taken seriously as an object of desire.
It is possible to play with the distance between the position taken up as a reader and the meaning the text seems to offer.
Take the following comments made by Ashwina in reply to my opening invitation to talk about a particular character she liked on television.
Ashwina chose Jamie, a baby in the soap opera Neighbours :
I like Jamie in Neighbours .
I like it 'cos you know when Daphne had a car crash, just because Jamie was in the car, my brother said that Jamie crashed the car and when the coffee shop blew up…my brother said 'cos Bronwyn was holding the baby when she saw it, he said that Jamie blew the coffee shop up [laughs].
He's cute, and podgy.
Ashwina's brother is telling a joke which subverts the text — Jamie is of course a purely innocent presence.
In recounting the anecdote, Ashwina can claim to be part of a shared network of understandings.
Indeed, in answering my question, identifying her place in a knowing audience is more important than supplying ‘accurate’ information about Jamie's role, which is added only as an afterthought: ‘He's cute and podgy’.
Constructing a Gendered Audience
Establishing their place in the audience, their position as readers, played a major part in these interviews.
Yet there were clear differences in the ways in which girls and boys presented themselves.
Much of what the girls had to say functioned as a display of their involvement as readers.
They would recall how they had reacted to key moments: ‘It was brilliant.
I started crying’; ‘That was very funny, I was laughing my head off.’
Whilst they disagreed about the objects of their enthusiasm, they didn't take issue with the idea of being a fan, so Mireille can safely say about Edd the Duck:
He's funny…he's cute and people draw him pictures and clothes.
I drew him that, I gave him one of those [pointing to the jumper he is wearing in the picture].
For the boys, things are rather different.
The picture they paint of themselves as readers is much more distanced.
They concentrate on showing themselves as knowledgeable rather than involved, as experts who can impart information.
Leon:
Baldrick's very funny.
What's his real name?
Gemma:
Tony Robinson.
Leon:
His real name's Tony Robinson, he's in Blackadder and he's in Points of View as well and he's funny.
By repeating the name here, now redundant information, Leon behaves rather as one might in producing a character profile.
He marshals the facts and then presents them.
Later he will comment on Cilla Black:
She used to be an old singer, I don't know any of her songs, but I just know she was an old singer.
Michael similarly stresses the information he has gleaned.
In talking about Philip Schofield he quickly gets into a detailed explanation of the rules of the game he hosts:
He entertains this game called The Movie Game .
There's this board you have to go up, you can say if you want one space, three spaces and you can go round the board and…
To have read the Philip Schofield text is to have an exact knowledge of the rules.
The boys make far fewer direct references to their own responses.
Instead irony is used to make it difficult to gauge the speaker's relationship to a particular character or text.
As Philip says:
I like B. A. Baracus 'cos he's not very strong…
He's weak.
He can only pick up one person and throw him two metres…
I can pick up a person and throw him two metres.
Philip's dead-pan comments refer to the ‘hulk’ in the A Team , whose incredible strength is part of the Team's success in defeating their enemies.
Such irony shows considerable awareness of the judgements that can be made about readers.
Philip's comments provide an ironic commentary on other (younger?) readers who identify strongly with the B. A. He suggests the possibility of using the text to bolster the male reader's own claims to superhuman strength even as he simultaneously dismisses this as fantasy.
In other words, he shows a recognition of the social uses to which reading can be put, the ways in which knowledge about texts is deployed.
And in this instance, he is only too aware of the kind of judgements I may make about him as a child reader, and tailors his reply accordingly.
Later he will make a sharp division between himself and women readers when he says about Cilla Black:
I like it when she says ‘Surprise, Surprise’, it's so funny, and I like it when they all start crying, 'cos they're happy and they all start crying 'cos they're thick and my mum starts to cry and you say ‘Why are you crying, it's meant to be happy?’ and she goes ‘Weaarrh’.
Thick!
The ironic male viewer stands apart whilst the women are moved to tears.
Irony is used here to mock an emotional response, identified as always female, always stupid.
In this particular interview irony was continuously deployed against almost any remark other boys made which hinted at any involvement with the text.
Asked about Mitch, Steven said:
Steven:
I've seen him in Baywatch and I've seen him in Knightrider .
Gemma:
Which do you prefer him in?
Steven:
Baywatch.
Gemma:
What's good about him in Baywatch ?
Steven:
He dives in the water.
Philip:
He can swim, it's amazing!
Where boys are most likely to drop this stance is when a whole group is having a go at a particular character, as this group is with Dot Cotton:
Edward:
She's a prat and a dork, she acts funny, she looks like an old cow.
Michael:
I hope she's going to fall in the laundry soon.
Alex:
I hope she dies of violence.
Michael:
Gets run over or something.
Offering exaggerated disapproval of a particular character seems safe territory.
It is tempting to pathologise the ways in which the boys behave.
Certainly my initial impression was that the older boys in particular were resisting the task I'd set them.
One whole session disintegrated into insulting every single character whose picture they looked at.
In the boys' groups, any  recognition that images of girls might have a different value from images of boys was met with intense embarrassment.
One group of boys initially wouldn't choose any cards showing female characters, and taunted each other by suggesting that the cards nearest each other were their respective girl friends (always indignantly denied).
The connotations of ‘reading’ the image are cast differently for them.
Differences between the girls' and boys' groups were marked chiefly by the extent to which they represented themselves as involved readers.
No such clear-cut patterns emerge when looking at the substance of their preferences: whom they had chosen to comment on, and whether they regarded them favourably or unfavourably.
For each group, the prime audience for their account of themselves as readers were other members of the group in a specific social setting.
I would want to argue from this that rather than the combination of gender and text leading to a particular kind of meaning being produced, particular kinds of reading are being used to mark gender difference.
Reader Activity
My interviewees are taking up subject positions as readers as they talk to me.
They are actively presenting themselves as readers in this specific context.
Many readers do not offer themselves primarily as meaning-makers, seriously intent on puzzling over the significance of texts.
Notions of what it means to read are much more diverse, encompassing more than a judgement on the text, and always referring to an interplay between text and the discursive space in which judgements about it are formed.
How readers make sense of texts is dependent on their understanding of how texts are circulated and commented on in different settings.
We need to look beyond the social position readers already occupy to the ways in which reading as an activity is itself structured in different contexts.
Women at the Top in Television
INTERVIEW WITH NAOMI SARGANT
Naomi Sargant, who for the first eight years of Channel 4 as the Senior Commissioning Editor for Educational Programming, talked to Women about her experience of the television industry.
We began by asking her how she came to be in broadcasting.
I was working at the Open University as Pro-Vice-Chancellor in charge of student affairs.
I had also been taking up quite a lot of time for public service, chairing the National Gas Consumers' Council, and also, more relevantly, working under Richard Hoggart who was chairing the Advisory Council for Adult and Continuing Education, which had a remit to develop national policies for education as a process continuing throughout life.
Jeremy Isaacs and I had know each other for a long time.
We had never worked together, but we had been in and out of each other 's views and policies about education.
When he set up Channel 4, he was given a mandate to have a very significant chunk as education, which wasn't his background.
At dinner one evening, we were congratulating him on getting the job and he mentioned this educational remit and that he had no idea what to do.
I had just come out of one of my planning meetings and I metaphorically banged the table and said ‘I know exactly what you should do.’
About twenty minutes later he looked at me and said, ‘Well, I was thinking about advertising a job that looked something like this.’
I said that sounded reasonably sensible.
Then he said, ‘If I  was to advertise this job how likely would you be to apply for it?’, and suddenly the hairs prickled on the back of my neck, because I knew he was serious.
And it was, of course, a wonderful job.
The story about how he asked the head of current affairs, Liz Forgan, who had been at the Guardian , was equally idiosyncratic.
But what he did was to go outside broadcasting for two out of his three senior editorial jobs, the first main appointments.
How did you see your job?
I think what was different in my approach, and it partly goes back to my background, is that firstly I had been working on educational planning, and that secondly I come from a background of market research.
I had recently been representing consumers on the National Consumer Council, as well as chairing the National Gas Consumers' Council.
I was quite preoccupied with how big bodies like this were accountable and served people's needs.
Having come out of that side of politics rather than the other, I always start where people are, and with what they want, and what their lives are like, and what will help them.
We had been talking on the National Consumer Council a bit about the lack of accountability in broadcasting, and I had also, as part of my Advisory Council work, directed and written up the first major study about adults, educational experience and needs — two and a half thousand interviews all over England and Wales.
So in a sense I had quite accidentally just done the market research.
So when everyone said, ‘Aren't you doing any market research?’
I said I didn't need to, because the stuff was already embedded in my head.
I had figures which actually showed what people were watching what they would do if you gave them five to seven more hours of spare time a week, all the things they would like to learn about that they haven't already learned about.
All of this was already mapped out in a very decent and proper piece of research that I had just written up.
How did you then set about using that information?
The next stage was much more practical.
We went into discussions.
To start with I wondered how on earth I would be credible to all the media people.
I think it needs to be said quite clearly that the media, in particular television, is extremely arrogant, inward-looking, incestuous and emotional in its decision-making.
Academics are like that too, though they don't admit it.
Both the media and academia had generations who believed that they had got a production-based right to ‘do things to people’.
The media believed it knew what to give audiences just as academics believed they knew what is right to teach people and the way to teach them.
I don't actually quite agree with that.
I come from a learners' perspective, a needs' perspective, and I don't believe that anybody has a God-given right to make those programmes with all these  resources without thinking about it that way.
So would one be acceptable to them, because they are a heavy trade?
I began there as someone who was already a professor, I had been the first woman Pro-Vice-Chancellor in the country.
I actually had a serious educational reputation.
But television was so arrogant that none of them even knew that I had a previous reputation.
It was irrelevant to them, and I had to make my way with them from point one.
For the first year or so some of the people, particularly in the big independent television (ITV) companies, were incredibly scornful of both Liz Forgan and myself.
Because you were women, or because you came from outside?
Predominantly because we came from outside, but clearly assisted by the fact that we were women.
The overt thing was that we came in from outside, but I think the hidden thing was that we were women.
Indeed, Mike Scott at Granada refused to meet us, simply refused at the beginning to meet us, and would agree only to talk to Jeremy Isaacs.
It was very uncomfortable until firstly I started getting some of the programmes I had commissioned back, and secondly I saw on screen that some of them were going to be among the first successes of the Channel.
I have had similar experiences in the academic world.
It requires holding your nerve, being totally committed and believing absolutely that's what you have got to do.
Do you remember Tom Keating?
His was a series which I selected, one which had been turned down by one of my more ‘authentic’ colleagues, but it was a wonderful success.
Do you feel that it was then you had proved yourself in broadcasting?
There was no question.
Once we went on screen, some of my programmes were among the serious early successes, including Keating, and in the next summer, Janis Robinson and The Wine Programme .
Everyone knew these were clearly very, very high successes.
That was it.
But there was still a problem about the label Education, and also that I did have such a very large chunk of air-time, 15 per cent of the Channel.
It took people a long time to understand that Education had a much broader view on Channel 4, and that many of the things that would elsewhere have been informational, or features or factual, would actually find a home in my lot, rather than in Liz's.
So initially they defined Education very narrowly?
Everybody still does — there's this knee-jerk reaction that education equals learning, not even that,schooling .
If you think about it, the majority of bosses in the media are — not actually uneducated — but they have not by and large come through the graduate tracks.
Like computing, it's an industry where you  can make your way up.
It is very good for creativity but it does have some other problems.
It allows people not even to understand when they are being irrational.
But what about attitudes to you as a woman?
Well, let's say clearly about Channel 4 that what Jeremy Isaacs did was quite unique.
He had a different channel to set up and he was determined to do it differently.
He is on record as saying, ‘In thinking about how to be distinctive, where would you go for different talent?’
His view was that he was more likely to find unrecognised talent among women than among men.
There were no women in senior broadcasting jobs at all at that time.
So he made these first three senior commissioning editor appointments, effectively heads of big departments, appointing two women and one man.
That was extraordinary at that time.
And neither of the two women, myself from the OU, and Liz from the Guardian , were in television.
But that wasn't it.
We very quickly had a woman Head of Marketing, a woman in charge of publishing, a woman Head of Presentation, a woman Programme Manager, another woman commissioning editor, Sue Woodford, in charge of multi-cultural programming, Carol Haslam in charge of documentaries.
Then we rapidly had a large number of other women.
Yet when the BBC did their big programme two or three years ago (commissioned by Michael Grade) about women in the media, although they had phoned up and, as it were, picked our brains about women and Channel 4, they quite failed to honour the fact what Channel 4 had done.
I think it is arguable that the fact that Channel 4 did do something different, and for much of this period has had almost half of its management structure female, actually led, inside the Channel, to a totally taken-for-granted different way of behaving and thinking about things, and a lack of poncing around, a lack of all these other structures and hierarchies.
Instead for many, many years there has been in Channel 4 a culture, which allowed you to expect these matters to be dealt with properly, without being made to feel that you were being perverse in raising the issue yet again or that you were making a point or a special case.
What difference did it make to your work that you'd come from outside the television industry?
Once I was inside and looking at the space I had and the needs I had identified, I saw my task differently from the people who had come out of production, many of whom, whether men or women, continued to want to master/ mistressmind productions themselves as Executive Producer.
I always saw myself as a creator of space for particular needs, and I found the best ideas which fitted in with that need and that slot and I then encouraged and  challenged and stimulated and created the space for that production team to make that programme in the best possible way.
We were very open to a range of ideas from big to little; the mother of a mentally-handicapped child wrote in wanting to do something for mentally-handicapped children, and she had got an idea about setting it in the production office of a children's comic.
The idea gradually built up; David Wood, the children's writer, wrote the script; we went and found a company, and gradually put the thing (Chip's Comic)together.
It became an extremely successful series, done with Professor Chris Kiernan, with a special agenda for mentally-handicapped children but appearing like a rather glossy children's comic.
We would, for example, have a need for multi-cultural programmes, and there would be a proposal and we would say, ‘Right, let's talk to this company who has proposed it.
Is this proposal good enough?
Do we want to go with it?’
Much later on, if we had a need but no proposals, we might occasionally put that area out to tender.
There was one early proposal about archaeology which became a series called The Blood of the British , where they had come in with the idea of the series.
I was interested in the waves of immigration into Britain both pre-historically and later, and I kept on looking for proposals which would represent this both in multi-cultural and archaeological terms.
The archaeology proposal came in with a standard white, upper-class male name attached to it, a safe BBC voice, and I said, ‘Lovely idea, can't stand the presenter.
I went back to the guy and said, ‘Look, go away and find a bright young archaeologist, preferably female.’
So he came back with wonderful 
The Blood of the British : Catherine Hills (Channel 4)
Catherine Hills from Newham.
The effect of my activity was to get Catherine Hills put on screen.
So we get two things, we get a very good new personality, and secondly, an intelligent personality, and, therefore, and this is an important part of the strategy, she gets out of the other archaeologists she's talking to a much higher level of interaction and intellectual interchange than she would if she were simply a standard presenter.
This became for me a serious piece of policy.
The BBC would, at that stage, have had a generalist — the standard habit when I arrived in the field was that they would have a generalist producer, researcher, or somebody writing the script, cobbling together the best knowledge, whether the producer or researcher had worked on archaeology last time, flower-arranging next time, what have you after that…
They would film to fit their rather general level of understanding, a pooled regression to the mean of intellectual safeness.
The Janis Robinson programme is an exactly similar example.
Janis knew everything about wine and therefore was lovely and witty and intelligent and got this buzz out of the interchange.
It doesn't only happen with women: it happened in a different way with Tom Keating and Chris Frayling (who is Professor of Cultural History at the Royal College of Art).
I found myself putting the intelligence into my programmes not through a general researcher, but through the intellect of the presenter.
This is not precisely a feminist point, but retrospectively, all of these are points about somebody unorthodox coming in, who doesn't accept the orthodox rules, and comes out of Jeremy Isaacs' determination to do things differently, and so having women.
I sat and looked at what I had got to do and in quite lateral ways determined how to do it, which was not in the way they had always done it.
What is interesting is that you had a kind of real intellectual respect for intellectual content and expertise and professionalism in a way that previous programmers perhaps haven't.
The content has to be the most important thing.
When you know what you are trying to convey, then you think about the best possible or the most exciting or exhilarating way of communicating this.
You then put another layer of filters on, which is that if you have got to choose, you choose content areas which are very important to Britain, or you choose content areas which the camera can communicate best.
That was the other brilliant thing that Jeremy did.
I went through these areas that I wanted to work in and I argued with Jeremy that we hadn't allowed for ‘things visual’, that we had a visual medium, that Britain was profoundly under-educated visually, so that we should actually use television for visual education and he fell for this.
He came back the next day and gave me another £1.2 million and told me I could spend it in any way I wanted.
It didn't have to be for one slot, it didn't have to be in a particular form, it could be anything as long as it used the medium for visual  ends.
This led me into programmes like Tom Keating,Every window tells a story , which was about stained glass, Tudor miniatures, Edwin Mullins doing a Love Affair with Nature ,Paintability , that wonderful Pottery Ladies series on the old ladies who painted all the original designs for Charlotte Rheade, Clarice Cliff and Susie Cooper — in that series you had a fantastic combination of feminism, oral history, skill, design, all in one series.
Pottery Ladies : Charlotte Rheade's pots (Channel 4)
Pottery Ladies : Jenny Wilkes and Mary Harper (Channel 4)
The other curious example was Kaffe Fassett and that knitting series which was not about knitting but about colour, Glorious Colour.
We watched him creating that knitting, talking about colour and going round and looking at the things which had inspired his imagination in his designing.
What other criteria did you work on in deciding which proposals to accept?
We knew we wanted to do obvious things like health.
Carol Haslam, who came and worked with me wanted to cover the health area.
We got amazing proposals in from men, which were entirely about general health, ignoring any particular women's health issues.
Classic — a team without a woman on it and not a mention of cystitis or breast cancer, the menopause, or any of these things.
And when you sat there saying ‘But what about some of the women's issues?’, they sat there saying, ‘Why, why does it matter…?’
I remember one team who were deeply affronted by this and went away and never came back.
We said, ‘Look, come back when you've worked on the proposal.’
We never censored their proposals.
We had these two things, we had to try to get women involved so I had women fronting For What It's Worth (Penny Junor, Sally Hawkins).
I have mentioned Janis and some of the others and we could add to the list — Heather Couper, the astronomer, for example.
The second thing was the content.
When we were doing Today's History at six, for example, Juliet Gardiner did a particular programme about women's history.
Moving on from the issue of ensuring that the content covers women, there is then the issue about whether you do special programmes about women.
What do you feel about that?
Well, when we were doing the long-running series,Today's History , it seemed perfectly sensible to do a programme about women's history, along with a number of other things which weren't adequately covered.
That seemed to me to be taken for granted and perfectly possible.
I never, on the other hand, determined that I would separate out a whole slot for a women's magazine.
I had separated out a whole slot for an over-60s magazine,Years Ahead .
That seemed to me to be a specific and different group, although many of them were older women, but that is a different point.
Women's viewing habits are different from men's, and older people's viewing habits are different from younger people's.
There are more differences between those groups than there are between the normal things that sociologists would look at; for example, social class.
People are more homogeneous in terms of social class, and religion, in their viewing than they are in terms of age and sex.
Let's talk about two other things that Channel 4 tried.
Liz shared my commitment to women, indeed, she was probably more radical than me being ten years younger.
She took the view that if one gave women the chance to do  current affairs they might produce current affairs' programmes that were different from men's.
She commissioned in one particular slot two groups of women to make current affairs' programmes but interestingly it wasn't a very successful experiment.
It wasn't that the programmes were bad, but they did not actually choose to cover different topics from male current affairs teams, while the whole hypothesis had been that they would in fact cover different topics — that there were uncovered topics in social policy and the rest of it.
The knock-on effect this had for me, which was quite important, was that I would otherwise have had an education slot for social policy issues.
I didn't have a theme in social policy or technology (which was to be dealt with by Channel 4 News) because it was anticipated that social policy and social issues would be dealt with by these women current affairs' teams, and they weren't.
They wanted to go off and cover Greenham Common and Sizewell and the radiation in Australia like everybody else.
I think what we would now say is that of course women are extremely competent programme-makers, but there isn't a lot of evidence that they want to cover different topics.
Later on, another current affairs' experiment was a magazine format series, which David Lloyd commissioned.
It had a couple of runs.
You could say it should have been allowed many more to establish itself, but it was not a notable success.
What about women in the power structure of the industry?
It is worth distinguishing between the management power structure and the general production structure, because what we have got increasingly are quite a lot of women at the professional level, working in individual production teams, as producers and directors of individual series or individual programmes.
If we start from the bottom up, I think there has been a big advance in women as professionals, as producers, directors, starting to come into sound, quite a lot of editors, slightly more difficult with cameras.
There aren't the professional barriers there that I think there were ten years ago.
It seems to me that that structural advance has been made mainly because of the breakdown of the big integrated production monopolies of the BBC and ITV, with their teams, solid structure and union agreements about their size.
The manual work or the heavy part of the team were almost entirely male, and they would go off to their hotels together or they would go and work together.
They were a sort of club rather like a football club.
But once you break that down and start to have lots of small independent production companies, then you find very many larger numbers of women and everyone can choose who they want to work with.
You will find people choosing to work with a mixture, with a more female team, or not.
What is interesting is whether the women were there ready to work because they were marginal to the existing structure and weren't being allowed into the existing structure or, and I think there is evidence to show this, because they are actually more  interested in being flexible, innovative and creative than in a tidy career track — that they are prepared to go nut and take chances.
I remember when I was at the Open University, the people who were engaged in implementing Open University programmes in the States, who were the deans in charge of the Open University experiments, were all women and all ‘marginal’ to the mainline male career people.
They were prepared to take this risk with their careers and with their lives.
I always felt that there was an analogy here.
I had masses of women coming in with ideas, and I would say that more than half of all of my commissions were brought in by women or contained women — writers, producers, directors.
It was only the ITV productions that were not led in this way, except Thames who, although they never had women in their top hierarchy, have always had extremely good women heading production teams.
Mary McAnally was an example, Catherine Freeman was another.
They had very good women at this level.
In a sense that level of space has now loosened up.
You can see if you look across the array of some of the BBC's productions: Caroline Pick, who is now running Forty Minutes , for example.
A lot of them have been helped in their careers by stints of time at Channel 4.
Claire Patterson, now at the BBC, did Right to Reply at Channel 4.
A lot of people have now moved on.
On the finance and legal side we have had some very good women at Channel 4: Janet Walker, for example, now, I think, at Granada; Kate Wilson, who was a lawyer and is now a senior lawyer.
The fact that we had a more open policy over those ten years has actually infiltrated into or irrigated the BBC and ITV, but you will still see a great area of editorial heads, or heads of departments, the equivalents of the commissioning editors, the executive heads, where there are very few women.
If you look across the BBC there is a great gap at the Controller level.
You still find one or two women in children's television — very stereotypical.
But not at the level of the big creative decisions and balancing of resources and priorities, money, control — those decisions are still being made by men.
Channel 4 is still out there with Liz Forgan as Director of Programmes and Andrea Wonfor as Controller, Arts and Entertainment.
Why is that?
Is that just inherent prejudice?
Or is it something structural — the way women work or their career patterns, having children?
I do believe there must be some prejudice, though nobody will ever admit it.
It cannot be natural.
Yorkshire Television is apparently going into the new franchise with not a woman in its top rank.
I am told that none of the new franchise applications have senior women as part of their management.
There are a few non-executive directors, statutory people at the top, mainly right-wing ones.
But if you look at London Weekend Television now Jane Hewland's gone, there is no woman in that senior management.
If you look at Thames there is no woman in senior management, though they have just  appointed a new female company secretary which is good, so there will be one.
I don't think Central has any, I don't think HTV has any.
You go all the way around the country, there simply aren't women there.
QED, they don't think about it.
I sat on a committee chaired by Paul Fox, a big representative steering group for the Royal Television Society's Biennial Cambridge Convention (the only woman), which he had asked me to be on at that time.
I started to do my statutory thing about ‘Please can we have some women speakers’.
After a bit, when I had said it twice, he said, ‘Naomi, if you want any women you will have to find them yourself.’
And that's Paul Fox.
The result was that I chaired a session and I got Pam Mills from the BBC to speak at it and everyone agreed it was one of the best sessions of the conference.
Paul is a good guy, but everyone is brought up as a liberal and everybody therefore thinks that we don't have to do anything active about it.
But we do.
Representation and British ‘Racial Problem’ Films
LOLA YOUNG
SOCIO-SEXUAL anxiety about Blacks has been a distinctive feature of British society since the first encounters between merchant adventurers and Africans.
Since film became a major component of mass circulation popular culture, the anxieties and fears — and also the pleasures — associated with Black people have erupted on to British cinema screens in a non-systematic, erratic manner.
Jim Pines has pointed out that
There isn't a substantial body of films which reflect an ongoing or developing concern with race-related themes, but rather sporadic ‘moments’ in which particular motifs have featured prominently.
(Pines 1981)
When examining racial representation in films made in this country, it quickly becomes apparent that there are not the plethora of images such as exist in American mainstream cinema, nor, consequently, the range of relevant theoretical and analytical critical work available for study.
The themes and preoccupations of the ‘racial’ problem films of the fifties and sixties made by White film-makers in Britain articulate some of those fears about inter-racial relations and Black people's presence here.
These texts constitute an invaluable resource, documenting particular experiences and interpretations of experiences and attitudes.
In the past, such films have been judged for the ideological correctness of their depictions of Black people, the  extent to which they rely on stereotypes and so on.
The belief that negative images in the media reinforce particular ideas about ‘races’ is still pervasive and retains currency on a popular, common-sense level.
But how useful is it as a base from which to discuss the complexities of ‘race’ and representation in British cinema?
How do racial and sexual relations underpin cinematic representations of Black women and men?
How does social realism deal with ‘the real’ in regard to‘race’?
I want here to begin to develop a conceptual framework that is able to assess critically the effect of the collision of two discourses — that of, race' and that of female sexuality.
The question of sexuality is central to a consideration of race: its representational presence or constructed absence is an essential component of the films which I analyse here.
‘Real Life’: 1959
There are several accounts of the events of this crucial period in the history of British ‘race relations’: what follows is an attempt to highlight some of the features which I feel are pertinent to a discussion of ‘racial problem’ films of the era.
I want as well to redress some imbalances in recent academic accounts of the period known as the sixties.
Whilst there are, perhaps, many things to be celebrated about the 1960s there are also many to be deplored: I am thinking, in particular, of the racist excesses of the mid to late sixties and beyond, which ran concurrently with eulogies of love and peace.
The political and social infrastructure for the perpetration of overtly racist acts goes back hundreds of years of course; but events immediately preceding the sixties laid the foundations for those excesses by the way ‘race’ became politicised.
In 1951 there were approximately 15,300 settlers from the Caribbean in Britain: ten years later that figure had risen to 171,500.
(Walvin 1984, pp. 111 ff.)
Britain's major conurbations from the mid fifties onwards underwent a steady demographic transformation.
In need of a cheap, large labour force after the economic and social havoc wrought by the Second World War, migration from the Caribbean and other ‘New Commonwealth, countries was encouraged by both commercial and public sector British employers.
‘Race’ became established as a sensationalist issue in print journalism in 1958, after a number of violent attacks on Black communities in Nottingham and Notting Hill, which were subsequently characterised as ‘race riots’.
The attacks did not constitute the first manifestations of organised racist aggression but the events were used as supporting evidence for the claims of the anti-immigration lobby.
Opinion was mobilised around the paradoxical notion that it was Black people who represented a threat to the rule of law in Britain.
Local and national press coverage of issues associated with race — housing conditions, employment issues, crime and so on— became more frequent.
Towards the end of the fifties, the threat of more stringent  limitations on Black immigration resulted in a rush to beat imminent restrictive legislation.
White people's concerns about Black immigration were constantly expressed in terms of numbers, and fears of being overrun and contaminated by Black colonial subjects with their alleged hypersexuality, hyperfertility and aberrant familial structures.
Such anxieties were frequently expressed in contemporary newspapers and journals.
Paul B. Rich suggests that ‘pathological terminology describing Black immigration became increasingly prevalent in the press by the late 1960s’.
Imagery relating to ‘floods’ of immigrants and references to crime ‘breeding’in Black ghettos became commonplace.
(Rich 1986, p. 189) The rapid growth of job opportunities had considerably diminished by 1960, but immigration was still increasing.
This was due, in part at least, to the fact that dependants waiting in the countries of origin were now ready to join their families in Britain.
This increased Black presence precipitated a fierce political debate.
Pressure groups, political organisations and other extra-Parliamentary activists vociferously expressed enough anxiety over the potential demographic transformation of British cities and the destruction of British culture to make it an issue within Parliament: the political argument culminated in the Commonwealth Immigrants Bill becoming an Act of Parliament in 1962.
Although the Labour Party — then in opposition — declared its disagreement with the underlying principles of the bill, the tone and level of the debates about immigration cemented the belief that not only was such legislation desirable from all political perspectives, it was also inevitable that it should be brought in.
James Walvin has indicated that the 1962 Commonwealth Immigrants Act marked a significant historical moment in the relationship between White Britons and Black settlers.
It was the moment when a choice had to be made about how to approach the exploitation and inequitable treatment meted out to Black subjects in Britain.
‘Race’ and Difference
‘Race’ discourse is a symptom of unease about particular kinds of difference.
The search for an explanation of those differences comes from an ‘ideology of difference’, which, having created a problem then seeks a resolution, and is unable to see that the problem lies in the original perceptions.
That individuals and groups should be categorised according to identifiably different, phenotypical characteristics is essential to ‘race’ discourse.
I do not believe that this perceptual process is either universal or immutable, but it is ubiquitous and extremely potent.
There is a long-established and widespread dislike of what is known as ‘miscegenation’.
Such anxieties are still informed by nineteenth-century pseudo-scientific genetic and biological explanations of racial difference and comprise distortion, fantasy and myth.
Rich points out that 
Victorian Social Darwinism was still alive in the late 1950s and, in so far as it shaped the vocabulary of ‘maintaining social standards’ used by the supporters of immigration control…it contributed to a climate of opinion favouring immigration control.
(Rich 1986, p. 189)
Social Darwinism's implicit assumption is that superior ‘races’ should take measures against the contamination of the ‘race’by inferior peoples; this clearly relates directly to anxieties about ‘miscegenation’.
Social Darwinism was not only applied to ‘race’ issues but also managed to incorporate the social facts of class-based hierarchies.
Thus these same theories were brought to bear on questions of the intellectual capabilities and, importantly, the fertility of the British working classes.
Hence the alleged attraction that Black men hold for lower-class women, a popular belief that dates back many years.
During the fifties ignorance about Black people was rife: I remember being asked on many occasions, as a child, if I had lived in the jungle, if my parents ate cat food or even people.
At least two of my contemporaries' mothers were asked where their newborn babies' tails were.
White people thought our colour would come off if they stroked our skin.
This imagery was perpetuated by the work of cartoonists in the popular press, by the popularity of jungle films such as Tarzan and by popular fiction such as the James Bond novels.
These constantly circulating racial stereotypes together with the resurgence of racist political activities in and out of Parliament, ensured that common sense attitudes towards ‘race’ focused on Blacks as problems, needing control.
The perception of vast numbers of Blacks detrimentally transforming British society was strongly allied to fears of Black male sexuality.
As a September 1958 edition of The Times pointed out, Black people ‘are charged with all kinds of misbehaviour, especially sexual’.
This problem of sexuality is frequently alluded to in films of this period.
These and other habitualised forms of ‘race-thinking’ were further compounded in the fifties by social and economic factors which kept Blacks and Whites largely separate within their own sets of social networks and spaces, ‘Crossing the line’was not merely a matter of breaking the boundaries of colour-based divisions in a figurative sense; it was also often literally a matter of transgressing geographical boundaries: often with violent consequences.
Flame in the Streets
If a narrative can be said to progress from one equilibrium to another, with the initial stability disrupted by a particular event or force, then ‘race’ is frequently the power which produces disequilibrium in racial problem films of this period.
On a macro scale, this is of course how Blacks were and to a large extent are still viewed: as a disruptive, damaging force disturbing the previously calm, stable landscape of cultural superiority.
Since a productive critique of cinematic realism must analyse its political and social context, I want to suggest that those specifically sexual anxieties about ‘race’ in Britain in the fifties and sixties haunted ‘Racial Problem’cinema.
British films of this period that made use of ‘race’ issues in their narratives promoted ideas which assumed consistent and uniform practices and social expectations relating to the synergy of ‘race’and sex.
Fears about the conjunction of ‘race’ and sex shaped these films' interrogation of White female sexuality in the years immediately following the last major wave of Black settlers in the mid to late 1950s.
The perception of ‘race’ as inevitably problematic is evident in most films that feature Blacks in significant roles, such as Sapphire (Basil Dearden, 1959),Flame in the Streets (Roy Baker, 1961) and A Taste of Honey (Tony Richardson, 1961).
The intractability of ‘race’ as a problem is not open to discussion in these texts.
The demands of social realism require a resolution of problems within the framework of the text — a requirement which must remain unfulfilled since the format of social realism paradoxically cannot offer solutions, as the text must ignore politics external to the closed internal world created.
Conformity to social expectations and adherence to the interdictions of socio-sexual taboos is presupposed, in most of these texts, even though compliance to these taboos has never held true for all people.
The texts inevitably demand that if such interdictions are violated then the instigators are punished: this is a pre-given ‘reality’.
Sapphire is murdered after consummating her relationship with a White student; in A Taste of Honey , Jimmy is despatched once he has had sexual relations with Jo, never to be seen again; in Flame in the Streets Gaby Gomez is badly burned; in the same film Peter Lincoln manages to escape ‘punishment’, other than a humiliating first encounter with his White fiancèe's father, Jacko, but then the progression of the narrative is frozen before closure.
Rich has argued that
[what is]apparent during this period is the bewilderment and confusion of many sections of the liberal intelligentsia in grappling with the immigration issue at the same time as they had difficulties in understanding the new elements of youth culture brought on by the emergence of what was in popular parlance being termed an ‘affluent society’.
(Rich 1956, p. 189)
Fears about Black immigration and anxieties about the moral decline of Britain's youth converged around sexuality.
The language of colonialism was used to pathologise White male youth and align their behaviour to that of Blacks.
Delinquent White youths were described as ‘uncivilised’; ‘barbarians’ who adopted unattractive clothing, listened to American-influenced music and ‘savagely’attacked innocent victims; they were also blamed for initiating a steady decline in sexual mores.
The liberal's contradictory impulses — to act  with tolerance towards one group whilst simultaneously projecting racist sentiments on to another, despised group — manifest themselves in both Sapphire and Flame in the Street .
It is the Teddy-boy types, young men who are seen as being the most violently aggressive towards Blacks.
This violence is specifically directed towards Black males: the youths who express sexual jealousy of Black men in Flame in the Streets do not have their own sexual relationships with women.
I WANT now to move to a more detailed consideration of Flame in the Streets as it contains many of the features with which I am concerned.
The action of the film starts on the morning of 5 November and finishes, literally explosively, during Guy Fawkes celebrations that same evening.
The narrative commences with Kathie (Sylvia Syms) and Peter (Johnny Sekka) walking together to the school where they both teach.
Their walk is accompanied by the strident tones of jazz-style music which dissolves into a calypso as Peter enters the section of the school in which he teaches, leaving Kathie to walk on to her class.
The girls that Kathie teaches are both Black (Afro-Caribbean) and White; it is beside a Black girl that Kathie stops to place a friendly hand on her shoulder and apparently encourage her in her work — there has been no dialogue so far in the film, only a musical soundtrack.
Peter's all-boy class is also hard at work, and our attention is drawn to his observation of a pupil eating an apple in class.
The child is not admonished; Peter, adopting the role of the wise and reasonable father, notes his behaviour with amusement.
Peter then approaches the blackboard on which he writes the date, 5 November: this is the cue for the jazz to take over from the calypso (in more strident tones than before) as an indication of the disturbing events which follow.
The film cuts from the Black man writing on the blackboard to the grotesque ‘nigger minstrel'-style head of a Guy, which, as if it had been lynched and hung, falls ominously to its chest.
Outside a factory bearing the words ‘Visser and Crane Furniture for the Homes of Britain’ boys ask passing workers for ‘pennies for the Guy’.
Thus two strands of the plot are introduced, along with the expectation of trouble to come.
There is a tension between the liberal pretensions of this text and the contemporary anxieties associated with Blacks and breeding.
It is rare in these films to see a non-pathologised Black or mixed couple with or without children.
In A Taste of Honey we do not see the young White girl, Jo's (Rita Tushingham) baby.
Sapphire, the Black woman who is light-skinned enough  to pass for White is pregnant by her White fiance’, but again the child does not appear as it is annihilated along with its mother.
The Gomez couple in Flame in the Street , although they have their arguments and race-related problems, appear relatively happy, if rather passionless: the structure of the narrative, taking place as it does over a period of one day, does not allow us to see the child that Judy Gomez is carrying.
In ‘Visser and Crane's’ furniture factory where the Black labourers are employed, the Black men sing calypso as they work, echoing the songs composed and sung by their slave ancestors in the Caribbean.
The calypso is not presented as strident political commentary: it is the bland and depoliticised version popularised by personalities such as Lance Percival and Cy Grant.
Black music frequently signifies the perceived homogeneity of Black cultural forms.
Calypso is a specifically Trinidadian musical form, but just as later Jamaican reggae stands as the archetypal Black music, so in this period does calypso.
The association of explicitly sexuality with young people's popular music and, more specifically, with music derived from Black cultural expression is made immediately through the invitation of one of the Black workers to a blonde female office worker: ‘Hey Baby, do you want to sing with us?'
The sexuality of Black males is further emphasised in this short sequence by the comment, ‘The terrible thing is, I am unable to give the chicks my full attention in this weather’, and ‘the weather is turning my blood to ice’.
Thus the Blacks who have ‘taken’ the jobs of White men are seen as preoccupied with music and sex, even if their sexuality is tamed by the British climate.
Working is the last thing on their minds.
The supposed attraction of certain White women to Black men is again accentuated by a young, White, overtly racist male protagonist through the comment, ‘You know what they say, they reckon that spades are special with the Janets; that's why they go for them’; this is followed by raucous laughter from his fellow White workmates.
Blacks are spades, women are skirts, Janets; neither are individual human beings.
Jubilee, the slum landlord in Flame in the Streets is Black, seen as exploiting both ‘his’ people and Whites by charging high rents and not carrying out essential repairs.
He is dressed in expensive clothing and drives a new car: Judy Gomez refers to him as a pimp, thus indicating his involvement in sexual as well as social exploitation.
Whether or not he is a pimp is immaterial: the house in which the Gomez couple live — one amongst many similarly decrepit properties owned by Jubilee in the vicinity — is full of signs of sexual activity, such as numbers of children playing on the stairs, in the hallways, and running along the landing, and Judy Gomez's pregnancy.
Later we are shown a Black family crowded into one room with a man playing a calypso on a double bass (!), and a Black man and woman in bed together, who invite Kathie to join them.
The reasons for Black people's poor housing are well documented but neither a  formal nor a perceptual space for raising a discussion of such issues is available in the film.
Manifestations of sexuality are, by contrast, given plenty of space.
In one particularly telling scene between Kathie and her mother Nell (Brenda de Banzie), the issues of sexual relations between Black and White people, and ‘mixed race’ children are brought out into the open.
Kathie is the only child and Nell advises her that ‘Black and White don't mix…you'll be neither one thing or the other…
They're not like us…
I don't just mean the skin…other things are different…ways, habits, everything’.
Nell's distress about Black people's ‘ways’ and ‘habits’reaches a climax with the dreaded realisation, ‘You'll have children, Black children!’
This last comment comes after an apparently horrific vision of Kathie and her fiance' in bed together.
This outburst, like some later scenes, makes a clear link between Nell's feeling of dissatisfaction in her relationship with Jacko and her racially prejudiced opinions.
The implication is that White women with bourgeois aspirations when denied sexual satisfaction are susceptible to ‘irrational’ racial prejudice.
(It is a sexually frustrated and jealous White woman who murders Sapphire.)
A major flaw of the liberal discourse of fifties' social realism is the attempt to explain away racism by locating prejudice in individuals, often already pathologised others, such as working-class youth or sexually frustrated women.
The individual act, thought and attitude is emphasised, whilst the endorsement of racial inequalities by institutions and the state is simultaneously ignored.
Such texts are incapable of analysing or explicating social inequality as government policy or placing the trade union and working-class struggle in a wider political and historical context.
Although this is in general a constituent feature of social realism, in the racial problem film it is a particularly potent device for a disavowal of racial guilt and responsibility.
Flame in the Streets approaches the question of both individual and (working-class) collective responsibility, and the struggle against racism.
However, it cannot adequately deal with either issue without stepping out of its self-constructed framework which sees prejudice as the unenlightened, deviant behaviour of individuals.
This tension is resolved by coming back from the brink of the recognition of the politics of divide and rule in society in general and instead binding the issue to the micro-politics of individualised self-interest.
This is illustrated in two scenes in Flame in the Streets .
Firstly there is the union meeting at which Gomez's nomination for a permanent rather than a temporary position as a chargehand in the factory is to be considered.
(Gomez, it should be said, is the epitome of the ‘good negro’: kind, considerate, unassuming but not obsequious, hardworking and able to make ‘jokes’ about his colour.)
Jacko (John Mills), Kathie's father, and a committed trade unionist, is asked to give his opinion on what has become a contentious issue within the factory.
Should a Black man be promoted over ‘one of our men’?
In an impassioned speech, Jacko begins, ‘I think this is just about the  most important question this union's ever had to face.
What's more, if we take the wrong line, this union won't only be split, it will be finished.
Finished!’
Jacko appeals to the meeting to endorse Gomez's nomination for promotion and not to  practise a de facto colour bar: ‘You're going to cut your own bloody throats and I'll tell you for why.
If we deny these chaps their rights as union members, they'll leave it, they'll leave, I wouldn't blame them.
Then what have you got?
A pool of cheap non-union labour !’
Persuaded by Jacko's rhetoric, the men vote for Gomez, and his nomination progresses to Head Office.
The question of employment and Blacks was a crucial issue in racist discourse: the accusation that Blacks took jobs from Whites was widespread.
Jacko does not counter the racist statements of his fellow workers: he appeals to their self-interest and does not criticise the political policies which create and manipulate the labour force.
The vital question facing the union was precisely the vital question facing Britain at that time; it was the time to make a choice.
What was Britain going to do about its colonial subjects now that they laid claim to ‘Britishness’?
The British government — and a substantial number of British citizens — effectively opted to exclude Blacks from the United Kingdom and deny them their rights to live as equals with other British subjects.
Similarly, when trying to persuade his wife to meet Peter, Jacko argues that if she does not compromise, at least on this point, then their daughter will be lost to them forever.
Kathie is all Nell has got, we've been told this several times; he appeals to Nell as the mother of their only child, not to cause her to leave home.
Once more, the question of what is morally or ideologically correct is not at issue here: political rectitude is not a consideration since the politics of ‘race relations’ are not articulated and cannot therefore be interrogated.
Textual Strategies
As Colin MacCabe has pointed out, in the hierarchy of discourses in the classic realist text, the visual is privileged.
The intention may be to undermine Nell's attempts to persuade Kathie to abandon her Black boyfriend.
‘You don't know how they live…like animals.
Have you seen them?
Six, eight, ten to a room.
Is that how you want to end up?
In one room with a horde of Black children?’
But this intention is itself undermined by the visual evidence presented to us which has implied Black sexuality and overbreeding to be the cause of the problem.
How political and social systems work, how disadvantage and oppression are established and maintained is not easy to make visible, and it is the visible which is privileged in the hierarchy of discourses within the classic realist text.
The kind of knowledge which can be learnt through classic realist texts mitigates against a detailed, productive analysis of racial issues.
These images also interact with other texts, particularly newspaper accounts of similar conditions, and combine to confirm for many White  spectators that the truth is that housing and employment problems and so on will not go away unless Blacks are sent away or at least have their entry to Britain severely restricted.
Within this perceptual framework, White women are frequently seen as agents in the narrative disruption which Black people initiate: it is the ‘skirts’ whose sexuality in one form or another is out of control or misplaced.
Thus, in A Taste of Honey , all Jo really needs is adequate love from a properly caring mother; instead she has to seek the transitory solace of a passing Black sailor.
Millie, Sapphire's murderer, clearly misses male sexual attention, fantasising as she does that her absent husband's return is imminent.
Her sexual frustration and jealousy leads her to destroy the hedonistic, deceitful Sapphire who otherwise would have become her sister-in-law.
Nell, in Flame in the Streets, feels rejected by Jacko who is too involved in his union to spend time with her.
Relating ‘Race’ to the ‘Real’
Chris Vieler-Porter suggests four categories of mainstream British cinematic representation of Blacks:(a) colonial-based dramas;(b) race-based dramas, in which category he places both Sapphire and Flame in the Streets;(c) race assemblage dramas, in which the Black presence is required to ‘provide a background against which White emotions can be displayed…to be the founding source of comedy’ and to act as ‘a mark of difference in ‘the team’of the adventure film’; and (d) ethnic drama.
This formulation is attractive as it marks out some of the broad historical shifts in the representation of Blacks in film.
However, the model needs to be developed in order to provide a more detailed view of ‘race’ and British cinema: the categorisation that Vieler-Porter suggests limits the scope for trans-historical analysis, and only concentrates on the manifest content of the texts.
I would like to propose one broadly based category which will clearly require extensive elaboration and refinement.
For now I want only to suggest possibilities for further investigation and analysis of representation in British feature films.
Stuart Hall's definition of inferential racism is useful as a starting point:
those apparently naturalised representations of events and situations relating to race, whether ‘factual’ or ‘fictional’, which have racist premises and propositions inscribed in them as a set of unquestioned assumptions .
These enable racist statements to be formulated without ever bringing into awareness the racist predicates on which the statements are grounded.
(Hall 1990, p. 13)
Typically, the fictional texts will have one or more anti-Black characters.
The film is intended to be a liberal and tolerant depiction of Blacks.
Solutions to the problem of prejudice are implied, usually on the lines of ‘more knowledge  equals less prejudice’, but only solutions within the framework of social realism and of a liberal perspective on ‘race’.
These texts are unable to be critical of the framework within which prejudice and racism flourish.
It is inevitable then that repressed racial anxiety seeps out of the edges of these texts, returning to defy its containment in liberal discourse.
As John Hill says:
The ideas and attitudes expressed by the social problem film…do not derive simply from the focus of their subject matter but also from their deployment of certain types of conventions (in accordance with what an audience ‘accustomed to the cinema’ expects) which, then, inevitably structure and constrain the way in which that subject matter is presented in the first place.
(Hill 1986, p. 56)
‘The Real and Race’
Colin MacCabe's position was that realism should not be defined by content or by its capacity to mirror reality but by the way in which the text's organisation functioned to position the spectator/reader.
(MacCabe 1974) The classic realist text then, as described by MacCabe, is defined by a structure in which the various discourses within the text form a hierarchy: among these discourses — each of which poses a particular view of ‘reality’— -one is privileged as the bearer of truth and serves as a gauge by which the veracity or falsehood of other competing discourses are judged.
Contradictory discourses are contained and framed by a dominant discourse.
He suggests that in all cases contradictory discourses are neutralised by the dominant, privileged discourse.
In realist cinema what is seen is privileged over what is heard.
Certainly in both Flame in the Streets and Sapphire , the visual images neutralise White liberalism.
It has been contended elsewhere that the reality of the social process is quite different from its appearance: we need to go beyond the misleading surface appearance of relations between Black and White people, to re-think difference and to recognise the composite nature of the reality of those relationships.
Textual reality is only a fraction of reality; the whole is unknowable and, possibly, unspeakable.
Perhaps part of the reason why some representations come to be considered as true is because we are habitualised into misrecognising the fragment as the entirety.
Feminism and Culture — the Movie: A critical overview of writing on women and cinema
Maria Lauret
‘Women and Film’, to quote the title of E. Ann Kaplan's (1983) important book on feminist film theory and criticism, defines a field of study which in the past fifteen to twenty years has been expanding rapidly.
To the beginner, the proliferation of academic criticism in particular can present a bewildering and rather daunting picture of competing schools of thought.
What we usually take to be specifically feminist concerns (e.g. ‘political’ ones — whatever that means) seem often obscured in this body of writing by the theoretical exigencies of semiotics, psychoanalysis, discourse analysis or Althusserian Marxism.
Amidst a diversity of close-up film analysis and theoretical arguments from all angles then, it might be useful to try and present some sort of an overview.
I shall bravely attempt to do this here, with a — necessarily truncated — history of feminist engagement with the cinema, focusing for economy and clarity's sake on some of the central areas of debate which have emerged in the course of that history.
The study of women and film involves, as in the subtitle of Kaplan's book, at least‘both sides of the camera’: women as film-makers, and women as  cinematic objects, viewed through the camera eye.
In my attempt at a wide-angled overview, however, I shall argue that the camera has not just two but many sides, and that feminist film criticism and theory can only benefit from casting its eye outside a field of vision in which the theory of the gaze and questions of representation and power have been dominant for too long.
This is not an original argument, in the sense that several short introductions to feminist film theory already exist which identify many of the same problem areas as I do.
But there are reasons why an update and, consequently, a change of direction in the overall picture of ‘women and film’ is called for.
First of all, increased interest in the female spectator has in recent years spawned a number of collections of film criticism which ask important new questions of feminist film theorists.
Secondly, the suitably defiant-sounding Women Call the Shots series screened by Channel 4 in 1990 demonstrated that there is a whole world out there of women's cinematic practices which has hardly yet had a look-in from the predominantly White and Western body of academic feminist criticism and theory.
Thirdly, there is of course the benefit of hindsight, which always makes the critic's job easier, and enables a view of ‘women and film’ in historical perspective against a backdrop of developments within feminist cultural analysis as a whole.
Feminist cinema may be a ‘global issue’, in Susan Hayward's words, too large and bumpy and  may be possible to argue that in theoretical and critical terms the truly global issues of a multi-racial international feminism are only just beginning to be addressed.
Mathilde Landeta (directed by Patricia Diaz, Canadian film about the Mexican film-maker).
(Women Call the Shots : Channel 4)
The Feminist Interest in Film
Since the resurgence of the women's movement in the early 1970s and its subsequent development into feminism (less an activist social movement than a political body of thought and cultural practices), film, as Annette Kuhn and others have pointed out, has been high on the agenda of women working for social change.
It is in culture, after all, and in mass culture particularly, that the meanings which structure our lives and by which we understand ourselves are constructed and reconstructed.
Literature has a long history of feminist interest, but film and media studies are certainly as central to feminist cultural debates.
This is not just because of the increasing domination of the visual over other media, as reiterated ad nauseam in discussions of the postmodern world, but is, more importantly, due to the specific characteristics of film.
In the words of the Williams Report of 1979
the close-up, fast cutting, the sophistication of modern make-up and special effects techniques, the heightening effect of sound effects and music all combine on the large screen to produce an impact which no other medium can create.
(quoted in Kuhn 1982, p, 124)
Rue Cases Negres (1983) directed by Euzhan Palcy, Martinque .
(Women Call the Shots : Channel 4)
This ‘impact’ has from the earliest days of film theory opened up questions of ideology, of desire and fantasy, and of representation.
In comparison with literature, as Christine Gledhill has observed, the appeal of the cinema lies exactly in the offer of an escape from language into ‘the pleasure of an achieved unity between subject and reality’.
(Gledhill 1984, p.31) Film structures our fantasies (entertainment or escapism) as well as our realities (film as documentary ‘evidence’ or information) and each function in itself is ample reason why feminists should have a keen interest in the cinema.
Women Call the Shots in providing the viewing public with a wealth of women's cinema — fiction and documentary, shorts and features, art-house  and mainstream — was a welcome response to this interest.
Trying to present that impossible chimera, ‘a balanced view’, the series in fact reflected the existing power relations in the industry by showing predominantly White, Western, heterosexual films, but clearly an effort was made to complete the picture with some lesbian films and with work (especially documentaries and shorts) from outside the familiar Eurocentric tradition.
Tokenism, as this ‘women's season’ showed, can be useful in that as well as making a gesture towards ‘minority’interest it at the same time betokened the absence of women's film on television which it sought to undo.
Thus, being confronted with such a wealth of cinematic work by, for, and about women of all stripes, the viewer is likely to feel more, not less deprived of such material, more, not less constrained by the dominance of banal mainstream cinema and TV images.
The Trace (1982) directed by Nejia Ben Mabrouk, Tunisia.
(Women Call the Shots : Channel 4)
The cinema debate screened on Channel 4 between four film-makers from countries not usually represented on the screen (India, the Philippines, Lebanon, and Brazil), which took place under the auspices of Women Call the Shots, was perhaps especially effective in this way, not only because it called attention to the existence of cinematic traditions outside of the ones we usually view, discuss, and study, but also because the four women film-makers involved in the debate took up such diverse positions.
Asked whether they saw themselves as feminist film-makers, for example, the four (predictably) came up with four different answers ranging from an unequivocal ‘yes’ to an almost indignant ‘no’.
Jocelyne Saab, the Lebanese director, interestingly nuanced the question of what it actually means to be a woman film-maker by pointing to the need, for her, to make connections with other Oriental women.
In other words, Saab felt that she had less in common with‘feminists’ in general (which, as we know, is often a shorthand for White Western women) than with women of the Orient.
This obviously stresses a desire to reach a specific cultural community, but more than that Saab's position also indicates the political aspects of cultural work.
It was this — the politics of culture — that implicitly governed the Channel 4 debate, opening up a whole spectrum of discussion widely at variance with the concerns dominating White (Western European and American) feminist film theory.
In any discussion of ‘the state of the art of feminist film criticism’, or of ‘feminism and film: where are we now, and what next?’, the problems which all four women in the Channel 4 debate raised ought to be central.
The debate challenged the ethnocentrism of much academic work in feminist film criticism and, particularly, theory very effectively; furthermore, it focused the question of priorities — what sort of films do we give our attention to, what do we study, what do we screen, what do we write about, and, of course,how .
These questions are vital for feminism as a whole if it is to be conceived as an international, cross-cultural movement.
Twenty Years of Feminism and Film: Developments and Debates
In the context of these questions, what is it in the brief history of White Western feminist criticism and theory that seems at odds with what is going on in the rest of the world?
Recognising that feminist film theory, criticism and film-making have developed very much in reciprocal relation to each other, I shall try to sketch the major areas of interest and controversy in the past twenty years in Britain and America.
In the process I shall attempt to explain the impact or influence film theory has had on film-making and spectatorship.
Stage One: Images of Women, Realism, and Semiotics
The first book-length studies of women in film appeared in the early to mid 1970s and were an integral part of the women's movement's push for cultural and political change.
These studies concentrated on images of women, a type of criticism which views films as cultural forms imbued with sexist ideology.
This sexism was traced in the stereotyping of women (the madonna/whore dichotomy of classic Hollywood is a well-known example), and critics implicitly or explicitly called for an authentic women's cinema which would portray real women as they really are.
The titles of Marjorie Rosen's Popcorn Venus (1973) and Molly Haskell's from Reverence to Rape (1974) indicate this concern with images; both books aim at giving a survey of representations of women in Hollywood film.
Haskell was almost immediately criticised, however, for operating on an untheorised assumption of a direct relation between representations of women in the world of cinematic fantasy (the ‘dream-machine’) and real women in the world of social and economic relations.
As part of a journalistic and sociological school of film-viewing, Haskell's work tended to ask ‘why this film now?’; this approach assumes by and large that unambiguous answers can be given, that ideology (sexism) can be ‘read off’ the film text, as, for example, in Haskell's well-known argument that the violence against women and the absence of big female leading parts in the films of the 1970s was a matter of a backlash against an emerging women's movement.
(Haskell 1974, Kuhn 1982) On the production side the early phase of feminist film was characterised by an interest in realism, whether in man-made liberal feminist Hollywood efforts such as An Unmarried Woman (Mazursky 1977),A Woman Under the Influence (Cassavetes 1974) and Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore ( Scorcese 1975), or in the making of documentary.
The latter, facilitated by the arrival of the cheaper 16 mm and 8 mm formats, represented an exciting departure for feminist film-makers.
Often working in small cooperatives and adopting the techniques of the earlier cinema vérité (fly on the wall), feminists engaged in the filming of women by women.
Unlike traditional documentary, the authority of voice-over was replaced with the autobiographical discourse of women talking on camera about themselves as simply and directly as possible.
Personal testimonies were presented in films such as Joyce at 34 and Janie's Janie , but there were also collective ‘her’ stories.
Union Maids , The Life and  Times of Rosie the Riveter and, in this country,Women of the Rhondda are products of early feminist oral history, often interspersed with historical documentary footage.
Critique followed hot on the heels of this pioneering work.
Films such as Citron's Daughter Rite adopted a format borrowed from the personal testimony (the diary, the autobiographical voice) but exposed the illusory nature of ‘unmediated’ film-making by revealing in the credits that the two women who had been reminiscing in the film were in fact actresses playing sisters.
(Feuer 1986, Lesage 1986)
Problematisation of ‘images of women’ criticism and its counterpart in realist documentary film-making became a major theme in feminist film criticism of the mid to late 1970s, on the grounds that realism created an illusory notion of transparency which could only reaffirm, not undermine dominant common-sense notions of the subject as (bourgeois) individual and of reality as fixed, accessible and ‘there’.
A typical statement of this position was Claire Johnston's argument that in realist feminist film ‘what the camera in fact grasps is the ‘natural’ world of dominant ideology’.
(Johnston 1976, p. 214) Here the role of film-viewer came into play as well, for critics of realist practices argued that the reproduction of ‘reality’ in documentary film encouraged passive viewing behaviour, reducing spectators to mere consumers of the dominant ideology.
B. Ruby Rich's critical comments on Not a Love Story , a documentary film about the pornography industry and one of the big hits of feminist realist film-making, were especially powerful in this respect.
In an analysis of camera angles Rich demonstrated that despite its ostensible anti-porn content Not a Love Story in fact reproduced the voyeuristic position which lends pornography its appeal.
(Rich 1986) In Britain the work of Claire Johnston and Pam Cook on Hollywood films by 1930s and 1940s women directors established an alternative brand of feminist writing on film, introducing criticism which drew on both Marxist theory of ideology (especially Althusser) and on French structuralism and semiotics (Barthes, Levi-Strauss).
Broadening the field of feminist film criticism to include theory, Johnston and Cook sought to understand film as a process of signification with its own ‘relatively autonomous’ ways and means of constructing meanings.
These meanings, they insisted, were not derived directly from social formations; the ‘relative autonomy’ of cultural practices (a concept appropriated from the neo-Marxist theory of Louis Althusser) prohibited any such simple translation from film image to social reality.
Using a Barthesian notion of myth, i.e. seeing myth as the signifying process by which ideology is naturalised, and film therefore as a myth-making medium, Johnston and Cook's work was concerned with classic Hollywood cinema.
Taking their terms of analysis from the burgeoning new field of semiotics and arguing against an earlier conception of Hollywood as a lost cause for feminism, Johnston and Cook re-read the films of women directors such as Ida Lupino and Dorothy Arzner.
Focusing on the ‘ideological cracks’ e.g. internal contradictions of the film text, they made a case for a women's discourse where it was previously thought none could possibly exist.
However influential, this feminist appropriation of some Hollywood women's films has remained an area of controversy.
Any transgression or hidden resistance in films by women directors is, it is argued, in the end always contained by the characteristic movement of narrative closure in Hollywood films made during the studio period, in which women tend to lose out or are victimised.
Stage Two: The Gaze
As Annette Kuhn has argued, Hollywood as a ‘dream-machine’ under the studio system worked as a configuration of forces acting together, of which cinematic characteristics, as well as the institutional framework of economic structures and power relations in the industry were an important part.
The debate as to whether this institutional framework exercised a determining (ideological) influence on film output has been an ongoing one, but the importance of Claire Johnston's contribution to it in the mid seventies is that she argued for a reading of Hollywood entertainment films which made a space for ‘collective fantasies of women's desire’.
(Johnston 1976, p. 217) At more or less the same time, Laura Mulvey took the discussion of women's desire and fantasy out of the realm of the ideological/symbolic.
Her article ‘Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema’(1975) radically changed the terms of the debate on feminism and film and focused them on the (male) gaze.
Using psychoanalytical theory, Mulvey argued that narrative fiction film constructs a male gaze, regardless of the gender of the individual spectator.
It does this not only in its narrative preoccupations (active male protagonist, with woman as victim or sexual object) but also — and crucially — in its conventions, in the way the camera moves and produces the image on the screen.
In a world ordered by sexual imbalance, pleasure in looking has been split between active/male and passive/female.
The determining male gaze projects its fantasy onto the female figure, which is styled accordingly.
In their traditional exhibitionist role women are simultaneously looked at and displayed, with their appearance coded for strong visual and erotic impact so that they can be said to connote to-be-looked-at-ness .
(Mulvey 1989, p. 366)
Using psychoanalysis as a political weapon to understand the unconscious determinants of the dominant imaging of women, Mulvey's concern with pleasure in looking took its cue from Freud's theory of scopophilia in early childhood.
I outline this theory very briefly here.
As the small child tries to find out about other people's bodily functions and especially their genitalia, its pleasure in looking is active and eroticised.
Knowledge of sexual difference  is thus established in looking.
Later in life this early thrill (a combination of pleasure and shock) is reproduced in voyeuristic activities as well as in its converse: narcissism and exhibitionism — presenting oneself to the gaze of the self and others.
Mulvey combined this Freudian explanation of pleasure in looking with the theory of the mirror stage in the work of Jacques Lacan, in which the child's first recognition of itself in the mirror is called a misrecognition, because what the child sees in the mirror is an idealised whole and rounded image at odds with the child's diffuse bodily experience of itself at that stage in development — it cannot yet control its movements, let alone its environment.
This misrecognition later becomes the ‘ego ideal’ which affords identification with idealised others, and it is this possibility of identification which constitutes another aspect of pleasure in film-viewing, as well as the voyeuristic mode posited by Freud.
Mulvey analysed the mechanism of the filmic gaze as composed of identification with the idealised male protagonist on the one hand, and on the other of voyeuristic distanced viewing, a private pleasure which the setting of cinema (the darkened room) encourages.
She distinguished three aspects to the gaze: that of the eye of the camera registering the pro-filmic event, that of the spectator viewing the film, and that of the characters on screen looking at each other.
Classic narrative film, said Mulvey, constructs a male viewer by privileging the look of the male protagonist at the woman character(s): as the camera follows this fictional male gaze so also is the spectator's look directed at woman as object.
Thus the spectator's gaze is ‘sewn into’, sutures, that of the male.
as if this indictment of classic cinema were not enough, Mulvey also drew attention to the role of castration anxiety in the unconscious dynamic of pleasure and unpleasure of film-viewing.
If strong women characters do appear in Hollywood film, this is no consolation for feminists.
For the woman as sexual object, displayed as spectacle on the screen in Hollywood cinema, is not just a source of pleasure but also imbued with threat since her lack of a penis implies castration.
For the male two responses are possible: dismantling this threat by making the woman submit to his will, or fetishising her.
The image of the ‘phallic woman’(such as Dietrich or Mae West) is the product of this latter strategy, whereas the frequent victimisation and punishment of women in Hollywood movies is an effect of the former.
Narrative cinema, Mulvey concluded, is a dead loss for feminists.
She saw the only viable feminist film practice to be one that breaks up the familiar structures of visual pleasure, thus exposing and problematising the habitual violence which is the male gaze.
THE debate on the male gaze has continued ever since and has had an impact on feminist film-making as well as on theory and criticism.
‘Theory films’ such as Sally Potter's Thriller (1979), Laura Mulvey's own Amy !(1980) and Riddles of the Sphinx (1976), both made in collaboration with Peter Wollen, and theory-informed documentaries like Michelle Citron's Daughter Rite (1975) and Susan Clayton and Jonathan Curling's Song of the Shin (1979) all tried to forge a new film language outside of the established structures of mainstream cinema.
These films were often independently funded and distributed through a network of art-house cinemas and educational establishments; but whilst trying to create an alternative circuit they were also subject to the dangers of marginalisation and exclusivism.
This was not just an effect of small scale distribution, but perhaps particularly due to their explicit problematisation of realism and of the conventional pleasures of cinema-viewing within the film text.
Some of them, such as Mulvey's films, and Tyndall, McCall, Pajaczkowska and Weinstock's Sigmund Freud's Dora (1979), presupposed a knowledge of psychoanalytical theory which necessarily limited their appeal.
On the other hand though, it must be noted that this was an important phase of feminist film-making because it established a foothold in Britain for avant-garde work, extending an already existing interest in (and audience for) the films of continental women directors such as Agnes Varda and Marguerite Duras.
‘Theory films’ demanded a different, more active and critical mode of viewing from that invited by realist documentary and classic fiction film.
This new dialectical relationship between spectator and screen image led some critics and film-makers to make large claims for the avant-garde film as inherently more progressive and political, because of its self-reflexiveness and because of its refusal to give in to the tendency of mainstream film to construct an ‘imaginary identity’.
Although some feminists rejected psychoanalytical theory on the grounds that it is inherently woman-unfriendly, many feminist film theorists after Mulvey saw Lacan's work on the psychic formation of gendered identity in relation to specularity (gazing in the mirror), the unconscious and language as central to their concerns.
Lacanian psychoanalysis, they argued, offered the best understanding of the objectification of woman in film, of the way film constructs a gendered viewer, and of the complex of perversions-voyeurism, exhibitionism, fetishism — which because of their prominence in mainstream cinema are pertinent to the feminist engagement with film.
Since the mid 
1980s, therefore, Lacanian psychoanalysis, often in combination with some brand of semiotics, has been pretty well dominant in Anglo-American feminist film theory.
Kaplan's Women and film.
— Both Sides of the Camera (1983), Teresa de Lauretis's Alice Doesn't: Feminism, Semiotics, Cinema (1984), and Constance Penley's more recent Feminism and Film Theory (1988), and The Future of an Illusion: Film, Feminism and Psychoanalysis (1989) all privilege the question of the gaze and the (im) possibility of feminist meanings in the White Western traditions of mainstream and avant-garde cinema.
This does not mean that a consensus has been reached about either the inescapability of the male gaze or its centrality in feminist film analysis.
Critique and modification has come from both within and without psychoanalytical film theory, and has centred on different aspects of the gaze.
Mary Ann Doane's argument concerning the ‘women's films’ of the 1940s, for example, was that these products of mainstream fiction cinema were directed at a female audience and thus did construct a female gaze.
Unfortunately, Doane's conclusion was no less pessimistic than Mulvey's as to the radical potential of this gaze, since she argued that the film narrative in these cases effectively forced the female spectator into a masochistic identification with the female protagonist.
(Doane 1984) The issue of the female viewer's possibilities for identification was taken up in a different way in the work of Janet Bergstrom and in Laura Mulvey's own ‘Afterthoughts on ‘Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema'’.
Making a case for the complexity of woman's position as spectator, both critics stated that spectators are not necessarily locked into identification with their own gender but are able to take up multiple identifications, whether simultaneously or in succession.
(Bergstrom 1988, pp. 181–2; Mulvey 1988, p. 74)
Finally, from within psychoanalytical criticism but from outside the Anglo-American paradigm, Gertrud Koch has drawn attention to a different theorisation of the gaze, one that does not link it to voyeuristic (peeping through the keyhole) pleasure but rather to the earlier, pre-symbolic stage in which the small child gazes openly at the world and at its mother: ‘We may in fact owe the invention of the camera not to the keyhole but to the baby-carriage’.
(Koch 1985a, p. 149) Koch and others have stressed that because this conception of the gaze goes back to the Freudian idea of an originary bisexuality it therefore affords a better explanation of women's actual viewing behaviour, e.g. their multiple identifications with either gender.
(Koch 1985b, p. 111)
IT is almost inevitable that a critical overview of feminist writing on film reproduces the dominant features of existing debate, even as it tries to displace  them.
It is, therefore, all the more important to round off this discussion of the privileging of the gaze by looking at the work of critics who positioned themselves outside the psychoanalytical framework.
Terry Lovell's Pictures of Reality was a seminal text in this respect, since it presented a scrupulous critique of the semiotic and psychoanalytical preoccupations of film theory even before they came into full swing in feminism.
From Lovell's Marxist perspective the feminist debates outlined above are misdirected for a variety of reasons.
As regards the feminist critique of realism, Lovell pointed to the failure to relate realism as a mode of signification to realism as an epistemology.
Likewise she argued that the feminist versions of Althusserian concepts of ideology overemphasised textuality at the expense of social and economic analysis.
All too often in this work, Lovell maintained, ideological effects were ‘read off’ from the film text itself, thus conflating the constructed or implied reader with actual viewers — and leaving the latter out of account altogether.
Finally and perhaps most importantly, Lovell criticised the narrowness of Lacanian psychoanalytic concerns because of their focus on the construction of individual subjectivity rather than on ways in which a collective subject can be constituted, and because the Lacanian subject was seen as ultimately powerless.
Pleasure should have an important place in Marxist aesthetics, Lovell concluded, but theoretical work on pleasure should be connected with the political and with analysis of popular culture as a prime site of ideological contestation:
The pleasure of the text stems at least in part from collective utopias, social wish fulfillment and social aspirations, and these are not simply the sublimated expression of more basic sexual desires.
(Lovell 1983, p. 61)
Christine Gledhill's ‘Developments in Feminist Film Criticism’ touched on many of the same points.
Starting from the position that the dominant framework of feminist film criticism was ‘too restrictive in the kinds of questions it asks of cinema’ Gledhill gave a convincing defence of feminist realist practices and concluded with a plea for a kind of cultural analysis which could ‘hold the extra-discursive and the discursive together as a complex and contradictory interrelation’.
(Gledhill 1954, p. 44) This demand for a wider and less myopic frame of analysis has only recently and partially begun to be met, primarily in a shift towards an interest in actual spectatorship, but also in related issues such as the experience of viewing and the role of cultural differences in film reception and production.
Stage Three: Spectatorship and Differential Contexts
The multi-interpretability of film (polysemy) and the realisation that spectators can and do adopt diverse identificatory positions in watching film has led to a new and more complex conception of film-viewing.
It is true that in film the ‘image’, however symbolically intended or perceived, is always  ‘literalised’ by the medium itself.
In this respect the cinematic sign differs radically from the language of literature, where images are less likely to be taken at only the literal level.
(Doane 1984, p. 6) But this does not mean either that film-viewers are not also active readers of film who can produce their own meanings, or that identification with mainstream fiction film characters means unconditional surrender to bourgeois ideology.
(Penley 1988, p. 11) Teresa de Lauretis has described this shift towards a greater interest in reception as in part a delayed effect of feminism's construction of a new social subject — women — who may be and are legitimately addressed in cinematic practices.
(de Lauretis 1984, p. 163) The impact of this shift on film-making has been that except for overtly feminist films, cinematic practices in the independent sector no longer necessarily can be said to construct a male gaze.
Whatever one may think of Sex, Lies and Videotape —— and it doesn't have to be much — it does at least address the question of the gaze and of masculine sexuality.
In ways more amenable to women's visual pleasure, off-beat films which then made it into the mainstream distribution circuit such as Lianna (Nelson/Renzi),Desert Hearts ,I've Heard the Mermaids Singing (Rozema) and Percy Adlon's work with Marianne Sagebrecht in Baghdad Café and Sugar Baby have achieved a degree of success in changing the dynamics of female objectification and sexual fantasy in an entertainment setting.
Where lesbian love and sexuality are addressed, however ‘delicately and discreetly’, a public space is nevertheless created for discussion and analysis.
Women's pleasure in viewing then is high on the agenda in recent feminist work on film.
This is welcome not only because women's desires are being taken more seriously in cultural production or because a less purist feminist film practice and criticism is simply more fun, but perhaps particularly because it is in relation to the audience, and in the context of film reception, that issues of race, class and sexual orientation can at last find their rightful place in feminist theory and criticism.
Charlotte Brunsdon's excellent collection Films for Women (1986) and E. Deirdre Pribram's equally useful Female Spectators (1988) both emphasise the heterogeneity of female spectatorship, whilst at the same time seeing film-viewing as very much a social practice rather than something which individuals undergo, passively, in the dark.
Thus it is not the case that the spectator's experience of a film is wholly determined by atomised viewing in the cinema — discussion afterwards with friends or groups, reviews and other contextual factors play their parts in the construction of meanings too.
Racial and cultural difference are addressed in this context both as determinants in the production of meanings and as a means of putting the concerns of White Western feminist film criticism into perspective.
These concerns must be recognised as specific , which doesn't mean that semiotics or Lacanian film theory has no relevance outside the established framework of Anglo-American and European cinema, but rather that their legitimacy  should not automatically be assumed or their dominance remain uncontested in the light of developments within feminism at large.
For example, Brunsdon notes that ‘Hollywood, as the world-dominant cinema, exports ideals of White femininity worldwide’, yet feminist critics have rarely looked at this aspect of the Hollywood dream-machine in their copious critiques of it.
(Brunsdon 1986, p. 55) In relation to the production of more differentiated cultural meanings, Jacqueline Bobo's article in Female Spectators (1988) on Black women's viewing of Spielberg's The Color Purple offers a good example of where feminist film criticism might go next.
Bobo draws attention to the role of cultural groups functioning as interpretative communities in the construction of oppositional readings of films which are regarded as reactionary by a theoreticist criticism refusing to see signification as a two-way social process.
She makes a useful distinction between three types of film-viewing: dominant readings, negotiated readings which are critical of what is on offer but nevertheless accept the underlying ideology, and oppositional readings which can range from outright rejection to the creation of subversive meanings.
Finally, Bobo notes that the recent popularity of Black women 's writing is one of those extra-discursive factors which must be taken into account when looking at cultural practices such as The Color Purple .
This brief discussion of the differential positioning of Black women as spectators returns us to the Channel 4 debate which I mentioned in my introduction.
Here the different ways of seeing ‘women in film’, especially in the controversies over realism, over documentary film-making, over the gaze and over representations of sexuality, converged, for once, in the serious questions those four women asked about the feminist film debate which I have outlined above.
Revisiting the debate: truly global issues
Christine Gledhill's forceful defence of realist film-making is of immediate relevance to the Channel 4 debate between four women film-makers: Deepa Dhanraj (India), Marilou Diaz-Abaya (Philippines), Jocelyne Saab (Lebanon) and Ana Carolina (Brazil).
‘Politically the issue is very important’, Gledhill argued,
an assertion of realism is the first recourse of any oppressed group wishing to combat the ideology promulgated by the media in the interests of hegemonic power.
(Gledhill 1984, p. 19)
The discussion opened with the (as it turned out) vexed question of politics in women's film-making.
Dhanraj began by stating unequivocally that  she saw film-making as a tool for socio-political challenge (she would not go so far as to say change) and that documentary was best suited to this purpose.
This immediately raised the question of whether documentary realism is therefore inherently more political than fiction or avant-garde cinema — a useless question as it turned out.
National histories and political contexts have to be taken into account; Marilou Diaz-Abaya explained for example that the Marcos regime had encouraged and subsidised an indigenous entertainments' fiction-film industry in the Philippines, but had put severe restrictions upon the making of documentary.
For Carolina in Brazil the non-controversial fiction film was likewise the only option left if she wanted to go on working at all: she had been jailed several times for the making of political films.
Entwined with the question of politics and of film-making as self-expression — a matter of class privilege (Diaz-Abaya) or cultural struggle (Dhanraj)— -was the issue of women's sexual objectification.
Working in India in a film industry which thrives on the sexual exploitation of women, Dhanraj spoke of the impossibility of positing a desiring female subject.
Jocelyne Saab, on the other hand, took issue with the question itself, which she saw as confined to the typically limited preoccupations of White, Western, middle-class feminists.
There is, said Saab, ‘nothing wrong with the representation of women as objects of desire’; she found them attractive and strong.
But again this statement was problematised as soon as specific conditions of production and national/cultural traditions were brought into play.
In Brazil, according to Carolina, ‘either you do sex films or you die professionally’, because of the politically repressive climate in which little other than sex films pleases the eye of the censor.
With regard to their own work, three of the four women said they had been criticised by White feminists for ‘too much sex’ or for ‘collusion in the exploitation of women for the male gaze’, a criticism which they all felt was inappropriate and indicative not just of Western ignorance vis-à-vis questions of representation and cultural difference, but also of institutional and political constraints.
None of these constraints, incidentally, had much to do with the novelty of women directors within their national traditions; all four could point to predecessors, especially in the earlier part of this century when the film industry was being established.
FEMINISM and cinema is indeed a global issue.
It encompasses a great diversity of questions around film as a signifying practice, as a locus of pleasure and entertainment, and as an instrument of dominant ideology, or, conversely, as a tool for political resistance and subversion.
As a cultural practice it is embedded in national traditions and subject to institutional  constraints, but it is also a multi-interpretable art form, which may be opaque in its meanings, or a window on the world (for feminist windows are different).
The film as film, as ‘text’, as visual artefact, takes up only a small place amidst this kaleidoscope of angles — and I haven't even touched on the economic aspects of production and reception, such as box office pressures, state subsidies, distribution and exhibition.
These do not always yield the most interesting insights into feminism and film, but they are indispensable for a full understanding of the factors at play, material and cultural.
Add to this the broader questions of feminism itself — its heterogeneity and contradictions, its activist and theoretical incarnations, its diverse and chequered histories, its multiple definitions and its uncertain future — and the stage is set.
‘Women and film’ would make a great movie if it had an international, multicultural cast and would address all these questions at once.
I would not want to direct it, but I do think it would be a shame if Lacan, Althusser, Freud and Foucault yet again were allowed to bag the best parts.
Not because they could not be useful — but they wouldn't give us, as desiring female spectators,that much to look at.
THE MATRIARCH AND THE MEDIA
Thatcher and the Media
SARAH BAXTER
THE media only penetrated Mrs Thatcher's defences once.
Two weeks before the General Election of 1983, she agreed to be interviewed on the BBC Nationwide's On the Spot in the guise of Tory party leader rather than Prime Minister of Britain.
Ordinary viewers had been invited to pose questions live from the BBC's regional studios.
A grey-haired geography teacher from Bristol, Mrs Diana Gould, appeared on screen.
‘Mrs Thatcher’, she asked, ‘Why, when the Belgrano , the Argentinian battleship, was outside the exclusion zone and actually sailing away from the Falklands, why did you give the order to sink it?’
Mrs Thatcher denied the ship was sailing away, but Mrs Gould persisted.
‘It was on a bearing of 280 degrees and was already west of the Falklands, so I'm sorry but I cannot see how you can say it was not sailing away from the Falklands when it was sunk.’
Mrs Thatcher was seriously rattled now.
She tried to brush her assailant aside with the words, ‘One day all the facts, in about thirty years’ time, will be published,’and was ticked off in return.
‘That is not good enough, Mrs Thatcher.'
Such lèse-majesté could only come from a member of the public.
The geography teacher was a latter-day incarnation of the boy who cried, ‘The Emperor's got no clothes on.’
During Mrs Thatcher's eleven and a half years in power, journalists were mostly fawning courtiers to the Queen of Downing Street.
There were some excellent investigative programmes from Panorama ,World in Action ,This Week ,First Tuesday and Twenty-Twenty Vision , which  probed government scandals in the 1980s, but no journalist was bold enough to take on the Prime Minister herself.
Mrs Thatcher never let herself be interviewed by another Mrs Gould.
The Jimmy Young Show's formula of tea and chat and a few questions on a postcard from Radio 2 listeners was her favourite method of reaching the general public.
There, she could pretend to be the housewife she wasn't, with the same concerns as Jimmy Young's daytime audience.
Unlike Mrs Gould, they couldn't answer back.
She would occasionally reward Thatcherite newspapers, such as the Express , with a gracious, unrevealing interview; on television, Sir Robin Day and Brian Walden would flatter her by pretending to be tough, and she would flatter them by pretending they were.
The media are by nature deferential to Prime Ministers, as the reception granted to John Major in his first few weeks in power showed.
Journalists, like anyone else, enjoy backing winners: they want to be ‘one of us, rather than‘one of them’.
It is also virtually impossible to break through the protective thicket of Number 10, unless its occupant decides to hack the branches away.
To the last, Mrs Thatcher's private thoughts and feelings were communicated through her legendary press secretary, Bernard Ingham.
On the day of her resignation, the immortal line, ‘It's a funny old world, was fed by him to the press and television at his final unattributable lobby briefing at Downing Street.
Yet Mrs Thatcher's unassailable, inaccessible image was explicitly fashioned by her for the media.
Aided by her publicity adviser, Sir Gordon Reece, the mousy frump in sensible shoes and off-the-peg clothing transformed herself into the glamorous power-dresser, with coiffed blonde hair and capped teeth, who led President Mitterrand to slaver, ‘She has the eyes of Caligula and the mouth of Marilyn Monroe.’
It was Barbara Castle who remarked, when Mrs Thatcher became leader of the Conservatives in 1975, that power had made her pretty for the first time.
But her clothes, make-up and hairstyle were not designed to please, but to impress.
In particular, they erected a physical barrier between her and lesser mortals — the men in suits who were all around her, in Parliament, in Whitehall and in the media.
Only another woman, Mrs Gould, refused to be intimidated and stripped her finery away.
In revenge, Mrs Thatcher tried to punish the BBC.
That Mrs Gould was allowed to put her question in front of the cameras proved television was stocked with sixties' radicals who were bent on sabotage.
Mrs Thatcher was  Boudicea , Britannia, Gloriana.
To criticise her, or her government, was an act of treason.
The ‘Bolshevik Broadcasting Corporation’ was yet another pillar of the establishment behind which lurked fifth columnists.
The same was true of ITV, after the screening of Death on the Rock , Granada's investigation into 1988 SAS killings of three IRA members in Gibraltar.
The quality papers, which published extracts from Peter Wright's  MI5 memoir,Spycatcher , were deemed to be almost as seditious.
As a result, the media has been subjected to a barrage of restrictive legislation.
Members of Sinn Fein, including its elected representatives, cannot speak on television; the Official Secrets Act has been amended to prevent leaks, forbidding even a ‘public interest’ defence; the new Broadcasting Act insists on ‘balance’, leaving programmes like Death on the Rock , which questioned the government's point of view, vulnerable to legal challenge.
Mrs Thatcher's personal crusade against the media, carried out by her henchman, Norman Tebbit, excluded the tabloids, which were largely satisfied with a regular diet of photo-opportunities.
Pliant editors were rewarded with knighthoods, and the Sun's owner, Rupert Murdoch, was granted a licence to strike at the BBC by establishing the first satellite station, Sky TV.
Yet the most important innovation of her era was the televising of Parliament, under the kind of controlled circumstances (no snoring MPs, no empty backbenches) that she so approved of.
Her twice-weekly parliamentary Question Times, where she would be thrown a few soft-balls by her own side, enabled her to shine at the dispatch box.
Television also gave her the opportunity to stage a bravura farewell to the nation, not just to fellow MPs, in her last speech as Prime Minister.
The medium that she was so hostile to served her well.
To have faced only one Mrs Gould in eleven and a half years shows how much, not how little, television let Mrs Thatcher get away with.
Women and Children Last?
Women under Thatcherism
ISOBEL ARMSTRONG
THE flurry of worry about the absence of women in John Major's cabinet had the odd effect of making Mrs Thatcher s premiership look almost progressive on women's issues.
Far from it: this was one of her greatest failures.
It was not mitigated by the presence of the odd woman in the cabinet.
Unlike Mary Robinson, President of the Republic of Ireland, she never made a single major public declaration which addressed itself principally to women's concerns, or recognised the need to release women's energies and potential.
On the contrary, her policies thwarted these energies.
Typical is her explicit disapproval of a coordinated policy of pre-school crèche facilities and childcare — significantly to a wide audience of women — on BBC Radio 4's Woman's Hour (17 May 1990).
She warned against a generation of ‘crèche children’.
Legislation affecting women in the last decade, whether it has been concerned with family, work or education, has been retrograde and consistently worked against them.
But there has been little legislation directed specifically towards women.
Why has Britain dragged its feet on the European directive under the Social Charter to prevent women being dismissed from jobs on the grounds of pregnancy?
Why is Britain's childcare provision for 3–5 year olds the worst in the EEC except for Portugal?
(Only 198 of 1.1 million women in a survey last year had crèches available at work.)
Why does the United Kingdom come bottom in Europe for maternity leave provision?
Part-time workers — two out of three of the female workforce — are excluded from  maternity leave altogether.
They are also excluded from the pension rights to which full-time workers are entitled, and would do no better under the government's opt-out scheme because this depends on savings rather than insurance.
And yet the proportion of women going out to work has doubled over the last thirty-five years (from 30% to 60% between 1951 and 1987), and almost all this increase is in part-time work.
(This trend has been so insistent that when men find themselves in part-time work economists have begun to call this the feminisation of labour.)
At the same time, statistics show that women still undertake the bulk of unpaid domestic work in the home (Social Trends , HMSO, 1990).
In 1980 one in eight of all adult women provided regular help for another dependent adult, and now one in four women aged between 45 and 64 have a commitment to provide such care without financial reward.
This is a growing burden, given the government's devolution of geriatric and mental care on to the ‘community’ while actually failing to provide support and relying instead on the voluntary services of women in the family.
Changes in community care were recently postponed because they would add to Poll Tax charges.
It is fiscal changes, however, which reveal women's double burden of second-class work status and family obligations and dramatise the government's contradictory attitude to women: since April 1990, married men and women have been separately taxed; but this is a phantom recognition of women because the married couple's new allowance is given to the husband .
So a woman's take home pay will always be proportionally less.
The Conservatives have worked to an archaic family structure where the man is seen as the dominant wage earner, despite their uneasy recognition that market forces, with demographic change, are soon going to require skilled female labour.
Their illusory tax change indicates that women are still seen primarily as supplements to the labour force and domestic workers in the family.
This attitude is behind the policy of skimping on women and children which has kept the family allowance or child benefit frozen (its real value has fallen by 18% in the last ten years).
This benefit is not a free gift to women, as its enemies claim, but the equivalent of a tax allowance for having children (recognised in other European countries), and it is targeted upon the very person on whom responsibility falls — the mother.
Such limitation on women's powers cuts into all classes and races: it is a sad waste of half of our country's potential; but the government goes further — some groups of women are positively discriminated against.
Lone parents now account for 14% of families with dependent children (it was 8% in 1971).
Research shows that lone parents belong to lower income groups which have been hard hit, kept in the poverty trap by changes in benefits and the income support system, which reduces support pound for pound, without compensation for childcare, whenever the woman begins to earn.
High mortgages, the massive increase of families in bed-and-breakfast accommodation, a revised benefits' system sweeping away school meals' entitlements and heavily dependent on loans, the Poll Tax, cutbacks in family planning clinics, the introduction of loans in higher education, fare increases and timetable reductions on deregulated public transport — we know that such hardships bear more on women the less money they have.
And what is hard on women is hard on children.
But would it have been different if Mrs Thatcher had had a spell on income support? or if she had ever lugged a buggy, baby, toddler and bags of shopping on and off her infrequent, deregulated buses?
Not very.
Policies creating women's hardship arise, it is true, from a failure of imagination.
But they are also caused by a deep intellectual failure and fatalism inherited from the earliest Tory analysts of poverty.
Thomas Malthus, first theorist of the dependency society and the true ancestor of present Conservative policies (rather than Adam Smith, the preferred model), believed that women must always come off worst in the ‘disgraceful’ condition of poverty.
In his essay on population (1798) he wrote that it was beyond ‘human ingenuity’ to eradicate it.
The only way to prevent the poor from plundering resources was to make them ‘free’ by depriving them of financial support.
Childbearing makes women dependent and thus they have less access to such freedom.
In the last decade there has been a real failure to think differently, to find new solutions to replace the sterile, old Malthusian ones.
But what of those luckier and more privileged women who have not suffered from policy dictated by what at its worst is a squalid pessimism?
These are the professional women, the graduates, the well educated or highly trained who can command full-time salaries.
There are many more of them than there were in highly competitive professions, in the law, the civil service, the universities, management, trade unions, and the media.
The Hansard Society Commission report,Women at the Top (1990), tells us this.
It also tells us that women never get to the top.
Its commonest expression after an account of improvements recorded is a qualifying ‘however’: the report finds that women are seriously under-represented at high levels everywhere.
Almost all senior judges are men, for instance, and there is only one woman in the Court of Appeal.
This malaise is endemic to senior positions of power, whether it is the media and press, Parliament, the universities or management.
The budget of the Equal Opportunities Commission has been cut in real terms during recent years; the report says: ‘equal opportunity remains only an ideal’.
Ironically, the government really has been true to its policy of noninterference in the ‘free market’ where women's opportunities are concerned, though in other areas it has often recognised the paradox that non-interventionist policies require intervention to make them work.
Recent years have seen an extraordinary surge of energy among women despite continuing disadvantages: the growth of Well Women Centres, Rape  Crisis Lines, the campaign in response to the discrimination against lesbians in Section 25, the Greenham peace camp, the organisation of professional groups such as Women in Engineering and Women in Publishing, are all manifestations of this energy.
However, impediments to women's lives will not disappear as quickly as Mrs Thatcher did.
But at least we can seek for different models of powerful women: sensitivity and strength, power and flexibility, commitment without dogma, determination and courage without authoritarianism, these would be welcome everywhere.
REVIEWS
New Men for Old?
HELEN TAYLOR
Lynne Segal,Slow Motion: Changing Masculinities, Changing Men , Virago, 1990, £6.99
THE contemporary women's movement has given us a language with which to describe and understand patriarchal oppression.
But while a sophisticated series of discourses has been developed to analyse the problems and conflicts in women's experience, and especially the pain and anguish of women's social, domestic, emotional, and sexual lives, the reasons why most women continue to define ourselves, and to practise as heterosexual have remained unexplored.
Heterosexual women, within the dominant discourses of two decades of Anglo-American and French feminism, have adopted an apologetic stance, uncomfortably aware of the fractured, divided nature of femininities available within what has been increasingly defined as monolithic patriarchy, a discrete and omnipotent masculinity.
A serious feminist critique of masculinity and male power was long overdue; Lynne Segal has at last provided it.
In the week during which I read my way through this long, exhaustive study, I was continually aware of the variety of masculinities which coexist uneasily within our culture.
One day Judge Raymond Dean was reminding us of the perils of ignoring men's bestialnature-—‘Men can't turn their emotions on and off like a tap as some women can’; the next, Prince Edward was vehemently denying his alleged homosexuality by expressing outrage that such an insult should be levelled at him; meanwhile, on TV the Audi driver screeched to a halt at the hospital where — with toddler in arms — he managed narrowly to miss his second child's birth, and Good Housekeeping boasted a curious advert showing New Man (Audi safely in the garage?) in boxer shorts, cradling new baby, sitting on a German washing machine.
Segal's book rightly refuses the notion of a single ‘masculinity’ in favour of certain specific ‘masculinities’.
The greatest virtue of Segal's book lies in its ability to demonstrate, through three decades of social history (albeit largely Anglo-American) the diverse and contradictory nature of masculinities.
It refuses simple definitions and simplistic judgements; it is never seduced by its subject; it excuses and  romanticises little.
Evidence, reference, footnotes by the thousand testify to a scrupulous researcher who, while insistently arguing her own socialist-feminist case, does considerable justice to a full range of different theoretical and political positions.
(Unfortunately, this sometimes makes it rather worthy and less punchy than her writing on women.)
The book begins with the 1950s, when baby manuals indexed ‘fathers’ as ‘for fathers see mothers’, and men were ‘angry’, ‘tough’or ‘queer’; it ends with ‘a new agenda for the 1990s’, described hopefully as a time when men join women in fighting for an end to exploitation of women at work and home, and the ‘masculinity’we have known will come to a timely end.
In between, she discusses those contradictory forms of masculinity through an impressive range of discourses — sociological, social-psychological, psychoanalytic, radical feminist, fictional and so on — always exemplifying her points with examples drawn from concrete social and political practice.
Her own position, forcefully argued at every turn, is that masculinity is ‘a heterogeneous set of ideas, constructed around assumptions of social power , which are lived out and reinforced, or perhaps denied and challenged, in multiple and diverse ways within a whole social system in which relations of authority, work, and domestic life are organised, in the main, along hierarchical gender lines (p. 288).
This thesis is worked through debates about the nature of ‘masculinity’, masculine subjectivity, sexuality, homosexuality, and violence.
Segal never shirks fraught and controversial issues, even around racism, black and gay machismo, and pornography.
She describes well the privileges attendant on maleness, as well as the hazards and horrors awaiting certain groups of men — notably poor, black men on welfare in the US since Reagan, and gay men in the era of AIDS.
She does not idealise those groups, nor fall into the trap of soft-focusing on the ‘New Man’ as the answer to all women's problems.
She reiterates the fact that masculinity is usually defined positively and valued highly, that it is a plenitude, an identity which — unlike femininity — is linked with success, power and dominance in every sphere' (p. 82).
But she also refuses the simple equation, made by many feminists, of ‘masculinity’ and ‘male dominance’.
For instance, in a neat linguistic reversal, she argues against the radical feminist view of ‘male violence in the hands of the state’, in favour of a socialist-feminist definition of ‘state violence in the hands of men’(p. 268).
I suspect that it is in this challenge to popular feminist orthodoxies that the book's significance will rest.
With cool logic but passionate polemic, Segal takes on the (primarily North American) body of feminist work which has been so influential in the peace, ecology, and anti-pornography campaigns of the last two decades.
She argues against Shere Hite, Mary Daly and Andrea Dworkin who have persuaded so many feminists that woman is the peacemaker, the non-violent, nurturing sex which abhors power, and is innocent of aggression.
Segal draws on ample evidence to show that the rates of male  violence against women vary considerably among societies, that they are alarmingly high in the US from which most of the disturbing studies of male violence derive, and that they bear a direct relationship to the general levels of violence of all kinds within any given society and period.
The causes of male violence intersect in complex ways with inequalities of class, ethnicity, race, and age.
For feminists to see all men as ‘potential rapists’ is not only grossly simplistic but also denies the specificity of crime and criminal, as well as women's own potential (suppressed into depression, self-hatred, and inertia) to be aggressive and violent, to abuse, batter, and murder — and to consume pornography.
While many feminists will abhor Segal's conclusions about violence and pornography, I found them extremely relevant at a time when the British anti-porn bandwagon is sweeping along with it Labour women MPs and anti-censorship feminists, in company with the powerful, pro-family, homophobic moral right.
Lynne Segal's previous Virago book Is the Future Female ? was a spirited discussion of the nature and function of ‘femininities’, especially in recent decades; published in 1987, at the most politically depressing period of Thatcherism when the socialist-feminist vision seemed a distant memory or hopeless pipedream, Segal defended her optimism about women's astonishing progress since the 1960s, and about the fracturing of gender identities which she saw as irreversible.
In Slow Motion , that clear-sighted optimism is brought to bear on the advances made in men's individual attitudes and behaviour, as well as state regulation and definitions of gender positions and possibilities.
In her insistence on the range of masculinities in practice, and her argument that masculinity is structured through contradiction, Segal reminds us of the very real shifts achieved by feminists in setting a new agenda for women and men.
This book — theoretically sound and politically important — fleshes out the points of similarity between the sexes (ironically around the crises, confusions and contradictions of gender definition) and points to the potential for radical changes which are now available with such a heterogeneous array of ‘femininities’ and ‘masculinities’in play.
Abjection, Melancholia and Love
JOSEPHINE McDONAGH
John Fletcher and Andrew Benjamin, eds.,Abjection, Melancholia and Love: the Work of Julia Kristeva , Routledge, £30.00 hbk, £8.99 pbk.
ABJECTION, Melancholia and Love is, with three additions, the proceedings of a conference held at the University of Warwick in 1957 on the works of Julia Kristeva.
As John Fletcher points out in his introduction, the element of the conference that could not be documented is the presence of Kristeva herself, her generous responses to papers, the dialogues which she sustained throughout.
(One wonders, nevertheless, why a transcription of the conversations staged between Kristeva, Jacqueline Rose and Toril Moi could not have been included in the collection?)
Kristeva's own voice is recorded in this volume only in the first of the essays, ‘The Adolescent Novel’, but each of the subsequent pieces variously addresses aspects of her work.
Together they constitute a representative sample of the range of work carried out in English inspired and informed by the broad spectrum of Kristeva's influential writings, from her early semiotically based work, notably Revolution in Poetic Language , to the later psychoanalytically oriented studies of abjection, love and melancholia.
A significant aspect of her work is that it always broaches the boundaries between the traditional disciplines of philosophy, psychoanalysis, literary, and art theory; the implications it holds for each are touched on by the essays in this collection (for instance, Ainley, ‘The Ethics of Sexual Difference’; O'Connor, ‘The An-Arche of Psychotherapy’; Minow-Pinkney, ‘Virginia Woolf: ‘Seen from a Foreign Land'’; and Burgin, ‘Geometry and Abjection’).
But the essays are most demanding and ultimately most productive when they too occupy that position of liminality between the discourses that uneasily constitute us and our knowledge of the world.
Kristeva's more recent interest in the practical or healing function of psychoanalysis leads her, in ‘The Adolescent Novel’, to consider the therapeutic aspects of narrative.
Noting a coincidence between the ‘open structure’ of adolescence, in which the subject, ‘in the aftermath of the oedipal stabilisation of subjective identity,…again questions his identifications, along with his capacities for speech and symbolisation’(p. 9), and the ‘open structure’of  the novel which explores a similar fluidity, negotiating the ‘frontiers between differences of sex or identity, reality and fantasy, act and discourse’, Kristeva suggests that some form of literary history, that of novelistic discourse, might contribute to the fundamental project of psychoanalysis, that is, ‘how to understand perversion in a way that is at once faithful and noncomplacent’(p. 22).
She locates the origin of psychology at the historical beginnings of the novel, and using the example of the French writer, Antoine de Sale, indicates that the enactment of betrayal and loss in the early novels depends upon a fantasy of completeness.
She then traces the development of the novel from the fifteenth century through increasingly complex versions of the same ‘open structure’, thereby linking the production of specific instances of narrative with a particular stage of psychic development.
This meeting of psychoanalysis with literary history is suggestive for literary criticism too because it enables an account of the differences between various articulations of the formation of subjectivity without relinquishing a notion of change in literary form, nor, alternatively, relying on the haphazard attachment of the development of a single subject to a historical account of a literary genre.
It is worth noting that the collection includes essays that seek to explicate and contextualise Kristeva's writings, for these will be useful to students attempting to assimilate the subtleties of her work.
Lechte's ‘Art, Love and Melancholy in the work of Julia Kristeva’ is exemplary for the clarity with which it lays out the terms of Kristeva's later work.
Similarly the opening sections of Elisabeth Gross' essay, ‘The Body of Signification’, give an illuminating explanation of the importance of the body in post-structuralist theory.
Leslie Hill's account of Kristeva's work in relation to the French Avant-Garde finds a more convincing context for her work than Tina Chanter's attempt to formulate relations between Kristeva and the early twentieth-century British MP Eleanor Rathbone.
Most effective however are those essays that do not attempt direct explication of the ‘master’ discourse, but engage in dialogue with Kristeva's work, in particular with its complex interactions between semiotics and psychoanalysis.
Cynthia Chase s tightly argued and richly suggestive ‘Primary Narcissism and the Giving of Figure’ repays close attention, for in it she makes a case for the significance of Kristeva's work to an understanding of post-structuralist notions of the ‘uncertain agency’of language, not as it is often misunderstood, as cavalier irresponsibility, but as the indication of the ‘imperative of linking an ethical or political project with a critical epistemology’(p. 135).
Chase focuses on Kristeva's reworking of primary narcissism, namely that the infant identifies with the (imaginary) father through the mother's desire, so that the mother is always a sign to be read.
This, she points out, provides useful clarification of the analysis of the dual functions of language, the cognitive and the performative, central to Paul de Man's work.
The child's identification with the father is the primary act of ‘giving face’, or prosopopoeia, in which the child at once understands and performs the mother's materiality as sign, a process which can be expressed in de Man's formula that questions the notions of agency in language: ‘killing the mother by finding her already dead’(p. 133).
Maud Ellmann, in her brilliant reading of Eliot's The Waste Land , ‘Eliot's Abjection’, is similarly concerned with the figure of prosopopoeia, here the giving of face to death itself — a case of killing the past by finding it already dead.
The Waste Land , she argues, is a hysterical text in that it always displays that which it attempts to repress; Eliot's articulation of his authentic poetic voice gives way, despite himself, to a staging of his own destruction.
Ellmann uses Kristeva's notion of the abject to dramatically destabilise traditional accounts of poetry that rearticulate Eliot's notions of tradition and individual talent.
The over-burgeoning production of anthologised post-structurally informed essays often fills one with a sense of mournful abjection.
This volume however is both unusual and welcome because it deals specifically with the work of Julia Kristeva; it is informative in so far as it indicates the cross-disciplinary implications of her work, and it maintains a balance between the introductory and the complex.
Lesbian Lives and Letters
ALISON HENNEGAN
Paula Bennett,Emily Dickinson: Woman Poet , Harvester Wheatsheaf Key Women Writers Series, £35.00 hbk, £9.95 pbk.
The Hall Carpenter Archives' Lesbian Oral History Group,Inventing Ourselves: Lesbian Life Stories , Routledge, £9.99 pbk.
LESBIAN LISTS , a cheerfully confident little collection, has no doubt whatsoever about Emily Dickinson's place in its annals: turn to page 35 and there  she is, one of ‘22 lesbian poets’.
(Also included are Edith Sitwell and Eliza Cook, which may give us cause to ponder.)
Less exuberant authorities on Dickinson — her biographers, editors and critics — have approached her sexuality altogether more cautiously.
Some have denied its relevance (‘it's the poetry that matters’).
Others, including far too many feminist critics, concentrate on The Master, the unknown and possibly incorporeal subject of an outpouring of intense poems written in the early to mid-1860s.
True, giving him pride of place entails an insulting belittlement of her passionate romantic friendships with women; not least the one she maintained for more than thirty years with Sue Gilbert, her dearest Other, and eventually — bitter blow — her sister-in-law.
But focusing on The Master ensures that there is, acceptably, a male at the heart of Dickinson's emotional life.
Over the years lesbian readers have become adept at spotting the obligatory men hauled into the biographies of women who seem to have lived perfectly happily without them.
Dickinson, to be fair, poses the biographer special problems: so many theories, so few facts — or, more accurately, so few biographical facts which can be neatly matched to the tussles and triumphs of individual poems.
Paula Bennett, her most recent critic, devotes surprisingly little space to the ‘facts’ of Dickinson's life.
There's very little information here for the new(ish) reader about family, upbringing, education, township, larger historical context, or simple chronology of the poet's fifty-six years.
Instead, Bennett uses a lavish array of very rewarding close readings to suggest how Dickinson exacted unlikely victories from seemingly unpromising circumstances.
Critical rejection of her poetry at an early stage denied her an audience, but also brought her freedom to write on, unfettered by that audience's demands or limitations.
Loss of faith in a traditional God-the-Father brought not spiritual anguish but freedom to explore more Motherly aspects of deity and the divinity of Nature.
Her ‘failure’ to marry and bear children (coupled with her insistence on confining her household work to the things she liked best — kneading bread, sewing and gardening) secured time and energy with which to think and write: there were more than seventeen hundred poems by the time she died in 1886.
And perhaps most important of all was her ability to take whatever was sustaining and useful to her in the mid-nineteenth century's version of ‘womanliness’ and ‘domesticity’and to reject those elements which stifled, maimed and, sometimes literally, maddened other women.
This, you will realise, is very much Emily Triumphant and, for Bennett, a large part of that triumph — both as woman and poet — springs from Dickinson's responses to the Godhead (or not), to the natural world, the was a point of view' and, Bennett maintains, one which shaped and informed Dickinson's responses to the Godhead (or not), to the natural world, the function of the poet, and the purpose, syntax and language of poetry itself.
Bennett argues her case in a particularly invigorating fifth, and final, chapter, ‘Of Genre, Gender and Sex’.
Concentrating on the poems themselves, she traces a network there, constantly reproduced and extended over the decades, of specifically female genital images.
It's so persuasively and convincingly argued — especially for those of us most happy to be convinced — that it's a trifle dampening to be reminded that these are ‘image patterns whose sexual significance may have been hidden from the poet on a conscious level….
Without external evidence, there is no way to know how deliberate Dickinson's use of this imagery was’, even if the images may, cautiously, be ‘interpreted with an eye to biography’.
‘THERE is no way to know…’: how it resounds, that phrase, standing for centuries of silence, hints, half-knowledge about the hidden complexity and richness of women's relations with themselves and each other.
And how very different from the home lives of our own dear dykes, as recently exemplified by the fifteen women whose tape-recorded, edited life stories form Inventing Ourselves .
Their interviews represent just a tiny part of the Hall Carpenter Archives, an outstanding collection of British gay and lesbian material — films, tapes, photographs, journals, correspondence, memoirs, periodicals, and ephemera — brought together with the help of funding from the Greater London Council.
Now, with the destruction of the GLC by an explicitly and dedicatedly anti-homosexual government, the Archives' holdings are dispersed, given refuge by institutions such as the London School of Economics and the Haldane Society.
For most of these fifteen women, knowledge — of their sexuality, its implications, risks and rewards — has been hard won: their desire to share it, preserve it, pass it on, was their main reason for agreeing to be interviewed.
Some, such as Sharley McLean, now in her late sixties, have already survived Hitler's efforts to silence them.
(Her gay uncle was less fortunate.)
Others have attempted to silence themselves, by entering convents, marrying for a ‘cure’.
Many of them initially resisted knowledge, others sought it vainly.
Time and again women failed to find the words in which to frame their questions, knowing only that the language available to them did not fit.
Other women grappled with the mystery of an as yet unarticulated knowledge of their ‘difference’, having no name to give it.
Many found it easier to recognise the sufferings of others — under Apartheid, in Vietnam, Nicaragua — before acknowledging their own — hopeless marriages, the aftermath of incest, the pain of family rejection, the struggle between conflicting cultures.
Rather like those nineteenth-century American ladies who often found it easier to fight for slaves, or Indians, or heathens or The Poor than for themselves.
Nice women,real women, put themselves last — but not Emily Dickinson, who, as  Paula Bennett points out, firmly rejected ‘the values of spirituality, purity and service.
So here's Emily, back again, because, teasingly, she seems after all to share so much with the women of Inventing Ourselves .
Like them she knew and feared the power of marriage and heterosexual passion to burn women up and out (her image).
Like them, she knew that the act of shaping — a line, an emphasis, a pattern — brings a measure of power and control, and, like them, told her story in her own way or not at all.
(Thomas Higginson advised her not to try to publish, so she didn't.
‘But neither did she change the way she wrote.’)
Like them she hated false endings, dishonest resolutions, a pretence that the half-told tale is finished: ‘This isn't the whole story: this isn't my statement.
That was then, this is now, and as a lesbian, here I am’, says Liz Naylor in her postscript.
Such a ‘sizeable number of poems that Dickinson left in semi-final or working draft after 1860 suggests that the very act of finishing a poem…became repugnant to her’ says Bennett.
And, like those fifteen women, Dickinson knew that, sometimes two — or more — versions of events or feelings can be true.
The variant readings which fill her manuscripts are part of the very substance of the text ’, Bennett insists, italicising her assertion.
Sometimes ‘the multiple variants are, it can be argued, what the poem is about’.
But, unlike them, it seems, Dickinson cherished in matters sexual, as in much else, an ambiguity which, for Bennett, is one of her greatest strengths: ‘For it allows us to identify with the speaker's feelings, whether or not we share their cause….
Indeed, in so far as knowing the ‘cause’ would restrict our reading of the poems, it is the one piece of information we can probably do without.’
Hmm.
I wonder.
It's a troublesome beast, this poetic ambiguity which we are so often taught to value more highly than the explicit.
If, for example, virulently anti-gay readers ‘identify, with the emotions of love or loss present in the works of gay poets who, considerately (cravenly?), omit disturbing pronouns, how valuable is the ‘identification, made so incompletely, in such ignorance?
Certainly it would be unwise to see it as proof of understanding or acceptance.
For most of the women in Inventing Ourselves ambiguity proved a treacherous friend, blurring, obscuring, distorting and denying.
Clarity was their quest and, ultimately, many of them feel, their salvation.
Yet, in Dickinson's hands, ambiguity becomes the means of survival.
Readings such as Paula Bennett's enable us to see that Dickinson's Poems and Inventing Ourselves are both Books of Revelations.
Struggles in Tigray and Tanzania
EKEI ETIM
Nell Druce and Jenny Hammond, ‘Sweeter than Honey’: Testimonies of Tigrayan Women , Links Publication, £6.95 (pbk); £19.95 (hbk).
Laetitia Mukurasi,Post Abolished: One Woman's Struggle for Employment Rights in Tanzania , The Women's Press, £12.95
IN the first of these books the authors give their personal assessment of the Tigrayan revolution.
They start off with an account of the failure of central government in Ethiopia to cater for its minorities.
The enforcement of Amhara supremacy over other nationalities and the absence of a democratic machinery for instituting change are given as the main reasons why the Tigray People's Liberation Front (TPLF) started an armed struggle in 1975.
The TPLF was against exploitation, and was fighting for national self-determination.
The authors maintain that the role of women in the Tigrayan society is still closely linked to their status in the feudal system.
Up to 1975 women were treated as children.
They were not allowed to own land nor speak in public.
In short women were at the bottom of the hierarchy of oppression with no rights of any kind.
Through the testimonies of Tigrayan women we learn about the effects of the actions by the central government against members of TPLF.
Suspects were arrested and sometimes killed, while their families were subjected to intimidation.
The TPLF admit that they started a revolution without carefully working out the details of what they hoped to achieve and establish.
They had to develop their ideas as they went along.
There is a good account of the way in which the TPLF tried to improve the conditions of women by allowing them to form associations such as the Adi Hageray Women's Association.
Such entities allowed women to discuss issues affecting them in public and alongside men.
The TPLF allowed women to share land from the age of fifteen, and to take part in elections.
The legal age for marriage was raised to fifteen — still too young to be committed.
Circumcision was forbidden and the concept of illegitimacy abolished.
However, the women declined to be TPLF fighters.
Most of them have opted for relatively less strenuous jobs such as teaching.
As well as indicating how the women have struggled to improve their conditions, the testimonies also show that women gave full support and backing to the Tigrayan revolution.
However, the authors give the impression that the people who benefited most from the revolution were women.
This cannot be the case since the men are fully in control and direct the lives of the people of Tigray.
While the first book depicted the conditions and the struggle by women in northern Ethiopia, the second is a detailed account of one woman's fight against injustice in Tanzania.
After ten years of service to her company, the Fibre Boards Africa Ltd (FAL), the author became a victim as the men in authority conspired and dismissed her.
The account of events leading up to her dismissal and her subsequent reinstatement is skilfully narrated.
The story has a familiar ring to it in the sense that women are seldom encouraged to be in top positions at work the world over.
If they get there the men plot all kinds of strategies to get them out of such posts.
The perception of women's inability to take on managerial positions are almost universal.
Laetitia Mukurasi was the head of Manpower Development and Administration department in FAL, which was a state-owned company.
She carried out her duties efficiently and devotedly to the discomfort and irritation of her boss, the General Manager, and his colleagues.
Apart from using subtle ways to show his disapproval of her, he saw the redundancy exercise initiated by the government of Tanzania as the perfect excuse and a legitimate cover for her dismissal.
The opportunity which he seized turned out to his own detriment.
He expected her to leave the company without questioning his decision, but he was wrong.
The author realised that she was wrongfully dismissed at a time when the company needed her services.
She had courage, and with the help of her union was able to take her employers to court.
This was the first case in Tanzania of its kind: she argued that she was dismissed because of her sex.
What is perhaps of great importance is the fact that she challenged the decision of her employers and won the case against all odds.
The court recommended that she should be reinstated.
This was eventually done.
The events in this book act as a symbol of hope for both men and women in similar situations.
Resistance in Hyderabad
GARGI BHATTACHARYYA
Stree Shakti Sanghatena, ‘We were Making History:’ Women and the Telangana Uprising , Zed Books, £29.95 hbk, £8.95 pbk.
These are not stories mother-Tandana tana
These are not legends of Rama and Ravana
(p. 195)
IN Britain the Asian woman is not a highly regarded species.
Her history is still perceived to be one of religious mystification and ritualised domestic violence.
She is portrayed as a victim of a patriarchal and backward culture, trapped in a position of victimage because she does not have access to the resistances offered by Western culture.
This book documents the participation of women in a struggle centred around the concerns of rural India.
While there was a cultural aspect to this battle (the Telagu people faced discrimination as a linguistic minority) it is stressed that the struggle was focused on the conditions of an agricultural economy organised around a system of landlords and tenants.
Although the dustcover of this book asserts that the Telangana struggle is ‘now legendary’, it is unlikely that this history is known in Britain.
The struggle took place in the Telangana region of the State of Hyderabad.
At this time Hyderabad was governed by a Nizam who, through a special relationship with the British crown, operated a feudal system of patronage, granting land to political allies.
These sections of land became hereditary property, with the local peasantry falling under the governance of the ‘jagir’ to whom the land had been given.
Civil courts had no jurisdiction over these areas.
As a result, the worst excesses of feudal exploitation carried on unchecked.
The life-stories in this collection document the role of women in the communist-led struggle against these conditions.
The personal testimonies of these women tell the story of mounting an armed movement in a rural setting, of organising in villages among people with little political experience, and of the specific disappointments faced by women when this struggle was crushed.
After having participated alongside the men — organising the peasantry, conducting a guerilla war, living in the dangerous and uncertain conditions of an ‘underground’ existence — the women found that they were expected to return to a supposedly normal feminine role after the struggle.
In part these stories reflect the disappointment of crushed political hopes.
We thought Independence was in sight.
We lost all our property.
Now we had to go back…the children have to live, what were we to do?
So they said, ‘Do some business, take some nurse's training, or take a sewing machine and look after the movement.
After all who can run a business as well as an ex-communist…?(p. 136)
The women speak of having sacrificed all the trappings of a normal life, and then being left with nothing when the leaders called an end to the struggle.
This situation was worse for the Communist Party women than it was for the men.
Women in the movement found their sexuality doubly policed, both by social conventions and by Party ‘discipline’.
Their political involvement demanded that they forgo family and personal relations.
One woman tells of being forced to give up her small baby while living in the ‘underground’.
When she hesitated over this action, she was accused of not possessing ‘the correct consciousness for the working class.
However, overall the women do not complain about the extent of their sacrifices: ‘In a struggle you don't see how many people are sacrificed.
You only see what the movement needs.
Women are just suppressed more.
That is their usefulness.’
(p. 253) Instead, the major complaint is that they were forced to give up political activity after the struggle.
Whatever actions they had carried out, now they were asked to return to the domestic realm.
Ten years later one woman asks the husband of a particularly illustrious colleague what his wife was doing.
He answers, ‘She is cooking and she is eating.
What else?’
For the British or Western reader this is too easily read in terms of familiar histories of the left.
The women do speak of the difficulties in reconciling a class-based politics and feminism, but even after several decades most of the women have remained loyal to the goals of the Communist Party.
Marxism is not seen to be particularly antagonistic to the rights of women, and several women attribute their general political consciousness to the education they received through the Party.
It was because the Communist Party fed me, that my learning stood me in good stead and I know at least this much and I live like this.
But my sister, she has forgotten everything and it's all just wasted.
It was because we were unable to bear troubles like these that we came into the Party.
And it is this struggle that showed us a way.
(p. 47)
This book offers the English language reader an introduction to the history of this struggle, as told by the women involved.
However, one thing which the book lacks is any guide to further reading.
The stories compellingly challenge Western stereotypes of the Asian woman, but perhaps we should beware of reading them too closely in relation to the Western experience.
THE MOTHER OF MODERN FEMINISM
KATHRYN BURLINSON
Deirdre Bair,Simone de Beauvoir , Jonathan Cape, £19.50
SINCE Simone de Beauvoir's death in 1986, several biographical and critical studies have appeared that seek to reassess the life and works of the ‘mother of modern feminism’.
Deirdre Bair is the most recent in a line of scholars including Lisa Appignanesi, Claude Francis and Fernande Gontier, Jane Heath, and Toril Moi.
De Beauvoir's life is of course amply documented in her auto-biographical writings.
It is, however, increasingly apparent that her Memoirs are highly selective accounts, characterised as much by omissions and evasions as by integrity and authenticity.
Whilst the Memoirs inevitably loom large in the background of any attempt to study de Beauvoir, biographers are now reading against and between the lines of her own narrative in producing new, though not necessarily less selective, versions of her life.
Deirdre Bair sees her project not simply as a rewriting of events, nor solely as a rereading of de Beauvoir's writings, but as a mixture of ‘literary biography’, ‘intellectual history’, ‘feminist theory’, and ‘oral history’.
Her aim is to ‘consider all the disparate aspects of Simone de Beauvoir's life and work which separately make splendid sense but which together are sometimes contradictory and conflicting’.
Although at the end of Bair's lengthy work a number of contradictions and conflicts do remain, this is nevertheless a meticulously researched study which provides many insights into de Beauvoir's world.
The opening chapters vividly depict the environment into which Simone de Beauvoir was born — an environment governed by the restrictive social  conventions of the French haute bourgeoisie .
De Beauvoir's lifelong habit of keeping her emotions under ‘constant, rigid control’ is seen to have its origins in the repressive upbringing that her mother attempted to impose.
De Beauvoir maintained rigid control over certain areas of her emotional and sexual life to the end of her days, yet some things she publicly, if not privately repressed have recently resurfaced.
The publication of de Beauvoir's letters to Sartre has revealed that, contrary to her repeated denials, she did have a number of sexual relationships with women.
Deirdre Bair did not have access to these letters at the time of writing, though the euphemistic terms she uses to describe de Beauvoir's relationships anticipate this recent confirmation.
Although Bair claims that de Beauvoir was ‘more at ease in the company of men’ she nevertheless enjoyed ‘intense’and ‘warm physical friendships’with women.
These ‘friendships’, however, tended to involve a third party, for as Bair stresses, it was not possible to be close to de Beauvoir without becoming involved with Sartre as well.
It has frequently caused feminists consternation if not dismay to discover that the writer who wrote of women's shackles was so emotionally and intellectually shackled herself.
Bair unflinchingly demonstrates the extent to which de Beauvoir was obsessed by Sartre, unwilling and unable to free herself of him and sacrificing everything to him, including other women.
From the beginning of their relationship, de Beauvoir prized Sartre's intellect over her own and willingly acted as his editor, critic, and sounding board, repeatedly pushing aside her own work to read his.
She adapted her personal life to suit his wishes, and rationalised her way out of emotional pain caused by Sartre's philandering.
Bair does not blame Sartre in any simplistic way, nor does she construct de Beauvoir as an innocent victim, but the relationship seems nevertheless exploitative, not only of de Beauvoir but also of the other (always younger) women drawn in to the couple's sphere of influence.
Bair discusses the de Beauvoir/Sartre relationship at length, but her study is not limited to this.
A feature of the biography is its evocation of the particular conditions in which de Beauvoir lived and, perhaps more importantly, worked.
The development of her fictional writing is carefully traced, and the method and circumstances of composition detailed.
The fiction is often tied to the life in a somewhat deterministic manner, but Bair's readings are persuasive when read in context.
She does not discuss de Beauvoir's philosophical writings in the same depth, though unsurprisingly devotes a large section to the writing and reception of The Second Sex .
Overall, however, de Beauvoir's work tends to be overshadowed by the wealth of other detail in the study.
Bair provides informative accounts of de Beauvoir's war-time activities, of the existentialist ‘circle’ and the shifts that occurred within it, as well as a fill discussion of de Beauvoir's involvement with the women's movement in her later life.
But it is personal relationships that emerge as the primary focus of this biography.
Much space is devoted to de Beauvoir's affair with the 
American novelist Nelson Algren, which Bair claims was a good deal happier than the Memoirs imply.
De Beauvoir's adopted daughter Sylvie le Bon also features largely in the latter chapters, and their friendship is portrayed as mutually supportive and stimulating — notably different from de Beauvoir's previous relationships with women.
Interestingly, despite Bair's desire to produce a ‘coherent, cohesive unity’, de Beauvoir emerges with contradictions intact — at times an intimidating woman, excessively rational, inflexible and intolerant, and at other times extremely naive and lacking in confidence.
But if Bair has failed to tie up all de Beauvoir's loose ends in a securely fastened knot, she has succeeded in writing a very readable biography of a woman whose significance to modern feminism is never underestimated.
The contradictions that remain are challenging — not only with respect to de Beauvoir's life but also in relation to our own lives.
Through Bair's memorable and at times troubling portrait, de Beauvoir confronts us once again.
WOMEN, ART, AND POWER
LYNDA NEAD
Linda Nochlin Women, Art, and Power and Other Essays , Thames and Hudson, £5.95 pbk.
THE essays included in the collection Women, Art and Power were written over a twenty-year period.
The earliest, ‘Why Have There Been No Great Women Artists?’, was written in 1970 (and first published in 1971) and the most recent, ‘Women, Art, and Power’, dates from the late 1980s.
The historical significance of this book is therefore multi-levelled: it is a reminder of the intellectual scope of one of America's leading feminist art historians, it testifies to the changing interests of the discipline of the history of art and, perhaps most importantly, it charts the developing priorities and concerns of the American women's movement.
All these areas come together in terms of Nochlin's language and style.
There is a polemical tone, an incitement and exhilaration in the earliest essays which is undoubtedly part of that general  historical moment during the ‘heady days of the birth of the women's liberation movement’(p. xiii).
Similarly, in the most recent essay Nochlin refers to the ‘discourse of power’, ‘parole’, ‘langue’(p. 3) and ‘jouissance’(p. 10), reflecting the impact that critical and linguistic theories have had on Anglo-American art history.
The invigorating aspect of Nochlin's work, however, is that the urgency of her earliest work is never lost in the later writing and that even in the essays of the early seventies, Nochlin recognises the importance of analysing the work and effects of ideology and representation.
Given the extent of political and intellectual change in the period which these essays cover, it is regrettable that Nochlin did not write a fuller and more extended introduction to the collection.
As it is, we are given five pages which briefly outline the genesis and original publication of the seven essays and only the briefest contextualisation of the pieces within a broader historical framework.
Whilst I entirely agree with Nochlin's decision not to amend any of the articles (‘despite the strong temptation to correct what I now know to be errors of fact or feel to be mistakes of interpretation’, p. xii), neither should they have been allowed to stand in an historical vacuum.
Nochlin has played a genuinely pioneering role in the development of Anglo-American feminist art history and the essays deserve to be placed within that intellectual and political context.
The absence of a really reflective introduction is, I feel, the one real drawback of the collection.
Käthe Kollwitz Losbruch (Outbreak ).
Illustration to Linda Nochlin's essay ‘Women, Art and Power’, in the collection reviewed here.
Taken as a whole, the essays demonstrate the scope of Nochlin's work.
Her great ability is to draw together diverse and not obviously related images in new and suggestive ways.
This is clearly demonstrated in the most recent essay, ‘Women, Art, and Power’, which brings together French, British, Spanish and German paintings, prints and photographs which cover a period of over three centuries.
Nochlin controls this extraordinary range of material well and with great wit.
As well as this broader-based analysis, there are more specific historical pieces included in the collection.
In the essays on Berthe Morisot's Wet Nurse and Dante Gabriel Rossetti's Found Nochlin places the images within specific nineteenth-century conceptions of femininity and respectability.
The Morisot essay is particularly convincing as Nochlin works over the complex relations of power involved in a woman artist painting a portrait of her daughter with her wet nurse.
Notions of work, class and gender are carefully unravelled and even Morisot's formal language becomes implicated in the painter's positioning as woman, mother, and artist.
Letter ‘N’: Nourrice Illustration from children's alphabet.
Illustration to Linda Nochlin's essay ‘Morisot's Wet Nurse in the collection reviewed here.
Perhaps something also needs to be said about the conditions of publication.
Thames and Hudson is one of the largest art publishers in this country and the inclusion of Nochlin's collection (and a new work on women and art in the ‘World of Art’ series) in their new list is an indication of the impact of feminist positions within the discipline of art history and its institutions.
This may still represent a minority of cases but, nevertheless, mainstream art publishers are now clearly responsive to the institutional visibility and commercial potential of feminist art history.
There can be no doubt that Linda Nochlin has played an important role in making feminist interests and priorities visible; this collection shows some of the ways in which she has brought these issues to the surface over the last twenty years.
—