

SIXTEEN
‘Introibo ad altare Dei.’
Paddy's voice was firm and resonant as he uttered the opening phrases of the Mass.
It was his first celebration as a curate.
‘Ad Deum que laetificat juventutem meam.’
Denis's voice was less certain.
It had been a few years since he had served Mass last as an altar-boy in Rosstrevor, and even the new authority of his police sergeant's stripes did little to compensate for his nervousness at being on the altar again.
‘Confeteor Deo omnipotenti…
’ As the brand-new Father Patrick Joseph O'Neil bowed to make his confession, Denis looked at him with pride.
His little, chesty brother had made it.
A priest in the family.
That was something surely.
His pride was shared by the rest of the family who were there in the front pews behind them — Hana, with little Jitka in her arms, Uncle Mick, who looked so much older all of a sudden, Carmella, who was much the same, but Joey had lost a lot of his old sunny quality and slumped sullenly in his place.
Sean and Michael were there too, but they stood at the back looking usher-smart in new suits, and keeping a professional eye on the collecting plate.
Father Donnelly was also there, looking plumper these days, but still the same cheerful personality he had been in Brooklyn.
He too, was proud and as he looked round the crowded pews of St Christopher's in Englefield, New Jersey, he thought of what a good turn-out it was considering that so many of them had come up from New York.
Unknown to the priest, but easily recognisable as such, were even some of the regulars from Rafferty's Bar — the Quinns, Kellys, Coyles and Dochertys, but no sign of Jackie himself.
He hadn't been too well lately they said.
The old man asleep in the middle of them all was Emmet Ryan.
Two of the boys had to carry him in.
Jock Lennox found the harmonium in the choir balcony right away and he had caused something of a furore even before the Mass had started that Sunday morning.
Jock decided to play as the congregation assembled and before the proper organist arrived, but his hesitant, hymnal efforts had a spare, Protestant  ring about them and when, in despair, he broke into a decidedly rag-time syncopation with ‘Wait Till the Sun Shines, Nelly’ the proper organist, who was a very proper spinster-woman, rose and hurriedly pushed him off the stool before he had got through the chorus.
There was a definite sigh of disappointment from the congregation below, some of whom had begun to join in, but then an apathetic silence resumed under the usual, dirge-like strains of ‘Soul of My Saviour.’
Father Paddy moved up from the altar-steps to kiss the altar-stone, then turned to the congregation.
‘Kyrie eleison,’ he said.
‘Christe eleison,’ responded Denis.
Paddy turned and continued:
‘Gloria in excelsis Deo, et in terra pax hominibus…‘
As the prayer went on he showed he had already mastered the priestly mumble.
Denis glanced round again.
Everybody was there in the front pew.
Everybody except — little Jitka gave her daddy a wave.
Denis found it hard not to wave back!
He turned to the altar again and gazed up at Paddy's back and tried to concentrate.
At the rear of the church, Sean glanced out at the porch and then at Michael on the other side of the main door who shrugged and gave an extra-loud ‘Amen’ which made Sean jump.
Where was she?
Surely she would have got his message?
He trusted Roberto.
She must come.
If only for Paddy's sake.
He was brought back abruptly from his anxiety by Paddy's voice from the altar as he quickly turned to face out again.
‘Dominus vobiscum.’
‘Et cum spiritu tuo,’ answered Denis.
Isn't our Denis doing well?
Sean watched admiringly as Paddy went to the side to read the Gospel from the Mass Missal, making the sign of the cross on the book, his forehead, lips and heart, saying, ‘Gloria tibi, Domine.’
Denis did likewise, saying, ‘Laus tibi, Christe.’
So did Sean and Michael and the family and most of the congregation, except old Emmet, who was still asleep and Jock, who sat in the choir balcony with his arms folded, looking down on the Latin mumbo-jumbo with Presbyterian disapproval.
He was only here himself because he liked Paddy and he was glad the lad had got through all his studies and everything.
Like all Scots, Jock had a very high regard for education.
The Gospel being read, it was time for the sermon.
Normally a solemn and serious part of the Catholic liturgy of the Mass, on this occasion its solemnity and seriousness were somewhat dented by the sudden arrival of a very pretty little girl of about four or five, who ran down the centre aisle towards the priest, her pig-tails flying, calling, ‘Zio Padee!
Zio Paddee!’
Uncle Mick stood up; so did Denis on the altar.
Up in the balcony Jock Lennox applauded, and  some of Rafferty's regulars laughed as Paddy gathered the little child up in his arms as easily as his heavy vestments would allow him.
All eyes then turned on the mother of the child, who had followed her and at once, everything was silent again.
Noreen was by now a very attractive young woman and richly dressed in the height of fashion, but even the light veil covering her face couldn't hide her obvious embarrassment.
She stood at the altar-steps, uncertain what to do as she watched her daughter try to put her arms round her priestly uncle, prattling all the while in infant Italian.
Denis came forward to his sister, looking stern and said firmly, Sit yourself down, Noreen.’
‘We were late,’ she whispered urgently, ‘I couldn't —‘
Sean and Michael came up alongside her.
Michael went to take Maria from Paddy and Sean took his sister by the arm.
‘It's alright now.
Just sit down here.’
His voice was soft and tender for he saw the terror in her eyes.
With a reassuring touch, he guided her gently towards a seat at the end of the front pew, motioning for everybody to squeeze up and make room.
There was an audible gasp as Noreen was seen by everyone else in the church.
Uncle Mick sat down quickly, glancing at his wife.
Carmella stared stonily ahead.
Joey was quick to see his cousin, but slow to react.
When he did, he made a gurgling kind of noise then rose to his full height in the pew and bellowed like a bull-calf, ‘NOREEN!’
Uncle Mick reached across his wife and gave him a heavy slap on the knee.
It echoed through the pews.
‘Hey, that was sore!’
Denis glanced round from the altar.
Carmella bowed her head.
Sean quietly gave Noreen's knee a little squeeze.
She clasped both gloved hands together.
Sean glanced quickly at her.
‘OK?’ he whispered.
‘OK!’ she replied in a hushed voice.
He patted her knee lightly.
‘Sure you are,’ he said.
Father Paddy was in the pulpit.
‘My dear brethren in Jesus Christ.’
He spoke quietly but such was the tension in the church, his every word could be heard quite distinctly.
There was only the hint of a similar tension in his husky tones as he laid his hands on the ledge of the pulpit.
‘I had intended to speak to you this morning on the Holy Father's encyclical ‘Lamentabili’.
Some of you might have heard about it in the press.
That is, those of you who read the Catholic papers.
That is, those of you that can read at all !’
There was a chuckle at this from people in the congregation.
‘In this decree Pope Pius was taking a good swipe at those who would bring the church up to date, the modernists as they call themselves.
These are people  who are so obsessed with the first decade of this new century that they're inclined to forget for a moment the nineteen hundred or so years that went before it.
There are many, priests too, who would wipe out in a day all the familiar things about Mother Church that endear her to us all, even the precepts and practices that are the reason she has survived for all these nineteen hundred years.
Traditional values are being threatened by this rush to modernise and go ‘twentieth century’ as they say today, and if we are not careful we'll throw out the baby with the bathwater!
Not that I ever knew much about bathwater.
I never even saw a bath till I got to America!
Back home in Ireland — I come from Ulster, as if you didn't know — I didn't know anyone who had a bath!’
He paused effectively.
‘No wonder they call us the black Irish!’
There was a laugh at this.
Father Donnelly pursed his lips.
‘Don't go too far now, Patrick,’ he thought to himself.
Paddy went on, folding his hands comfortably under his cope.
‘Of course, everything benefits from having a fresh look at it now and again.
You can't get to be nearly two thousand years old and not have few cobwebs on you.
But it's a duster you take to it, not one of the latest hydraulic drills, and even as you dust, you must do it lovingly.
That way you see what it was you liked in the first place, and you see it fresh and clean again — like new.
But if we rush, bang and crash our way to change we'll lose everything — and we might never get it back.
Just imagine now, my dear brethren, if the modernists had their way we'd be having a banjo up there for an organ — sorry Miss Baker!
We'd have white tie and tails to say Mass instead of vestments and you'd all be answering ‘OK’ instead of‘Amen’!
It's not as bad as that I know but you get my meaning.
OK?’
The congregation responded as if with one voice —‘OK!’
And for the first time in the twenty-year history of St Christopher's, a priest laughed in the pulpit.
‘Serves me right,’ he said, ‘I was getting carried away with meself.
Here was I, not going to talk about the Pope's ‘Lamentabili’ and haven't I spent ten minutes on it already.
I think, since this is, after all, my first sermon as curate here — in fact, it's my first sermon ever — I'd better stop or the Bishop will be posting me back to Rosstrevor.
And you know what that means.’
There was another pause.
‘I'd never get another bath.’
Father Paddy waited while they enjoyed his banter.
He enjoyed it too.
He was obviously so happy and content in himself and his vocation that he had no real worry about being himself — even in the pulpit.
It was not that he was obviously going to be a good priest.
He was a good priest already.
He was now serious again.
‘Finally, my dear friends and brethren in Christ, I must explain.
The little girl you saw a moment ago was my niece.
Her name is Maria O'Neil — and as many of you will know, that's her mother there below, my little sister Noreen.’
He smiled down at her.
You could almost hear some of the women in the audience working it out in their heads — if the name's O'Neil like the good young Father — and that's her Mother — and she's his sister — then she's not married!
Paddy was well aware of this and with an imperceptible shake of his head, continued sardonically —
‘Let those that are without sin cast the first stone.’
Carmella's head shot up.
Her expression was angry.
Paddy went on imperturbably, ‘Jesus said —‘Suffer the little ones to come unto me.’
Our Lord made that remark to some well-intentioned apostles — some of the apostles were thick you know, quite thick.
But then, faith and goodness have never been a matter of intellect.
Otherwise how many of us would be here?
Anyway, they were trying to keep the children from bothering the Lord.
But children didn't bother him.
They don't bother anyone, except perhaps their parents at times.
But that's because they have them twenty-four hours a day.
For the most part everybody likes a child, and nearly every child likes everybody —’ At this point, Joey's voice was heard to croon quietly.
‘Noreen I can see you.’
Paddy bowed his head and let it register, then lifting up his head, he said,
‘For I say to you, unless you become as one of these you shall never enter the kingdom of Heaven.
Innocence, real innocence isn't ‘not knowing’— that's ignorance.
‘Suffer little children’ and God bless them, there are some do suffer, and their parents suffer because they love them, and all their family and friends who love them —‘
Paddy looked down for a moment at Joey, who beamed up at him, ‘We gonna play checkers, Paddy?’ he called out suddenly and laughed.
Carmella slapped his knee again.
Uncle Mick put his hand over his face, but Paddy was quite unperturbed.
‘Sure, Joey,’ he said.
There was a slight pause before he continued.
‘Innocence is goodness in faith.
It's trust in hope.
And it's the action of charity.
Faith, hope and charity.
It's all we need.
And it's available to all; there to be used in every second of our daily lives.
The faith to believe in ourselves and our fellow human beings.
The hope for the future life and charity towards all and everything.
For there is none here who does not depend on someone.
And there is no one here who doesn't need a God of some kind.
We are all family.
All of one blood.
His blood, who died for us on a cross.
Our Father Who Art in Heaven.
Making us all brothers and sisters and children again with God.
Children of the  soul.
OK?’
This time there was no response from the congregation.
Instead there was a silence.
‘In the Name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost.
Amen.’
He said this quite casually, then stepped down from the pulpit and made his way to the centre of the altar once more.
When he turned to face the congregation, his voice was strong.
‘Credo in unum Deum, Patrem omnipotentem…’
The church was a different place now.
It was no longer a social occasion, or a family occasion — it was a holy occasion.
Noreen's face was alight with loving pride in her brother.
Then she was aware of someone staring at her and looking out of the corner of her eyes she saw it was Carmella.
She turned to her.
Carmella was crying.
Noreen wanted to go to her but Hana and her child were between.
Suddenly the child reached out to Carmella.
She took the baby and hugged her.
Hana turned to Noreen and smiled.
Noreen turned away.
Where was Maria?
She couldn't turn round so she fixed her eyes on her two brothers on the altar.
The priest was offering his fingers to the policeman who poured some water over them.
‘Lavabo inter innocentes manus meus…
’ She remembered Paddy having to wash Denis after football.
‘Orate fratres…‘
‘Pray brothers!’
Sean knew what it meant alright and was remembering all the prayers at home.
The rosary last thing at night.
It's something he'd never try at Rafferty's anyway!
Wouldn't that make Michael laugh?
Michael himself was now in the choir balcony beside Jock Lennox letting Maria look down on all the heads below them.
Suddenly her hand was pointing as she called, ‘Mamma!
Mamma!’
‘That's right,’ said Michael, ‘That's my kid sister.’
‘No, no,’ insisted the child, turning a serious face up to him, ‘Mamma!’
‘That's right,’ said Michael agreeably, lifting her on to his knee.
The O'Neil double-act started up again at the other end of the church, Denis responding to Paddy.
‘Listen now, there's a good little girl,’ said Michael.
Maria turned to face the front as Paddy intoned, ‘Dominus vobiscum.’
‘Et cum spiritu tuo.’
‘Sursum corda.’
‘Habemus ad Dominum’
‘Gratias agimus Domino Deo nostro.’
‘Dignum et justum est.’
‘Vere dignum et justum est…
’ And off Paddy went once more into his professional mumble.
Michael could easily have followed every word of it in his Mass Missal, but he didn't have one.
Anyway, he just liked the sound of it, and hadn't he heard it for most of his life — until now.
A bell sounded.
‘Campana!’ shouted Maria.
‘That's right,’ said Michael, ‘A bell it is.’
It sounded again.
And again.
‘Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus,’ said Father Paddy.
Uncle Mick found it difficult getting down to kneel for the Consecration.
He was getting old, he thought, and him not even seventy.
Three score and ten, that's the score, is it not?
Retirement wasn't as good an idea as he thought it was going to be.
For one thing he was down to half-pay and even more important, there were no little extras coming every week in brown envelopes.
And Rafferty's Bar wasn't the same with the boys running it now.
Old Jackie was more easy-going.
They were a couple of sharp boys, his nephews, especially Sean.
Good luck to them.
They'll need all their sharpness.
It's a hard world these days.
Not like the old days at all.
Ah, the old days, when he first came over — his reverie was cut short by the boom of the gong announcing the elevation of the host.
‘Hoc est enim Corpus meum.’
He heard Paddy's whisper from where he was kneeling in the front row and it had quite a chilling effect.
Not so long ago Paddy was lying ill in the attic bedroom, now here he was changing bread into the body of Christ and wine into His blood.
‘Christ!’ thought ex-Superintendent Mick, awed in spite of himself.
‘That's nice,’ thought Joey as he watched his Uncle Paddy lift the host high above his head.
It was like a game — like basket-ball.
Now Paddy had a silver chalice in his hands.
‘Hic est enim Calix Sanguinis mei…’
And he held this above his head too, and knelt down before it.
Ain't he gonna drink it? thought Joey.
I sure would.
‘Oremus —‘
Why is old Paddy talking all this funny stuff? thought Joey.
‘Pater noster, qui es in caeli —‘
There he goes again!— Ouch!
Hey!
Joey exclaimed loudly.
His mother had dug him hard in the ribs.
‘You sit uppa straight.
 Attentione , eh?’
Carmella glared at her son and he sat up straight.
She was tired, she thought.
This hasn't been good coming here — no, no good.
Not with her here.
And she stiffened at the thought of Noreen.
Bringing a bad name on two families.
A child got no father.
Well, not real, properly married father, like all people got.
He's my cousin — well, second cousin.
And she's my niece by marriage.
What does that make little Maria?
A little bastard!
Why don't Rico marry her instead of keep her in fancy apartment all these years?
She say she going to be entertainer.
Is that what they call it?
‘Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi: miserare nobis…’
It was getting near time for communion.
‘I hope she don't go!’ thought Carmella.
Little Jitka started playing around her feet.
‘Cute baby.
Least she's gotta father!
Funny little mother though.’
As she was thinking this, Carmella caught Hana's eye.
Both women smiled.
‘What a sad woman,’ thought Hana.
‘Shame too about her boy.
He's so good-looking too, you'd never think —‘
‘Confiteor Deo Omnipotenti…’
Father Paddy had now begun to say the Confiteor in preparation for Communion.
Hana looked at her husband with pride but wished he had cleaned his boots better.
She could see the soles as he knelt down.
‘Sole’ of my Saviour, she thought and started to giggle, but then she had to take up Jitka who had fallen by the kneeling board and was crying.
People had begun to file out from the pews.
Hana, with Jitka in her arms, was among the first, squeezing past Noreen and then Sean.
This left a gap between Noreen and Carmella.
Noreen looked to her but Carmella rose at once and followed out after Mick and Joey at the opposite side.
Sean nudged his sister.
‘Are you goin'?’
Noreen bent her head.
‘I can't,’ she said.
‘Course, you can.
There's Michael goin'.
If he can go, then anybody can.
Come on.’
Paddy turned with the host held above the chalice in his hand, to see most of his family gathered along the altar-rail.
For the first time, his voice faltered.
‘Dom…
Domine, non sum dignus…’
He advanced to his Uncle Mick with the wafer of communion bread in his hand.
The older man looked up, his eyes moist.
Paddy offered it to him, with the slightest of smiles while Denis held the paten below his uncle's chin.
‘Corpus Domini Nostri Jesu Christi…’
Uncle Mick bowed his head.
Joey grinned.
Carmella was still red-eyed, and seemed glad to return to her seat again.
Little Jitka tried to grab it from Paddy's hand.
Denis smiled at Hana.
Michael was blushing as he received Communion and left quickly.
When he came to Noreen, Paddy stopped, and brother and sister stared at each other.
She had lifted back the veil and looked stunningly beautiful.
The brothers could almost hear her heart beating.
Denis hesitated and looked from one to the other, then he put the paten under Noreen's chin.
She closed her eyes as if awaiting a kiss.
Her lips parted.
Paddy still did not move.
Everything seemed to stand still.
‘Come on, Paddy,’ whispered Sean in a hiss.
Paddy immediately  resumed his communion ritual.
‘Corpus Domini Nostri Jesu Christi…’
And proffered it to Noreen.
For a moment her eyes opened and then she hurriedly bent her head.
Denis withdrew the paten and was ready to move to Sean when a wild yell rang out.
It was Carmella and she was screaming vituperatively in Italian.
‘Basta!
Basta!
 Communione per una puttana!
Perche il sacramento per una peccatrice  comme  le ?
Eh, sacerdote?
Dire!’
Sean was so astonished that he almost swallowed the paten as well as the host and Paddy, his face bright red as his hair, hurriedly passed on to the next communicant.
Noreen still stood with bowed head.
Her veil now covered her face, but her mortification was evident to all beside her and around her at the altar-rail.
There were cries of shock and protest at Carmella's outburst but Sean grabbed his young sister's arm and, roughly pushing people aside, he dragged her up the centre aisle.
Denis was trying to comfort Carmella as she was sobbing in the pew.
Uncle Mick sat forward with his head in his hands.
Joey seemed bewildered as he put one large hand on his mother's shoulder.
‘Wassa matter, Mamma?’ he asked plaintively.
Michael came hurrying towards Sean at the top of the aisle and took Noreen's other arm.
Jock Lennox, standing at the back, had Maria in his arms.
The little girl was frightened when she saw her mother being hustled up the aisle towards her.
‘Mamma!
 Que  causa ?’ she wailed.
Noreen quickly took her from Jock and with her brothers beside her ran through the porch of the church into the daylight.
At the altar, Father Paddy had solemnly completed the giving out of communion, and after much prayer and ceremony in the cleaning of the chalice and paten at the altar, the ordinary service of the Mass was resumed with the prayers after Communion and the Conclusion.
Throughout it all, there was an undisguised murmur of conversation in the church and Denis felt slightly sick.
Paddy, on the other hand was now quite composed and when he turned again to the congregation, his voice was calm although his face was deathly pale.
‘Dominus vobiscum,’ he said.
‘Et cum spiritu tuo,’ replied Denis with a dry voice.
‘Ite, Missa est.’
‘Deo gratias.’
And he had never said it more thankfully.
Paddy then turned to kiss the altar and when he turned back his hand was raised to give his first priestly blessing.
This should have been a happy and holy occasion but the expressions on the faces looking up at him — Denis, Hana, Uncle Mick, Carmella, now pale and shaken, even poor Joey — told him more than any words how empty the action was.
‘Benedicat vos omnipotens Deus, Pater et Filius et Spiritus  Sanctus.’
But no one responded with ‘Amen’.
The celebratory breakfast was cancelled.
‘We have to get back,’ explained Denis lamely, with little Jitka in his arms.
Uncle Mick had left at once with Carmella.
They'd been seen boarding the street-car with Joey still asking —‘Where's Noreen?’
Little knots of people still talked earnestly in the street outside the church for a long time afterwards.
Such excitement hadn't been known in Englefield since the Lowrie's house had burned down.
For a first Mass it had certainly been a tough baptism.
Poor Father O'Neil.
Somebody woke up Emmet Ryan and Jock Lennox shepherded the Rafferty ‘regulars’ in the direction of the nearest drink.
In the sacristy, long after a sombre Father Donnelly had left him, Father Paddy O'Neil, still in his new vestments, sat in a chair by the window as the afternoon shadows lengthened.
And Paddy wept.
‘Friends!’
Bobby Keith spread his arms wide as he shouted the word from the improvised stage set up outside the gates of Mason's  Proprietry .
Mason's was one of the largest machine-works in North Sydney and it had a large labour force.
For the most part they were unskilled, underpaid and underfed and most of them were here during the thirty-minute refreshment break in the middle of the day because there was a good chance they could stretch that break into an hour at least.
And they did.
‘Brothers!’ cried Bobby, but that only seemed to make matters worse.
The babble of cat-calls and obscenities continued.
He tried again —‘Comrades!’
Worse still.
Bobby sighed and turned to the chairman but he was in earnest conversation with a ponderous constable.
I'll have to hurry, thought Bobby.
His voice was sore.
He had been shouting in the open air for more than ten minutes and to no great avail.
The chairman, an unsympathetic Englishman, then mounted the rough platform which had been quickly tacked together that morning.
He tried to help matters by calling through his cardboard megaphone for —‘the best of order there for the speaker’.
Unfortunately, he followed this up with some unkind comments about —‘A lot of bleeding convicts!’— which was heard by enough of the men at the front to turn the yard into a snarling cockpit again.
Bobby had to make his own presence felt.
He was getting nowhere making an appeal to their sense of order so he had to do something.
He suddenly had an idea, and taking the megaphone from the chairman, and wincing at the soggy mouthpiece, he summoned the last of his voice from his diaphragm and sang to the sea of caps and hats, a Harry Lauder music hall song:
’ I love a lassie, a bonnie Hielan' lassie,
She's as sweet as the heather in the dell,
She's as sweet as the heather, the bonnie bloomin' heather,
Mary, my Scots bluebell!’
Nothing could have quicker distanced him from the Pommie chairman or won him their attention so soon.
He was allowed to finish his song in comparative silence and when he did, they gave him a cheer.
This time when he raised his hands they were quiet at once, no doubt expecting another ditty, but instead, Bobby took his chance.
‘Do you realise,’ he proclaimed, ‘that the British Empire extends to one-fifth of the land mass in the world.
It had a recorded population only last year of four hundred million and is fully recognised as the richest crown on earth — and yet — and yet, friends — Britain allows ten million working men to live in chronic destitution and lets match-girls sweat their labour in factories.
A quarter of a million people live on work-house charity in England and child-beggars run free in the streets of London.’
Bobby had long ago learned the working man's love of facts as opposed to theories and he always made sure to have a few up his sleeve before he spoke at a union meeting.
He was new to the Trades Union Movement but the union movement was relatively new to Australia.
There was still an ingrained suspicion of what used to be called ‘combinations’.
The working man was learning slowly how to organise himself, but Bobby Keith was learning fast.
‘Why do I tell you this?’ he was saying confidently.
‘Why do I tell you all this, when you yourselves know what poverty is and what starvation is and what a lack of cash is about?’
There were growls of approval here and there.
He had them now.
But he must tread carefully.
Another constable now joined the first and the chairman was getting fidgety.
‘I'll tell you why.
I'll tell you why, my friends.
Because we are the children of that Empire.
We are all part of King Eddie's growing family.
For six years now, we have been a dominion in a commonwealth of dominated countries —’ Two more policemen appeared.
Bobby noticed but pressed on.
’— just as our neighbours in New Zealand —’ There was a cheer from some in the crowd at the mention of the sister colony.
‘Yes, New Zealand is now a dominion too, and has been since September.
But friends, comrades -consider — if Britain treats its own like dirt, how will it treat its faraway cousins down under the Antipodes?’
‘Give us a song,’ yelled somebody.
‘Yeah, what about ‘Lily of Laguna’?’ shouted someone else.
‘I'll sing you a song, mates,’ yelled back Bobby hoarsely, ‘I'll  sing it from the roof-tops when we see an end not only of this strike but of every useless, time-wasting; pointless strike we've ever seen in this country in the last half-dozen years.
I'm a union man.
I 'm your man, as you all know, but I have to tell you, my friends, that the bosses can't lose in the present situation.
And why can't they lose?
Well, I'll tell you lads, because they've got the power where they need it — at the top.
They've got the vote you see.
So have we.
But do we use it?
No, we do not.
But if every man here used his vote as he should and put a Labour government not only in the State of New South Wales but throughout the dominion, not only throughout the dominion but the Commonwealth, not only in the Commonwealth but throughout the world —’ Bobby was enjoying himself now and so were most of his audience, standing under the afternoon sun.’— then the working man will have his true voice and he will make it heard in the corridors of power, for we will be the new power then — and we will use it for the greater good of all.
For we are the real power — we are people power and we must win in the end for we are indestructible —‘
Unfortunately, at that precise second, the makeshift platform gave way and Bobby disappeared at the very height of his rhetoric with the chairman, the union secretary, the workers’ deputy and the four constables who by now had infiltrated the platform party.
It had never been intended that the flimsy structure should support such a weighty assembly, so with a creaking and a cracking and much shouting and swearing down it went in a flurry of legs and arms and broken planks and red Australian dust.
‘Are you feeling better?,
‘I think so.’
‘Aren't you sure?’
‘No.’
‘Oh.’
Bobby was lying in bed in his room at the  Gebler's house in the Bronte district of Sydney.
He was their paying guest and had been since that afternoon seven years ago when he had tracked Rachel Gebler down to her home in this seaside suburb close to the famous swimming beaches.
Not that Bobby had much time for sea-bathing.
His work as a paid negotiator caused him to travel through most of New South Wales  arbitrating in disputes, taking part in conciliations and talking, talking, talking as industries grew up in the prospering state and workers flooded in from Britain, mostly from Ireland, to claim their share of what were meagre wages.
Fifty years before, gold had been discovered at Bathurst and wages had been spectacular, but those boom times were well  over and the rush now was for any job at all and to fight to keep it.
It was a boss's world and everybody knew it.
That's why the workers' weekly pennies went to pay men like Bobby to speak for them and that's just what Bobby Keith could do best.
He didn't always win, and occasionally he came a cropper — just as he'd done at Masons' gates a few days before.
Now he was in bed with severe bruising, a sore throat and a dislocated left knee and being tended by Rachel.
‘Sure you're comfortable?’ she asked.
‘No,’ he grumbled'
‘What's wrong?’
‘There's a draught from the door.’
‘What can I do about it?’
‘You could shut it.’
Rachel rose from the bed and took up the tray from the bed-side table.
‘You know father says that the door must always be open.’
‘But he's not even here.’
‘But mother is.
It's alright, I'm just going.’
She went out, flashing him a smile — and closing the door behind her.
She immediately opened it again from the other side.
‘That better?’ she asked brightly, and was gone again.
Bobby groaned — and not only from the discomfort of his bumps and bruises, but from seven years of continuing dilemma.
He had first come to this house in a blaze of romantic ardour and passion.
He had expected to sweep Rachel off her feet and carry her off to New Zealand with him on the next sailing, but he had reckoned without her Jewish father and mother, the new Zionism and Rachel herself.
She said she loved him, they said they loved him, but somehow nobody would fix a date for a marriage.
If it were ever mentioned at all, something else would turn up.
Either he had to go up to the Broken Hill Ironworks at Newcastle or she had to go down to Canberra to see some official about tariffs or quotas or immigration levels.
Rachel was a journalist, and a good one.
Bobby was a Socialist, and a good one.
They each believed that what they were doing was vital for the betterment of the world as each saw it and neither would give way to the other, or defer in any way to the other's claimed priority in attention, preference or responsibility.
As a result, the weeks passed, and the months and before they knew it, it was years.
Bobby must have drifted into sleep for he was wakened by a knock at the door.
When he opened his eyes, Mr Enoch Gebler was standing blinking over his half-glasses and smiling.
‘Guten afternoon, mein Robert.
You are better, ja?’
‘Ja, Papa.
Not so bad,’ answered Bobby sleepily.
Mr Gebler came  forward smiling with two large books under his arm.
He sat on the chair by the side of the bed.
‘This day have I been in the library and it has been very interesting.
Very interesting.
Ja.
I have been reading of Mordechai Noah.’
‘Oh?’
‘Ja.
You know, that in 1825 he bought an island on the Niagara River in America and offered it to all the Jews in the world to make a Jewish state called Ararat.
Interesting, ja?’
‘Ja’,
‘I am thinking that if all the Jews in the world come to the island it would into the water sink, ja?’
He cackled with silent mirth.
‘It's the same with Scotland.
If all the Scots went back to Scotland — it would serve them right.’
Mr Gebler was puzzled.
‘Bitte?’
‘Nothing.’
The old man frowned.
‘Nothing is nothing, Robert.’
‘Sorry Papa.
You were saying?’
‘Ja.
You will have heard of Eretz Israel?’
‘Was he a rabbi?’
Gebler laughed again.
‘Nein, nein, it is the idea of the homeland, the land of Israel, you know?
That we Jews have our own country instead of being small part only of many countries.
In Konigsberg, in Prussia, my homeland, OK?
There was much talk when I was boy of Haskala -which is civic freedom, ja?
And we sang Hatikwa and Mishmar Hajarden — which means watch on the Jordan — and so we begin to think of Zion — and a home in the land of Palestine.
And my books here — see — this one tells of the Hovevei Zion, and how from the Russian pogroms they come to settle in Palestine with money they get from Baron de Rothschild.’
‘Capitalist.’
Bobby almost spat the word out.
‘So?
He is good Jewish boy, ja?’
‘Nein,’ mumbled Bobby while Enoch lifted his second book.
‘Here is Theodor Herzl.
He is dead you know.
Ja, only forty-four years.
Nicht gut.
Forty-four is not old.’
He looked keenly at Bobby over his spectacles.
‘You are not forty-four?’
‘No, I am not.
I 'll be thirty-four on my next birthday.’
‘Ja?
And you are not married.’
Bobby closed his eyes.
‘No, I am not.’
Fine you know I'm not, you old goat, thought Bobby.
He wondered if Gebler was playing a game with him.
‘You need to make child soon, ja?’
‘Ja.’
So I would, thought Bobby, if you would just let me close the door now and then, but he only said, ‘I've heard of  Hertzl .’
‘Ja.
He makes ‘Die Welt’ and in it he tells of Zangwill who goes  to make settlement in Uganda, but mostly he tells of your English government.
‘It's not my government,’ muttered Bobby.
Enoch never heard him.
‘And how they give much land in Palestine but some Jews are not happy with this.’
‘Like Rachel?’
‘Nein, nein.
Rachel is one of Poale Zion.’
‘What's that?’
‘The workers for Zion.
So she go to Palestine to meet with them, and she then meet you with boat in Aden when she is coming home again, you remember, ja?’
‘I remember.’
‘And this year she is in Switzerland at Congress.’
Bobby sighed.
‘I remember.’
That's just what I'd like with her right now — congress thought Bobby wistfully, and adjusted his bandaged limbs more comfortably under the bedclothes.
Where was she anyway?
‘Where is she, Rachel?’
Bobby laughed.
‘Why you laugh?’
‘It's just what I was thinking,’ said Bobby.
Mr Gebler rose.
‘I go and find her.’
He walked briskly to the door then halted.
‘I close the door for you.
The draughts, ja?’
And he went.
Bobby smiled and shook his head.
‘Just as you say, Papa.’
And he closed his eyes again…
‘Bobby!’
It was only a whisper but Bobby heard it clearly and his eyes opened at once.
The gaslight had been turned down low but he could make out Rachel standing at the foot of his bed in her dressing-gown.
She put her finger to her lips and he watched in astonishment as she opened her dressing to reveal that she had nothing on.
The gown slipped soundlessly from her shoulders and she tiptoed like a shadow towards him.
He tried to ease his body to one side to let her come in but he was surprised once again as she got hold of his hand and began to pull him out of the bed.
‘What the —’ she exclaimed.
‘Sh-sh!’ she whispered, with just the hint of the Rachel giggle in it.
‘Momma and Papa are still downstairs and the bed creaks.’
So Bobby found himself on the carpet — on the silk dressing gown — and on Rachel!
Over the years they had often made love like this, in his back bedroom when the parents were in the house — Rachel seemed to enjoy the danger — although never on the floor before!
He had to be careful for other, more practical reasons.
She daren't become pregnant, so he had to make sure to come out in time.
But first there was the pleasure of getting in!
Her body was smooth and firm and easy to enjoy.
There was no strain.
A rhythmic, riding, gliding mutual movement born of long practice and an unspoken understanding.
There was no need for words.
They gave themselves to each other naturally, confident that she would take and hold as he would thrust and that she would give to let him thrust again — long and deep, longer and deeper, longer and deeper still — till both their hearts were thudding and each was lost in the act.
Neither had been virgins when they first loved in this very room but each had learned from the other how to make real love, how to prepare and gradually extend the intensity until the explosion.
Sometimes she would climax first, sometimes he, and on good nights they would explode together so that they felt the same tingling in the very tips of their toes and even then he'd had to remember to withdraw — just in case.
This night, while it was not one of their magical occasions, neither had any real complaints but in their natural preoccupation they both forgot that Bobby had a dislocated knee!
At the very height of the paroxysm, he made a movement with his knee which caused him to give a great cry which she, lost in the abandon of the moment, construed as passion, but was in fact a loud, animal yelp of pain.
Instinctively, she reached up to put her hand over his mouth, reminded again of her parents below.
He sank, like a punctured  Zeppelin on her breasts.
‘Is it your knee?’ she whispered.
‘No,’ he croaked, ‘It was the other one.’
‘Good,’ she said, and her arms went round him again.
Suddenly, he felt her stiffen below him.
‘You didn't come out.’
Her voice was flat and distant in his ear.
‘Oh, God!’ he groaned.
There was a long silence and they lay absolutely still and grew cold together in the draught coming in under the closed door.
‘Ay.
There's nothing like a good bed,’ said Nessie O'Neil to her daughter Nellie as they made up the bed in the box bedroom at Ballytreabhair Farm.
It was Sunday and Nellie was visiting with the twins.
The two women were in Kevin's room, where Nellie had found her mother when she and Liam arrived in the cart after last Mass in Rosstrevor.
‘How that boy sleeps in a cot like this beats me.’
She was tucking in the sheets at the wall side, and blowing the hair out of her eyes as she reached over.
Nellie was doing the same at the other side.
‘First of all,’ she said, ‘he's not a boy, he's twenty-six.
And for another thing, why is he in this silly wee box of a bedroom when there's a perfectly good bedroom on the other side, and even the back one where Noreen and I were?’
‘Because he's been here since he was a lad.
Dynamite wouldn't shift him now.
Besides, he has all this things here.’
‘So I can see.’
She couldn't hide the deprecation in her voice as she straightened up and scanned her eyes scornfully round the little room.
The walls were filled with battles.
Prints of every size showing every kind of combat from medieval jousting to the latest newspaper cuttings of the Zulu War.
There was an Irish League poster announcing a talk by Mr Richmond MP in Newry, illustrations of assassinations of crowned heads in what seemed every capital of Europe, and most unexpectedly on the mantel above the tiny coal fireplace, a framed photograph of Noreen.
Nellie picked it up.
‘Oh, an' what's this doin' here?’
‘What's that?’
Nellie held out the frame.
Her mother came over.
‘My lord!
I threw that out years ago.’
‘You couldn't have thrown it far then.’
Mrs O'Neil peered at it.
‘The devil he is,’ she said quietly.
Nellie took it back.
‘You mean she is.’
She put the frame face down on the mantel.
‘Do you hear from her at all?’
Her tone was light but tense.
‘Devil a word,’ replied her mother.
But Paddy mentions her now and again when he's writin'.
She sees him and Sean and  Michael sometimes I understand.
But it's been a while now since I heard.’
‘Is Sean still sendin' the dollars?’
‘He is, but not regular like before.
I had to write an' tell 'im it was killin' his da'.’
Nellie gave a short laugh.
‘Da wouldn't be pleased at that.’
‘He wasn't, but I told him that Sean 'n' Michael was havin' hard times and had to draw in the reins a bit.
Not that they had to mind.
Sure didn't they buy yon man Rafferty — I think that was his name -ay — they bought him out.’
‘Don't tell father that,’ grinned Nellie, ‘or he'll be out on the next boat!,
‘He'd swim if he know'd his boys had a public house.’
‘I've never seen 'im so glad to see Liam.’
‘Right enough,’ nodded her mother, ‘where did they go?’
‘Looking for a ‘bone fide’.
Liam said he would drive him over by the Newry Road, with Kevin bein' away with the cart.’
She busied herself with some clothes.
‘Where is Kevin anyway?’
‘God knows, I never ask.’
‘It's ages since I seen him,’ said Nellie.
The older woman gathered up some shirts and underwear.
‘Would ye look at the state o' this stuff?’
Nellie laughed again.
‘Dear God, does he still wear them things?’
Her mother threw the bundle on the floor by the door.
‘Here, we'd better get on.
There'll be blue murder if he comes back and we've been in here.’
‘Won't he notice that the place has been cleaned up?’
‘Well, the damage has been done then, if ye see my meanin'.
I'll just tell him he left his door open, and when I went to shut it, I saw the mess.’
‘Mother, ye're a devious woman.’
‘Well, he never lets anyone over the door and he sees to himself for the most part.
I can only get in when he forgets to lock the door.
Sure I have to, Nellie, for if I didn't give it a redd up at least once in a while he'd have the place like a right midden.’
‘Isn't it?’ commented Nellie dryly.
She noticed her mother had replaced Noreen's photograph on the mantel so that it faced out again, but she said nothing.
‘I'm wonderin',’ said her mother, ‘if we should clear out them ashes from the grate there.
She stood looking down at the tiny fireplace.
Nellie bent to look out of the window, parting the curtain with one hand.
‘I don't hear the twins.
I'm always suspicious when they're quiet.
I left them in the parlour.
I might just give them a glance.’
She  started for the door.
Her mother knelt down at the fireplace and lifted the iron grill from the front of the fireplace.
‘Bring that auld bucket for the ashes back with ye,’ she called.
‘Right,’ said Nellie.
Nessie began to lift off the larger embers and was surprised that the heap of ashes was so high.
She had lifted the larger pieces clear when she saw something buried in the grey ash.
It was a parcel wrapped in oil cloth.
She pulled it out.
It felt strange to her touch.
She blew the ashes clear and spat as the dust went into her mouth.
When she opened the cloth, she discovered a revolver.
‘Jesus, Mary and Joseph!’ she exclaimed.
Nessie rose up, her heart fluttering.
What was she to do with such a thing?
She was pondering this in a panic, when she heard the scream of the children and the sound of feet running.
Nessie quickly put the gun back in its wrapper and into the pocket of her apron before she turned round.
She held it with one hand while the other went to her throat, as Nellie's face appeared at the door.
She was carrying Celia and Dermot was clinging to her waist.
Both children were crying loudly and their mother's face was scarlet with excitement.
‘Ma, will you come and see?’ she said.
‘Nellie girl, what a fright you gave me!’
‘An’ it's the fright we've had I can tell you.
Would you just look and see?’
She crossed over to the window, still carrying the seven-year-old Celia and dragging Dermot, her twin.
The two children were positively screaming by this time and shouted to their grandmother.
‘Nana, don't want to see it 'gain,’ yelled Celia through her tears.
Dermot ran to his grandmother.
Only her hand was between the revolver and his childish face looking of at her, tears streaming on his plump cheeks.
‘Nana, I'm feared of the monster.
It'll eat us all up, Nana.’
Celia buried her little head in her mother's shoulder as Nessie joined Nellie.
Dermot couldn't resist a sly peak out of the window too, as the women bent to look.
And there, bumping and jolting its roaring way up the track towards the house was a motor car.
A monster right enough!
Belching fire and smoke and scattering hens and geese before it.
The 1907 Stanley Steamer was the first motorised vehicle any of the O'Neils at Ballytreabhair had ever seen!
‘In the name of God!’ exclaimed Nessie.
‘What would you call that?,
‘It's a horseless carriage, I think.
I've seen pictures of it.’
‘Would ye listen to the noise of it?’
‘Oh, look,’ said Nellie.
‘It's stopped in the yard.’
Celia screamed again.
‘Don't let it come in, Mam.
Don't let it come in.
‘I'd better go out,’ said Nessie, putting Dermot down.
‘You stay here with the childer.’
She hurried away, but halted at the doorway.
‘Did ye bring the old bucket?’ she asked Nellie.
‘It was full of slops,’ answered Nellie, still gazing out of the window.
She was less agitated now and even Celia had turned to look.
Dermot was standing on his toes, peering over the window-sill.
‘An’ I told himself to empty it this morning',’muttered Nessie as she made her way out.
They were strangers, the two men in the yard.
They stood by the car, staring at the farm front door.
Nessie acted fast.
In two steps she had reached the slop bucket, dropped the packet in, watched it splash on the cobbles and turned round as a voice rang out in the yard.
‘Mrs O'Neil?’
It was the taller of the two men and he spoke with an air of authority.
Nessie found herself reacting as if to the parish priest or the headmaster of the school.
‘Yes, sir?’ she answered.
‘We have your son here, ma'am.’
His voice was calm and he had a definite southern accent.
‘Kevin?’
‘Yes, ma'am.’
All subservient reaction was forgotten at once as Nessie yielded to more primitive instincts and rushed to the car to see her youngest son.
He was lying in the back seat with his leg raised on a cushion.
His trousers were torn to reveal bloodstained bandages on the leg.
‘Kevin!’
She was beside him in a moment.
His face was deathly white.
‘I had a bit of an accident, Ma,’ he said in a very faint voice.
‘What happened?’
‘I can't right remember, Ma —‘
‘But Kevin —‘
‘I think your son needs to rest, Mrs O'Neil.’
It was the tall man again.
‘If you will allow us, my friend and I will carry him into the house.
You could show us his room perhaps?’
It was funny I should have just tidied the room this day, thought Nessie as the two strangers laid Kevin on the new-made bed.
It was as if I had been expecting visitors.
Nellie watched from the window, holding a child tightly on either side of her.
‘Is Kevin dead, Mam?’ asked Dermot.
‘Not yet, wee Dermot,’ answered Kevin from the bed.
The two strangers left with all the stealthy tact of professional  undertakers, but Nessie heard the tall one say to Kevin, ‘Rest well, O'Neil.
We'll need men like you.’
‘Yes, Captain.’
‘I wish you good day, ma'am.’
The tall, grave man nodded to Nessie, and did the same to Nellie.
‘And to you, ma'am.’
And they left the room.
Nessie went to sit by her son and Nellie turned again to the window.
The other man had difficulty starting the machine and had to put a long handle in the front and turn it several times before the engine roared into life startling the children again.
‘It's alright, childer, the monster's going away now,’ said Nellie.
In the bed, Kevin chuckled.
‘I never had no trouble startin' up old Random, God Bless Him,’ he said, ‘though this new mare, Dandy's trickier.’
‘Where is Dandy, anyway?’ asked his mother.
Kevin hesitated.
‘It's hard to say,’ he said at last.
‘Why so?
‘Because I don't know.’
‘You don't know?’
‘No.’
‘A horse and a cart that stands as high as a house and cost the best part of thirty pounds and you lost them both?’
‘Ma, I don't —’ Kevin's excuse was cut short as Nellie came forward with her children.
‘Ma!
Can't you see the boy's badly hurt.
Let's see to his leg first and then we can hear about Dandy and the cart.’
Kevin grinned weakly.
‘Did you think I'd kicked the bucket, Ma?’
At the mention of ‘bucket’ Nessie was immediately alert again and hurried to the door.
‘I'll get some water,’ she said.
As she left, little Dermot climbed on to the bed with Kevin.
‘Why is your leg all red, Uncle Kevin?’
Nessie had the pig bucket in her hand when she heard the noise of singing in the early evening air.
She stopped and listened.
The voice was familiar but she couldn't place it.
Then the cart came into view.
Liam Murphy was lying across the back, drunk as a newt and singing his head off.
’ There's a neat, little still at the foot of the hill,
Where the smoke curls up to the sky,
By a whiff of the smell you can plainly tell
That there's poitin boys, close by.
For it fills the air with a perfume rare,
And betwixt both me and you,
As home we roll we can drink a bowl
Or a bucketful of mountain dew.’
‘A bucketful, indeed,’ said Nessie to herself, as Old Den brought the cart to a halt in the yard.
He, surprisingly enough, was comparatively sober, which means he was drunk by any ordinary standards, but by the very gauge he had set himself over the years, he might be called a pillar of sobriety — and grumpy with it.
‘Here, woman,’ he said.
‘Will ye give me a hand with your man here?
He's drunk enough to float the  Mauretania , and left me to drive him home that's had so little over me lips you would think it was Lent.’
By this time he had hold of Liam's feet and was pulling.
‘Will ye shut yer singin'?
You've been the very opery since we left Kilkeel.’
He called to his wife, ‘Will you give a hand, Nessie?’
His shouts brought out Nellie and the children, and the young ones rushed to the back of the cart.
‘Is Daddy dead, too?’ asked Celia, staring round-eyed at the prostrate body of her daddy.
‘Dead drunk by the look of him,’ muttered Nellie.
‘Here, Da, I'll give ye a hand.’
‘I was askin' yer mother,’ he said, ‘but she's —‘
‘Never mind, we've got him now,’ said Nellie.
‘He'll have to come into the house and sober up before he's fit to take the cart home.
Come away, you big lump,’ she said to her husband, as he tried to embrace her.
Between them all, they managed to get Liam to the house, the twins being much amused by all the palaver.
Old Den turned the horse and looked about him in the yard.
‘Where's that old bucket?’ he mumbled.
At that Nessie reappeared with the bucket in her hand.
‘Where have you been?’ asked Den.
‘To the pigs with the slops, where you should have been this mornin',’ replied his wife.
‘See's that bucket,’ said Den, holding out his hand.
‘What bucket?’ she asked.
‘Sure, the one ye have in yer hand.’
Nessie was alarmed.
The pistol was still in the bucket, covered with muck and mess, and she was on her way to put it under the tap.
‘What do ye want it for?’ she said.
‘What does it matter what I want it for?
I want to give the horse some water, woman.
It's the only one of us has not had a drink this hot day.’
‘I'll get you some from the tap then,’ she said.
‘Be quick about it then.’
Den was wiping the horse down with a cloth, and Nessie turned to the back of the yard and the standing pump.
She wasn't enjoying the intrusion of this foreign weapon into her world, and wondered what to do with it next.
She let the water run till the package was clean again.
‘Come on, woman, I'm starved.
And here's a mare that's dyin' o' thirst.’
He was on her before she knew, and had the bucket full of water from her hand before she could stop him.
He never even glanced at it, and put it under the horse's nose at once.
‘Here, let me do that,’ said Nessie urgently, taking it from him.
Den, ever willing to let Nessie do the work, let her take over, and lurched towards the house, saying, ‘It's a terrible thing when a good son becomes a responsibility.
Isn't it he should be taking care of us?’
It was some time before they had Liam fit to drive the cart home.
He kept apologising to Nellie and swearing undying devotion to her.
She paid no attention and by the time she carried the sleeping twins out into the yard, it was already getting dark.
Liam was helped up on to the driving seat by an even grumpier Den and the two women and the reins put into his hand.
He promptly keeled to the left and slumped in the driving seat with a smile on his face.
‘Would ye look at that?’ growled old Den.
‘I can't abide a man that can't hold his drink.’
‘Not the amount you've poured into him, Da,’ said Nellie.
‘I'll have to drive meself.’
‘Sure you can't take a horse an' it's dark already,’ said her mother.
‘There's nothin' else for it, is there,’ replied her daughter.
‘Not at all,’ said Nessie.
‘Sure you can stay here —‘
‘But, mother —’ Their discussion was interrupted by another noise on the track and the frantic arrival into the yard of Dandy and the O'Neil cart being driven by Tim, the barman, of all people.
He jumped from the cart and came straight to Den.
‘Have you got Kevin here?’
‘We have,’ answered Nessie at once.
‘We'll have to get him away.
Auld Davie — Sergeant Davidson — is on his way here with two Garda from Newry.
He's waitin' for them now at the railway station.
They're comin' by train.
We only just got word and they better not find your Kevin.’
‘In the name o' God,’ said Nessie.
‘Why, what's he done?’ asked Den with a puzzled frown.
‘That doesn't matter now,’ said Tim.
‘Let's have him on the cart.
‘Wait a minute,’ said Nessie.
‘If the Sergeant arrives and sees our cart gone, isn't that the first thing he'll think, that he's got word and bolted?’
‘But he can't find him here,’ said Tim, ‘especially the state he's in.’
‘How do you know about the state he's in?’ said Nessie.
‘What's goin' on here?’ asked Den impatiently.
On top of the cart, Liam started to sing again, ‘On the banks of the roses my love and I sat down…’
‘Shut up, you,’ yelled Nellie.
‘Tell you what, mother, can't we take Kevin away in the back of the cart with the childer?
The Sergeant will never think to stop us, and Kevin can stay over until his leg's better.
He can go to Liam's people at Hilltown over the mountains.
They'll never think of him there.’
It took them half the time to get Kevin out to the Murphy cart than it took to get Liam sobered up again and it was Nellie who finally drove the cart away with its very full load.
At the very last minute Nessie handed the pig bucket to Tim, who was sitting at the back with Kevin and the children ready to jump off at the road end.
‘Just in case he's sick,’ she said, pointedly, indicating the package in the bottom of the bucket.
Tim glanced in and understood at once.
‘That's very kind of you, Mrs O'Neil.
Sure, that might just come in very handy.’
The cart drove off at once.
‘God bless ye, girl,’ called out Mrs O'Neil to Nellie, ‘and thanks for callin'.’
‘Sure it's a pleasure, Ma.
There's never a dull moment at Ballytreabhair.
Good night, Da.’
Liam came to life again with ‘'TIS the last rose of summer…’
‘Will ye shut up?’ from Nellie was the last thing the old couple heard as they watched the cart disappear down the track.
‘You go to your bed, Den.
I'll see to Dandy.’
‘You gave away our pig bucket,’ queried Den.
‘There was a hole in it,’ lied Nessie.
‘Ah.’
Apparently satisfied, he shambled off towards his bed.
Nessie had only closed the stable door when Sergeant Davidson arrived with two uniformed policemen in the police cart.
‘It's late you are,’ he said, ‘putting your animal away, Mrs O'Neil.’
‘Den likes to see Dandy get the benefit of the cool night air,’ answered Nessie.
‘I see,’ said the Sergeant.
‘And Den would be the man who'd know about horses.’
‘He knows about his own at any road.’
‘I'm sure he does.’
He then explained that he had authority to search all premises for weapons and any suspicious matter or persons in view of‘information received,.
‘Oh, ay,’ said Nessie.
‘Would ye mind if we looked around?,
‘Not at all,’ said Nessie, folding her arms in front of her.
‘Is your boy at home?’ asked the policeman lightly.
‘Which one?’ countered Nessie with a smile.
‘The one that's not making a fortune in Amerikay.’
‘Ah, Kevin, you mean?’
‘The same.’
‘Sure I never know where that boy is.
He's that late these nights, I'm sure there must be a girl in it.’
‘I'm sure there's something in it.’
‘Well, that's both of us sure, Sergeant,’ she said going indoors ahead of him.
Sergeant Davidson and his colleagues made a thorough search of Ballytreabhair Farm, but all they found that night was the sleeping form of Old Den snoring contentedly in his own bed.
‘It's yourself, Mrs Beattie?’
‘Oh, it's you, Mrs Friar.’
‘A fine day for the time o' year.’
It is that.
Snell but no' bitter.’
‘Ay.
Christmas is comin'.’
‘So it is.
Ay.
We'll have the weather for it.’
‘Ay.
So we will.’
And that would normally be the end of it.
A street exchange no different from any other that takes place in the course of a day in the High Streets and Main Streets of any town anywhere.
The only truism appears to be that the smaller the town the greater the extent of the exchange.
Forces, being a smallish town and by no means a city, the passing of street pleasantries is not quite the folk art it is in villages but people still enjoy passing the time of day with their neighbours.
The qualifying condition, however, in this particular instance, was that Mrs Beattie and Mrs Friar could hardly be classed as neighbours and even the most cock-eyed optimist would never even hope that they might even begin to be pleasant to each other.
On this morning however, they dallied somewhat so that each might have the off-chance of that little bit of news that other people call gossip, which the other might add to the jigsaw of seemingly useless information built up bit by bit in small minds.
Especially Mrs Friar's.
A mind like hers had never been trained to encompass a vast concept or to accommodate any larger vision than what she could see with half-closed eyes.
To look openly and plainly on anything or anyone would, in her mind, leave her exposed.
She might as well be naked.
And Mrs Friar had never seen herself naked since she was three years old, and even then it was an accident.
Mrs Beattie, on the other hand was a free spirit by comparison  but even she was conditioned by her class and her religion — she could give nothing away for nothing.
Even a piece of her mind could cost you dearly if you got on on the wrong side of her.
But this sunny morning, she was expansive.
‘This is me since I got up,’ she said.
‘Ay.’
‘If it's no, one thing it's another,’ she went on.
‘Oh ay.’
Mrs Friar was playing it close.
‘Ay,’ rejoined Mrs Beattie, realising she had lost the first round, ‘I was just on my  wey up to see Thomasina.’
‘Oh?
Ye've a nice day for it.’
This was not in the rules.
It was supposed to be Mrs Friar's turn to proffer a tit-bit.
Anything would do.
Mrs Beattie wasn't fussy.
She decided to help her along.
‘And Ella's well?’
‘Fine.
Ay.’
Mrs Beattie waited, but nothing happened.
There was a pause and both women looked past each other up the busy street.
‘An awf fowk aboot the day,’ added Mrs Friar.
‘It's ay busy on a Friday,’ said Mrs Beattie with a touch of acerbity.
And then by one of those quirky coincidences that make life interesting both women spoke at once, and both said the same thing.
‘Wee Becky's —’ Mrs Beattie laughed and even Mrs Friar smirked.
‘Great minds think alike,’ she said as if she'd invented the aphorism.
Mrs Beattie nodded,
‘Ay,’ she said, ‘fools seldom differ!’
The set had reached deuce when Mrs Beattie decided to go for the advantage point.
‘Ay, I wis just goin' to say wee Becky's seven the day.’
‘Ay, so she is.
I mind the date by my husband that was, Mr Friar.
He was ay the day before.
December the fifth.’
‘Ay, his birthday would ay be the same date every year!’
Mrs Friar failed to notice the sarcasm and went on, ‘I wis just thinkin' o' droppin' in a wee present.
I've got it here in my bag.’
‘So have I. I just got mine frae Ferguson's the now.’
‘I was there yesterday.’
‘Isn't that funny?’
‘I don't think it's funny at all.
It's a book.’
Mrs Beattie laughed.
Mrs Friar looked offended but continued.
‘For readin'.
Wee Becky's the great wee reader.’
Mrs Beattie laughed again, so hard in fact she had to put her hand over her mouth.
‘You're not goin' tae believe this.’
Mrs Friar pursed her lips into their accustomed position.
‘You're not goin' to tell me you bought a book as well.’
‘I did.
And here it is.
It's no' even wrapped yet.
I have some nice paper in the drawer in the house I was goin' to use.’
With that she brought out a shining copy of Charles Kingsley's The Water Babies .
Mrs Friar's jaw dropped.
She gulped and said, ‘You're right.
I don't believe it.’
‘What book did you get then?’
‘That one!’
‘This one?’ said Mrs Beattie incredulously.
‘Well, no' that exact one.
The same one.’
‘I don't believe it.’
‘I did.
Oh, it's annoying.’
‘No, it's not.
It's funny, that's what it is.’
‘Is it?’
‘Of course it is!’
Mrs Friar wasn't so sure.
‘Well, what are we goin' to do?’ she said.
‘I tell you what we'll do, Mrs Friar,’ said Mrs Beattie taking her arm.
‘We're goin' to go right back to that shop and we're goin' to give my book back.’
‘Are we?’
‘We are.
And we're goin' to use the money to buy something else.’
‘But what?’
‘I don't know.
But we'll think of something.
Come on.’
And Mrs Beattie and Mrs Friar, to their own and everyone else's astonishment, went arm-in-arm up the street.
Rebecca Friar and Elspeth Keith were just like sisters although they weren't.
They had grown up in the same house since they were babies and were virtually inseparable.
They did everything together and people thought they were twins.
Their common love was reading and their common hate was Kenny, Elspeth's big brother who was ten, but worse was a boy!
At seven, this was a vital factor for the girls.
This didn't bother Kenny at all as he more or less ignored them and they did the same to him.
They didn't like boys.
At school, they kept well away from them even though they were both popular and pretty girls.
Elspeth was fair-haired, almost blonde, Rebecca was dark but there was something about the eyes they had in common, yet where Elspeth was grave and silent most of the time, Rebecca, or Becky as she was usually called, was lively and voluble.
As Uncle John was often heard to remark, ‘I wonder who she gets that from.’
That Friday afternoon, the girls were back from school and talking in Elspeth's bedroom.
‘I know what you're going to get for your birthday,’ said Elspeth conspiratorially.
Becky affected to be unconcerned.
‘So do I.’
‘What is it then?’
‘A book.
It's always a book.’
‘Ah, but what book?’ said Elspeth.
Becky didn't answer.
Elspeth was triumphant.
‘Ah, see you don't know.’
‘I can't be expected to know everything,’ replied Becky pertly.
The two girls were changing from their second best school clothes to their third best play clothes.
The first best clothes were only for Sunday and when visitors came.
Elspeth was determined to be excited.
‘Do you know who else is coming to the party tomorrow?’
‘Of course, it's my party.’
‘Kenny!’
Becky stopped buttoning up her blouse.
She looked shocked.
‘But he's a boy!’
‘So he is,’ said Elspeth.
‘It's a girls’ party.
Uncle John wouldn't let him.’
‘It was daddy said he could come.
It was his tea-time anyway, and he's coming too, and he's a boy.’
‘But he's old.’
‘So is Kenny.
He's ten.
And anyway he came to my party when it was my birthday.’
‘But he's your brother.’
‘He's yours too.’
‘No, he isn't.
He's my cousin.
That's what Uncle John says.
He says that he's my daddy's brother.
He showed me a photograph once.’
‘Of his brother?’
‘Ay, and he said that was my daddy.’
‘That must feel funny to see your daddy in a photograph.’
‘Ay.’
‘Did he look nice?’
Becky didn't answer at once, and when she did it was very quietly.
‘Ay,’ she said.
The party was not a great success.
At least at the start of the Saturday afternoon.
Kenny's taunting drove Elspeth to tears and Becky was made to sit with Mrs Friar whom she did not like.
Becky was put out in any case because her mother had not appeared.
Mrs Friar explained that she had had to go to Aberdeen again.
Why did her mother have to go to Aberdeen?
Elspeth whispered to her one night in their room that that's where you go to buy babies.
‘She's not going to buy another baby,’ Becky had said indignantly.
‘She hasn't finished paying for me yet.’
For all their high intelligence and exceptional reading ability, they were still two little girls and the  world was often a puzzle to them.
What they didn't know they read about.
What they couldn't read about, they guessed, and very often they got it wrong.
Becky didn't get a book after all.
She was very disappointed.
For all her pretence, she loved books.
She loved the feel of them, the smell of them, especially when they were new, and her biggest luxury was to cut the new pages of any book.
She and Elspeth had the most books of any girls in the street.
Thomasina had said often that they should play more with their dolls like any other girls, instead of spending most of their time in the ‘library’ as she called their shared bedroom.
Thomasina at this time was fussing around the table.
The tea and cakes had been cleared and everyone was sitting now in the big couch and the two fireside armchairs.
‘What are we waiting for?’ asked Becky a little sullenly.
‘You'll see,’ said Mrs Friar mysteriously.
‘Where's Gran?’ asked Elspeth.
‘She's away with your daddy and Kenneth to bring in the present.’
At this Becky sat up.
‘What present?’
‘You'll see,’ said her Aunt Thomasina.
Becky looked across at Elspeth, whose big eyes told her she didn't know either.
Becky was puzzled.
She thought she'd had her presents.
A handkerchief from Kenny, a box of colouring pencils from Uncle John and a penny colouring book which Thomasina, or ‘Aunty Tom’ as Becky called her, lot from a magazine,Woman's Realm .
They were not especially close, Becky and her aunt, but they got on well enough.
It was different with Uncle John.
He was as good as a real daddy.
And in her heart, Becky wished he was.
There was a sudden noise in the corridor outside and then several bumps before the door opened wide and there was Gran Beattie with a big smile on her face, indicating with her own vocal fanfare, ‘Tarra!’
John and Kenny stood in the doorway holding a huge wooden doll's house.
Becky's face fell.
EIGHTEEN
Christmas in New Zealand was not what Tina had expected.
For one thing, it was hot and sunny and not at all the weather she had associated all her life with Yuletide.
And yet in many respects it was just the same kind of Christmas that she and her family had always known back home in Scotland.
Like most migrants, she still thought of Scotland as home and Britain as the homeland, although she knew she would never see her native country again.
Unlike other exiles, however, she didn't live in the half hope that she might.
And what a country this was, especially at this strange summer-time Christmas.
It was a tuppence-coloured Scotland.
It had all the greens and blues and purples of the old country but more so and the sun undoubtedly shone brighter below the Equator.
She and Jim had settled well.
Even old Florence had adjusted.
At least, she was venturing out on to the verandah of the Mackenzie farm steading on most days and lay in the shade, making an endless succession of crocheted table covers and mats.
While she was doing so, she was company for little Sandy, who was just six months old and still in his pram, the image of his daddy, Bruce Mackenzie.
Tina and Bruce had met at a farm dance near Gore.
She had gone with Jim when they were both on the Keith farm at East Gore on the Mataura River.
When they'd heard that name, they knew they must take the place.
It was the Mataura that had brought them from Scotland, and it had to be a good omen.
The farm dance was the only way that young people could get together in those parts, and a great deal of matchmaking went on.
Jim and Tina had made up a foursome with Jean Hay and Bruce Mackenzie.
They were an obvious foursome from the beginning, and it was just a matter of time until they paired off.
There wasn't much choice in any case.
Younger, unattached people were at a premium in Southland.
Most people had come out as married couples, so it was inevitable that four young people living within pony and trap distance of each other would become more than good friends.
Bruce and Tina were best man and bridesmaid at Jim's wedding to Jean Hay at her parents' place in Gore.
The Hays were also Scottish, but they were from Edinburgh and thought themselves a bit superior to most of their neighbours.
Jean, however, was a good plain Scottish New Zealander, born in Southland and ideally fit to be a farmer's wife.
Which was just as well, as Jim was not ideally cut out to be a farmer!
However, he had bought land from the New Zealand and Australia Land Company on good terms and he thought he might as well take the chance of a place while he could.
With the help of a couple of good men and with Jean's know-how, they could just about make it.
There would be time to get back to his books later, so like many others, he rolled up his sleeves and before long, he was a cocky with the best of them, and the farm prospered.
But the farmhouse could hardly cope with two women, still less three.
From her reclining position, Mrs Keith still took a controlling interest in the household, but with only Jim in the house and two farmhands in the hut, Tina had become used to being in charge.
When Jean Hay had become Jean Keith, it was only natural that she assumed head girl status, so for a time, things were a little uncomfortable.
Luckily, Jean and Tina were compatible and amenable and between them, they softened the worst effects of Florence Keith's interference.
This then was the situation when Bruce Mackenzie, after much prompting from Jim and Jean finally proposed to Tina.
It was obvious to everyone, including Tina, how much he liked her.
But he was in his thirties, and already much set in his ways, and perhaps reluctant to make too many changes too quickly.
Tina, too, wasn't entirely sure.
The Martin Dickenson episode was still with her, and there was a faint memory of that feeling on the docks with the young Irishman.
She had to think to remember his name — Denis, that was it.
She had imagined, in her ingenuous way that when she married it would be a combination of that quayside romance with the close sexual intensity she had known with Martin Dickenson in the cabin.
Instead, there was only a warm friendliness for that good man, Bruce Mackenzie.
Jim liked him, and Bruce seemed to be able to manage with her mother.
They often sat together not saying a word, which is maybe the best way to get on with anybody.
At any rate, in the spring of 1905 she had married Bruce in Gore and moved to his farm outside Edendale.
Alexander Keith Mackenzie had followed in eighteen months.
Mrs Keith had stayed at East Gore with Jim and Jean.
The Mackenzies had invited the Keiths and their children, two-year-old Billy, and Roberta Keith, born only a few months  before and named after Robert in Sydney, to join them for the festive season.
This was to be a real family Christmas, and Tina was hard at work in the kitchen with Hilda van Meer.
She and her husband, Jan, were on the next farm to Bruce, and they had looked on Bruce as a son.
Now they accepted Tina as a daughter, and were constantly on hand with advice and assistance.
They were a Dutch couple and had all the practical good sense and household standards of that nation.
Unfortunately, they also had the same lack of humour, but Bruce and Tina had many occasions to be glad of their proximity.
Tina wiped the sweat from her forehead with the back of her hand, and shooed away the flies as they played round her face.
She was making hard work of plucking the goose.
It was a tough old bird.
What a way to spend Christmas Eve, she thought.
Hilda was making a Dutch Delft Cake at the oven.
This was her speciality and she made it on every occasion.
Tina, Hilda and Jean worked happily on their particular task.
They were a congenial trio, and already the sense of Christmas excitement was making itself felt in the house.
The presents were already wrapped and round the tree in the front room.
The cards were hung above the mantelpiece.
There was one from John and Thomasina and the children, but nothing so far from Bobby.
But then Bobby was always late.
He had written telling them about his recent marriage to Rachel in Sydney, but he hadn't given any address or any details of the wedding.
Tina had felt let down, but knowing Bobby, he would tell them in his own good time what had happened.
He was still in his Union job and seemed to do a lot of travelling.
She wished he could have been here for Christmas.
So did Jim, although he said they'd never get a word in if he came.
Tina knew that despite their great differences, the brothers loved each other.
He was out on the farm now with Bruce and young Billy Keith.
Bruce was showing him how the new tree planting was coming on.
It had been old Jan's idea.
He was with them too.
Old Jan always tagged along when Bruce went round his place.
He was very proud of the new trees, you would think they were his.
‘Only God can make a tree,’ he said, ‘but we can give him a hand now and then.
Besides you need the wind shelter, the birds need the tree shelter, the pests need the birds and the soil needs the pests.
We all need each other.
Everything depends on something.
Only thing we don't need is 'possums.
Them's the devil's creatures.
Tree rats, I call them.’
The three men were walking over the top paddock.
Bruce had wee Billy on his shoulders.
‘Me hungry, Dad.’
Jim looked up at him, and patted his knee.
‘You'll be home soon.
You alright up there with Uncle Bruce?’
Billy wasn't so sure.
His face was grave.
Bruce Mackenzie was six feet four and that's a long way up for a two-year-old.
‘Nice place you've got here, Bruce,’ said Jim as they walked.
‘You've done well.’
‘Needs the work,’ said Bruce.
‘Needs the weather,’ added Jan.
‘Like any place.
It's all a matter of luck, I suppose.’
Bruce laughed.
‘But it's funny,’ he said, ‘how lucky you can get if you've got good soil.
‘That's true for sure,’ said Jan.
‘When I first came up from Balclutha, Hilda said what I needed first was a good wife but Jan here said what I needed first was a couple of good horses.’
‘True,’ said Jan.
‘So I got the horses and Hilda said —‘
‘You get wife now!’ interjected Jan and he cackled with laughter.
‘That's right,’ said Bruce, ‘So I got a wife.
You'll know her Jim.’
And Jim laughed.
‘But then do you know what this old devil says?’
‘No,’ said Jim obligingly.
‘You get milk machine!’
Jan just beat Bruce to it and both men laughed.
Up on his high perch, wee Billy felt a bit out of it.
Dad, apple! he cried as they went under a fruit tree on the edge of the old plantation near the house.
‘Help yourself, Billy,’ said his uncle, and Billy reached up and pulled an apple from the tree.
Actually, he didn't pull it.
He merely held on to it, while Bruce pulled him, and with a gurgle of laughter the boy found the apple was in his hand.
‘That's a Cox's Orange,’ said Bruce to Jim.
‘'Tisn't,’ said the little boy, ‘it's an apple.’
‘Don't speak with your mouth full,’ said his father.
That night the adults sat round in the front room, among the Christmas lilies and gladioli in the last of the evening sun and talked after supper.
Even old Florence had been brought in and sat in the most comfortable armchair while they talked.
They spoke of the Europe they remembered, of Christmases in Scotland and Holland, of their different childhood memories and all the things that adults talk about on a sentimental occasion like Christmas Eve.
Everybody had something to say and it was amazing how people had such different memories of the same event.
Jim, being Jim of course, wanted to discuss Rudyard Kipling's Nobel Prize, or the surrender of Dini Zulu, king of the Zulus, or the fact that the  Mauretania had run aground at Liverpool, or the rage that Lili Elsie  had become in ‘The Merry Widow’.
Jim got all his news from The Southland Times , which he was sent once a week from Invercargill.
He was always keen to discuss the world news, especially the news from Britain, but he found few takers that night.
The supper had been too good, the weather was too pleasant and the company too friendly to worry about newspaper stories.
Real life was full and interesting enough for all of them.
They had little need of a newspaper, faraway, world.
It was only when everyone was thinking of bed and Jean and Tina had gone off to give their respective babies their last feeds and Hilda was in the kitchen clearing the last of the dishes, that Bruce said, ‘Would anyone like a nightcap?’
Florence Keith was the first to reply from her chair.
‘That would be very nice.’
The men were slightly taken aback.
‘It's a special occasion,’ she explained.
‘Christmas comes but once a year.’
‘So it does, Gran,’ said Bruce.
‘And it would be nice,’ she added slowly, ‘if someone was to give us a bit reading.’
‘What kind of reading, Gran?’ asked Bruce with the whisky bottle.
‘From the book, of course.’
‘Book?’ asked Jan with a frown.
‘My mother means the Bible,’ explained Jim.
‘Ah, the Good Book,’ said Jan.
‘I understand.’
‘Your department, Jim boy,’ said Bruce.
‘Your wee nip, as I think you call it, Gran.’
He grinned, giving her a glass.
‘Thank you, Bruce,’ she said almost primly.
‘Well,’ said Bruce, ‘do we have the toast first?’
‘If I have to do the reading we do,’ said Jim.
‘OK then.
Cheers!’ said Bruce.
‘Slainte!’ said Mrs Keith, unexpectedly.
Bruce went to the book shelf and took down the Mackenzie Bible.
‘There you are, old son, it's all yours.
Mind, it's heavy.’
Jim took the big book and opened it on his knees.
After a moment, he cleared his throat and read.
‘From the Gospel of St Luke, Chapter 2, Verses 6 to 11.’
He cleared his throat again.
Bruce whispered, ‘Do you want another drink?’
Jim shook his head and read on.
‘And so it was, while they were there, the days were accomplished that she should be delivered.
And she brought forth her first born son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger. because there was no room for them in the inn.
And there were in the same country shepherds abiding in the field, keeping watch over their flock by night.
And, lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them.
and they were sore afraid.
And the angel said unto them, Fear not.
for behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people.
For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour which is Christ the Lord.’
The next morning belonged to young Billy.
He had most of the presents and all the adults to himself, and it only came to an end for him when he was very sick late in the morning, but whether from too much excitement or too many sweets, nobody could tell.
He was put down in the spare bedroom with the blinds closed against the sun, and Jim sat with him telling him stories until he fell asleep.
At the lunchtime Christmas dinner Tina, Jean and Hilda decided to wear their new bonnets with the flowers all round.
Mrs Keith stubbornly insisted on wearing her old cap at the back of her head with a ribbon under her chin.
Jim suggested that the men should perhaps wear their hats but Bruce said it was too hot.
The Christmas goose was well and truly cooked and a good time was had by all.
The van Meers brought some wine which they said was Australian and the Keiths enjoyed the reminder it gave them of meals on the Mataura.
Florence stayed with the whisky.
It was medicinal, she said.
She considered all strong spirits as medicine.
Florence Keith was a great authority on medicines and even on the ship she had brought all her favourites from home.
‘Milne’ Ointment for Eczema, Clarke's Blood Mixture, Nervetonine, Dr J. Collis Browne's Chlorodyne, Keatings Lozenges and for special emergencies, ‘Roderick Dhu’Old Highland Whisky.
Unfortunately, that was finished now and she had to make do with what was to hand, ‘Johnnie Walker’, which was very nice indeed thank you.
After the lunch, they all sat on the verandah and looked at the grass and listened to the wood pigeons and warblers.
There was not much else to do.
The ladies had removed their hats but were still constricted by their fashionable jackets and long skirts.
The men had taken off their stiff collars, but were still uncomfortable in waistcoats and tight trousers and big boots.
The thing to do was move as little as possible.
‘So that was Christmas,’ said Bruce sleepily.
‘It's not over yet.
There's still Boxing Day,’ said Tina, dangling baby Sandy on her knee.
Jean had Roberta up at her shoulder and was patting her back and Billy was lying beside his dad in the long chair.
Bruce was in the hammock and Mr and Mrs van Meer were sitting side-by-side on the steps.
‘Boxing Day's not for me,’ said Bruce.
‘Can't afford it.
Work to do.’
‘And we'll have to be travelling back,’ said Jim.
‘Two days of a holiday's enough.
Even at Christmas.’
‘Too much of a holiday is bad for you,’ said Hilda.
‘How do you know?’ said Jan, adjusting the cushion below him.
‘You never take holiday.’
‘Women can't take holiday.’
‘That's right,’ said Jean.
‘A woman's work is never done.’
‘And a man's is never paid for,’ said Bruce putting his hands behind his head.
‘It's not so much the work we're never paid for,’ said Jim.
‘It's the worry.’
‘You should worry,’ said Hilda.
‘With a good wife and a good place and a son already to take over —‘
‘Wait a minute,’ said Jim, sitting up.
Hilda waved her hand, ‘You know what I mean.’
And so the talk drifted nebulously into the haze of a farmhouse afternoon under a lazy New Zealand sun.
They were well fed and well disposed to each other and they could hardly be blamed if they felt just a little smug.
On that particular Christmas Day, theirs was the nearest thing to an idyll to be found in the southern hemisphere.
‘Dad?’
‘Yes, Billy?’ said Jim.
‘Me want apple again.’
‘Oh, Billy,’ said his father.
But the little boy's request was unusually apt, for, unknown to them all, they were not in Edendale, Southland, New Zealand, but the Garden of Eden by Gore.
Noreen's face was contorted in anger.
‘You do that again and I'll kill you,’ she whispered.
And Rico did it again.
He slapped her hard.
Very hard.
She kicked out at him at once.
He winced with pain and made to grab at her.
She ducked under his arm and made for the door but he caught her arm.
She screamed and pulled hard.
It hurt her all the more and she slumped to her knee.
He hit her hard across the head and she fell to the ground crying loudly.
He stood over her shouting just as loudly in Italian.
He prodded her with his foot.
Get up!
Get up! he hissed.
She turned and lay on her back and looked up at him, her hair dishevelled, the tears staining her cheeks.
‘You Italian bastard!’
He drew back his leg as if to kick her, but she quickly turned and pulled the other one and brought him down.
Scrambling, she got to her feet and made a grab at the kitchen knife at the sink.
He was on top of her, but she pushed the knife right under his face.
‘Leave me alone!’ she screamed.
He hesitated, then grabbed her wrist and twisted it so that she screamed again and the knife dropped.
He pushed her away so that she fell hard against the door.
Then he lifted the knife.
This time he was calm and ashen-faced.
‘You want to play with knives, little girl, you learn how to use them, eh?
He advanced on her.
She covered her face with both her hands and screamed.
The door behind her suddenly opened and she was pushed against Rico, who staggered back.
Noreen felt a sharp little pain on her right arm and looking down, she saw the blood.
Furiously, she sprang at Rico and pummelled him.
‘Basta!’ yelled a voice behind her.
Rico threw her off, and she turned to see Mamma d'Agostino standing in the doorway.
There was an Italian exchange between mother and son which Noreen couldn't follow, it was so fast and vehement.
Noreen looked down at her arm.
It was only a small cut, but it was bleeding and she put her hand over it to try and stop it.
Rico was pointing to her, but his mother advanced into the room and, pushing him aside, went to Noreen and looked at her arm.
She held Noreen's hand, then glared round at her son.
‘Benda!
Pronto!
Rapido!’
He left the kitchen.
Mamma put her ample arm round Noreen's shaking shoulders and brought her to the kitchen table and made her sit down.
Rico came in with a couple of white towels, which he threw on the table.
‘Niente benda,’ he growled.
The mother motioned him to go with a shake of her head.
He shrugged and went.
Mamma d'Agostino took one of the towels to the sink and then came back and lifting Noreen's arm began to daub it.
It stung hard and Noreen reacted.
‘'Scuse,’ said Mamma softly.
‘'S alright,’ whispered Noreen.
Mamma then wrapped the larger towel round the arm.
‘Tene!’
‘It's a big bandage for a wee cut.’
She tried to smile, but instead bit her lip.
‘You tell Mamma what happen?’
And Noreen told her, catching her breath between sobs.
‘I took Maria over to Mrs Lennox in Queen's.
You remember she had the apartment where Sean and Michael stayed before they took the house at —‘
Mamma nodded, ‘Si, si.’
Well, Maria likes going to Mrs Lennox and Jock plays the piano for her.
She likes to sing, you know.’
‘Si.’
‘Well, I left her there.
She's OK’ with Mrs Lennox and it's good for her to get away from me for a bit just now and again.
You know.’
‘Si.’
‘Well, I came back here to the apartment and Rico's not home.
I hoped we could go someplace.
Have a meal, you know.
See some friends.
Like you, for instance.’
Mamma smiled and nodded and patted the girl on the shoulder.
‘But he's not home and I wait all night.
So I go to bed.
I think I should call you, but then I changed my mind.
I mean, why worry you?
Normally when he's gonna be late, he says.
Some job, you know.’
Mamma nodded again.
‘Naturally I can't phone the police.’
‘Naturally!’
‘And I don't want to ring Sean or Michael.
They might be mad I should leave Maria in Queen's.
Anyway, so I go to bed.
He comes in about six o'clock this mornin' and he's in an awful mess.
He won't say what he was up to, but his clothes are all dirty and a great big tear on his sleeve.
So I ask him what gives?
He wouldn't tell me and went straight into the bathroom there and it was ages before he came out.
But instead of getting into bed, he gets into another suit, God save us, and says he's going out again.
I ask him if he'll take me over to the Lennox's in his car.
You know he's got one of these Ford cars now.
And he says he's too busy.
And I say, ‘Too busy for your own daughter?’
And do you know what he tells me, Mamma?
Do you know what he tells me?
‘She's your daughter, not mine.’
I couldn't believe it.
‘She's your daughter,’ I said.
‘I know because I was there at the time.’
And then he gets up on his high horse and he says, ‘Rico has no daughters, Rico only has sons.
Why don't you make me sons?’ he says.
as if I had anything to do with it.’
Mamma made sympathetic sounds and patted Noreen on the shoulder again.
‘I don't really know what went on from there.
One thing just seemed to lead to another, and maybe 1 said more than I should have done.
1 know he certainly did.
Then when I told him that it takes a man to make a man, he hit me right across the face.
Well, not even my own father did that.
Nor did any of my brothers.
So I kicked out at him, as any right-minded girl would do.
And he hit me again and again.
Oh, Mamma, it was terrible.
And then when I fell and was trying to get up, he came at me with a knife and that's when you opened the door and — Oh, Mamma!’
She broke down again and put her head on the older woman's shoulder.
‘Mamma come just in time.
But everything gonna be OK.
Everything OK.
I speak to Enrico.
He's my boy.
I know how to tell him.
You leave it to Mamma.’
Noreen suddenly looked up at the Italian woman.
‘Why did he never want to marry me?’
Mamma looked away.
‘Was he married before?’ asked Noreen.
Mamma looked down and shook her head.
‘Yes an' no.’
‘What do ya mean yes or no.
Either he was married or he wasn't.’
Mamma d'Agostino sighed a sigh that shook her generous frame, then stood up and walked to the kitchen door and opened it slightly, then said in a low voice, ‘Enrico.
Resta la!’
She closed the door and returned to sit with Noreen.
‘My Enrico is a good boy though sometimes he not do good things.
But he always beautiful.
Very, what you call, 'ansome.
Si?’
‘Si,’ said Noreen with a little sigh.
‘He was young man, he wanted to be  architecto .
Comprende?’
‘Si — er — yes.’
‘An’ he study hard at the scuola to make paper for  architecto .
But, at the scuola, also studente ragazza — bella ragazza.’
‘A woman, you mean?’
‘Si, a young girl.
She fall in love, he fall in love.
They wanna —‘she waves her hand, ‘sposarsi.
Comprende?’
’ Get married.’
‘Si.’
‘So, Cattolica.
Matrimonio.
Chiesa.
OK?’
‘I understand.’
Mamma hesitated.
Noreen didn't know whether the older woman didn't want to continue, or didn't know how to.
‘Go on, Mamma.’
‘La luna di miele,’ said Mamma.
‘On their honeymoon they go to Genoa, and —‘, she looked away again, ‘when they make the love, Lisa, she make the blood.
And the blood.
And the blood and more blood, till everything is blood.
And she die.’
‘Oh, my God.’
‘My Enrico, he is covered with blood looking down on pretty Lisa, lying on her bed of blood.
It is — orribile, no?’
‘Terrible.
Poor girl.’
‘Poor Enrico.’
‘Of course.’
‘He leava the hotel, he leava Genoa, he leava Italia.
He leava his Mamma and he come to Amerigo, and he make big noise in New York, Chicago, Detroit.
All the places with Italia famiglia.
He make big noise, big bangs, you know.’
She made a gun gesture.
‘But he make big money.
He send for one brother, then two brother, then  four brother, then for his Mamma to make house for him in New York.
He lives for his Mamma, his famiglia, his money.
Then he meet you.
And he love you, mia piccola.’
Noreen bowed her head.
She felt herself beginning to cry again.
‘But does he love me still, Mamma?’
Mrs d'Agostino did not answer.
‘Oh, yes, he loves his money, his life, his brothers, but does he love Maria and me?
Would he have loved her more if she had been a son?,
‘He is Italian,’ was all the mother said.
‘Is that what it is?’ said Noreen.
‘I dunno.
I dunno anything.
I am Italian too, see?
But now you know why you hurt him and he angry.
He no marry you because of Lisa, because he think he kill Lisa in matrimonio and no wisha kill you in matrimonio.
 Capisto ?’
‘I think so,’ said Noreen.
‘So you talk to him, eh?’
Noreen made to get up, then sat down again.
‘I don't know what to say.’
‘You don't have to say anything!’
Both women turned and there was Rico standing at the kitchen door.
‘Rico!’ said his mother.
But he raised his hand.
‘OK, mother, I speak to Noreen.’
Noreen rose.
‘I know,’ she tried to say.
He nodded.
‘Yes, you know too much.
You please dress.
I take you to Mrs Lennox.’
Noreen rose.
‘Yes, we'll get Maria and we'll —‘
He raised his hand again.
‘No.
We don't get Maria.
I leave you there.’
‘What?,
We leave you there with Maria.
I give you money.
You stay with Mrs Lennox.’
‘But, Rico —‘
‘I LEAVE YOU!
Mamma, you tell her.’
He turned on his heel and left the doorway.
Mamma rose to Noreen at once.
‘Noreena —, she started to say.
‘You don't need to tell me anything, Mamma,’ said Noreen, surprised by her own coldness.
‘I understand.’
She shook her head in disbelief.
‘I understand everything.’
She felt the Italian mother press her arm and she winced.
‘'Scuse, Noreena, I no mean to hurt you.’
‘I know you don't, Mamma.’
And turning into the big, soft breast, she threw her arms round the woman's shoulders and cried like a baby.
The infant, Abel Keith, lay in his cot and seemed to smile.
It  was probably wind but to Bobby Keith and to Rachel, his wife, it was a smile.
‘Isn't he a lovely boy?’ said Bobby.
‘He's OK,’ said Rachel.
‘That's the Scottish part in him,’ said her husband, nudging her.
‘What's the Jewish part then?’ she asked.
‘You can't see that,’ said Bobby.
‘He's got his nappy on.
Can I not pick him up?’
‘No, I've just got him down.
Leave well alone is my motto.
Don't pick him up unless you have to.’
‘There speaks the natural mother.’
‘I'm not at all a natural mother,’ said Rachel.
‘The whole thing was pretty unnatural to me.’
‘What else are women for?’ said Bobby playfully.
‘Don't even joke to me about it.
A nightmare, the whole thing.
Let's leave him then.’
She was already moving away from the little cot and had her hand on the gas mantle and was turning it down.
He reached her before it popped off and put his arm round her waist.
‘Would you like to — um — go up to bed now, or shall we descend to the ground floor?’
She removed his arm, saying evenly, ‘Nothing could be further from my mind.
Ssh.
Be quiet now.
She kept hold of his hand and guided him from the room.
In the sitting room-cum-bedroom of their Darlinghurst first floor flat, the table had already been set for dinner.
‘That looks nice,’ said Bobby.
‘What are we eating?’
‘Wait and see,’ she said, going into the small scullery.
‘Don't be too long,’ he called.
‘Quiet!’ she said.
And rattled through the bead curtain that separated the tiny kitchen from the living area.
‘Be quiet yourself,’ he said, stretching himself out on the uncomfortable horsehair sofa.
He adjusted himself and stretched out.
Well, it's turned out not so badly, he thought, although it's been a rough ride.
He remembered it all too well.
Poor Rachel.
She'd had a terrible time at the birth.
He had blamed the doctors.
They were shouting at her to get on with it.
I think they needed the bed for somebody else.
Two days he was hanging around the place.
He was due to go up to the Blue Mountains that morning and she started having pains, she said.
Then there was water all over the stairs and she'd yelled ‘Get me to the hospital’.
God, he remembered how frightened he was.
He'd never ever got used to Rachel's being pregnant.
She didn't seem to suit the fat tummy and  at the end, she just looked awful.
She'd only been annoyed because it upset all her work plans.
Instead of having to cancel a trip to the Blue Mountains, she'd had to put off a trip to the Blue Danube.
There was another Zionist Congress in Vienna, and she'd had to pass it up, because she was passing it up quite often herself then.
He hadn't realised pregnancy was such a dislocating experience, or even that getting married itself would cause such an upheaval.
When he first mentioned it to Mr Gebler he thought the old guy was going to have a fit.
Even Mrs Gebler didn't seem too pleased.
It was all something to do with their thinking he didn't have a proper job, so they said.
But really he knew it was only because he wasn't Jewish.
He wasn't Kosher.
They had stalled him for long enough, but with a baby coming, he couldn't wait any longer and then when Rachel told them she had to get married, she was thrown out of the house.
Bobby couldn't believe it.
Old, harmless Enoch suddenly turned into a Shylock and demanded that Bobby remove his pound of flesh.
They were hardly given time to pack their things.
It didn't take him long, and all she wanted were her books and all the time the mother was crying and rocking backwards and forwards and the old father was ranting on in Yiddish.
It was eerie and he was glad to get out.
Now, here he was in downtown Sydney.
The flat was tiny, but it was cheap.
Now they were down to living on his salary alone, this was an important factor.
She had had to take the time off, but they wouldn't pay her for it.
And she lost her university part-time lectureship in Hebrew Studies, because she was pregnant.
Maybe sex is a sin with the Jews, he thought.
Or at least with Jewish academics!
‘Come and get it.’
Rachel entered with two plates.
‘What have we got here?
Sorry — I didn't mean to ask.’
They sat down and as always, Rachel bowed her head in a silent moment before she picked up her fork and began to eat her  Gefillte Fish.
‘I knew I recognised it.
Your mother used to make it hot with this sauce.’
‘Egg and lemon.’
‘That's it.
I would recognise her breadcrumbs anywhere.
It's as if she made it herself,’ he said, munching happily on the fish ball.
‘My mother did make it.’
‘What?’
He gulped.
‘Yes, she was here this afternoon.’
‘And you didn't tell me?,
‘I didn't know she was coming.
It was just after you left for your meeting.
There she was at the door.’
‘Was old Enoch with her?’
‘No, my father was not with her.’
‘Well, well.’
‘She's been before.’
‘Now she tells me.’
‘She's my mother.’
‘She's my mother-in-law.
I have certain rights,’ he insisted jocularly.
‘She's not well, Bobby.
She's got terribly thin.
Suddenly.’
He stopped eating and reached across and took his wife's hand.
‘She threw you out, darling.’
Bobby meant it lightly, but Rachel looked up, her eyes angry.
‘No, she didn't.
It was my father threw me out.’
Just at that, there was a cry from Abel in the next room.
Rachel rose at once.
‘I'll get him.’
She left Bobby picking at his  Gefillte Fish.
Suddenly he'd lost the taste for it.
NINETEEN
The Pittsburgh Pirates were leading Detroit 4–3 in the 1909 Baseball World Series and only minutes remained in the game.
High in the bleachers, ex-Superintendent Mick O'Neil watched with his favourite nephew, Denis.
Denis, in his nine years in the United States had never really taken to baseball.
As an ex-hurler, he preferred football, but Uncle Mick had dragged him time and time again to see his own beloved New York Giants.
The trouble was that Uncle Mick loved baseball even more than the Giants and he would travel any distance to see a good game.
so here he was at Pittsburgh watching the final game of the year.
The excitement had been intense and Denis watched in alarm as his uncle went every shade of red before going into purple and subsiding again to pink as the tension eased.
This can't be good for him, thought Denis, and he remembered the story he had read of an old man in England, although younger than Uncle Mick was now, who lined up to receive the very first old age pension ever issued in England and dropped down dead as soon as his money was passed over the counter to him.
The excitement of free cash was certainly not worth it on that occasion and what the ups and downs of a baseball game did to Uncle Mick's blood pressure and heart-beat count was not something a loving nephew dared to consider.
It was only a game after all.
However, on this particular day, since his idolised Giants were not taking part there was some degree of restraint in Uncle Mick's spectatorial behaviour.
Unfortunately, he decided to side with Detroit on the day, so that he might be as comfortably partisan as usual, but he did so among a group of Pittsburgh supporters, whom he referred to throughout the same as Pitts-buggers, which did nothing to improve inter-City relations.
But Uncle Mick was still, even at seventy, a man to be reckoned with and he managed without any great effort to intimidate the group or at least deflect their more sinister intentions.
That is until Pittsburgh scored a questionable run on a slide in.
And while the Pitts-buggers went wild with delight, Uncle Mick went wild with frustration, and  started to remonstrate with the biggest of the pack.
This man's joy at his team's win greatly tempered his reaction at being jabbed in the chest by a vigorous old Irish American, but even he had to retaliate when Uncle Mick pulled his cap down over his eyes and shoved him back in his seat.
Soon a scrum developed which bore a greater resemblance to that other American game than to the former game of Redcoat rounders being played below, and Denis had to pile in beside his uncle to the great detriment of his new coat and the loss of one trilby.
They found their way to the Railway Station and the train back to New York and all the while, Mick O'Neil was fulminating against the unfairness of the universe, particularly as it related to Detroit in the last five minutes of the game.
Even in the compartment he was explaining to the other half dozen men who had no option but to listen, how the New York Giants would have taken both of them on, one after another, and still have had time to take on the Chicago White Soxs as well.
One stranger in the carriage suggested that the Philadelphia Athletics were the finest team in the world due to Connie Mack.
‘If you mean Cornelius McGillicuddy —’ said Uncle Mick.
‘I do, sir,’ said the stranger.
’— then you're talking of the worst catcher ever not signed by the New York Giants.’
‘What about Jock McGraw?’ said somebody else.
‘John J. McGraw was an even worse baseman than I was.’
Denis could hardly hide his smiles, knowing that Uncle Mick had never stepped on a baseball pitch in his life.
He felt too seriously about the watching of it ever to have played it.
The train drew in to Penn Station with the arguments still raging round Uncle Mick's grizzled head, but that head was still unbowed and at one time Denis was sure he saw a wink in the wicked old eye as he took on about three arguments at once and lost all of them.
Since real action in the world was now denied him, Uncle Mick gave himself over thoroughly to debate.
There was no issue on which he wouldn't take one side or other and preferably the minority, or losing side.
There was more fun as an underdog — and since he had more bark than bite it was a casting that suited the irascible old gentleman ideally.
He was simmering down, or more exactly, getting a little tired as they stood on the sidewalk waiting for a street-car.
The overhead lighting didn't suit anyone but it certainly didn't flatter Mick O'Neil.
His normally  rubicund visage looked wan and strained and Denis thought he was breathing a little heavily.
‘You OK, Uncle Mick?’
‘Sure I'm OK.
Wassa matter?’
‘Nothin'.
I was just wonderin'.’
‘It's been a long day.’
‘Sure.’
Their car came, and they climbed on, just managing to find a place on top at the front among the smokers.
Denis noticed that his uncle, sitting about three seats ahead of him was coughing more than usual, and glaring openly at the briars either side of him.
Don't let him pick a fight now, prayed Denis, we're almost home.
Another fit of coughing and the street-car lurched to a halt suddenly.
This caused Uncle Mick to lean heavily on the passenger on his left causing the pipe to fall from his mouth.
It fell on the floor and rolled towards Uncle Mick's feet — and he promptly stood on it with all his forty-year police authority and his size ten boots.
The man couldn't believe it and could only stare as Uncle Mick got up and marched triumphantly up towards Denis and the exit stair.
There was a smile on his face and it was still on his face when he stopped as if seized up and fell headlong in the passageway.
‘UNCLE MICK!’ cried Denis and jumped up.
‘Requiem aeternam dona eis Domine…’
St Patrick's Cathedral was a sea of blue for the funeral.
It was a Police Force out in force to recognise a man who was one of theirs.
A policeman and a man's man and at the heart of it, a blunt Irish cop in New York.
His was a species that would last, but Michael O'Neil was one of the original stock.
The family was in the front row right as befits the relatives of the deceased, with Carmella appropriately in place of honour between Denis, in his best uniform with black gloves, and Joey, extremely smart, in unaccustomed black.
Looking at him one was sure he was just the smartest, young man about town, but then when he spoke — Next to him sat Michael and Sean with a sombre Noreen between them.
Carmella had not acknowledged her as she took her place, but an exchange of looks between Denis and his two younger brothers indicated that Noreen was going to be there no matter what.
Carmella sensed this and remained remarkably calm.
Joey didn't recognise his cousin at first, and kept peering along as if to make sure.
Noreen was only older by a couple of years, but their mark was laid heavily on her, just as it was on the Rafferty regulars.
Jackie, himself, was there this time, looking as old as the late Emmet Ryan was at Paddy's first Mass.
The rest were there in a self-conscious group at the side.
Like Sean and Michael, they weren't too happy about being in the midst of so many policemen, with all the exits covered.
Every known criminal in New York was  there, and those that were ‘otherwise detained’ had sent flowers to the man who'd sent them up.
They filled the aisle around the coffin and spilled on to the altar itself.
On the main altar, Father Paddy and Father Donnelly were concelebrating mass with the Bishop.
Bishop Monaghan was brief in his address.
He was getting old now and didn't bother overmuch about impressing people.
He was waiting to impress his Maker, and he would have the chance before long.
‘Michael O'Neil,’ he intoned thinly from the pulpit in his Cork lilt, ‘was a terrible man altogether.
But a loveable man with it and a smile on him to the last.
He leaves a grieving wife and a —’ Here he hesitated just enough for everyone to notice,’— a fine son.
And a family of nephews —’ another hesitation —‘and a niece —’Noreen looked up at this, and almost defied the Bishop with her stare, ‘— that do him much credit in this world and I trust will be of some satisfaction to his account in the next.
Michael O'Neil knows what the score is now better than any of us here, and if I know Michael, he'll be arguing with St Peter at the gate and be telling him in his best Superintendent manner that celestial security is not what it was -if they let people like him in!’
The old Bishop waited for the little murmur of sympathetic approval that ran through the ranks, and they listened just as sympathetically as he rambled on into the usual pious platitudes that ended his eulogy.
At the end, assisted by the two younger priests, he came through the altar rails and sprinkled the coffin with Holy Water.
Some of it spilled inadvertently on the nearest congregation, particularly Carmella and Joey.
‘Hey,’ Joey said, wiping his arm and knee, ‘that's wet.’
‘Amen.’
The procession made its very slow progress to the rear of the church, and the organ blared out the ‘Dies Irae’.
Two senior police officers stepped forward to assist Denis, Sean, Michael and Joey in the removal of the coffin, under the direction of the undertakers.
Denis patiently instructed Joey in what to do and he and Michael kept him from talking too loudly.
Sean looked back to Noreen as he left the pew.
She nodded to him.
As the coffin was lifted up on the shoulders of the men, Carmella stood and reached out her hand to touch its wood at Joey's shoulder.
‘OK, Mamma?’ he said.
‘Oh, Mick,’ she called.
‘Oh, Mick, ne partire mi.’
Every head bowed, except Noreen's.
She rose and went to her aunt and put her arms round her shoulders.
Carmella didn't react at first but then she looked up and saw who it was.
Noreen held her gaze and her arm round her then Carmella reached up and patted her hand and turned her head away again.
Both women watched as the  coffin moved slowly away up the aisle, and gently, still with her arm around her, Noreen followed with Carmella.
As she moved up, Noreen lifted her eyes to the choir stalls, as if in a signal, and the organ segued to a softer introduction to the Recessional Hymn.
Then came a moment that electrified the congregation.
It made its impact because it was so unexpected.
For it was not the Police Choir that sang but seven-year-old Maria O'Neil.
She sang solo against the humming of the male voices behind her and against the organ counterpoint.
What the words were didn't matter.
It was the sound the little girl made.
Her pure unforced natural soprano soared into the air above them all and showered that hard school of auditors with a sprinkling of lovely notes that they turned into tears.
The scene at the graveyard was more than usually touching.
Autumn had given the trees that extra golden lustre and the leaves that had already fallen lay round about the mourners, feet like a russet carpet.
Liam Murphy stood at one side of the grave with a tiny white casket in his arms, and on the other side, Kevin O'Neil carried the same sad load.
Canon Devlin intoned the burial service in a creaky Latin and pulled his long cloak tighter around him against the wind that sifted through the cemetery on the outskirts of Milltown.
On either side of him stood Eugene Murphy, Liam's father and the children's grandad, and Tim, the barman, in his best clothes.
Nobody noticed Sergeant Davidson standing by a tree nearby.
Old Den stood at the opposite side of the grave with Tommy Drennan, each with a cord ready to help lay Celia and Dermot Murphy to rest.
An outbreak of scarlet fever had taken the nine-year-old twins in little more than a week.
They were not the only children to die in the district and the Milltown cemetery was only one of several busy around that time in an awful traffic with children's white coffins.
Celia, the younger by ten minutes, had always been the weaker, but it was Dermot who'd come home from school first, complaining of a sore throat.
Nellie had put him to bed thinking it was a cold, then hearing of the scarlet fever in Newry through Tommy Drennan, she sent for Dr Nolan at once.
He didn't come till the next day, he had so many calls, and all the same— sick children.
By this time, Celia had the same throat and both were in the same bed for company.
Nellie was convinced it would pass, even though she could feel that both children had high temperatures.
Then next morning, both children had the rash, and Nellie sent Liam to fetch Dr Nolan from wherever he was.
Liam complained that he had plenty to do with the new shop opening for him to be running  around after doctors —‘just because a couple of kiddies are sick’.
However, Nellie's nagging won the day and he agreed to go in his new Austin car and look for Dr Nolan.
Liam had joined his father, Eugene Murphy, in a series of newsagents' shops, which served as a cover for a very thriving bookmaking and betting business run from the back of each.
Old Eugene had never worked in his life due to what he said was a bad heart, but he never lacked in daring and was never afraid to take a gamble.
Fortunately, he had the luck and nearly always won, so he bought McLaughlin's old newsagents' in Hilltown as a front for his ‘line’.
In no time, he'd bought a second one for Liam in Milltown, and then a third in Warrenpoint and now Liam was just about to clinch a site in Newry.
It would be Belfast and Dublin next, then Rosstrevor and the world.
Nellie would have liked Liam to have opened his next branch in New York, just to give her a chance of seeing her brothers and Noreen, but Liam had been adamant.
‘Sure, we've got a fine life going here.
What need have we of America?
Aren't they all daft there?’
There was no way she was going to get her husband to America, and Nellie would like to have gone.
Just once.
To see for herself.
Letters from the States had been few and far between of late, although money from Sean still came from time to time.
Only Paddy wrote to their mother and father on any kind of regular basis, but even he was busy with his new parish.
Anyway it was not always easy for Nellie to get up to Rosstrevor as often as she'd like to catch up on any news.
She understood from her mother on her last visit that Carmella had moved to New Jersey after Uncle Mick's death to be near her sister, and that Noreen was helping Sean and Michael in their new business.
There was always a rumour that Noreen had had a baby to an Italian, but they had never heard the truth of it in Ireland.
That's the way things go in families.
Everybody gets on with their own lives and old links get used less and less till they're forgotten, and before you know it, people are dead and gone and it's too late.
Nellie had hoped it would not be too late for her, and now this had to happen.
Liam had found Dr Nolan at Annie McAteer's house, Annie Fitzpatrick that she now was.
She had always been the great friend of Noreen's and of Liam too in his young days.
At that time, every girl was.
Now she was a mother of five and the three young ones were all down with the fever.
Fatally, as it turned out.
Dr Nolan looked deadbeat as he came into the little bedroom at Milltown.
‘Put out your tongues,’ he said brusquely to the wee ones, who were sitting in their best night clothes, with their hair newly brushed.
You had to be nice to see the doctor.
It made little  difference if a dreadful rash despoiled both little faces.
As soon as he saw the tongues, he knew.
He put the back of his hand on each forehead and asked Nellie if they'd complained about pains in the ear.
‘Not really.’
‘Well, either they have or they haven't, woman.’
‘They haven't,’ said Nellie firmly.
‘And what about bed wetting?’
Nellie blushed.
The children had had a bad spell with that, but she thought it was over now.
‘No, they don't —‘
‘Dermot did the other night,’ said Celia righteously.
‘Right,’ said the doctor.
‘Separate beds it is to minimise the infection, as much liquids as they can take, except milk.
No milk under any circumstances.’
‘And what about food, doctor?
Will I —‘
‘If they want to eat, let them, but keep everyone away from them.
No little friends visiting.’
He was hurriedly packing his case while Liam fetched his coat.
‘Is there anything else, doctor?’
Nellie asked at the front door.
‘Prayer,’ said Dr Nolan tersely.
‘Will you give me a lift back in your fancy motor car, Liam?’
‘I will that, doctor.’
But prayer wasn't enough and Celia and Dermot Murphy died.
The funeral service was a hurried one because of their condition.
The coffin had to have an extra lining and the lid was screwed down earlier than it might have been, so that nobody could look on them dead, except the undertaker who came to the house and wore a mask and Liam who insisted on being with them all the time.
Nellie wouldn't go near the room.
She refused to look upon her two children dead.
Perhaps that was why she still thought they were alive.
She never cried at all.
Indeed, she smiled.
She smiled all the time, but it was a smile that put a chill in your heart.
The Temperance Army was on the march in the United States.
More and more states were adopting laws which banned the sale of alcohol.
Other places closed down saloons altogether, especially in Ohio.
And in New York State, 315 towns banned saloons altogether.
This was all part of a movement to prohibit the use of alcohol and the propagators began to be known as the prohibitionists.
Sean and Michael O'Neil could not be considered as such.
They were known as Wets, and the Wets claimed that Prohibition would result in drinkers switching from drink to drugs.
This problem was one that was confronting the brothers as they sat one late night at Rafferty's after everyone had gone.
Sean was pacing up and down.
‘We'll have to do something, Michael.’
‘As you say, Sean,’ said Michael, sipping happily on a full beer.
Now that they were the owners of Rafferty's, they adjusted the rules sufficiently to allow themselves a drink after hours.
Not that either of them were drinkers; one now and then was enough.
They had seen enough of their father drunk and there had been a terrible scene at Uncle Mick's funeral when Denis got drunk and started arguing with them about their business practices.
He'd been hearing things, Denis had said, and he wanted to know what was going on at Rafferty's.
Mind you, he had told Sean he was speaking as a brother, not as a policeman, you understand.
Although from his truculent manner, it was hard to see him as brotherly, but then Denis had been nearest to Uncle Mick.
Why shouldn't he get drunk?
But why is it that there are always fights at family funerals.
Especially Irish funerals.
You've got to be awake at a wake, if you're to survive.
Even the songs they sang on such occasions had a defiance in them, always remembering of course they had a drink in them at the time.
’ Look at the coffin with golden handles
Isn't it grand boys to be bloody well dead?
Let's not have a sniffle, let's all have a bloody good cry,
And always remember the longer you live,
The sooner you'll bloody well die.’
Sean always had his wits about him and had tried to placate him by saying there was nothing they were doing at Rafferty's Bar that would offend a brother, or would concern a policeman.
For some reason, Denis took offence at this, and was even more determined to ‘get to the bottom of it all’ as he put it.
His voice was raised to a shout, ‘You don't make the money at Rafferty's Bar for youse to dress like lords and drive a car.’
‘Hey, that's poetry, Denis,’ Michael commented.
This remark had made Denis so mad he'd swung a punch at his young brother, and Michael, being used to that sort of thing at Rafferty's, easily avoided it.
As a result Denis hit old Jock Lennox by accident, who fell on top of Pat Kelly and spilled his drink.
Pat was so incensed he got up at once and hit Jock, and Mrs Lennox screamed.
Jock then tried to hit Denis, who was still swinging at Michael, who didn't want to hit his big brother, and stumbled back into Sean, who jumped to one side and collided with Pat Kelly, knocking his  next drink out of his hand!
Pat was a big man and grabbed Sean and bundled him over the couch and into the laps of Mrs Kelly and Mrs Quinn who screamed blue murder.
Before they all knew it, Carmella's front room was a chaos of flailing bodies, and a sea of broken glass.
Joey stood in the door laughing his head off and Noreen peered over his shoulder, her hands over her mouth.
Carmella was the only calm one, and picking her way through the shambles, she called the Police to sort it out!
The boys hadn't seen Denis since.
‘We'll have to be giving them cocaine instead of whiskey.’
‘Ah, they wouldn't like that,’ replied Michael.
‘I mean you take a mug of cocaine at night before you go to bed.’
‘That's cocoa, you idiot.’
‘Well, same thing, it puts you to sleep,’ said Michael, completely unfussed.
‘The thing is we'll have to do something or we'll find we'll have to work for a living and we don't want to do that.’
‘Heaven forbid!’ agreed Michael.
‘Right,’ said Sean, ‘we can do two things.
We can sell up here altogether, or we don't.’
‘That's two things right enough,’ said Michel, pouring himself another beer.
‘If we don't sell, we can lease the cellars to the Italians as they wanted.
You remember that?’
‘I do,’ said Michael.
‘That was Noreen's man.’
‘Rico.
‘That's right.
Didn't they have some idea of using our cellars as storage?’
‘They did, Michael, but they also liked the fact that our cellars connected with next door, which connected with next door to that, which I believe led out to the East River.’
‘Would you believe that?’ said Michael.
‘Isn't it extraordinary what goes on under your feet and you never know about it.
You mean to say you could go down our steps there and if you keep goin' you'd come out on the water?,
‘I do.’
‘Then I move that we sell the cellar.’
‘Why do ye say that, Michael?’
‘Well, if you're tellin' me that our cellar leads out to the East River, then it follows that the East River leads to our cellar, and it could just happen that somebody would leave a door open somewhere, and we'd have the whole of the East River down round our feet.’
‘Don't be daft, Michael.
I mean that they have what they call  ‘access’ to the water, which means to the docks which means to the port which means to the open sea which means to the world.
Do ye follow me?,
‘Ah, you're a devious man, Sean.
You've got me all at sea indeed.’
‘Contraband, Michael.
That's what it is.
Contraband and the dope.
They're into it already, you see.
This Pro-hib-ition, or whatever they call it, is comin', you mark my words, or the Tally boys wouldn't be into other ‘arrangements’, as they say, and lookin' to buy cellars and hidey-holes and places behind walls, if ye follow me.
Now, you see, in Rafferty's here we could be sittin' on a gold mine.’
‘Or a swimmin' pool,’ said Michael.
‘Not at all.
If we go the right way about it, we could set ourselves up nice with a good little earner still in Rafferty's.’
‘But you won't get your hands dirty, will ye, Sean?
I mean there's Denis —‘
‘Sure, there's always Denis.
No, Michael, I won't get me hands dirty.
Nor, will I tell you, get me feet wet.’
‘But listen, Sean.’
‘What's that, Michael?’
‘If you go in with this Rico lad —‘
‘Ay?’
‘What will you say to Noreen?’
Sean thought for a minute, then smiled at his brother.
‘Nothin'.’
‘But if you're goin' in with Rico?’
‘Who says anythin' about goin' in with Rico?’
He looked at his brother.
Then Michael grinned.
‘Ah, I see.
Well then, I suppose I'd better learn to swim!’
TWENTY
The picture of the Child of Prague looked down in all its red and gold splendour on the framed photograph of the late Superintendent Michael O'Neal who smiled widely on three little blonde heads who should have been in their beds.
But Jitka, Katya and Clara O'Neil, aged seven, four and two respectively, were taking every advantage of their father Denis, referred to by them as Pops, because their mother Hana was in the big bedroom on the first floor awaiting the arrival of her fourth child at any minute.
The Brooklyn brownstone at 59/57th was formerly the home of the still-lamented Superintendent, but when Carmella and Joey had moved out to New Jersey, Hana and Denis and their three girls had moved in, glad of the extra room the Brooklyn brownstone provided.
Clara had just been born then, and now, more or less on schedule, Hana was in labour again.
Denis O'Neil was determined to keep going until he got that son!
It was St Patrick's Night, 1912, and Sergeant O'Neil had had a long day, what with the parade and all.
He was tired already yet he knew he was in for an even longer night once he was home.
Carmella would hardly have recognised her house now.
Instead of her florid and much-ornamented, multi-coloured, Italian disorder there was a stark, severe Slavonic black-and-whiteness in the decoration of the house.
Plain drapes replaced the flounced curtains and white paint covered the old, ornately wallpapered walls.
No wonder Uncle Mick grinned as he looked down on the nearly-elegant sitting-room.
He knew Carmella would have had a fit had she seen it.
Not that his nephew Denis was in any better a mood as he chased his little women around the room.
‘Come on kids,’ he whined, ‘Pops is tired.’
The girls continued to giggle and scream and run and hide and generally have fun with their father, whom they adored and knew they could do as they liked with — especially, Katya, the middle one and the liveliest.
‘Gotcha!’
He caught her behind the sofa and whirled her up in his arms.
‘Me too!
Me too!’ yelled Clara, the two-year-old, who always had to have what Katya had.
Denis dutifully bent down and Clara climbed on his back putting her little arms round his neck.
Thus laden, and with eyes popping and face red, he motioned Jitka to go ahead and open the doors, which she did, and together, they climbed the stairs to the children's room at the back where Noreen used to sleep.
Jitka turned and put her fingers to her lips as they came to the main bedroom and they tiptoed passed.
Hana was lying-in with Mrs Finklestein and Mrs Robovitch, who were the neighbourhood delivery and despatch team.
They were expert in basic birth techniques and in the laying out of corpses.
Mrs Finklestein was the midwife and Mrs Robovitch was her helper.
They swopped roles for deaths in the street.
There wasn't much the urban pair didn't know about life and death.
They were street-wise in every respect.
They had helped Clara into the world only the day after the O'Neils had moved in two years before and Denis knew his wife was in good hands.
Her own mother was now living with her son who had married a Polish girl from Hoboken.
It was too far for the old lady to come over.
Denis was relieved.
He liked Hana's mother well enough but she had just refused to learn any English at all, and every visit was a strain.
Speaking of strains, he was finding it was just that to get three little bundles of blonde mischief settled.
How did Hana manage all the time?
It would be different with boys, Denis thought.
He desperately wanted a son to continue the O'Neil line, a line of Irish kings after all!
And to be company for him in his old age among this sorority of Slavonic women he seemed to be siring.
Surely this time?
‘Come on Jitka, give me a hand with these two.’
Jitka, being the oldest was already in her own single bed, and the other two made the most of the other single with one at each end.
They kept tickling each other 's toes and would not settle.
Denis made threatening noises, but they knew better than to take him seriously.
Denis was the kind of man who was rarely taken seriously, especially by his own family, but he had to get these three down to sleep before anything started in the other room.
He sat at the end of Jitka's bed, while she tried to lead her sisters in their song about St Wenceslas.
Dear Jitka, she was always so serious and Katya so impudent, Clara so dreamy.
Denis wondered sometimes if they came from the same father and mother.
That reminded him.
He gave a glance over his shoulders, but no sounds yet coming from the bedroom, only the occasional snatch of Yiddish as Mrs Finklestein conferred with Mrs Robovitch.
My dear Hana he thought.
What a wonderful wife she has been.
He didn't care when it happened, as long as it did and that Hana would be alright  again.
They say the fourth child is the most dangerous.
Now how would I know that, he thought.
Still, he hoped she'd be alright.
A man felt so helpless at such a time.
As long as it was a boy.
If he was born before midnight, he would be called Patrick.
After that, any name would do, as long as it was a boy's name.
Denis, he supposed, keeping up the first son tradition.
Denis, the third.
‘Come on now, Pops, it's your turn now,’ said Jitka.
‘Yes, your turn, your turn,’ chorused the other two shrilly, bobbing up and down in the bed.
‘Quiet!
OK.
OK.’
And taking a breath, he sang softly.
’ Let him go, let him tarry, let him sink, or let him swim
He never cared for me nor I don't care for him.
He can go and love some other girl and wed her if he can
For I'm going to marry a far better man.’
They squealed with delight as though they hadn't heard it a hundred times before.
Denis raised his hands.
‘Quiet, girls, you'll waken your mother.
‘She's not asleep,’ said Jitka.
‘She's making our little sister,’ said Katya.
‘Who said?’ asked Denis.
‘Jitka,’ replied Katya at once, and laughed, putting her head under the sheets.
‘Bye-bye,’ said Clara, doing the same.
‘Come on now, girls, said Denis, leaning over to them, ‘it's getting late and pops is tired.’
‘You can sleep with me,’ said Katya.
‘No, me,’ said Clara.
‘No,’ said Denis, ‘Pops sleeps with Mama.’
‘Not tonight,’ said Jitka, gravely with all her seven-year-old wisdom.
Denis found himself a little abashed, and rose to cover his embarrassment.
‘No, Jitka, maybe not tonight.’
‘'nother song Pops please!’ whimpered Katya.
‘Yes, please!’ echoed Clara in exactly the same intonation.
‘Pops can't sing,’ Denis pleaded.
‘I know,’ said Katya, ‘but just one.’
‘Just one,’ added Clara.
He looked at Jitka.
She shrugged.
He knew he would have to go through with the nightly ritual.
So once again, in the same quiet voice.
Denis was no singer.
’ Hurrah, me boys, hurrah!
No more I wish for to roam,
For the sun it will shine in harvest time
To welcome our Paddy home —‘
Just then Mrs Robovitch appeared at the bedroom door.
‘Mrs Finklestein says maybe you should the doctor get.’
Denis was already on his way downstairs…
Anna Patricia O'Neil was born at a quarter after two the next morning, so Denis didn't get his Patrick after all, nor even his Denis, but he got his much-loved and hard-worked Hana back and for that he was grateful.
It had been a hard labour.
Anna had come into the world feet first and it took all the experience of Mrs Finklestein and the skill of the young Dr Arlen, who had come back at once with Denis, to turn the baby round without strangling the little thing with its own cord.
Denis had sat downstairs in the sitting-room while it was going on, praying fervently to the Child of Prague, or was it to Uncle Mick, to protect his little European wife from all her pain and bring her safely through.
Oddly enough, he never gave a thought to the child being born with such difficulty; he could only think of his wife.
But now it was all over and he sat in the big armchair as dawn lightened the front windows and gave thanks, with a cup of coffee, to the Child of Prague high on the opposite wall.
The Child Christ King with two fingers raised and an orb in his left hand and a circlet of stars around his crowned head.
It was Hana's picture, and she had brought it from Prague herself.
It was one of the first things she put on the wall when they re-decorated the house.
She wasn't pleased when he put Uncle Mick's picture below it.
He raised his coffee cup to both of them, and he could have sworn that Uncle Mick in the frame below grinned even wider.
Liam Murphy knew he had to do something about Nellie.
She had been strange at the funeral, and even stranger in the two years that had passed.
She insisted on putting out the clothes for the children each morning and preparing meals for them as usual.
It was weird and it was getting Liam down.
Dr Nolan said it was just shock and she would get over it in time, but it was hard to live with just the same.
What was even more worrying was that she had never cried and even when he remonstrated with her and told her bluntly that their two children were dead and buried she just smiled and turned away.
She was always smiling, that was the worst thing.
‘You don't think she's mad, do you, Dr Nolan?’
‘If you lost both your children, wouldn't you be mad?’ the doctor had said.
But they were my children, too.
‘You're not the mother.’
He had taken her up to see her own mother, and Nessie, to his surprise, humoured her in her chatter about Celia and Dermot.
When Liam managed to get a word with  her alone, she said the less fuss they made about it the sooner Nellie would get over it.
‘What she needs,’ said Nessie, ‘is a good cry.’
‘I know what you mean,’ said Liam.
It was his father gave him the idea.
Old Eugene had taken to his bed.
The last heart attack had been a big one, and he wasn't able to shrug it off this time.
Dr Nolan had said he would wash his hands of him if he didn't rest up properly.
‘So who wants a doctor with dirty hands,’ said Eugene and agreed to rest up.
When Liam had gone to see him, the old man asked about Nellie.
‘Has she broke yet?’ he said.
‘Not a sign of it, Da.’
‘Ah, there's the pity.
What she might need is a good fright.
If it was a shock that made her quiet, it'll be a shock'll bring her round again.’
What he suggested gave his son a shock.
‘I think you should take her to Amerikay.’
‘What?,
‘Give her a bit of a break.
Yourself too.
A holiday would do it.’
‘A holiday, is it?
When would I have the time the way things are and you on your back?’
‘There's always time, Liam.
That's the funny thing, and then you find there isn't enough.
That's even funnier.’
‘And for another thing, where would I get the money?’
‘I'll give you it.’
‘But you don't have it.
It's all tied up in the shops.’
‘Not all of it.
I used to keep what I called me tithe.’
‘Oh, you did, did you?’
‘Ay, it's where an ignorance of good book-keeping stands you in good stead.’
‘And where is this money then?’
‘Ah, that would be tellin' now.
But I'll not have to reach out too far to put my hands on it.’
Tell me, Da, an' I'll —‘
‘I'll tell ye nothin'.
Jus' you go into Newry and make enquiries about that fancy new boat that's all the talk of the papers.
I was readin' about it only yesterday.
It's going to make a try for the fastest Atlantic crossing.’
‘The Titanic?’
‘That's it.
The Titanic.’
‘See what it would cost for a couple of places on her?’
‘But I don't like sailing,’ said Liam.
‘But do ye like Nellie?’ said the old man.
So the arrangements were made with the White Star line and unbeknown to Nellie, Liam eventually did get two reservations on the new ship, which was brought down from Liverpool to Southampton, where most of the passengers got on, and then to Cherbourg to pick up some more and finally to Queenstown before crossing the Atlantic to New York.
Liam thought it would be best to join the Irish passengers at the latter port of call.
It would save time and a little bit of money.
Not that money seemed to be a problem.
He didn't know where his father got it from, but there was plenty of it.
So who was Liam to worry?
As the day of their embarkation drew closer, he had to confess to feeling just a little excited.
What annoyed him though was that he had to make most of the preparations.
Nellie seemed to drift through each day starting a lot of things and never finishing them, and doing an awful lot of washing.
She was always washing.
Especially the children's clothes.
She even packed a bag for each for them.
Liam just decided to ignore it all and hope for the best.
They were to take the car to Newry on the morning of 10th April.
Someone from McLaughlin's old shop would come and pick it up.
Then Liam and Nellie would take the bus to Belfast, then the train to Dublin, where they would stay overnight at the Gresham Hotel.
That would be like a holiday in itself.
In the morning, the shipping line said there would be a special connecting train that would bring them and the other 180 Irish passengers to the ship at Queenstown in time for the sailing.
He tried to get Nellie interested in all the arrangements.
‘Do ye know,’ he said, ‘there are more than two thousand of us and that's not counting the crew.’
But Nellie only smiled.
When the morning came, he had a terrible job getting the Austin started with the handle.
‘I hope this isn't an omen,’ he muttered.
Nellie had packed the two children's bags and left them at the door.
He quietly took them to the back of the house before they left.
Eventually they got away, but they had got hardly a hundred yards down the road when she suddenly screamed out, ‘We've left them.’
‘Left what?’ he yelled over the noise of the engine and the wind.
‘The bags.
The children's bags.’
She kept on and on about them until he had no option but to brake hard, and with a great deal of difficulty in that narrow lane, turn the vehicle around and go back.
Sheepishly he collected them from the back door and they started out again.
‘We'll miss that bus,’ he muttered.
They almost did, because  they had difficulty finding a man in the shop who could drive the car.
Luckily the bus itself was delayed, and so they got themselves on board.
Liam wasn't sure, but he had the feeling Nellie was beginning to take an interest, and was even enjoying herself as they sat in the bus.
He asked if she was looking forward to the sea voyage.
‘Oh, I am,’ she said, ‘and the children will love it too.’
He sighed and looked out of the window.
When they got to the railway station in Belfast, things got even worse.
‘Where are they?’ she said.
‘Who?’
‘Celia and Dermot.’
‘Oh, Nellie.’
‘I'm sure I saw them.’
‘We'll have to get on the train.’
‘I'm not going without them.’
‘But, Nellie —‘
‘Say what you like.
I'll have to find them.’
And off she went into the crowd waiting at the platform until she was lost to sight.
‘Nellie!’ he cried.
He had just got most of their luggage on board and now was in a dilemma.
Should he continue getting it on, then go for her.
Or should he just take it off again and hope that she'd come back in time.
He felt a tugging at the case he was holding, and it was the porter, trying to take it from him.
‘You'll want it on, sir.’
‘What?,
‘The case, sir.
You'll want it on the train.’
‘Oh, I don't know.’
‘Please yourself.
Will that be it then, sir?’
‘What?’
‘Your luggage?’
‘Yes.
I mean, no.
Damn!
Get it all off!’
‘What's that?’
‘Get it all off!
I'll give you yer shillin'.’
‘As you say, sir.’
And the six pieces of luggage, two large, two medium and two small, were taken off again and laid on the platform.
The porter got his shilling and Liam waited.
He waited as the rest of the passengers boarded.
He waited as the final farewells were taken, and he was still waiting as the train pulled away.
And when the platform emptied, he could see at the very end of it, a forlorn figure sitting all by herself.
‘Oh, Nellie!’ he said softly, and with a great well of pity in his voice.
He sighed and started to walk towards her.
Nothing much was said.
Nellie seemed to have forgotten everything, even her children, and Liam wondered whether he would get his money back.
He had toyed with the idea of taking her to Dublin anyway, but they had had a rocky road enough already and perhaps she would be better at home.
Instead of Queenstown, they stayed in the Queen's Hotel that night in Belfast, and it was lunchtime the next day before they got back to Newry.
Liam wondered why there were such long faces to greet him at the shop.
It was only when they found the man who had taken the car back that the shop manager told him.
‘Mr Murphy?’
‘Yes.’
‘Mr Murphy's dead.’
Liam thought long afterwards of the strangeness of those few days, and how he was brought back from what was to be a trip to America, just in time to arrange his own father's funeral.
If Nellie hadn't gone looking for the children…
. If the children hadn't died…
If his father hadn't suggested a holiday?
So many ifs.
Life is full of them, but they only make sense when you look back on them.
Everyone can see clearly enough with hindsight.
It was a modest kind of a funeral at old Eugene's specific request.
Liam found a letter, which the old man had written just after Liam's mother's own death the year before.
‘I don't want all that  palaver ,’ he had written.
‘And I would never rest easy, knowing all that good money was thrown away on show, and to get people drunk at my funeral who owed me money, when I was livin'.
So I just want a plain box and a plain stone, and a plain speech from the priest, and you can do what you like with the business.
By the way, if you have need of extra funds, you can look under my bed.’
And under the bed, Liam found a leather box full of banknotes!
Liam Murphy was now what could be called in any circumstances a rich man.
He was a wealthy man however with a sick wife, and in this, he thought he was unfortunate, but really he didn't know how lucky they both were.
For at the very time he was sitting alone in the house, in the early hours of the morning of the funeral day, reading again his father's will, the most modern ship in the world, the SS Titanic, was going down stern first, with all its lights blazing into the icy waters of the North Atlantic.
The unthinkable had happened.
The unsinkable had sunk, and taken with it half of its passengers and crew.
A loss of more then 1,500 lives.
Of the 180 Irish passengers who boarded at Queenstown, only twenty were saved.
It was sink or swim for Noreen O'Neil —‘The Singing Sensation from Ireland’— or ‘The Sweet Colleen wearin' the Green’— as the posters outside the South Broad Street Theatre in Philadelphia proclaimed.
This was a Monday night and the early show of a week's run in a tour which would take her round the Eastern States, and hopefully into New York for the spring of 1913, that is if audiences took to her in this first week.
This was to be her try-out.
It was all Sean's idea.
He remembered how she'd sung for the passengers on the ship and how they'd all liked her.
He got her in to see an agent who was a friend of Jock Lennox, and he had arranged an appointment with a producer who was sending out a show with the American Ragtime Octette and Cissie Loftus the impressionist, as well as The Ramblers, a famous juggling act, and an Australian called Pansy Montague, who toured as La Milo, an exponent of the art of living statues.
The Scholtz Twins, a brother and sister musical act, was also on the bill and Rose and Bernie shared the same theatrical lodgings with Noreen and Maria at the Benson Theatre Home from Home off Vine Street.
The Scholtz act was on stage now, Rose on the saxophone and Bernie at the piano.
It may also be mentioned that Rose was also on roller skates!
They were building up to a strong finish with ‘The Skater's Waltz’ and Noreen knew her number would go up next.
Her palms were sweating as she stood in the wings in her best green dress waiting for them to come off so that she could get on.
Part of her was wishing they would hurry up and the other part was hoping they'd take forever!
Hell, let's get it over with, she thought.
I've only got two songs, and an encore — just in case.
There was a flourish of the saxophone, a twirl and a curtsy from Rose, a rise and a bow from Bernie and a scatter of faint applause from what seemed a very distant audience, and then there were Rose and Bernie almost on top of her, snarling at each other about something, going off into the darkened wings arguing at the top of their voices.
They always had an argument at the end of their act.
‘Quiet please in the wings!’ hissed the Stage Manager.
‘Sorry!’ yelled Bernie, disappearing through the pass door to the dressing rooms.
Meantime the band had struck with Noreen's entry music and, taking a deep breath, she stepped out into the lights.
And almost immediately she wished she hadn't.
The air was cold on stage, the little orchestra seemed to be down a mine and all she could see was a very small bald head and a very long baton.
The audience too seemed miles away and only a few coughs could be heard.
Noreen felt her feet were in lead boots and there was no feeling in her hands at all.
As for her voice, it seemed to be down at her  elbow somewhere, and it was only by a kind of automatic reflex that she was singing at all.
’ I know my love by his way of walking
And I know my love by his way of talking
And I know my love dressed in jersey blue
And if my love leaves me what will I do?’
What will I do indeed, she thought?
Mammy, Daddy, I feel the right fool up here like this!
’ And still she cried ‘I love him the best
And a tiring mind can know no rest.’
And still she cried ‘Bonny boys are few
And if my love leaves me what shall I do?’
Her internal agitation was greater than the poised picture she presented.
Noreen O'Neil looked good as she pranced across that stage to the catchy Irish tune.
It was a song she had known since she was a child and she'd heard her mother sing it a thousand times.
She repeated it now almost like a child, and for a woman of thirty-two with a child of her own, she looked astonishingly childlike herself.
This sympathy may have explained the level of applause she got at the end of her opening song, so that she came more confidently to centre for her second.
Noreen had a small voice and relied on people listening to it for its full effect.
Thanks to her appealing appearance the Philadelphia audience gave her the benefit of the doubt and listened.
’ I'm bidding farewell to the land of my youth,
And the home I love so well.
And the mountains so grand in my own native land,
I'm bidding them all farewell.
With an aching heart I'll bid them adieu
For tomorrow I'll sail far away,
O'er the raging foam for to seek a home
On the shores of Amerikay.’
She came off to a reasonable round.
Perhaps it was her choice of material, or the fact that it was a big theatre.
She knew she hadn't won them completely.
‘Gotta give it more second house,’ said the Stage Manager, as she passed.
‘It's a big space.
Ya gotta belt it out, lady.’
‘Sure, Fred,’ she said and hurried past on her way to the dressing room.
If she were quick, she could get back to Benson's place and check that Maria was alright with Mrs Benson.
She paid an extra dollar a week for Mrs Benson to put Maria to bed and keep an eye on her, but somehow she didn't think that Mrs Benson was all that reliable as a child-watcher.
She didn't know if there was a Mr Benson.
At least she'd never seen one.
Bernie Scholtz passed her on the iron stairs as she was hurrying out.
‘You goin' back to the digs, Noreen?’
‘Yea,’ she said.
‘I've got to see Maria.’
‘I'll come with you.
Could do with the air.’
‘That's nice o' you, Bernie.’
‘Don't mention it.’
Bernie Scholtz was a youngish, good-looking Jewish boy, but there was a weakness in his face.
Noreen had noticed it right away, but couldn't put her finger on it.
All the same he seemed popular backstage and the girls liked him, but he didn't seem to bother much about them.
Nor about his sister, Rose, either.
For a brother and sister act, there was certainly no love lost between them.
The only time they spoke was to quarrel, and in the dressing room and round the dining-room at the Benson's Theatre Home from Home they rarely sat beside each other.
However, he was obliging enough and she was glad of his company as she hurried through the Philadelphia streets towards the lodging house.
When they got there, Maria was sitting on the piano stool in the parlour, picking out a song on the keys and trying to sing along with her halting one finger accompaniment, ‘Jol-ly Go-od Luck to the Gi-rl Who Lo-ves a Sol-dier’.
This was one of the songs Cissie Loftus sang in her impersonation of Vesta Tilley.
When Maria heard her mother come in, she jumped up with a squeal and ran to her.
At ten years of age, she was a dark-haired miniature of her red-haired mother, a striking little girl in every respect, and promising to be something of a beauty.
‘Ma, you wanna hear me sing my song?’
‘Not now, darlin'.
It's time for your bed.’
‘Oh, let her sing her song, Noreen.
She looks cute.’
Bernie was standing still with his coat on, staring at the little girl.
Maria moved at once to her mother.
Maria didn't like Bernie.
‘OK,’ said Noreen.
‘You sing for Uncle Bernie.’
‘He's not my uncle.’
‘Well, you can still sing for me,’ said Bernie, ‘if I give you a dime.’
He proffered the coin.
Maria hesitated.
‘Could buy you a candy,’ he said.
‘Maybe she's tired,’ said Noreen.
But Maria was already back  up to the piano stool.
She was an instinctive professional.
‘Jolly Good Luck to the Girl Who Loves a Soldier’.’
Whether it was the incentive of the dime or the desire to get it over, there was little hesitation this time, and her hand shot out imperiously at the end of it.
Bernie dropped the coin into the podgy little palm, and leaning into her precocious face, said,
‘Don't I get a little kiss?’
‘No, you don't Bernie,’ said Noreen, lifting the child up and carrying her out.
Bernie shrugged and removed his coat.
The second house went a little better, but not much.
She tried to belt it out as Fred, the Stage Manager, had advised, but Noreen wasn't a belter and the heavier second house didn't warm to her as much, nor did she to them.
By the Thursday night, she was getting tired and it didn't look as if the try-out week was going to be a success.
It was not really the money.
Mamma d'Agostino made sure that something came from Rico every month, and Sean and Michael looked after most things anyway.
But she needed to do something with her life.
What she didn't want to admit was that she needed a man in it.
But she liked being taken care of, without being smothered.
She enjoyed the freedom, but she dreaded being lonely.
Noreen, frankly, wanted her cake and to eat it as well.
The theatre experiment was no more than that — an experiment.
She would see out the contract if they would have her, and then consider how things were at the end of it.
Even in three mediocre nights in Philadelphia, she won her admirers.
Cards and flowers had already come to the stage door, and Bernie was making mocking remarks at every opportunity.
Bernie himself was becoming quite fond of her and Noreen thought he saw more of her than of his sister.
Rose, on the other hand, seemed to prefer the company of the dancing girls, especially a little Milwaukee German-speaking dancer called Gerda.
Rose, you see, was a lesbian, although Noreen didn't know that.
Few people did.
Perhaps not even Rose did.
But Gerda did.
Noreen was kept on after the try-out week, but she knew that was only on the strength of Fred, the Stage Manager's sympathetic report, and for the fact that she got on well with everyone in the company, especially Bernie.
The next week they were in Trenton, New Jersey, before going up to Hartford in Connecticut.
Noreen used these weeks to polish her act and ‘sell’ the songs as Bernie had said she should.
She managed so well that on the Wednesday in Hartford she even got her encore, which she had rehearsed and never had the chance to perform, ‘The Last Rose of Summer’.
It was a little ambitious for her, but the audience knew it and she got by.
Maria kept asking to be taken to the theatre.
But Noreen kept  saying she was too young, and should be in her bed.
She should also be at school, and Noreen threatened to send her back to Uncle Michael who would take her to school every day, if she didn't stop going on about coming to the theatre.
So Maria remained at home, or rather at whatever lodgings Noreen found in the town they were playing.
And Bernie came too.
And Rose of course.
And, after a time, Gerda.
They made quite a little group at train call.
the mother and daughter, the two women friends and the altogether too amiable Bernie.
As the weeks went by, Noreen was thrown more and more together with him, but nothing happened, and even Maria was learning to like him a little bit.
Not that the Scholtzs liked each other any better.
If they were really brother and sister, they were a strange pair, but that was nobody's business but their own, and like all the other members of the company, Noreen just let them get on with it.
Never mind, the dates were going in and the last few weeks of the tour in the Eastern states were coming up.
It was at Binghampton that the first incident occurred.
It was Sunday and they had all found rooms in a commercial apartment house.
For some reason, Noreen had a suite on the first floor.
She couldn't afford it, and Bernie offered to pay his share.
Noreen wasn't sure.
‘You can always lock the door,’ he said with a grin.
So they took it.
She had gone out to the drug store to get a bottle of milk for Maria's bedtime cocoa, and when she got back to the suite, Bernie was in her section taking off Maria's dress.
The girl was standing in bloomers and liberty bodice.
‘I was just getting her ready for bed, it being so late and all,’ he said without turning a hair.
Noreen felt alarm and anger, but she couldn't say anything.
Maria wasn't complaining.
All she did was hold out her hand and say, Look, Ma, Bernie gave me another dime.’
Noreen kept a closer eye on Maria after that.
But there were no incidents of any kind, although Bernie's familiarity with the little girl seemed to grow as each day passed.
On the next Monday they were at Easton and Noreen was last in the band call.
Two new acts had come into the show and they needed all the orchestra time they could get before going into Scranton.
So Noreen was later home than usual.
This time Bernie was giving Maria a bath!
Walking back to the theatre that night, Noreen was extremely tense and said little.
She gave a very indifferent performance, and walking home, Bernie asked her, ‘What's the matter, baby?’
She suddenly stopped and rounded on him.
‘I'll tell you what's the matter.
Maria's the matter.
I don't want  you dressing her.
I don't want you undressing her.
And I certainly don't want you giving her a bath.
You understand that?’
‘Come on,’ he said.
‘She's a big girl now.’
‘She's ten years old, for Chrissake!’
This was shouted so loudly that passers-by reacted and Bernie put his hand out to her.
‘Say, baby —’ She hit it away ferociously.
‘Take your hand off me.
And keep your hands off Maria.
She's my baby.
And I don't want you to as much as speak to her from now on.
Get me?’
‘But, Noreen —’ But Noreen was already walking away as fast as she could in the direction of the apartment house.
From then on, Noreen took Maria everywhere with her, even to the theatre.
This, of course, delighted the child and every night she stood in the wings performing everybody's act with them, and even at the end of two shows, she was as bright in the dressing room as she'd been at the overture.
Perhaps because of all this extra strain, the tour did not go well for Noreen after this.
In fact, things went rather badly.
So bad that Noreen was called in to the Stage Manager's office one morning.
Fred was very solemn.
‘Noreen,’ he began, ‘we all just love ya, lady, but you ain't doin' the business.’
Sitting in the swivel stool at his little desk in the theatre, Noreen could only bow her head.
‘Look lady, I've given ya all the rope I could and I guess you jus' plumb hung yourself.
We got two new acts in.
We gotta get this show right before we go into New York.
And Scranton's our last chance.
There'll be new acts coming in yet and there'll be acts goin' before we hit 42nd Street.
By the way, the Scholtzs leave Saturday.’
Noreen look
‘Oh?’
For some reason she felt a little disappointed for them.
‘I know you two don't get on now, so you won't break your heart about that.
But you're gonna be next if you don't pull something out by second show Saturday yourself.
I told the boss I would report to him Monday.
OK?’
‘OK.’
‘Ya got three days, lady.’
‘Thank you, Fred.’
‘And, lady —’ His voice stopped her at the door.
She turned.
‘Yes?’
She felt like crying, but she knew she wouldn't.
‘There was once a hell of a lot of work done by someone we know in three days.’
And his finger was pointing up to the ceiling.
Yes, and she went, immediately feeling lighter.
During the show that night, she tried so hard in the second song, which was now ‘The Last Rose of Summer’ that her voice cracked on ‘No rosebud is nigh’.
The orchestra ground to an embarrassed halt and the audience was completely silent, as if not believing  it.
Noreen bowed her head blushing in shame and was about to walk off when the song was taken up by a voice in the wings and out stepped Maria in her best dress to finish the song, ‘To reflect back her blushes or give sigh for sigh’.
The ten-year-old continued with all the aplomb of a veteran diva.
As the orchestra took up the refrain once more, she came to take her mother's hand at centre stage, and sang as if it was the most natural thing in the world.
’ I'll not leave thee, thou lone one, to pine on the stem,
Since the lovely are sleeping, go sleep thou with them.
Thus kindly I scatter thy leaves o'er thy bed,
Where thy mates of the garden lie scentless and dead.’
The audience cheered.
Noreen cried.
Maria jumped up and down, and even Fred, standing in the prompt corner, applauded and threw his hat into the air.
He indicated that Maria should take a bow.
Noreen pushed her forward.
Maria went gladly.
Noreen stood back, biting her lip to watch, as the applause still rang out for Maria.
Noreen turned to the prompt corner and caught the Stage Manager's eye.
He was grinning from ear to ear and pointing his finger up to the flies.
TWENTY-ONE
The summer of 1913 was a good one — especially for the Keiths and the Mackenzies in New Zealand.
Things had gone well for both families over the past few seasons and each farm was thriving.
The boys of both houses, Billy Keith who was now seven and Sandy Mackenzie, five, and his young brother Stuart, or Stu, who was three, were growing up strong and healthy under the sun.
The only girl, Roberta, or Berta, as the family called her, was the same age as her cousin Sandy and although ‘chesty’ as they said, she was certainly  spirited enough, and more than kept up with all the boys.
She kept wishing her mother would have a sister for her, but Jean Keith was in no great hurry to oblige.
Nevertheless, during the winter of 1909 she had become pregnant again at almost exactly the same time as Tina did with her second son, Stu.
The sisters-in-law used to refer to themselves as Mary and Elizabeth, but they were never quite sure which was which, although big Bruce Mackenzie was quite sure —‘that there was nothing bloody immaculate about Tina's conception, I can tell you that!’
Jim was more apt to consider that with both farms pretty much under control there really wasn't much else to do!
Whatever the way of it, Tina was a month ahead of Jean and had Stu with little trouble in her own bedroom instead of going into the hospital at Gore as she'd done with Sandy.
Mrs Keith, Senior, who had been staying with Jim and Jean during Tina s confinement, then came back in the trap with Bruce to take up her old room at the Mackenzie's again, and to help Hilda look after the house and wee Billy.
Not that she did much of either.
She said she was tired after the journey!
When Jean's turn came for her third, she fully expected it to be as straightforward as Billy and Berta, but in the last week she got a lot of bleeding.
So much so, that the doctor, who was new to the district, thought that for safety's sake, Jim should take her into the hospital at Invercargill.
The bleeding persisted and Jean was very weak when Jim left her at the maternity ward.
‘Should I wait?’ he asked the nurse.
‘I'll have to ask the doctor,’ she said, and left him standing in the bare corridor.
It was a senior nurse who came out to him.
‘Mr Keith?’
‘Yes?’
‘Mrs Keith is very sick.’
‘I thought she was pregnant,’ said Jim, trying to keep his voice steady.
The nurse loo–ed at him keenly, then indicated left.
‘We have a waiting room, Mr Keith.
Perhaps you'd like to —‘
‘I'd like to see my wife.’
‘That would not be possible, I'm afraid.
The doctor is with her now.’
‘Then I'd like to see the doctor,’ said Jim, meeting her eye.
The burly nursing sister was just as firm.
‘If you'd like to wait.’
She pointed again to the left.
Jim waited.
He waited a long time, and when the young doctor finally came out, it was almost dark.
Jim could nonetheless tell by his anxious face that something was wrong.
He stood up, and his heart was beating fast.
‘I'm sorry Mr Keith.
We've lost the baby.’
‘And Jean?’
‘She's fine — well, she's tired let's say.
It was —‘
‘I'm not really interested, Doctor.
I know you did your best.
The doctor said nothing.
Jim had to swallow hard.
‘When can I take her home?’
‘She'll need a bit of a rest.
I've given her something —‘
‘Of course.
I'll be back in the morning.’
And Jim went out and got drunk in Invercargill with a man he'd met at the last A&P show, Bill McKirdy, and he stayed with Bill that night to sleep it off.
It was actually two days before he was allowed to bring Jean home.
They were a very sober pair as they set out again for Gore.
Neither said much.
‘Was it a girl?’
Jim asked Jean eventually as they drove home in the cart.
‘Yes.’
There was a long pause before Jim spoke again.
‘You going to tell Berta?’
Another pause.
‘No.’
That night, Bruce came up to Gore and got Jim drunk again.
All that was three years ago, and Jean had soon got over it, but now Tina was pregnant again and showing it, much to the amusement of Sandy and Stu.
Old Florence had left as usual for East Gore to stay with Jim and Jean and ostensibly to clear her verandah room for Tina and the new baby, but really everyone knew it was to get out of the way before all the excitement.
‘Excitement is very tiring at my age,’ she said.
Ross John Mackenzie was born without any complications, and took his place at the end of the Mackenzie line.
A new generation was taking root, and certainly a more fortunate lot than their British counterparts whom Jim and Tina had left behind.
Florence Keith still got the Forres, Nairn and Elgin Gazette from John regularly.
And apart from football results and local scandals, most of the stories seemed to deal with dock riots, railway strikes, suffragettes throwing themselves under horses, derelicts in the London embankment and half a million children ill-fed and diseased.
If anything was an inducement to emigration, reading the paper was.
Life in New Zealand was hard for the original settlers, but not quite as hard for Bruce and Jim's generation, and it looked as if it might be a veritable paradise for the children's.
Yes, the summer of 1913 was a sunny one in every sense of the word.
The big occasion for country folk was the A&P Show.
Most people had their own Agricultural and Produce Show and the main one for the Mackenzies and the Keiths was the big Gore Show.
Everybody came, because it was a great day out for the family.
As well as a chance for the farmers and traders to do business, it was an opportunity to meet old friends and to make new ones.
It was a mixture of agricultural show, horse show, trade exhibition, Highland Games and garden fete.
It had a bit of all of these things rolled into one and best of all, on the last day it had the races.
This was a chance not only to see some sport, but to make some extra money, and many a good profit made on a good deal on the Friday was lost on a poor horse on the Saturday.
Similarly, if you hadn't been lucky in the market, one lucky bet could send you home the richer by a season's takings, if you could spot an outsider.
Jim Keith was particularly adept at this, and everybody sought his advice.
Naturally he didn't give everything away.
He had to keep the prices up.
Bruce was not so lucky, but in this particular year, he had a good week with his stock prices and could afford to lose a few shillings on the nags as he called them.
The children loved the hectic activity of the day, and it was difficult to keep track of where the boys were at any one time.
Little Stu stayed with the women most of the time, and Ross was in the pram, but Billy and Sandy went wild.
Berta, as usual, tried to keep up with them, and Jean noticed she was becoming breathless.
‘You take care, Berta, girl.’
‘I'll be jake, mum,’ but Jean wasn't so sure, and kept an eye on her as the day progressed.
There was a little merry-go-round and primitive swings for the children, but it was a wonderful playground for the Keith and Mackenzie offspring, and while the two fathers were winning and losing money at the races and  the mothers were scrutinising the cakes and clothes stalls, Berta kept up with her brothers in and out the sideshows.
Like most families the Keiths and Mackenzies had brought picnics, and they decided to have theirs in the paddock where the Highland Games were being held.
They could listen to the pipe bands and Tina liked watching the Highland dancers on the raised platform.
It reminded her nicely of home, and Mrs Keith particularly enjoyed the solo competitions.
She had her own chair brought to that particular paddock right at the start of the day and never moved until it was time to go home.
It was while they were sitting on the grass en famille watching the Highland dancing that Jean first noticed Berta.
The little girl was on her own a few yards from the rug where she had been sitting eating some moments before.
Jean nudged Jim.
‘Look,’ she said.
‘Berta thinks she's a Highland dancer.’
Jim looked over and smiled as his daughter made rather ungainly attempts to emulate the lively young girls above her, but then as he watched he became slightly concerned, because her movements became even more ungainly and then spasmodic, and then jerky until her head was nodding, her legs shooting out in a frenzy, her arms twitching, and she fell, uttering a loud cry, which was so strong and unreal, that it stilled the noise of the bagpipes and everyone looked to see what was happening.
Jim ran to her.
She was no longer writhing, but lay on the ground, rigid, and seemed to be choking.
Her face became blue, the veins in her neck swelled up and the pupils of her eyes were huge.
Suddenly the convulsions started again, and her legs and arms moved in violent, jerking spasms.
‘Get her tongue, her tongue!’
Florence Keith cried out.
Jim reached into her mouth and prised it open enough to pull the tongue forward.
He was amazed at how difficult it was, but gradually it eased as she eased, and he noticed that she had wet her dress.
He lifted her up and felt her nearly rigid in his arms.
‘Take her to the cart,’ whispered Jean.
‘Poor wee Berta.
She's had a fit,’ said Tina.
‘It's the falling sickness,’ said Mrs Keith quietly.
But Jim knew as he carried his daughter through the crowd that now circled them, that Berta was an epileptic.
Everyone turned up at the 42nd Street Theatre that night to see Noreen make her New York debut.
The only thing was that it wasn't Noreen.
It was Maria.
News of the child's intervention on stage at Scranton had spread through show business and some of the vaudeville columns had picked it up.
There was quite a run on  the unfashionable theatre's box office but it didn't take old Fred by surprise.
‘We gotta star,’ he had said.
Noreen's role had diminished to little more than a chaperone for Maria.
The act was now billed as ‘The Singing O'Neils — Noreen and Mary — a Colleen and a Colleenette!’
Maria had become Mary because the management thought it sounded more Irish.
Maria objected strongly but Noreen had said it would only be for a little while until she went back to school in New York, now that Noreen had money enough to get them their own place.
She needn't rely any more on Rico — or her brothers, she could be entirely independent.
But she reckoned without the impact her daughter was to make.
The act now took the form of a double act.
Noreen would come on first as before with her song — and then be joined by ‘Mary’ who would take the melody while Noreen harmonised and then Maria would conclude with a solo — usually ‘The Last Rose of Summer’— and they would finish together with ‘Let Him Go Let Him Tarry’, another of the O'Neil family songs which both knew backwards.
It was noticeable to everyone that audiences much preferred the little girl on her own and as Fred said, she was the ‘star’.
There had even been a phone call the previous day from one of the new Moving Picture companies asking if ‘Mary O'Neil’ would like to come out to California?
All Maria wanted was to get back to Mrs Lennox and old Jock again.
She loved singing, and being on stage, but she hated the travelling.
Six months had been too long and she wanted to be home.
Noreen felt much the same so it was with great relief that for the New York engagement they could at least travel in from Queen's each day and sleep in their own beds at night.
First, however, there was an opening to get through.
The difference from six months before was that The O'Neils were near the end of the first half instead of being just after the opening.
This also meant that they could get away earlier at night after the show, as they didn't need to wait for the curtain.
Noreen was also worried about having Maria up so late — she was after all, just turned eleven.
The O'Neils occupied most of the first row of the circle.
Denis was there with Hana, Jitka, Katya and Clara.
Anna had been left with old Mrs Finklestein.
Mr and Mrs Lennox were there in style and enjoying just being in the circle instead of up in the gallery where most of Rafferty's regulars were.
Carmella was there with Joey and her sister Rosa and her husband Mario Malcase, in from New Jersey.
They had also brought Father Paddy in from his parish, and he had brought Father Donnelly who had invited Bishop Monaghan, but he had declined, saying he was a bit too geriatric these days for modern vaudeville and ragtime singing.
The old  Bishop didn't know what he missed.
The O'Neils were anything but ragtime.
Their infectious Irish rhythms and lilting harmonies captivated the house, but when the little pocket diva sang her solo this time, she ‘wowed’ them, she ‘knocked them cold’, she was ‘sensational’, or whatever other cliche theatre people use to describe a successful performance.
For there was no doubt about her success that night, and for the encore this time, she came on alone.
The audience went immediately silent as the little tiny diva stood centre-stage and ‘belted out, in a voice much older than her years:
’ Dear thoughts are in my mind and my soul soars enchanted
As I hear the sweet lark sing in the clear air of the day.
For a tender beaming smile to my hope has been granted,
And tomorrow she shall hear all my fond heart would say.’
Noreen appeared at the prompt side and little Maria turned to her and sang the next verse to her.
’ I shall tell her all my love, all my soul's adoration,
And I think she will hear me and will not say me nay,
It is this that gives my soul all its joyous elation,
As I hear the sweet lark sing in the clear air of the day.
As the final chords swelled to the close, the ‘star’ revealed all of her eleven years by running from centre stage to her mother's arms while the audience stood on their feet and cheered.
Except the O'Neil family in the first row of the circle, who sat in stupefied amazement, hardly believing what they had witnessed.
It wasn't ‘The Singing O'Neils’ to them.
It was Noreen and her little daughter.
What they couldn't see though was that another interested spectator was Rico d'Agostino in the stalls.
In the dressing room afterwards, brightly lit by the new  Tantallum electric lamps, the atmosphere was just as electric.
Everyone crowded in and Maria had to sit up on the ledge of the window to be seen and heard.
It was her hour and she knew it.
There was something alarming in the way an eleven-year-old girl -or ‘nearly twelve’ as she kept saying — could so easily comport herself among a press of adults.
Noreen stayed by her just in case and she clung especially to Michael whom she seemed to adore.
Only Father Paddy seemed a little dubious.
‘She has to consider her schooling you know,’ he tried to tell Noreen above the noise of a roomful of O'Neils.
Noreen nodded over her drink, ‘She never gives it a thought,’ she said, ‘but I do.’
‘She'll be in these moving pictures next,’ said Paddy.
‘They've already asked,’ said Noreen laughing.
‘God save us, gasped Paddy.
Will she be with all those little midgets that play at being children?’
‘They are children, Paddy.’
‘They are never children,’ he answered, ‘that let themselves be photographed like that for all the world to see.’
In the other corner, Carmella had her hand in Joey's, who, as usual, couldn't keep his eyes off Noreen.
They were with Sean who was telling his aunt how things were with him and Michael.
‘You see, Carmella, we've had to move with the times, you understand.
There's no bucks in moving beer these days.
The public wants a bit more these days — some music, maybe a meal, girls — you know.’
‘No, I dunno,’ replied Carmella.
‘But I do, Sean,’ put in Joey grinning.
His mother turned on him.
‘Where you know from eh?’ she flashed at him, ‘Here, gimme that glass.
Mamma mia!’
It was half a tumbler of whisky.
‘See that Rosa.’
Rosa only laughed.
So did Sean as he took it from Carmella.
‘Here, I'll take that,’ he said.
Carmella glared up at Joey, but turned to Sean again.
‘So you in the big money now, Sean?’
‘Gettin' there, Carmella,’ he grinned.
‘Gettin' into what?’ she persisted.
‘Hell, Carmella, you're as bad as Uncle Mick!’
‘Dad's dead you know,’ said Joey simply.
Carmella raised her eyes.
‘I know, Joey,’ Sean answered quickly, then turned to his aunt.
‘You could say we were into real estate now.’
Carmella still looked doubtful but she managed a smile.
‘I hope you no' do anythin' Uncle Mick wouldn't do, eh?’
‘Never!’ answered Sean at once.
And there he was speaking the truth.
Under the window, Hana was similarly quizzing Michael, despite the fact that Maria's arms were around his neck.
‘How come you an' Sean no' marry yet?’
‘We're not allowed to Hana, it's against the law!’
It was a moment before Michael's quip got through to Hana.
She wasn't used to his humour, but she quickly laughed and pummelled his chest with her free hand.
The other held a very generous Bourbon.
‘You know what I mean, you big stiff.’
‘He's not a big stiff,’ said Maria defensively.
‘I mean,’ Hana went on, ‘if you were in Prague, two beautiful  young men like you, you would have wives, yes?’
Michael grinned.
‘Yes.
If they looked like you, Hana.’
Hana was pleased.
‘When Mike grows up,’ said Maria, squeezing his neck, ‘he's gonna marry me, aren't you, Mike?’
Mike laughed.
‘How could I refuse?’ he said.
Jitka and Katya were playing with Noreen's make-up at the mirror and painting circles on their cheeks with lipstick.
Denis, with Clara asleep on his shoulder, was in earnest conversation with Jock Lennox.
‘I'm tellin' ye, Denis, yon's a voice, a real voice,’ Jock was saying.
‘You're tellin' me,’ said Denis with some astonishment.
‘I'm tellin' ye’ alright,’said Jock, ‘an' another thing,’he turned to his wife,’— isn't this right Margaret —’She nodded dutifully.
‘I've always said that she'd be an opera singer, didn't I?’
‘That's right,’ said Mrs Lennox, ‘so he did.’
‘Ay.
I can ay tell a voice when I hear one,’ said Jock, quaffing his drink with a gulp.
‘An opera singer, ye say?’ said Denis.
Jock nodded.
‘Another Gall-Curci, if she wants.’
‘Good lord, is that right?’
He glanced over to the prodigy at the window.
She was fast asleep on Michael's shoulder.
Daddy Den O'Neil died taking the high note in ‘The Londonderry Air’.
It was one of his favourite songs and he was showing them all in the lounge bar at Ingham's how it should be sung one Saturday night.
It might be said truthfully he died at the high point of his fame!
The truth was Denis O'Neil Senior could well have been a professional singer.
When he was younger, he had the voice, he had the looks, the physique, the charm.
All he lacked was the opportunity.
And when he met and married Nessie Monaghan, he was immediately aware, like any true artist, that she had the better natural voice and he contented himself with being a better-than-ordinary pub tenor and a hit at every christening, wedding and funeral he attended.
Now he was attending his own, but in a non-singing capacity!
That must have hurt him.
To have to lie there in his coffin on Ingham's counter and hear somebody like Tommy Drennan murder a good song like ‘Slievenamon’ and himself lying there and could do nothing about it!
Even Sergeant Davidson making a try at ‘The Bard of Armagh’ sounded better.
He looked strange out of uniform.
People hardly knew him.
Nessie didn't sing.
She was very quiet.
She sat with Nellie and Brigid Drennan, Tommy's wife, at the corner table and never said much the whole night.
Which was unusual for her.
Hardly a word out of her, even when the curate, Father Mooney, insisted on making a speech to the company, and him hardly knowing Den at all.
Trust him to be smart whenever he had the chance in public.
He even had the cheek to sing himself.
‘Mother Machree’ and even if everyone hated to admit it to his face, Father Mooney sang it well, considering he was a man that had no formal training at Ingham's.
Liam Murphy on the other hand, was a natural.
He was one of the few who didn't give the company a song.
Colonel Mayhew was another, and Canon Devlin, but then they could be excused as being respected elders, as it were, of the community.
They had their dignity to consider and Mr Tait, the factor, didn't know any better, and had little dignity, but Liam should have sung.
He had no dignity to speak of, only money, but he said he had a sore throat.
perhaps that's why Bushmills Whiskey is so often referred to as ‘the gargle’.
Whatever it was, Liam's throat must have been bothering him something terrible for he got through an awful lot of the stuff that night.
And he was by no means the only one.
Old Den would have liked that.
Liam was holding forth to one and all, and to Den in his box.
‘He was a good one was auld Denis.
Didn't he and I get drunk many a night together —‘
‘Once!’ called out Nessie from the corner.
Liam jumped.
‘God woman, what a fright you gave me.
I thought it was Denis!’
‘How do you know it wasn't, Liam?’ called out Tim from the side bar.
Everyone laughed.
Liam wasn't sure.
‘Youse can be at the codding, when youse like,’ he mumbled thickly, ‘but if this auld one in here —’he tapped the coffin with his glass —‘if this fella wants to, I tell ye, he'll be sittin' up as bright as ye like and be givin' us all the ‘Lark’, just as he was doin' that night when —‘
‘Sit down, Murphy, ye're blootered.’
This time it was Kevin.
‘I am not,’ said Liam, with some difficulty.
‘Ye are so,’ called out Tommy Drennan, ‘but it's no' fair, you had a start on us all.’
‘That's right,’ agreed Tim.
‘He's here before me sometimes.’
‘Are ye tryin' to do Old Denis there — God rest him — out of a hard-won and well-deserved record of attendance?’ enquired Tommy jovially.
‘I wanna sing now,’ said Liam.
Groans all round.
‘I wanna sing a song for my poor wife who's — who's gone off her head.’
There was an immediate silence in that crowded lounge bar that morning.
Those who had the nerve looked at Nellie.
She was all smiles — as usual.
Others looked at the drinks in front of them.
Liam started to sing drunkenly.
’ Poor old Dicey Riley, she has taken to the sup,
Poor old Dicey Riley, she will never give it up,
It's off each mornin' to the hock
An' she drops in for another little drop,
Ah, the heart of poor auld Dicey Riley!’
On the last line he slumped against the bar and his arm hit the coffin.
It slewed alarmingly and everyone shouted.
Kevin pounced on Liam and was going to hit him, but Sergeant Davidson was even quicker.
‘Here Kevin,’ he said breathlessly.
‘Give me a hand with him.
He needs some air.’
‘He needs a punch in the mouth.’
‘I know,’ said the Sergeant quickly, ‘but sure, he's drunk.
Come on.’
Reluctantly, Kevin helped Sergeant Davidson to get the senseless Liam out of the door and into the morning air.
They sat him down roughly on the outside bench, and his head hit the wall with a thud.
‘Good job he can't feel it,’ said the Sergeant.
‘He will in the morning, thank God,’ said Kevin.
The two men stood in silence for a moment, glad to take in the freshness of the late morning after the stuffiness of the bar.
They'd all come straight to Ingham's after the Requiem Mass and they were waiting now for John Burns, the undertaker, to come and tell them when the grave was ready at the cemetery and the men would walk the coffin there.
The women would take Nessie back to the house and they'd all meet there again for something to eat and they'd start all over again where they left off.
It was the best way with grieving — drown it.
‘Talking about my sister like that,’ muttered Kevin.
‘He was drunk,’ said Davidson.
‘That's no excuse.
Everybody else is.’
‘Here, have a Gold Flake.’
And he offered a cigarette.
Kevin hesitated.
‘Don't ye smoke?’
Kevin chuckled as he took the cigarette.
‘I don't know.’
‘Try it.
Everybody else is.’
Kevin looked at the policeman as he leaned to accept the  proffered match which he was shielding with his fingers.
He was friendly enough, but Kevin was wary.
He had to be.
‘I'm sorry about your da.’
‘Ay.’
‘He was a fine auld man, was Denis O'Neil.’
‘Ay.’
He coughed on the smoke.
‘Alright?’
‘Sure,’ spluttered Kevin.
You'll soon get used to it.
‘Ay.’
There was a slight pause.
Inside they could hear Mr O'Donnell, the vet, playing his accordion but nobody was singing.
‘I hear Liam's booked to go to America again,’ said Davidson, looking out on the empty road.
Kevin looked at him in surprise.
‘How do you know that?’
‘Oh we have our ways.
It's in our line of business you might say.’
‘Ay.
It's funny my mother didn't mention it.’
‘She doesn't know.
Nobody knows.’
They glanced round at Liam who by now was fast asleep with his mouth wide open, his head back against the wall.
Kevin tried another drag at the cigarette.
He quite liked the feeling it gave him, but he didn't know if it was it or the drink was making him feel rather dizzy.
‘So he's goin' to have another try at takin' Nellie over then?’
‘No.’
‘But you just said —‘
‘I said he had booked a passage.
One.
And one-way.’
‘What?’
‘Ay.
But remember, this is confidential.
Between us.
On the Lusitania I understand.’
‘What about our Nellie?’ asked Kevin.
The Sergeant shrugged.
‘The bastard.’
And he glanced round at the still-insensible Liam and threw away the cigarette in disgust.
‘What about yourself, Kevin?’
‘What do you mean?’
‘I mean, with all this Home Rule for Ireland agitation and Ulster fighting to stay loyal —‘
‘Loyal?
Loyal to what?’ interrupted Kevin.
‘The Crown, of course.
King and Country and all that.’
‘Of course.’
‘I would have thought with 50,000 men training already under General Richardson to fight for Northern Ireland there was a place for a fine young Ulsterman like you.’
‘With guns made of wood and bought for one-and-six each?’
The Sergeant was startled.
‘How do you know that?’ he said.
Kevin smiled.
‘It's in our line of business as you said yourself.’
‘Ay.’
‘Anyway,’ said Kevin slowly, ‘I was thinkin of emigratin' myself.’
‘Oh?’
The Sergeant was immediately interested.
‘That I am’, said Kevin, and soon too.
‘You'll be joinin' your brothers then, in New York is it?’
‘No.’
‘No?’
‘No.
I'm goin' to friends you might say.’
‘Friends?’
‘That's right.
In Dublin.
Excuse me now, me mam will be lookin' for me.’
Davidson noticed that Kevin still limped slightly.
The Sergeant was thoughtful as he carefully stubbed out his cigarette with his thumb and finger and put the stub back in the cigarette packet.
Then, blowing on his fingers, he turned to follow Kevin.
As he passed Liam, still asleep, he gave him a shove and sent him sprawling into the gravel.
The fall seemed to bring Liam to his senses and he sat up on the road wondering where he was.
John Burns had arrived and Kevin and Tommy Drennan already had the front of the coffin on their shoulders.
Tommy Drennan and Mr O'Donnell came next and they were looking for two to bring up the rear.
Only the priests remained, and the Colonel and the Factor and none of them could really be asked.
‘Just a minute,’ said Sergeant Davidson, going out of the street door with a bucket of water in his hand.
He returned in a few minutes with a very wet and chastened Liam and the cortege was complete.
Thus Old Den left the scene of his many triumphs on the shoulders of his son and his friends, leaving behind him on the bar fond memories of countless great nights of debates, discussion and song, echoed now in the keening of the women from their seats in the corner.
Behind the empty and desolate bar, stood the solitary figure of Tim, the barman, calmly tearing up at least half-a-dozen pages of unpaid drinks in the name of Denis O'Neil.
A circle of O'Neils sat in silence round the dining table in Sean and Michael's new service flat in Gramercy Park, New York City.
Both men had moved up in the world recently and the evidence of their new wealth was all around them in the curtains, the carpets, the original paintings and the quality of the ornaments and effects.
Not that Sean and Michael chose any of them.
The decor was inclusive in the rent and all that can be said was that the decor was expensive.
Few New York flats boasted an early Rousseau.
Not that an animal picture on the wall meant anything to either of them that particular evening.
Father Paddy had rung the previous day to give them the news from Rosstrevor.
It was Kevin who had written.
It was the first letter they had ever received from him.
Its style had made Sean's terse epistles to his mother seem like florid prose: ‘FATHER DIED LAST NIGHT.
FUNERAL MONDAY.
ALL WELL.
KEVIN’ They all knew, however, the well of love that was  hidden beneath the bleak words of the cable, but nobody could talk much about it.
Their careless, feckless, irresponsible father was gone and though he contributed little or nothing to their care or well-being while he lived, his going left an enormous gap in each of their lives.
Just to know that he was there could bring a smile to the face and to know now that he wasn't brought an ineffable sadness to them all.
He would be missed to a degree all out of proportion to his usefulness.
Perhaps we need men like Denis O'Neil to give us the pointless perspective, to underline the fact we do not live by bread alone but by blarney and beauty and other indefinable things that don't always make money.
‘You're the only Father we've got now, Paddy,’ said Michael, breaking the long silence at last.
‘Not to mention the Son and the Holy Ghost!’ added Sean.
‘I wonder how my mother is,’ said Noreen softly.
‘She's got Kevin there,’ offered Denis.
‘I doubt if that's much comfort,’ said Sean.
‘And Nellie and Liam Murphy,’ added Noreen.
‘That's even worse,’ said Michael.
‘Poor Nellie.’
Nobody said anything after that for quite a long time.
‘Well,’ said Denis at last, ‘we're not the children we were.’
There was a muffled, vague sort of reaction to this.
‘I would say that was very profound, Denis,’ said Paddy.
‘No, what I mean is we were still children when we arrived here in a sense.’
‘We arrived here in a boat!’ muttered Michael.
Denis took no notice.
‘We'd been sent out here on Uncle Mick's money.
We hadn't tuppence between us and Irish accents you could cut steak with.
And look at us now would youse — look at this place now — Sean and Michael live like kings — whatever they might say — and I'm not going to go into the whys and wherefores here.’
‘Thank God for that,’ muttered Sean.
‘The point I'm tryin' to make is that we've done well — even you, Noreen.
I know you've had your difficult times, but you've also had your easy times too.’
‘Now then, Denis,’ said Paddy quietly.
Denis raised his hand in an appeasing gesture.
‘Don't worry brother, I'm not going to preach.’
‘Deo gratias,’ said Michael.
‘Where'd you pick that up, Michael?’
‘I heard Denis say it somewhere.’
‘The fact is we've all done for ourselves and in less than thirteen years.
I think that's something.’
‘When are you goin' to be Superintendent, Denis?’ asked Sean.
Denis grinned.
‘Whenever I get some hard evidence on you two!’ he said.
‘Don't think I don't know what's been goin' on.’
‘Tell us, Denis,’ said Michael in his innocent voice.
Denis was about to when Noreen interjected.
‘It'll be time for me to go and collect Maria soon —‘
‘Where is she tonight?’ asked Paddy.
‘A Charity Night at the Harvard and Yale Club.
Jock and Maggie are with her.’
‘Who?’ asked Paddy.
‘The Lennoxes.’
‘Oh yes.’
Noreen turned to Denis, her face earnest.
‘But what I wanted to ask Denis was, what did he mean by saying we weren't children any more?’
Her brother didn't answer at once.
He sat with his arms folded, staring down at the fancy tablecloth and when he did speak again he was so quiet that they could hardly hear him, so they had to listen seriously — even Sean and Michael, who were never, or rarely serious.
‘What I meant was,, said the oldest son, ‘is that we are free at last.
At least, as a son I feel that.
As long as my father was alive I felt that I was not myself but his son, as I hope my son will feel for me — if I ever have a son, that is.’
‘How is Hana?’ asked Noreen.
Oh yes, Hana.
He looked shy again.
Sure she s fine.
I think.
She's standing by, shall we say?’
‘That'll be five now Denis,’ said Paddy.
‘Please God.’
‘Thanks be to God for another one, said Paddy.
‘Good old Denis!’ said Sean.
‘Good old Hana!’ said Michael.
‘God be with her any road,’ said Paddy.
‘Has she long to go?’
I dunno, said Denis, They re not sure —
‘Even Mrs Finklestein?’ asked Noreen.
‘Even Mrs Finklestein,’ laughed Denis.
‘It could be next month or next week or tomorrow.
Who knows?
But they know I'm here, in case anything happens.
He glanced at Sean.
I left them your number.’
‘Number?’ queried Sean.
‘The telephone number,’ said Denis.
Oh ay, said Sean.
D ye know I forgot we had a telephone!
‘Well Denis, you'd better hurry up and say what you were going to say,’ said Michael.
‘Why so?’ asked Denis.
‘In case you've got to go and become a father again!’
‘Go on Denis,’ said Sean, ‘never mind him.’
‘Right,’ said Denis, trying to get his thoughts together again, ‘Well — what I was trying to say was — with Da gone, good old wonderful irritating undependable Da —‘
‘God rest his soul,’ murmured Paddy.
‘Ay,’ continued Denis, ‘well, with him away, I can be my own man now.
I can be myself.
I can begin to be a real father to my girls and prepare for the day when I'll be a grandfather to their children.
What I mean is, you always think that you're tomorrow's man and yesterday's child and then suddenly you realise that today is the tomorrow you were always looking forward to, if you see what I mean, and quite soon you'll be yesterday's man yourself.’
He looked up and round his brothers and sister.
‘D'ye know what I mean?’
Nobody answered, so Denis went on.
‘Until we all got the news yesterday, we were all Den O'Neil's children.
Well, we're not the children we were, ye see.
We re not children no more.
That s what I meant.
That's all.’
There was a long silence again.
Noreen was crying and trying hard to hide it.
The brothers pretended not to notice.
Suddenly, the telephone rang out.
It was so loud that everybody jumped.
‘Dear God, what's that?’ cried Paddy.
‘It's the telephone,’ said Sean.
‘So it is,’ said Michael.
‘You answer it, Mike,’ suggested Sean.
Michael rose.
‘Sure,’ he said.
Then he hesitated.
‘Where is it?’ he said.
All this time the phone was ringing out.
‘I don't know, said Sean.
‘I've only been here a week.’
‘So have I!’ rejoined Michael.
‘For Pete's sake!’ cried Noreen, rising, ‘I'll get it.’
But she didn't know where it was either and soon the whole family was up on their feet looking for the source of the noise.
It was Noreen who found the instrument.
It was out in the hall.
They all crowded round her to hear.
‘It's Mrs Finklestein,’ she said.
‘She wants you, Denis.’
Noreen handed the receiver to Denis.
They watched as he took it, his face grey, his voice tight.
‘Yes?’
He listened gravely, then gradually his expression relaxed and he broke into a wide grin, then a laugh, then with a loud yell, he threw the telephone into the air.
‘It's a boy!’ he cried.
Suddenly everybody was shouting and cheering and crying and on the carpet under their feet Mrs Finklestein's distorted voice was still telling nobody all about it…
INTERLUDE TWO
The seven years between 1912 and 1919 saw the changing of the world.
From this time, nothing was ever to be the same again.
Yet it all began so simply.
Two pistol shots around ten-thirty on a summer morning in Bosnia and the Edwardian idyll was shattered forever.
And while Hana and Denis O'Neil celebrated their first son and their tenth wedding anniversary, another European couple, also celebrating their wedding anniversary, met their deaths together in a carriage in a Sarajevo street.
Admittedly, they were of the royal house of Hapsburg but they were no less dead for that.
It was the repercussions of this relatively minor event in the Balkans that led to the Great War as it was called, the First World War.
As early as the summer of 1912, the year of the Titanic and of the Suffragettes and of the first Variety Performance by Royal Command at the new Palladium Theatre, Europe was already building up its armies.
The hit song of the year was ‘It's A Long Way to  Tipperaray ’ but old Ireland was singing an older song and building up a hidden army.
Kevin O'Neil was just thirty years old and already a part of it in Dublin.
In 1913, Liam Murphy did sail for New York without Nellie, promising to send for her ‘as soon as he was settled’ but Nessie O'Neil wasn't sure and took her daughter home with her to the farm ‘for company’.
Liam wasn't made welcome by his in-laws in New York and after an awkward lodging, first with Denis and then with Sean and Michael, he took Noreen's room at the Lennox apartment when Noreen got her own place in Manhattan with Maria.
In England, Emily Davison died under the King's horse, Anmer, at Tottenham Corner during the Derby, but more people worried about the injury to the horse.
At the same time, at Edendale in Gore, Bruce Mackenzie, with the help of old Jan, bought a couple of good horses for his sons Sandy and Stu —‘for when they grew up a bit’.
The Kaiser banned the tango in Germany as ‘immoral’, but took delivery of a thousand new Maxim machine-guns.
Lloyd  George called the build-up of arms in Europe —‘organised insanity’.
But then…
On 28th June 1914, Gavrilo Princip, a nineteen-year old student, took advantage of a corner, and as the State carriage made its slow turn, dashed forward with a pistol.
He was known to be linked with a Serbian secret society known as the Black Hand.
It was the two shots fired from this hand on that summer morning in the Balkans that ignited the smouldering embers of war in Europe and led to the fire that caused the conflagration that created the holocaust.
It was the First World War because it affected most of the people of the world.
It was the Apocalypse.
It was Armageddon.
Yet at that moment in Forres, John Keith tried his best to stop it happening.
‘Lloyd George is right!’ he yelled from his cart at the corner of the Main Street.
‘War is insane and we mustn't go mad with it.’
It was Saturday afternoon and he was standing, as usual, on the cart he hired as his platform.
Every weekend he gave Mossman the baker a shilling for his cart and every Saturday afternoon he pushed it from the bakery to the square in the High Street and harangued the passers-by about the stupidity of the forthcoming war.
Everybody seemed to know it was coming.
It was common talk and all the young men wanted to be in on it before it was all over.
It was nothing more than ridiculous hysteria and totally unreal, but only a few people saw this and John Keith in Forres was one of them.
Being his father's son, he was a man of strong principles and he was not afraid to speak up for them.
Just as his late father was reviled in Forres for siding with the Boers fourteen years before, so John was mocked and jeered for speaking up for peace.
He was even accused of being a German spy!
‘The government,’ he yelled to the crowd of mechanics and young men listening, ‘try to tell you that it is your duty to fight.
It is patriotic.
You must play the game.
But lads, it is not a game.
This is for real.
Patriotism is meaningless to the working man.
It is not his duty to die at a general's whim.’
John did not have his brother Bobby's ease on a platform but he had more integrity and honesty and he knew he had to do it.
He had to do what he could.
Thomasina was profoundly embarrassed and went to her mother's with Elspeth and Becky every Saturday afternoon to escape all the comments.
But Becky often skipped away to listen at the back.
The thirteen-year-old was proud of her Uncle John but his own son Kenny was ashamed.
Like the rest of Britain's youth he was determined to go if war came, and John and he had some awful rows in the house about it.
‘It's as bad as a war wi' you two,’ Thomasina had said.
Kenny was eager, ardent and just as principled as his father and in his seventeenth year.
When war did come on Bank Holiday Saturday — 4th August — young Kenny was nowhere to be seen, but John was in his same position, shouting loudly to the crowd as usual.
This time the crowd was in a different mood, high on euphoria and drunk with patriotism.
This time the men didn't tolerate John.
This time they saw him as a public enemy.
Pushing his cart and yelling like Dervishes, they jumped up and pinned him down.
Becky screamed but couldn't reach him.
Singing the national anthem they pushed John through the streets, finally dumping him in the Town Mill pond.
Meantime Becky had run to Mrs Beattie and brought back Elspeth and both of them, with the help of a man who was passing, pulled John out and walked him, dripping and stinking of the pond, back to his house and to his bed.
Kenny didn't come home that night.
It was three days before he appeared and when he did he was in uniform.
He had been to Aberdeen and joined the Gordon Highlanders.
His mother cried, Elspeth was so proud, Becky couldn't believe it, but John was very solemn and quietly ordered his son from the house.
Kenny never said a word.
He kissed his mother on the cheek, nodded to Becky and turning at the door, saluted his father in the chair, then was gone.
John was never to see his son again.
John himself was warned by the local Police Inspector not to speak at the square again or he would be arrested for speaking against the national interest.
‘But it's a matter of conscience,’ protested John.
‘It's a matter of Crown regulations,’ replied the Inspector.
John did speak.
He was arrested and after a trial before the Tribunal, all of whom he knew well, he was sentenced to a year in Peterhead Gaol.
Second Lieutenant Kenneth Keith of the Gordon Highlanders looked over the parapet of his trench on Christmas Eve and was astonished to see one of his soldiers talking to a German soldier in No Man's Land.
The German soldier was holding out a box of cigars.
‘What does he want, Thomson?’
Keith shouted to his own man.
‘Jam, sir.’
‘Give him a cigarette.’
‘Yes sir.’
Then followed a most extraordinary scene.
Despite Second Lieutenant Keith's orders to keep their positions, his soldiers swarmed over the trenches to meet their counterparts in No Man's Land.
He could only watch helplessly.
No officers were invited.
It was strictly other ranks — a vast congregation  of privates.
The ground between the trenches was milling with men singing and joking and laughing.
A game of football was played — Scotland versus Germany — which ended in the dusk in a draw 2–2.
Meantime, senior officers had gathered to watch from the rear observation and the order went out that all ranks must return to their posts.
Some men protested, saying it was Christmas, others refused point blank to return to the trenches.
One of the leading spokesmen was Private Thomson.
A Major and a Captain hurriedly came on the scene, Lieutenant Keith bringing up the rear.
The men began to drift back.
Eventually only Thomson remained obdurate.
‘Why dae we have tae kill each other?’ he kept saying.
Kenny couldn't help thinking of his father on the cart.
‘Deal with this fellow, will you,’ said the Major, walking back to the trenches, annoyed at getting his polished boots muddy.
The Captain turned to Lieutenant Keith.
‘You know what to do, Keith.’
Kenny sprang to attention.
‘No, sir.’
He had only been commissioned a week.
The officer looked at him scornfully, but there was pity in his voice as he said quickly, ‘Shoot him, man!
And that's an order!’
He also left.
‘Ye widnae dae that, sir?’ said Thomson in his gruff voice.
‘Have a smoke, Thomson.’
‘Thank ye, sir.’
And as the soldier lit up there in the open ground, and twilight faded around them, someone started playing ‘Roses of Picardy’ on a mouth organ.
Second Lieutenant Kenneth Keith slowly, and with heavy fingers undid the button of his holster and, like  Garvilo Princip, fired two shots between Thomson's startled, incredulous eyes.
That night both sides sang Christmas carols to each other, but Second Lieutenant Kenneth Keith sat alone and apart, staring straight ahead, his back against the wet, trench wall, thinking of his father.
‘Stille nacht, heilige Nacht!
Die der Welt Heil gebracht…’
And a star-shell lit up the winter night sky…
In the New Year, Field Marshall Kitchener sternly pointed his finger at half-a-million more men who reluctantly answered the call.
No cheering this time.
A hundred thousand were already dead.
Zeppelins appeared over the south coast and the first civilian war casualties were a little boy and his sister killed when a bomb destroyed their cottage at King's Lynn.
At that same time in New Zealand, Billy Keith and his sister  Roberta were playing war games in the back paddock and nine-year-old Billy was shooting her with a walking stick, but seven-year-old Berta would not lie down.
She was getting her dress all dirty, and it made her cough.
‘And anyway, why do I always have to be the German?’
‘Because you're a girl!’
Berta had no answer to that kind of logic.
From the rear verandah, Gran Keith called them for lunch, still with her knitting in her hand.
She had found her vocation.
At the express wish of Queen Mary herself, Florence, like thousands of women throughout the Empire, was knitting socks for soldiers at the front.
Women in Britain enrolled at the Labour Exchanges for war work in the factories.
The battle for Hill 60 at Ypres had begun.
Nearly 70,000 men died for a quarter-mile of wood.
Americans rejoiced in white heavyweight boxer, Jess Willard's victory over black Jack Johnson in Havana, but raged over the sinking of the Lusitania by a German submarine.
It was the very ship that had brought Liam Murphy out the year before.
When he heard, Liam couldn't help thinking he was lucky.
That was the second time he had been saved from drowning.
‘I must be spared for a reason,’ said Liam and began to chance his luck on the Stock Exchange on Wall Street.
And he was lucky.
So was English comedian, Charlie Chaplin, who made a hit as the little tramp.
D.W. Griffiths made ‘The Birth of a Nation’ and the O'Neil brothers made a down-town night-club out of Rafferty's Bar.
The regulars retired to the Shamrock Club in Brooklyn.
Sean asked Noreen to act as hostess now that Maria, at Canon Paddy's insistence, was at school in a convent at Baltimore.
She would get special singing lessons — from an Italian nun.
Rico d'Agostino started up the same kind of place in what used to be Hogan's Bar only a few blocks away.
He asked Noreen to join him there.
She refused.
He offered Joey a job, but Carmella nearly had a fit.
Joey was disappointed not to be able to wear a ‘monkey suit’ as he called it, but Carmella was adamant.
Then Sean asked her if she would let Joey come to their place.
Carmella wasn't so sure.
She needed a lot of persuading, but Sean was persuasive.
‘He's a big, good-looking guy,’ he said.
‘He'll be OK,’ added Mike.
Italy meanwhile, prompted by a young radical called Benito Mussolini, negotiated to come into the war on the side of the Allies.
Nurse Edith Cavell was shot as a spy.
Rupert Brooke died of blood poisoning en route to the Dardanelles where 25,000 Australian and New Zealand troops were killed, 76,000 were wounded and 13,000 reported missing in a bungled and mismanaged expedition against the Turks.
In Sydney, Bobby Keith, now an important figure in Australian  trade union affairs, and beginning to consider a political career, railed against the war at every meeting.
‘It was England's bugles that sounded and it was our young men who answered.
And look what they do with them.
Throw their young lives away in a stupid, ill-considered and bloody botch of an idea to come in through Europe's back door.
Did they they think the bloody Turks would leave it open for them?
And where was Churchill when the bullets were flying?
Crying his eyes out about that bloody poof, Rupert Brooke?
There is a corner of a foreign field alright.
It's Turkish and its thick with ANZAC dead and the guilty party therefrom is forever England!’
And the Aussies cheered, daring the policemen to make a move.
In 1916, conscription was introduced in Britain.
The Old Contemptibles had become a compulsory and unwilling army.
On Easter Monday rebels in Dublin led by James Connolly and Padraig Pearse proclaimed an Irish Republic.
All seven leaders were later executed.
Connolly was allowed to recover from his wounds in hospital and was then taken from Kilmainham Gaol to Dublin Castle and shot by firing squad sitting in a chair.
Kevin O'Neil suddenly arrived back at Ballytreabhair —‘for a wee holiday’ he explained to his mother.
He played cards with Nellie.
She told him about Liam in America.
He was there looking for a place for her —‘and he had the children with him’.
Kevin glanced questioningly at his mother.
Nessie put her finger to her lips.
‘And they're growing up to be quite American,’ Nellie went on.
It was better to leave her with her dreams, Nessie later told Kevin.
‘Aren't we all better off with our illusions?, she said.
‘Who said dreams are an illusion, Ma?’ replied Kevin.
He left soon after for the south again with a stranger.
Sergeant Davidson came asking about him.
‘He's away again,’ said Nessie.
‘Ay.
I waited,’ said the old Sergeant.
It wasn't long after that Sir Roger Casement was hanged for smuggling German arms into Ireland.
Armoured ‘tanks’ were introduced.
An epidemic of venereal disease in London was blamed on soldiers.
The price of a loaf rose to tenpence.
In a bleak mid-winter Lloyd George became prime Minister.
Some joy, however, came to the Keith family.
At least to that branch of it that had rooted at Edendale in Southland, NZ, where it was now summer.
For Christmas that year Tina Keith gave her husband Bruce the present of a baby girl!
Her pregnancy had been uncomfortable and she feared she might not carry, but here it was -a girl for Bruce.
He insisted on calling the child Christina, but of course she became Chris at once to everybody.
January 1917 — Sergeant Denis O'Neil was promoted to Captain, Buffalo Bill died but the USA knew a boom year — so did the other O'Neil brothers even if Rico d'Agostino was proving a bit of a nuisance in trying to buy them out.
Or was he trying to buy back Noreen?
Wilson armed his ships against submarines.
Noreen wondered if it would be safe to go home again for a visit?
The United States entered the war —‘to save democracy’.
Aeroplanes bombed London.
Mata Hari, Malay wife of a Scotsman called MacLeod, was sentenced to death in Paris as a spy.
The Virgin Mary appeared to three children at Fatima in Portugal.
The Pope sued for peace.
Canon Paddy was promoted to Monsignor and transferred to Boston.
British troops were bogged down in the Flanders quagmire.
Captain Kenny Keith succeeded in making a break-out with his platoon and for his bravery was awarded the Military Cross.
‘He was a mad bastard,’ said his Sergeant, ‘just didnae care.’
The next day he rescued one of his men from a shell crater and was shot in the back by a sniper.
He died that night in a forward hospital, choking on a cigarette.
He was buried in a war grave and the little boy who ran through the house in Forres waving a wooden sword now had a wooden cross with his name on it in Belgium.
When his effects were sent back to Forres, John Keith said little but took the medals his son had won in battle and late at night, after his session at the Mason's Arms, walked to the Mill pond and threw all four of them in, ribbons and all.
He said later that he'd lost them.
Arthur Balfour, the British Foreign Secretary declared Palestine a homeland for the Jews.
Rachel Keith would like to have gone there but her mother died and instead she went to see her father to try and effect a reconciliation, but her old father wouldn't let her over the door.
Abel was now nine and his grandfather had never seen him.
Bobby took the boy to his house.
Enoch Gebler would not open the door.
Bobby pounded on the door with his fists, but Enoch only responded with a Jewish incantation.
Abel suddenly bent down to the letterbox and called through, ‘Grandfather Gebler, it s me — Abel.
He stood back and waited.
Inside, the incantation stopped and then the door slowly inched open.
Enoch Gebler embraced his grandson, then took the boy inside, closing the door against Bobby, who gave the door a good kick and grinning, walked away.
‘The old bugger,’ he chortled.
Soon afterwards General Allenby captured Jerusalem and Lawrence of Arabia galloped into Damascus and into uncomfortable legend.
Mary Pickford was proclaimed the world's sweetheart and Maria O'Neil in Baltimore, now fifteen years of age was jealous!
The year 1918 began with meat rationing in Britain, then the Russian Bolsheviks sued for a separate peace with Germany.
Von Ludendorff smashed through the Allied lines at Arras in the hope of rolling the British back to the Channel before the fresh American troops arrived and Paris was shelled by ‘Big Bertha’, a huge gun named after Mrs Krupp.
The French, under Marshall Petain retreated to attack again and drove the German offensive back over the Marne.
The British tanks pushed them further back to the  Hindenberg Line.
After Cambrai, the corner had been turned and now there was no going back.
The Americans came ‘over there’ for the last act and the curtain came down in Belgium where it had all begun four horrific years before.
Shortly after dawn a party of Germans entered a railway carriage at Compiègne and by the eleventh hour of the eleventh day of the eleventh month, the Armistice was signed and the war was over.
Germany was not only humbled but humiliated, yet the Kaiser was swept off to exile in a train twenty carriages long followed by a cavalcade of twelve motor cars.
He had refused to shoot himself.
But ten million people had died in a campaign that had begun as a summer frolic in 1914 and now ended in a shower of November rain.
What a price to pay for an Imperial whim.
It was a debt that was never to be repaid by the politicians or the generals of both sides, no matter how many red poppies were later bought or how many ‘Last Posts’ were sounded on dismal anniversaries.
Nearly as many women died too, in a sense, as spinsters and widows of the lost generation in the decades that were to follow.
How many wives waited and how many more waited to be wives?
The brave heroes returned to an epidemic of influenza which all but carried off those who had survived a living hell.
Other victims it carried off were the acid Mrs Friar in Forres and old Jan van Meers in New Zealand.
A virus is as impersonal as a bullet or a shell.
They say if it has your name on it…
But who can write on a virus?
Except perhaps, another New Zealander, Professor Ernest Rutherford, who, at Manchester University, succeeded in splitting the atom and in the process started off a chain of events that would be even more shattering than that set off by two shots.
But in 1919 disenchantment set in around the globe.
The world was never to be the same again, but when everything has been changed, nothing is changed.
Nevertheless, life went on as it always does.
By the accidents of distance and dates of birth both the Kiwi Keith and the Mackenzie houses had been spared the effects of war and neither knew the pain of loss or the sadness of wounds in young bodies.
Indeed, it could be said that they had prospered.
Only in Forres had the family known the universal sorrow of  war in the death of Kenneth, but then in 1919, coincidental with the Versailles Peace Conference, Jean Hay Keith surprised her husband with twin boys, Jamie and Kenneth.
Another Kenny Keith!
‘The Lord giveth and the Lord taketh away.’
Our story continues…