

Recruitment and selection
The search for an actress to play Scarlett O'Hara took two and a half years and thousands of dollars.
Talent scouts toured every hamlet in the Southern States seeking the girl with the subtle personality that producer David O Selznick needed for the star role.
Thousands of young hopefuls were interviewed but none possessed the elusive qualities Selznick sought.
Yet his persistence and a clear vision of the kind of person that he wanted, plus a gambler's luck finally paid off.
Literally just as filming began the quest ended with Vivien Leigh.
Selznick's personal involvement in the recruitment and selection process for the film's star was legendary.
In those days although the role of personnel officer was less accepted, the major film studios had hordes of people concerned with finding the right faces to fit the parts.
But Selznick knew that he could not hand over the selection process to assistants.
Though he delegated much of the work he always made the final selection choices.
Today, with personnel management much more established, it is far easier for many managers to take a back seat and leave recruitment and selection to specialists and even outside consultants.
Despite this, it pays to be involved with recruitment and selection.
Your job is to obtain results through other people so choosing the right ones is vital.
People are almost certainly the most expensive and crucial assets under your control.
Your organization's effectiveness depends on who works for it, they will influence results at the corporate, departmental and individual level.
So you are merely making life more difficult for yourself if you neglect the recruitment and selection process.
Give it a proper share of your attention and it will certainly repay you.
You will reduce the amount of time and energy spent on trying to deal with ‘square pegs’.
THE PROCESS
These are the main stages to consider:
Stage 1
Manpower planning
Stage 2
Job analysis 
Stage 3
Candidate specification
Stage 4
Attracting candidates
Stage 5
Matching process
Stage 6
Interviewing
Stage 7
Decision and appointment
Stage 8
Induction.
Though recruitment and selection is not a particularly difficult process to master, it is time consuming.
You can seek help with it in a number of ways: there are your own staff and possibly other work colleagues; and there may be a personnel department or at least a person with some training in this area.
You could also look to outside advisory agencies for assistance, such as employers' associations, training organizations, and specialized bodies for articles and literature such as the British Institute of Management, or the Institute of Personnel Management.
The latter have a free code of practice on this area.
Employment agencies offer another source of help with the recruitment process as do specialist selection consultants.
There are also candidate registers that are occasionally useful for finding people with specific technical or scientific qualifications.
Finally, there are advertising agencies who can often give useful aid on certain aspects of recruitment.
Help of any kind will cost money and time, yours and theirs.
So only seek assistance if it seems cost effective to do so.
By organizing much of the process yourself, at least for the key posts, you will enhance your ability to select the right person.
MANPOWER PLANNING
Manpower planning has become quite sophisticated where internal or external specialists are used and computer time is available for making predictions.
You may well not have this kind of elaborate back up to help forecast your manpower requirements.
Nevertheless, it is still worthwhile trying to take a strategic look at your present and future recruitment needs.
Vacancies can then be made to fit into your broad objectives and those of the organization.
Do you in fact want to recruit at all?
A study of the tasks that need doing may lead you to question whether there is a vacancy.
All too often research and staff turnover testify to a failure to use the talents of people already employed in the enterprise.
So, before embarking on the next stages of the recruitment process, ask yourself:
1
What is the manpower requirement at present and over the next few years?
2
Why do I need to recruit?
3
Why do I believe a vacancy genuinely exists at present?
4
If a vacancy does exist what has caused it?
5
Can the work be reallocated so that existing staff absorb it?
6
Could the organization be altered in some way to avoid the need to recruit, yet still obtain the same on the job results?
7
Is my existing staff working to full capacity?
8
Do I have sufficient management skills available within my area of responsibility to maximise the contribution of a new recruit?
9
Is the appointment really necessary?
10
Why did the previous job holder leave?
11
How frequently do people leave the job, or at that level?
12
Did the person leave because of a management failure?
13
How realistic is the job, can it be done properly anyway?
14
Is the type of person available, inside or outside the organization?
Having thought through some or all of these questions and taken a hard look at the future you next need to analyse the job itself.
JOB ANALYSIS
Job analysis is a systematic study of a job in order to reveal its content and all the other relevant aspects.
It can be used not merely for recruitment purposes but also for defining training needs, establishing pay scales, safety arrangements, improving work methods and so on.
Thus you discover what tasks are to be performed and how they are carried out in order to create a picture of what the person will actually do in the job.
The categories of information that job analysis demands are:
Job requirements , such as basic education and pre-job training needed; on the job training required; physical effort; mental effort
Responsibility , for materials and equipment; supervision of others; safety of others; contact with the public etc
Working conditions , such as humidity, temperature, noise, hazards etc.
From this collection of information, which in many cases will need to be in considerable detail, a job description can be written.
The latter is a working tool which on two or three pages of A4 paper at most, broadly describes the purpose, scope, responsibilities, tasks and relationships which form a particular job.
The job description lies at the heart of good recruitment and selection practice.
It helps to: Match the person to the job and the job to the person.
Some extremely efficient managers are wary of using job descriptions because in some circumstances these can be used by employees or unions to limit the flexibility of the work which is undertaken.
Making job descriptions an integral part of the daily work arrangements however, goes much further than using it to identify what sort of person you want to recruit.
For this latter purpose it can prove invaluable, a bench mark against which you can compare candidates for the job.
Do not leave the creation of job descriptions entirely to personnel experts.
While they can devise initial drafts, as manager you should take a close interest in the contents.
This is particularly so for senior posts.
Anyone who has responsibility for subordinates should, ideally, have a major say in creating the job descriptions of their employees.
A typical job description will contain the job title, to whom the person is responsible, their main duties, followed by a more detailed list of tasks.
Candidate requirements such as particular skills or personality are not normally part of a job description.
CANDIDATE SPECIFICATION
Having described the job the next step is to identify what kind of person will fit it.
Sometimes called a candidate specification, it states the essential attributes that you require and also the merely desirable ones.
It should also indicate the warning signs that you might look for such as: changed job frequently in the last five years, no sense of humour, over concerned with financial rewards.
The job description and the candidate specification can help you be more precise about the job holder.
A common method of classifying or judging candidates is the Seven Point Plan.
Using this method candidates may be assessed at the interview on the following seven job requirements which have to be met by the person appointed in the job:
1
physical make up such as health, appearance, speech etc
2
attainments such as educational and occupational achievements 
3
general intelligence such as ability to reason quickly and accurately
4
special aptitudes such as mechanical dexterity, verbal or numerical skills etc
5
interests
6
disposition or those features of a person that emerge through a relationship with others and the work itself.
This might include intangibles such as self reliance, acceptability, persuasiveness etc
7
circumstances such as financial and family background.
In practice you will probably find the above guide will provide a good enough outline of the sort of person you are looking for in relation to the formal job description document.
ATTRACTING CANDIDATES
Attracting candidates can often be easier than selecting the right one, especially during a period when jobs are hard to obtain.
But many jobs require very specific education or training and it may be necessary to take careful steps to ensure that the right people apply.
Before going outside your organization look around to see whether there is anyone already on the payroll who could do the job.
This is often a far simpler and cheaper solution.
Advertise the job internally first or simultaneously in other outlets.
The existing knowledge about the employee from inside the organization makes it easier to decide whether he or she is able to perform the work well.
If there is no one already employed who could do the job and be released to undertake it, then it means going to the open market.
The latter may have its own special characteristics for the job you have in mind.
For example, there may be restrictions on the catchment area from which you can expect to recruit, or particular requirements in terms of communication about the vacancy.
You may need to develop contacts with schools, special agencies, universities, the Department of Employment, professional bodies and so on.
All of these may be a valuable source for recruitment.
For some jobs you will have to pay for advertising.
The range of media is large and the costs can be high so it is worth investigating the pulling power of different choices.
It is perfectly reasonable to select a job advertisement for a similar post in a particular publication and to ask that journal to tell you what was the size of the response.
You can even ask the advertiser about the quality of respondents.
Writing advertisements is quite an art but most jobs do not demand a particularly exceptional approach, merely a high degree of clarity about the kind of person needed.
Use the job and candidate specification to explain what sort of employee you want to recruit.
Insist on having a say in what goes into job advertisements for employees who will ultimately be your subordinates.
Do not leave it entirely to the advertising agency or the personnel department.
In the advertisement give more priority to:
1
the work being interesting
2
advancement and prospects
3
earnings and security
4
personal involvement
5
relationships with working colleagues
6
education and training prospects.
Give less priority to:
1
holiday entitlement
2
opportunities for travel
3
sports and social facilities
4
status symbols
5
fringe benefits
6
prestige of the organization.
It is usually best to avoid box numbers in advertisements as research indicates that these tend to put people off applying.
In your advert give the name of the person to whom the reply is to be made since this has also been found to be a positive factor in encouraging people to reply.
Finally, if you handle the advertisement entirely yourself make sure that the copy is legal.
Racial, sexual and other forms of discrimination, even when unintended, can easily creep into advertising material.
THE MATCHING PROCESS
You know what sort of person you want but how will you choose from the applicants who do apply?
There are several commonly used methods at this stage:
1
application forms
2
interviews 
3
group selection methods
4
tests such as psychological, aptitude, personality and so on 
5
references.
Of these five tools, tests are the most controversial and the least used in Britain.
In the mid 1970s an IPM survey showed that even the most popular tests were used by fewer than 10 per cent of companies.
These were probably mainly the large employers selecting for technical jobs.
The main way that people are selected today remains almost exclusively through a combination of the application form and the interview.
Since interviewing is costly try to minimize the number that you conduct.
Screening is a way of sorting out candidates initially without meeting them face to face.
Screening initially sorts replies from a job advertisement but it is easy to overlook good  candidates .
if the process is not conducted with care.
Sort the replies into:
Group I Clearly unsuitable candidates who are sent a letter of rejection
Group 2 Some doubts, reserved for further study if necessary
Group 3 Send an application form, and or invite for interview.
To avoid postage it may sometimes be sensible to mention in the advertisement that rejected candidates, who fall into group 1, will not be informed in writing.
INTERVIEWING
Interviews serve three main purposes.
They allow you to assess the suitability of candidates and also to ensure that the latter have sufficient information on which to base their own decision.
Sometimes though, the interview serves an additional public relations purpose in getting the organization across to people who will either apply again, or carry the word elsewhere about the excellence of the organization.
Interviews have a poor reputation for effective selection.
There is some convincing research that they are often no better than if the manager had simply stuck a pin in at random amongst the names of candidates.
But the main reason why interviews prove ineffective is that the interviewer has not been properly trained and has not prepared thoroughly for the task.
It does not necessarily help to use a panel interview for selection purposes if the members are also inexperienced.
But if you can arrange for experienced selectors to be present then this may lead to a more objective assessment of the candidates than if you act alone.
Have well considered questions ready for both types of interview which you ask in a logical sequence.
To do this, study the application form carefully as well as the job description.
Then, during the interview you can attempt to use the candidate specification to assess how the person matches up to your requirements.
Do take notes.
Not only will it help you afterwards but it will show the candidate that you are taking an active interest in his responses to your questions.
However do not let note taking become obsessional, it can tend to interrupt the flow of conversation if carried out in too much detail.
Interviewing is a major subject in its own right and you could well gain from, even enjoy, studying it in further depth.
It is certainly worth a couple of days training to help improve your effectiveness.
There is one question that you should always ask each candidate, preferably at the very start of the interview.
Enquire: ‘If you were offered this job would you take it?’
Some candidates may indicate a clear reluctance to commit themselves at this stage and this is helpful in making the final decision about who best to appoint.
A few candidates may virtually eliminate themselves by their hesitancy and you can even consider refusing to continue the interview.
Here are some self analysis questions to consider after each interview.
Did I:
1
Ensure that the physical setting was comfortable and likely to create a good impression?
2
Try to give the candidate a favourable impression at the start, making him/her feel welcome and relaxed?
3
Take the whole interview into account or instead make up my mind too soon without proper evidence?
4
Make the interview a two-way process, giving out as well as being silent?
5
Use silence constructively to keep the candidate talking?
6
Successfully avoid talking more than 20 per cent of the time?
7
Interrupt the candidate?
8
Establish rapport before asking personal questions?
9
Follow up leads and insist on answers?
10
Ask one question at a time?
11
Give the candidate my complete attention?
12
Control the interview or lose it to the candidate?
13
Allow the candidate time to ask questions?
14
Get the organization's public image across?
15
Ensure that the candidate got a fair deal and left feeling that he had done himself justice?
16
Explore any unexplained gaps in the candidate's history?
17
Ask open and probing questions?
18
Pose my questions in a logical sequence and link them with the candidate's replies?
19
Summarize what the candidate said to make sure that I got it right?
20
Help the candidate to help us both match the person to the job and vice versa?
21
Avoid trying to create a stressful situation?
22
Smile?
23
Allow enough time for the whole interview?
24
Plan out the interview in advance and broadly follow this plan?
DECISION AND APPOINTMENT
If you conduct the interview with care, systematically collect the information needed and compare the candidate's attributes against those that you are seeking, then the actual decision should not present major problems.
Sometimes there will be two candidates who are fairly evenly matched and there may be uncertainty about which should be appointed.
A second or third interview may solve this difficulty and a more senior person can sometimes be asked to give a second opinion.
But occasionally, the uncertainty remains about which person to choose.
At this stage it may be sensible to rely on your instinct but a further step that is worth trying is to give each candidate a simple task to perform that is related in some way to the post which is to be filled.
You will also need to take up references, though do not place too much reliance on these.
Normally you should have references in your possession by the time you conduct the final interviews since they give one more piece of information to assist with your judgement.
Always ask the candidate's permission to seek references.
It is sometimes worth following up written references with an informal discussion over the phone about the present employee.
Similarly a private meeting with a person's current boss can produce startling revelations!
One more step could prove to be justified in certain jobs: should you request a security check on the candidate?
Such a check should uncover facts such as a past prison sentence or a person's credit status.
These checks are only justified if the person is likely to be handling large sums of money or to be exposed to the possibility of bribery.
Similarly, it may be warranted in  situations where highly confidential and sensitive material is to be handled by the job holder.
INDUCTION
Once you have made the appointment and the candidate has accepted is this the end of the recruitment and selection process?
It most definitely is not.
One of the most important stages has yet to be started, namely beginning to fit the person into their new job.
Induction is a final but important step that is often neglected, falling between the end of the selection process and the beginning of a person taking up their new role.
Yet it flows naturally from the choice of the person and begins the moment that they accept the offer of appointment.
Induction is part of the recruitment process the Japanese pay great attention to with results that well recover the time, effort and cost involved.
Careful induction is not difficult to plan but produces some clear benefits.
In particular by helping to smooth the process of joining the organization it
1
helps establish a favourable attitude towards the employer
2
assists the person reach their maximum effectiveness in the shortest possible time.
Recruitment and selection is therefore a series of logical and relatively simple steps.
It is the key to the success of many effective organizations who have found that it is a sound long term investment.
Appraisal and review
‘How well am I doing?’
Every employee occasionally wants to know the answer to this question.
Effective managers usually want to be able to give an answer to it.
Appraisal usually occurs in a face to face meeting between two individuals.
Less commonly, there is the team appraisal approach which involves several colleagues.
Whichever method is used, the process is essentially an inter personal one in which there is considerable communication and sharing of views.
Appraisal attempts to improve performance by determining regularly how well a job is being done.
It tries to define whether there is a gap between desired and actual performance, then to provide support to help bridge the gap.
Thus appraisal systems are perhaps more accurately termed performance review systems .
The exact title though is only important in one respect, namely in convincing staff of the desirability of having some way of judging and commenting upon performance and gaining their acceptance and co-operation.
For some people ‘appraisal’ smacks too much of an excessively rigid method which could involve unfair disciplining or even the sack.
Managers perform appraisals when they monitor day to day operations, ensure that tasks are completed and help individuals to work better.
Formal appraisal systems, however, go beyond this normal daily checking and feedback.
Formal systems provide a periodic summary of the collection, analysis and recording of information about the way that an individual is working.
Much of the material will already have been discussed informally.
The difference lies in bringing together and summarizing facts and opinions, to produce a judgement.
The latter allows both parties a chance to stand back from the daily routine and take a harder look at overall performance.
Apart from helping to improve actual work performance the main benefits of adopting a formal appraisal system are that it:
1
encourages a more systematic approach to managing subordinates
2
provides information about a person's potential for promotion or transfer
3
improves motivation by giving feedback on personal progress.
In sum, appraisal systems should promote a healthier attitude towards work by employees and consequently many large employers have become deeply committed to such schemes.
But not everyone is convinced.
Robert Townsend, the Avis man who wrote Up the organization , dismissed such schemes as gimmicks.
He argued that the best action for management is to ‘provide the climate and proper nourishment and let the people grow themselves.
They'll amaze you.’
Certainly most small organizations cannot afford elaborate or rigidly devised appraisal schemes.
If such firms are efficient then probably everyone knows who is doing well, through the informal appraisals that happen all the time.
AIMS
Because ICI, Ford or the Gas Corporation have an appraisal scheme does not mean that your organization automatically needs one.
If you do decide that you would gain from having a proper appraisal system then start with a simple approach and stick closely to it.
Appraisal schemes have a nasty habit of becoming complex and over sophisticated.
Appraisals help managers deal with the three Ps, pay, promotion and performance.
All involve difficult decisions and demand a fair assessment that employees can readily understand.
Any one scheme can achieve some of the following aims but not all of them at once:
1
lets the subordinates know where they stand
2
recognizes good work
3
communicates directions for improvement
4
develops employees in their present job
5
develops and trains them for promotion
6
tells them how to make progress in your organization
7
assesses employees in the broad context so that you can show them where they fit in
8
warns backsliders that they must improve
9
develops records to show on paper where each employee stands.
These aims suggest that there are various interested parties concerned with the results: you the manager; the person appraised; team colleagues; senior managers; and the personnel department.
In reconciling the needs of these groups it is sensible to separate appraisal for the purpose of judging performance from that of dealing with pay and promotion.
Many organizations have gone the whole way and created entirely  different systems for each of these needs.
‘How am I doing?’ thus really implies, answering four key questions:
1
what do you think of my work?performance 
2
how will I be rewarded?pay 
3
what is my true capacity?potential 
4
do I merit advancement?promotion 
MAKING APPRAISAL SUCCEED
Successful appraisal ultimately rests on the acceptability of the system and the way that the manager handles it, particularly in the face to face situation.
The ingredients of an effective appraisal system include:
1
it must be based on predetermined standards of performance based on the job being performed
2
any targets or standards of performance must have been previously agreed between employee and superior, or team colleagues, and be seen to be both sensible and reasonable
3
the appraisal should involve face to face discussion between a manager and employee
4
process and outcome are carefully documented
5
an action plan for the future is mutually agreed.
Apart from suffering from confused objectives, appraisal schemes may fail for a variety of reasons:
1
inadequate organization of the whole process
2
poor communications about the process
3
lack of commitment by just about everybody
4
reluctance by managers to introduce anything which might disturb the cosy relationship between superior and subordinate
5
no standards of performance specified or agreed
6
employees think the scheme is unfair, lacks objectivity, is meant to catch them out rather than develop them
7
does not offer the employee anything he or she really wants, such as personal development, pay, promotion, recognition, job satisfaction etc.
A final reason for the possible failure of an appraisal system is that it is conducted as a top down, rather than a bottom up approach.
In the former  method the manager makes his own judgement on an employee's performance and tries to obtain agreement on this assessment, focussing on the past rather than the future.
By contrast the bottom up approach puts the onus on the employee to do a self appraisal and then discuss it.
It focuses on the manager helping the individual to find ways to improve in the future.
STANDARDS
Standards are a must for effective appraisal.
They are also one of the hardest aspects of a scheme to develop.
It may take weeks or months for clear and credible standards to emerge and you must be willing to update them regularly.
The kind of standards of performance which you need to search for and devise are ones that rely as far as possible on observable facts rather than mere opinion.
Thus you and the employee may jointly search for standards which are mutually acceptable which do not lead to hours of argument about whether or not they have been achieved.
The three main types of standards for appraisal purposes are:
1
measurable or quantifiable results , such as profit per quarter, sales per month, customers served per week, completed orders per day, cartons packed per shift and so on 
2
standards that reflect agreed policies such as timekeeping, absence, health, approach to customers and so on.
You may not be able to measure the results exactly but at least the appraisal discussions are based on some known criteria, rather than likes and dislikes
3
personal qualities and work characteristics , such as self confidence, co-operation, enthusiasm, leadership, attitudes, initiative and so on.
These intangibles are not always helpful and schemes which rely solely on such woolly concepts usually fail.
Non measurable standards, that is ones where you cannot be certain whether or not a specific desired result has been achieved tend to cause trouble since they are easily challenged.
To define standards around someone's job you can: ask job holders to write essays describing their work and its purpose; create detailed job descriptions; use rating scales; identify critical incidents such as good or bad behaviour; and compare declared aims and results.
The more senior the employee the harder it may be to define clear performance standards.
This is particularly so in the public sector.
But it is certainly not impossible and the attempt to arrive at agreed standards in all  organizations can be helpful and educational to manager and employees alike.
Research and practical experience have also highlighted some warning signs about appraisal schemes:
1
employees will only admit weaknesses if they feel that this will not be held against them.
They will need convincing that the appraisal is likely to benefit them
2
your employees must understand the link between job performance and reward (if there isn't one, you are probably working in the public services)
3
criticism only improves performance if offered in a kindly way, with a genuine liking or at least respect for the other person
4
performance will improve if goals are specific and jointly set
5
if the manager is helpful, facilitating, receptive to ideas and able to plan, people not only like it but respond to it
6
performance also improves if the evaluation stems partly from the employee and is a prelude not to recrimination, but to further goal setting.
INTRODUCING APPRAISAL
Do not hand over the job of introducing formal appraisal to the personnel or organizational experts.
By all means let them help you think through the objectives of appraisal and offer forms, cards and folders for documentation purposes.
Let them also lay on interview training.
But as a manager you must not only understand the appraisal scheme but also adapt it to your own needs.
Your golden guideline is:keep the system simple .
Having decided on the precise objectives being set for the appraisal scheme, next you must choose who will be consulted, who will be appraised by whom and how often.
This is often best done in conjunction with those who are going to be on the receiving end of an appraisal interview.
Make sure that the details of the scheme are worked out to your satisfaction and written down.
Once the scheme is launched it may be too late to save it from failure if you have no readily available answers to the many questions that employees will certainly raise.
Tackle head on the issue of whether the appraisal scheme is going to be linked to financial rewards and promotion.
If it won't be, then say so early on and concentrate on the developmental purposes of the system.
Make your intentions clear to everyone so that they understand:
1
that there will be an appraisal scheme
2
why and when the scheme is being introduced 
3
who will be affected
4
how the scheme will operate.
Appraisers need help in gaining confidence to make the interviews work.
They may need assistance in: how to be more objective; becoming better at listening and communicating; how the scheme will be managed and co-ordinated and so on.
Suitable training may well be a good investment.
THE INTERVIEWS
An important conclusion from the considerable research on appraisal interviews is that you should adopt a definite form of strategy for the meeting.
There are at least five well known approaches:
1
Tell and sell .
The manager makes up his mind about the person's performance and simply conveys this opinion.
He then tries to persuade the other person to adopt specific solutions for action.
In summary: ‘I'll tell you what I think about your work and you try my suggestions for improving things.’
2
Tell and listen .
The manager objectively describes the person's performance but says nothing further.
He listens carefully to what the other person has to say about it.
In summary: ‘I explain what I think of your performance but after that it's up to you to respond and I'll listen constructively.’
3
Joint problem solving .
The manager and the subordinate jointly review performance focusing not on the individual but the latter's work situation.
Together, various remedies are explored sometimes indirectly prompted by the manager.
In summary: ‘We'll discuss work problems and possible remedies, both of which you suggest; I may have some thoughts on these too.’
4
Self appraisal .
The manager prompts the subordinate to carry out a personal audit.
From this the person is expected to identify strengths and weaknesses in performance and then put forward proposals for change.
In summary: ‘Assess your own performance, you'll probably be far tougher on yourself than I'd be; suggest the next steps for improvement.’
5
Goal setting .
Manager and subordinate, separately or together, define the person's future objectives in terms of aims and tasks.
The manager's role is confined to stimulating the subordinate to thinking through what results  are to be sought and ways of achieving these.
Later, the results are carefully compared with the intentions in order to identify remedial action or set new targets.
In summary: ‘I stimulate you to think about how you are going to achieve agreed objectives; later we'll explore what happened and whether you need any help to improve further, or merely some new objectives.’
Many managers are particularly sceptical about the fourth of these methods, self appraisal.
In fact where it has been adopted results suggest that most employees are extremely realistic about their own performance and can indeed make a reasonably accurate assessment.
Self appraisals can also make your life much easier during the delicate stage of deciding what action is going to be taken to improve performance.
For instance, one manager in a public service agency had a subordinate who was not really effective at supervising others and was resistant to suggestions for improvement.
Instead of criticizing the employee the manager asked him to do a self appraisal of personal strengths and weaknesses.
To the manager's surprise the man freely confessed that he felt poor at supervising and did not like doing it anyway.
This led to a constructive discussion in which the employee volunteered to give up his supervisory role and instead concentrate on other activities at which he was better and actually preferred.
A minority of self appraisers will under or over rate themselves, but this quickly shows up.
The under raters need encouragement to raise their sights and reach for the apparently impossible.
Over raters are usually rather immature and may not be able to take criticism so whatever approach you adopt you might well antagonize them.
Only hard feelings are created by challenging the under rater's unrealistic view of himself.
For these people you will need to adopt more rigorously agreed targets and measures of performance.
Criticizing anyone is a definite art.
The main rule is, don't.
If you must, then at least do it in private away from other employees.
Get to the point simply and directly.
Not only must you be accurate but armed with strong, supporting evidence.
Only present this if the employee demands the facts.
Criticizing behaviour is seldom satisfactory (see chapter 5, ‘Problem people’) since this will be difficult to alter.
Only criticize what the person has done, not what sort of person they are.
Above all, do not challenge the person's motives or compare their performance directly with someone else's.
About the worst error you can make in an appraisal interview, apart from getting into a direct confrontation and violent argument, is to slip imperceptibly into being defensive.
Avoid apologizing if you've made a criticism in good faith.
If you find yourself offering justifications and elaborate explanations for your opinions about the employee's performance then you will have lost control over the meeting.
Yet another major error is to pull your punches.
Most people hate unpleasantness and the prospect of hurting someone's feelings is abhorrent.
So instead they hedge their comments and the end result is the person being appraised still does not know what the organization thinks of them.
Unpalatable truths are a threat to our self respect.
So usually we avoid them which is why an effective appraisal interview can be a most uncomfortable experience.
Here are some tips on conveying the raw truth:
1
try to get the interviewee to volunteer the information by, for example, inviting them to list their strengths and weaknesses
2
sandwich critical comment between encouraging and complementary remarks
3
a week or so before the interview ask the subordinate to complete an appraisal preparation form so as to provide a starting point for the discussion
4
ensure that the subordinate really understands the purpose of the appraisal.
Each appraisal interview you conduct is a chance to analyse where you went wrong.
Never be satisfied with your performance in these sessions until the results start showing in terms of better performance from those you manage.
Keep polishing your skills which should include:
1
an ability to organize and conduct an interview
2
establishing a suitable atmosphere and rapport
3
a capacity to communicate with subordinates
4
ensuring that subordinates communicate with you
5
motivating, counselling and coaching
6
obtaining key information
7
determining and pursuing objectives.
Appraisal interviews can be made more effective if you stick to some well tried ground rules.
First, be prepared to invest time in getting ready for each one.
Read the facts about the subordinate and think about his work style.
Secondly make sure that you are not interrupted during the meeting and have a rough idea about the format which the interview should follow.
Don't stick to this rigidly if the discussion takes a different course to the one you expected.
Your format should enable you to follow a pattern which falls into three parts:
Beginning : listening; having the right objective 
Middle : deciding areas for investigation; properly analysing and exploring issues
End : helping the interviewee to solve problems; deciding a plan of action.
Encourage the interviewee to do most of the talking.
If you speak for more than about a fifth of the total time this is not appraisal, it's lecturing, or worse, pontificating.
Knowing that their boss loves to talk leads some cunning subordinates to turn the appraisal interview into a non event.
Use open ended questions to get the appraisee talking and where appropriate use silence to prompt more response.
Reflect back to the other person your interpretation of what they are saying and feeling.
Summarize to show that you understand their contribution.
If talking is your weakness then give encouragement by non verbal gestures, short prompt words and phrases.
At the end of the interview conclude decisively with a summary.
Do not turn this into a drama!
Merely state what you feel the interview has achieved, describe the agreed plan of action and then open your diary to fix the date of the next meeting.
This latter step emphasizes the importance which you attach to the whole process.
If you end the interview feeling good, that is encouraging.
But how did your subordinate feel?
Make sure that the appraisal interview ends on a positive note with the other person feeling up, not down.
If they depart in a state of gloom then the chances of improvement are cut by at least half.
Finally, never let yourself or the subordinate lose sight of the whole purpose of your meeting together.
The appraisal interview is not an end in itself.
The purpose is to improve work performance and is justified only if it has that result.
TEAM APPRAISAL
An individual's performance is not just a matter of concern between manager and subordinate.
Other people such as immediate work colleagues or fellow team members also have a vested interest in how someone is performing.
Thus team appraisal is a logical extension of the individual appraisal Interview.
The impact of team appraisals is considerable.
The effect of one's own peers openly commenting on one's performance in a critical but essentially constructive manner can be far greater than anything the individual manager can achieve.
Creating the climate in which such tough talking can occur is a highly skilled task and takes careful preparation.
Team appraisal complements the individual face to face appraisal meeting.
Each team member not only comments on the group's performance but  circulates a self appraisal answering these kinds of questions:
1
last year the main results I achieved were…
2
during the same period the results which I feel I did not achieve were…
3
I think I need to improve my personal effort in respect of…
4
the issues about my performance that I'd like the team to discuss with me are…
Team appraisal thus involves sharing with colleagues your own strengths and weaknesses and what you and they think could or should be done about them.
Often such matters have never been previously talked about and instead left to fester in bad relationships, complaining, negative attitudes and lack of drive.
If done well team appraisal can be a dynamic force for change.
It promotes a more open style of management and ultimately greater trust between work colleagues.
But it is far more demanding not only of subordinates but particularly for the manager whose role must change from critic to helper.
Coaching
Every manager is a coach.
Coaching is built into the job.
Few organizations however formally acknowledge it, or deliberately try to develop the coaching role.
Yet every day supervisors coach their subordinates, and senior managers their juniors.
Coaching is the personal help which you give to develop your subordinates' skills and improve their way of working.
It is a highly practical activity concerned solely with today's tasks, not some future job which the subordinate might perform.
It provides a vital link between learning and doing, imparting skills, knowledge and changing attitudes.
This change is not a one way process.
You are both altered by the experience since it does not involve solely issuing orders.
Nor is coaching the same as either counselling or formal appraisal.
The former provides direct advice to an individual, usually about personal problems.
The latter is a very formal process occurring usually two or three times a year.
It is likely to have wider aims, such as deciding whether the employee is performing well or badly, analysing whether the employee should be paid more, or perhaps promoted, or selecting personal targets or identifying training needs.
By contrast coaching is a continuous process which may be incorporated into both counselling and appraisal sessions.
It is an informal, forward looking activity with no overtones of criticism.
Its main focus is on helping people find solutions to current work problems, but in such a way that they learn whilst doing this.
Thus the role of the coach is not to hand out advice passively but to act as a partner and a catalyst.
This role is only just being appreciated by even quite sophisticated organizations.
Many organizations are struggling to harness the creative energies which it releases.
They are often unsure how to reconcile the approach with more traditional management practices.
Coaching is also beginning to be recognized as an essential tool which has to be developed systematically, not left to chance or the interest of a few concerned managers.
Coaching, however, has not been developed in the UK as much as it should have been.
The economic depression of the early 1980s has unfortunately  encouraged many managers to abandon the harder role of catalyst in favour of the more convenient and autocratic style of telling people what to do.
Another reason why coaching does not occur as often as it might is due to the time pressures which every manager faces.
These tend to provide an excuse for putting off coaching and this is why some organizations are now insisting that coaching is built into the management role more formally.
Two other factors may deter the use of coaching.
First, the manager himself may feel somewhat shy about creating formal coaching sessions.
This shyness can stem both from personality and lack of confidence.
The second is that the complexity of many production and commercial processes can make it particularly difficult to weave the coaching role into the normal run of affairs.
COACHING SKILLS
What makes a good coach?
Like teaching, some people do it naturally while others have to learn the skills in a more formalized way.
Good management coaches usually have had considerable practice at developing their abilities.
Actual experience rather than theoretical learning is what matters.
The main requirements for effective coaching are:
1
Recognizing that most of an individual's development occurs on the job
2
Accepting that if people learn on the job then they must have demands and challenges in their work
3
Recognizing that your management style, priorities and attitudes influence subordinates
4
Accepting that subordinates need to participate in objective setting since this produces motivation and commitment.
It is also a learning experience for the manager who may find his ideas questioned and challenged
5
Ensuring that control information which assesses how well subordinates are doing, is available to them.
The data should preferably be devised by the subordinates
6
Frequent informal contact.
This is of more value than infrequent formal contact
7
Ability to delegate and back this up with coaching linked to the task
8
Willingness to listen to what the subordinate is really saying and trying to understand what lies behind the spoken word
9
Recognizing that a coaching opportunity has occurred and a desire to exploit it 
10
Refusing to be concerned with your own authority or status
11
Knowledge of coaching techniques and how learning occurs.
An effective coach is interested in people, recognizing their importance and potential.
You need to know the desires, interests and capacities of your subordinates and above all to avoid doing their thinking for them.
Though the above list could be readily expanded no one of course possesses all these virtues.
Being an effective coach means being willing to learn by doing, especially by building coaching into your personal style of management and constantly analysing your most recent coaching session.
It is also possible to attend short management courses run by specialist consultants on improving coaching skills.
But there is no quick solution and good coaching demands plenty of your time and conscious effort, being constantly alert to coaching opportunities.
Specific techniques that each require your attention and practice include: questioning; discussing; listening; summarizing; delegating; appraising and observing.
One essential skill that you must develop if you are to coach successfully is the ability to structure a coaching discussion.
Because the session is informal it is liable to fragment into a desultory conversation with no clear direction.
Having recognized that you are in a potential coaching situation here are the main steps:
STEP 1
Explain that you would like to discuss the situation in more detail with your subordinate.
Try to stop incoming phone calls and prevent any other form of interruption if possible.
Ask questions about the work progress facing your subordinate.
The purpose is to begin clarifying the nature of any problem or decision.
STEP 2
Lead the subordinate to see new possibilities and the need for more information by asking additional questions.
Through this method you stimulate the person to look at things afresh and to think aloud.
Questioning is a powerful tool, however, it must be used with tact.
Fired off in rapid succession questions merely sound like an inquisition with the result that you will be creating anxiety, not ideas.
Be patient, let your subordinate have time to absorb each question.
Encourage the response to be thought through.
What you are trying to do is to develop an employee who thinks for himself.
STEP 3
Supply new information gradually, not all at once in an overwhelming chunk.
Encourage the subordinate gently to seek solutions and propose action.
Resist the temptation to offer your ideas, instead continue to probe, dropping clues and helping the subordinate to see new ways forward.
Try encouraging a redefinition of the problem.
For example you might say, ‘I wonder if there is another way of looking at this situation…’ or ‘do you think you might redefine the problem in a different way’.
If necessary you may have to give examples of redefinitions.
STEP 4
Lead the subordinate to the point where choices must be made.
Once again your job is not to make the final decision.
If you have done your part correctly the subordinate should by now have all the information necessary to make up his own mind.
STEP 5
Agree and summarize the next step so that you both know exactly what is supposed to happen next.
Here your role is to ensure that any plan has been developed in enough detail to satisfy you as manager that it is workable.
It may not necessarily be the absolute best plan but it should certainly be the subordinate's own.
Your whole attention must be directed to balancing the need to produce the best result which you could personally produce, and the one which gives the subordinate a chance to learn through practical experience.
A measure of your success in a coaching session is when the subordinate feels the discussion has been between two equals and that together you have arrived at the best course of action.
Finally, give the subordinate authority to go away to make the final choice and implement any action.
Throughout all stages of the coaching session you must be careful that your authority does not create a passive assent to questions and feedback.
It is only too easy to create a ‘yes man’ climate which will help neither you nor your subordinate.
In asking questions, therefore, try to do this in an uncritical way and do not present ones to which there is a simple answer of ‘yes’ or ‘no’.
WHAT SUBORDINATES NEED
Not all subordinates take kindly to being coached.
Older managers who report to younger ones, in particular, may resist the coaching session.
It  requires great tact and perseverance to make some people accept a coaching atmosphere.
The first requirement of your subordinate is that you should both have the same aims in the coaching session.
These should be mutually decided upon.
Your job is to help your subordinate understand why certain objectives must be achieved and to ensure that the work of the subordinate is within his knowledge and ability.
In deciding objectives, be prepared to modify your views.
Part of the mutual learning process is that you may find that apparently sensible objectives need altering in the light of critical questioning by alert subordinates.
The next requirement is that subordinates must feel a sense of responsibility to achieve.
The coaching session can help create this if it revolves around the person's job and role.
Avoid implying that you would like to see the other person adopt your own managerial style.
If they decide to emulate you this is fine, a great compliment.
But don't expect or encourage it.
Your questions and general approach should draw out of each subordinate how they intend to proceed, giving guidance and information only where this is essential.
The more you thrust forward your ideas, your solutions, your methods, the less the subordinate will feel responsible for his own actions, and hence committed.
Remember also that learning takes time, especially for older people.
What may seem resistance at first may instead be uncertainty and possibly real anxiety.
Check that the subordinate fully understands what has been discussed and can explain back to you roughly what is the next stage.
Allow plenty of time for them to find out what they do not know and summarize to bring together the strands of the discussion to a point where you both understand the proposed action.
Subordinates also need adequate feedback on their performance.
This is to help them understand how their own thinking is developing under your guidance.
Such feedback should be offered in a positive way leading to further commitment.
The latter will develop as the individual realizes that his contribution is being seen as relevant and helpful.
Adjust your method to the needs of the subordinate.
For example, some subordinates may enthusiastically welcome your enquiries, respond readily to indirect guidance and need little or no prompting to seek out information.
Other may sit there stubbornly waiting for you to tell them what they are meant to do whilst making it abundantly clear that the session is hardly welcome, indeed is being conducted almost under duress.
Variations in response put you on your mettle.
You need considerable confidence to switch approaches and find appropriate responses.
It may take  time for the resisters to realize that you mean to influence events through them and are not wanting merely to impose your nominal authority over them.
Enthusiasts however, may have to be gently discouraged from making too many demands on your time and that when you ask a question you are not automatically expecting any action.
Finally, subordinates respond best to coaching if they are motivated.
This depends on many factors but three in particular will influence feelings of wanting to get as much as possible out of the coaching opportunities which you provide:
1
The job they do must place real demands upon them .
Unless the job stretches subordinates there is no reason why they should need, or seek, your help.
Their abilities must be fully used if they are to feel involved and committed.
2
The job must seem achievable.
3
The job must make a worthwhile contribution to corporate or work objectives.
Coaching can be used for both individuals or group settings.
It is also possible to apply coaching skills in a variety of tasks, such as appraisal or job reviews, training, job interviews, target setting, handling meetings and so on.
From the above it should be apparent that coaching is a challenge for most managers.
It is of course possible to be an effective manager without coaching but by using this skill you can achieve even better results.
Problem people
Problem people are the ones managers moan about.
You've got none in your team?
Then you're either fortunate or perhaps less aware than you might be about what is going on.
Virtually every organization has employees who seem to cause concern.
They often require more than their fair share of your time.
A problem person may cause you a headache in countless ways.
For example, poor work, bad timekeeping, resisting change, being aggressive, making crude jokes, failing to delegate, withholding information, missing deadlines, upsetting clients, customers or important people inside or outside your organization and so on .
The list is endless!
You may be worrying about such people because you are left to pick up the pieces afterwards.
Or maybe results that you are trying to achieve are being put at risk by their behaviour.
You often hear managers say that:'I've run out of ideas on how to deal with him…’ or ‘she could do so much better but I just can't seem to make any progress…’or ‘he simply didn't do what I asked…’
These are all signs that the manager may have a problem person with whom to deal.
The behaviour of the problem person has to matter enough for you to want to do something about it.
Their behaviour must also be frequent or serious enough to justify attempts to alter it by deliberate management action.
Tackling problem people is part of your job because you are paid to achieve results not on your own but through others.
But not all managers are instinctively skilled at handling problem people so that a variety of methods have been evolved to assist with coping with them.
OPTIONS
Problem people may justify the use of some or all of the following techniques:
I
coaching
2
counselling
3
appraisal
4
training 
5
direct confrontation
6
punishment
7
job restructuring
8
neutralizing
9
transferring
1O
termination
11
behaviour modification.
Most of the above will be familiar to you in some form.
Neutralizing involves giving the employee work where their weaknesses cannot cause problems and where they get a chance to use whatever strengths they possess.
Transferring shifts the person to a job where they can capitalize on some especially strong or unusual skill or where their particular deficiency will not really matter.
Much attention has been paid to helping managers learn how to use appraisal meetings to tackle their problem people.
There is certainly every justification for trying this approach since it allows you to bring into the open the nature of the problem which is worrying you.
But much depends on your own skills and whether you have analysed the true nature of the difficulty correctly.
Other methods such as transferring the employee, restructuring the job and firing the person tend to be last resort tactics and in certain circumstances can be hard, or even impossible to implement.
Another assumption underlying the use of the first 10 methods listed above is that you are able to analyse carefully not merely what is going wrong but why.
For example you are expected to dig into the problem and discover causes such as:
lack of job knowledge or job related ability
stress and emotional problems
motivational factors
medical disorders
group pressures
organizational causes such as poor induction, excessive span of control, lack of effective training
working conditions
family problems
cultural differences.
Once you uncover the cause, the theory goes that you are half way to solving  the particular problem that concerns you.
Unfortunately it is never quite as easy as that.
Even unravelling the cause can be so time consuming that many managers merely give up the struggle.
The eleventh method, behaviour modification, is less demanding in terms of complex causes and offers a simpler approach to tackling problem people.
BEHAVIOUR MODIFICATION (BM)
This has nothing to do with brain washing or the era of big brother.
It is merely the application of some basic rules of human behaviour that researchers have uncovered over the last hundred years or so.
These findings are being applied in a systematic way to help managers influence the behaviour of their employees.
You do not have to become a psychologist in the academic sense.
You don't even need to know much about the theories behind behaviour modification.
You are merely required to put certain principles into practice at work.
To help do this a number of consultants now run carefully devised training programmes and there are a variety of excellent do it yourself handbooks.
Two of these are mentioned in the further reading list.
Because behaviour modification is such a mouthful and sounds rather insidious various writers have tried to make it sound more acceptable by devising new names for it.
Here we'll just stick to initials, BM, to save writing the words out each time.
BM is simpler in many ways than other methods that try to influence problem employees.
It focuses the attention on a very limited aspect of the problem, namely behaviour.
You do not look at motivations, feelings or even attitudes.
Instead the spotlight is on what people actually do, or don't do.
In other words you are looking at actions.
Managers have to modify or influence behaviour all the time.
You give people new schedules, reports to write, projects to complete, a customer or client to visit and so on.
You do this to help the organization.
The question is not whether you will influence behaviour but how.
BM says that behaviour is influenced by two powerful forces, both of which could be modified by you in some situations.
These two forces are:
1
triggers, or cues that precede someone's behaviour
2
the results of behaviour, that is, the consequences that follow from someone's behaviour.
The first of these assumes a direct link between what happens before someone behaves in a certain way and their subsequent actions:
A trigger is any event which produces the behaviour you are concerned about.
For example, if every time you tell the typist that your work is very urgent the result seems to be that the job arrives late, then maybe she hates being put under pressure and reacts in the opposite way that you want.
Your saying the work is urgent is the trigger, the result is lateness.
With BM YOU do not try to unravel the typist's feelings or motivations.
You concentrate on external events only.
You don't know that you are inadvertently causing the work to arrive late by stressing its urgency any more than you know what thoughts and feelings are going on inside the typist.
But you do now have a link which could be tested to see if it is valid.
For instance, you could try giving the typist work and saying ‘here's my latest report’.
If the work now arrives in time then this could mean that by changing the trigger you have altered the behaviour.
The second of the two forces influencing behaviour is the result of the behaviour itself.
BM assumes that people learn from the consequences of their behaviour.
Suppose every time one of your subordinates turns in completed work ahead of time you react by giving him a whole load more, what may happen?
Probably the person will conclude that ‘it's not worth finishing my work quickly, all that happens is I get stuck with twice as much!’
It would not be surprising if you found that the work started arriving either only just on time or even late.
This example shows how behaviour is learned as a direct result of its consequences.
Thus the second major influence on behaviour is the reward, or payoff, as it is sometimes called, for acting in a certain way.
In our example the reward for producing work quickly is merely more work!
Thus one of the most vital questions that a manager can ask concerning behaviour is: ‘What is the reward (or payoff) for acting that way?’
Discover the payoff and you unlock the key to affecting how a person can be influenced.
Putting the two factors that influence behaviour together we have a very simple model which can be used for analysing all problem people situations at work:
The dual role of rewards is another important aspect of using BM.
People may be influenced by rewards in two ways:
1
their behaviour may be reinforced or strengthened.
Here the reward or payoff is a positive one
2
their behaviour may be weakened or discouraged.
Here the reward or payoff acts in a negative way and is a form of punishment.
If you smile every time one of your subordinates says ‘good morning’ then your smile may be positively reinforcing their behaviour to do it again tomorrow.
 Similarly , if every time one of your subordinates makes suggestions at a meeting you purse your lips then this may send a message to the person that you disapprove and they may be discouraged from coming forward with ideas.
One of the most revealing facts about using BM is that you often discover that inadvertently you are either rewarding undesirable behaviour and hence encouraging it, or are mistakenly punishing good behaviour.
Suppose one of your subordinates keeps telephoning you for advice and help several times a day thus interrupting your work.
When he phones you naturally listen sympathetically, offer advice and ask pertinent questions until, grateful, he rings off.
You feel good about the help you've given perhaps, but you still wish the person would only ring when it's essential.
By asking: ‘What is the subordinate's reward (or payoff) for acting that way?’ you can begin to pin down some possible factors behind the behaviour.
You don't attempt to tackle the employee directly and challenge him to explain his actions.
While this might stop the behaviour it might also stop him ringing you when he is really in difficulties.
Instead you list some possible rewards he may be gaining from the phone calls:
1
gains detailed advice
2
receives encouragement and reassurance
3
enjoys annoying his boss
4
avoids having to find the solution himself
5
feels important through interrupting the boss.
You could probably add to the list of possibilities.
With BM YOU don't attempt  to question the employee and dig into his feelings and motivations.
Instead you pick the most likely payoff and test to see if altering it changes the pattern of behaviour.
Suppose that you decide that the employee's main payoff from constantly telephoning you is that he receives encouragement and reassurance.
Next time he rings you withhold this type of reward.
You merely listen in a non committal way.
Soon the employee learns that he is not getting from the phone calls what he wants and expects.
The reward has gone and consequently the undesirable behaviour may diminish or cease.
You may, however, need to go further and meet him more regularly to discuss issues of current concern, so that any major problem is not withheld by this changed relationship.
Negative payoffs, or punishments, can also be given without the manager realizing, with the result that desirable behaviour is discouraged.
For instance, an employee is asked to send in a regular report on how certain work is progressing.
On receiving it you use this report to criticize the employee's work.
The result is that for sending in the report to criticize the employee's punished.
He soon learns either to give you misleading information or delay sending in the document.
Pinpoint behaviour
When managers are asked to describe some of their problem employees they often use phrases like: lazy; poor motivation; negative attitude; obstructive; aggressive and so on.
These all assume that the manager knows what is going on inside the mind of the employee.
BM forces you to stop relying on vague notions about the problem and requires you to be very specific.
Does lazy, for example, mean the person arrives late every day, or takes an excessive lunch break, or never volunteers for anything, or lies about with his eyes closed half the time?
BM demands that you specify the exact behaviour which you dislike.
You have to define it, not in terms of attitudes, feelings or motivations, but in terms of observable consequences.
You must be able to see the adverse behaviour and describe it precisely.
The crucial test question to ask is: Could I measure the extent of this undesired behaviour if I wanted to?
If you are unable to find a relatively easy way to measure the adverse behaviour then the chances are that you will be unable to decide what to do about it.
You simply won't know what to look for in the way of payoffs, the consequences of behaviour.
In BM the first step in influencing the behaviour of other people is to make a precise statement of the adverse behaviour.
This statement relies on external  factors, not internal ones to the employee.
Thus a view that a subordinate is obstructive must be redefined in terms of observable effects: refuses to do over-time; objects to all new ideas or suggestions (all suggestions or just some?); does not provide vital information when needed; persists in coming in very late for regular meetings and so on.
In much the same way the possible causes for behaviour either in terms of triggers, or in terms of payoffs must be expressed as precise statements.
Attempts to do this will usually lead to separating internal forces from external ones.
The latter are amenable to testing by the manager to see if they influence behaviour.
For example, imagine that you have a subordinate who persists in going home early each Friday when you are holding a routine staff meeting.
What might be some of the possible triggers?
Compare your list with the one below:
Internal factors
Poor motivation
Dislikes meetings
Has a bad attitude
Low morale
Bored
Hates rest of team
Obstructive
Insensitive
Low drive
Depressed
Impatient
Lacks ideas
Poor concentration
External factors
Needs to catch uncrowded train
Has a regular hair appointment
Has a faulty watch
Exhausted after a hard week
Just been paid
Meets boyfriend who also finishes early
Has another part-time job
Meetings last too long
Contribution to meeting usually ignored
Meeting always starts late
The statements on the left may be contributing to the adverse behaviour but your chances of confirming it are limited.
Even point-blank questioning may fail since people often cannot or will not explain their feelings or attitudes.
Should you find out there is probably little you could do about it anyway.
The external factors though are concerned with real events.
You don't need to assume anything about how the employee thinks or feels.
You could experiment, question and observe to test out how these external factors relate to behaviour.
For example, you could discover whether the employee's watch was faulty, or whether she did have a regular hair appointment on Friday.
Similarly you  could try shortening the meeting, holding it on a different day or suspending it altogether for a few weeks.
You might arrange for pay to be given out at a different time and check whether the trains are less crowded somewhat earlier in the afternoon.
In this way you can try systematically to determine what forces lie behind the unwanted behaviour.
The basic steps in using BM are:
Step I List all the behaviours that cause you concern, either because they are disappointing or because you want to encourage them.
Step 2 Pinpoint the  behaviour so that it actually describes actions that people do, and which could, if necessary, be quantified in some way.
Step 3 Eliminate from your list any item that is not strictly related to job performance.
Step 4 Select the single most important behaviour that is causing you concern.
Step 5 Determine the extent of this behaviour; does its frequency or seriousness justify your efforts to try and alter it?
Step 6 List the triggers that seem to lead to the behaviour.
Step 7 List the rewards (or pay-offs) that seem to encourage (or discourage) the behaviour by answering the question: ‘What is the reward for acting in this way?’
Step 8 Decide what behaviour you want to achieve.
Step 9 Decide which triggers you intend to alter to discourage the unwanted behaviour or encourage the desired behaviour.
Step 10 Decide which pay-offs you intend to alter to discourage the unwanted behaviour or encourage the desired behaviour.
Step 11 Draw up and then implement your plan for bringing about change.
Step 12 Evaluate the success of your actions by asking: ‘Have my actions made any difference to the person's behaviour?’
This chapter can only give a broad outline of BM and further reading is certainly justified at this stage.
Using BM though is mainly a question of understanding the basic principles and then carefully experimenting on the job, learning through doing.
Negotiating
Every manager negotiates.
Negotiation is about bargaining and the latter occurs in an endless variety of forms at the workplace.
There is the formal negotiating process associated with bargaining with unions over such wide ranging issues as annual pay agreements, working practices and changes in method, introducing new technologies, procedural agreements and many other topics.
But there is also commercial bargaining such as making and renewing contracts, dealing with other departments and agencies, handling redundancy arrangements, and coping with the demands of work colleagues and subordinates.
Negotiation is concerned with resolving conflict.
This conflict is sometimes formally identified as such.
At other times there is simply a disagreement between two parties which the manager must try to resolve.
There are two kinds of successful bargaining:
1
where one party wins what the other loses
2
where both parties emerge from the negotiation having obtained a mutual benefit.
In practice the situations facing you will involve a mixture of both forms of bargaining.
Hence there is a need for a combination of strategies and tactics.
Of the two forms of bargaining the, ‘I win you lose’ variety is probably the commonest, particularly when dealing with unions.
However in commercial bargaining or in interchanges between departments or divisions both sides may emerge with a real gain.
Since every manager negotiates at some time, what are the ideal characteristics for being a good bargainer?
The main ones that seem to be needed are:
1
a quick mind
2
unlimited patience
3
an ability to conceal one's position, opinions and facts without lying
4
capacity to inspire trust in others 
5
to be self-effacing yet assertive at key moments
6
possession of detailed knowledge of the issue under negotiation yet able to see the wood for the trees.
Politicians and diplomats frequently exhibit these characteristics when dealing with foreign affairs.
During the Second World War the King of Saudi Arabia, Abdul Aziz, managed to convince both the British and the Germans that he was on their side.
He did it by carefully keeping his options open and just stopping short of deliberate lying.
POWER
Underpinning all negotiations is power.
It is the crucial factor which determines the final outcome.
Bargaining power, whether belonging to an individual or a group, is sometimes regarded as a rather mysterious ingredient and indeed there is a multitude of definitions.
One of the best sees bargaining power simply in terms of the end results that it can achieve: It is the strength of the negotiator's position after all bluffing has ceased, or failed.
Bargaining or negotiation, a less pompous term is haggling, only occur when both parties are dealing at the margin.
There is no real bargaining if one side or the other holds a total or overwhelming position.
Thus bargaining begins to matter when both sides believe that they have a minimal amount of ability to impose their solutions on each other.
It tends to occur therefore when there is a slight, not substantial, imbalance of power.
Because bargaining occurs at the margin there is a tendency in negotiating situations for each party to take the course of action which seems to minimize the disadvantages, rather than to maximize the gains.
Putting it slightly differently:
my bargaining power is based on the losses which you would suffer if you were to agree or disagree with my proposal
your bargaining power is based on the losses I would suffer if I were to agree or disagree with your proposals.
Intangible though bargaining power may seem at first, it has several important features.
Bargaining power can be:
1
more or less accurately defined
2
applied to the bargaining situation
3
analysed so as to determine its exact elements and how these are spread across the negotiating parties 
4
used to formulate a strategy
5
understood so that it can be manipulated to help you achieve your objective.
Analysing one's bargaining power may not appeal to some managers.
Understandably they feel that it is such an intangible asset that it is more productive to go straight into the negotiating situation and test out the reality of bargaining power.
Yet there are some accepted gains arising from trying to define one's bargaining power more accurately in advance.
The most obvious is that it helps you prepare your position so that it is based on facts rather than speculation or wishful thinking.
The exercise itself actively helps you to formulate your aims and strategy for bargaining.
CONFLICT OR CO-OPERATION?
Many managers like to think that while they must inevitably bargain this can surely be without any real element of conflict.
Yet the nature of many negotiating situations is inherent conflict, it is why bargaining has become necessary.
A simple series of steps to establish if the situation is one with built in conflict is as follows:
Step I State the issue on which you will be negotiating.
Step 2 List the points that you and the other party will most likely raise about this issue.
Step 3 For each point state the most likely settlement that you and the other party will try to achieve.
Step 4 If the problems are different for each side or the solutions each side wants do not coincide then the bargaining is likely to be one involving conflict, that is based on I win, you lose.
BARGAINING STEPS
Bargaining has three elements which are common to all situations, whether formal or not:
1
preparation for negotiation
2
negotiation itself
3
monitoring to ensure implementation.
Preparation
Preparing to bargain, particularly when a great deal is at stake, is a sound management investment.
In far too many instances real hard preparatory work is confined to well trained union negotiators.
Yet preparation is not always a case of in-depth research so much as systematically thinking through what may be faced in the real life negotiating position.
Before you even start bargaining you should have an idea of the range over which negotiations can occur.
For example, what is or is not negotiable, what will be your highest and lowest demand, what are your maximum and minimum concessions?
The formal preparatory steps are:
1
define carefully your overall objective, that is the settlement you want to achieve
2
clarify your own bargaining power compared to the other side's; power and objectives must be in balance otherwise one or other is going to have to alter
3
if necessary, prior to bargaining, seek to strengthen your power by a planned strategy
4
devise detailed bargaining aims that together help achieve your overall objectives
5
prepare your case and carefully document it.
Fully brief your bargaining team.
Negotiating process
The process is much the same in each negotiating situation; actual bargaining is seldom the same from one issue to another.
The bargaining steps are as follows:
1
examine your opponent's position in depth.
Obtain as much information as you can about his argument, his willingness to shift from the present position.
Conceal as much information about your own position as you think is sensible
2
try to redefine the way that the opposition sees its own position so as to enable it to shift away from that position to your benefit
3
move towards a settlement, be alert for an opportunity to bring matters to a conclusion, choose a moment when events are generally going well.
4
finalize and document the agreement
5
monitor the agreement to ensure that it is implemented in the way that was intended.
There may be a variety of ground rules or conventions to which you and the other party must adhere during the negotiation.
These will differ according to local circumstances and above all relationships.
The kind of conventions which you can expect to find operating are:
1
if we bargained about this issue, or ones related to it before, then the issue is negotiable now
2
what we agree must be adhered to
3
there should be a negotiating deadline to complete our bargaining
4
sanctions operated before the negotiating deadline are disruptive
5
there is room for manoeuvre in both parties' positions.
Thus you need to know in advance your:
a
ideal settlement
b
acceptable settlement based on bargaining skill
c
minimum fall back position beyond which there is no argument possible and conflict or no settlement is preferred.
Implementation
The ultimate test of a successful negotiation is when the agreement reached is implemented to the satisfaction of both parties.
This satisfaction is relative, one or either may emerge less than entirely happy with the result.
Not all agreements demand specific actions but when these are expected they should be summarized during the bargaining process and recorded in detail.
Always summarize the concessions which you have agreed to make during the bargaining process but omit to mention those offered by the other party.
These however, must be properly noted in the documentation circulated afterwards.
It is sometimes said that whoever keeps the minutes of a meeting holds the real power and in negotiating situations there is much truth in this.
Always circulate after the meeting your understanding of what has been agreed, even if the other party does exactly the same.
When an agreement has been reached the implementation or follow through should involve both parties.
Since many negotiations seem to break down at the implementation stage it is often worth making a prior commitment to monitor progress jointly and to meet again shortly after implementation is supposed to start.
This allows a rapid response to any  divergences from expectations and for counter action to be agreed.
STRATEGY
A bargaining strategy is the broad framework or plan for obtaining your overall objective.
Such plans are usually carried out using a variety of separate tactics.
The strategy which you will be able to adopt depends on your bargaining strength and other constraints, such as conventions.
Strategies in negotiation can be offensive or defensive and are likely to take account of previous strategies adopted by both sides.
Since bargaining situations are seldom exactly the same your strategy is bound to change to some extent.
You need a flexible and adaptive approach in devising your ground plan for bargaining.
Although there is no single strategy suitable for all occasions there are some recognized categories that you should be aware of in devising your own.
The common types include:
1
opening moves
2
increasing your bargaining power
3
sanctions.
Opening moves
The opening move strategy is often considered the most important since it can set the pattern and tone of all future negotiations.
It works on the assumption that each side is willing to move from its starting point during the negotiations.
The strategy thus usually starts by aiming for the ideal result but having two other results in mind.
The first is the acceptable result (see 5b above on page 51) which you see as a realistic one.
The second result is your fall back position.
This is the minimally acceptable result (see 5c above).
The value of having a clear idea of what would be a realistic settlement and the fall back position can hardly be overemphasized.
By clarifying in your own mind the exact nature of these positions you can enter into bargaining with much greater confidence.
Not only do you know where you are trying to get to, but you can also give attention to attempting to discover the fall back position of your opponent.
The opening move strategy has all sorts of implications about the size or nature of your starting position as far as the other party is concerned.
Pitch your bid too high and you run the risk of driving your opponent away from the negotiating table.
Set your opening move too low or unambitious and it will be difficult later to achieve a settlement well away from this starting point.
Generally though a large demand has advantages over a low one.
Increasing your bargaining power
Increasing your bargaining power is not an end in itself but usually arises  because you cannot move sufficiently close to your opponent's position to gain a settlement.
So instead you set out either to strengthen your position or to undermine his.
Sometimes this can be done before negotiations start and occasionally during the actual bargaining itself.
Ways of trying to increase your bargaining power include delaying negotiations or confrontation until you are in a stronger position, initiating action in another area which raises the costs to your opponent if he disagrees with your offer, linking the issue under discussion with much wider issues which do not seem of much importance at first sight to your opponent but which may be to his long-term disadvantage but to your long-term advantage which will compensate for your short-term loss.
Here are some well tried checklist questions that can help you think out ways of improving your power base for negotiating.
Ask, can I:
1
take some action which I am currently not taking?
2
refrain from taking some action that I am currently taking?
3
force my opponent to take some action that he currently is not taking?
4
restrain my opponent from taking the action he is currently taking?
5
restrain both of us from taking action in which we are currently engaged?
6
cause both sides to take action jointly?
Sanctions
A sanction is a strategy to punish your opponent in some way.
You can use it either before or during negotiations.
It is commonly used to attempt to alter drastically your bargaining position, either by strengthening it directly, or weakening your opponent's.
Another reason why you might resort to sanctions is because you feel like it!
You may wish to get at your opponent in some way and think that this strategy will further your personal or general bargaining aims.
Finally, you might use a sanction to show that you really do mean business in terms of your bargaining position.
For example, management might suspend all negotiations about pay and conditions until employees agree to work normally during the bargaining.
TACTICS
Tactics are the means by which you will try to achieve the broad strategy or plan which you have in mind.
There are hundreds of different negotiating  tactics and many people are rather better at these than the critical creation of the basic plan.
Tactics used in one bargaining session may fail in another, and vice versa.
The point about any particular tactic is that it should only be used to achieve a definite and known result.
For instance, the classic tactic of demanding an adjournment should not be thrown away on a low level aim, such as ‘let's have coffee’.
It is particularly useful when you want your opponent to take time to think out his position so that he comes round to your point of view, and can do so without too much loss of face.
Here are some well known tactics with some suggestions as to how you carry them out.
1
undermine the argument of your opponent by: challenging h! s assumptions disputing the facts of the argument attacking the conclusions of his argument pointing to a major inconsistency
2
undermine your opponent's credibility by: questioning his experience suggesting that he is losing control negotiating to the point of his mental exhaustion
3
support your own argument and credibility by: demonstrating a mastery of detail making an appeal to reason or emotion minimizing weaknesses by saying the point has already been taken into account
4
encourage movement in your opponent's position by: summarizing the course of negotiations so far, suggesting that the time has come for mutual concessions suggesting a new position which represents a different point of departure for both parties linking two or more issues since ‘it might help us get nearer a settlement’ suggesting an adjournment indicating the exact area to which you want your opponent to pay attention
5
enable your opponent to abandon a commitment by: describing all the concessions you have made so far  suggesting that the circumstances have changed blaming some other party or situation for the present position, such as the government, another union, the economy, the personnel department suggesting that somehow there has been a misunderstanding referring the whole matter to another individual or group.
TRAINING
Negotiating is an art, not a science.
But it does lend itself to careful analysis and preparation which may well pay off during the actual bargaining.
You can also obtain help in learning to negotiate through off the job training.
Trade unions run extensive negotiating sessions for their full time officials and it is sensible for managers to gain a familiarity with the subject.
There is no substitute for actually practising a bargaining activity and role playing is a useful method used in off the job courses.
A typical training programme usually takes the form of a series of workshops, sometimes in a residential setting, lasting around three days with perhaps a follow-up day a few months later.
Training in negotiating will normally cover:
I
planning
2
developing a co-operative negotiating environment
3
pre-negotiating attitudes and team building
4
planning for formal and informal approaches
5
the role of ritual in negotiation
6
assessing the probability of conflict and planning to deal with it.
Training will also usually deal with the actual negotiating process:
1
identifying the phases of a negotiating meeting
2
setting time limits and defining boundaries
3
assessing settlement points and the resources of each party
4
probing the limits of the other party
5
countering arguments
6
the role of tactics.
TOP 10 PRINCIPLES
The above indicates that there is far more to negotiating than sitting down  opposite the other party and trying to bargain.
On the other hand, it can be a great deal of fun even if the stakes are quite high.
Some people are natural bargainers and others find the whole process rather tedious.
But all managers have to negotiate at some time so it pays to learn about handling the process well.
John Winkler, a well known marketing expert has taught thousands of executives to learn to cope with and even enjoy the bargaining process.
He suggests the following top 10 tips for bargaining:
1
If you don't have to bargain, don't bargain .
If you can get what you want without giving anything away then avoid conceding anything.
2
Be prepared .
It pays to research and prepare thoroughly for the bargaining process; find out as much as possible about your own bargaining power and the situation of the other party.
3
Let the other side do the work, not you .
It is worth making an important demand early on in the negotiations and sticking close to this position thus making the other party have to work hard to squeeze concessions out of you.
4
Apply your power gently at first .
Assess and build up your bargaining power early on, preferably well before negotiations start.
Then gradually apply pressure so that the message permeates through that you could do the other party harm or cause them problems.
5
Make them compete .
Force the other party to try hard to get your attention and let them know or think that they could lose out to someone else.
6
Leave yourself room .
Allow enough space to manoeuvre around the offer; ask for more than you expect and concede less than you would ultimately be willing to give.
7
Maintain your integrity .
Do not reveal your hand by telling them the complete story, but never lie; if you make a commitment stick to it; be tough, abrasive and if necessary cunning but always trustworthy.
8
Listen, don't talk .
Encourage the other party to reveal their information and position first.
The more you listen the more you'll learn which will make your bargaining position stronger.
9
Keep contact with their hopes .
There is a limit to how much you can demand without causing deadlock.
Large demands have to be floated gently and you must stay in touch with the other party's reactions by looking for signals that they are being pushed too far or too fast.
10
Let them get used to your big ideas .
Demand the absolute top limit and do not give way too easily.
Remember, it may take them time to come to terms with your demands.
Be patient and do not try to settle too early.
Report writing
Report writing is a disease.
Daily it devours whole forests and countless hours of sweated labour.
Yet to what end?
Few reports produce tangible results, many are drivel, most are soon dead or dying.
The world is awash with them.
It is only too easy to write reports.
The real problem is to make your particular message stand out from the crowd.
Like job applicants there are usually a host of competitors vying for attention.
Yours may fail because there is nothing special about it.
What exactly is a management report?
It is usually a written document directed to decision makers, conveying facts, opinions, information, interpretations and possibly recommendations.
It concerns some issue which may ultimately imply a choice of what to do about it.
Is there anything special about such reports?
In terms of the art of writing, no.
But if your report is to produce more than the predictable yawn then it must be different.
Its prime target is an audience of decision makers whose names you can write down on a single sheet of paper.
It will also have a structure and content, length and style which all blend to meet the needs of this defined audience.
Achieve these aims and your report will be special, even rare.
STAGES
Report writing falls into three phases requiring equal time commitments from you.
Stage one is preparation, stage two is production, and the final stage is follow through.
Few report writers invest up to a third of their time on follow through which is why their efforts so often arrive on death row; the shelf in someone's office where doomed reports await transfer to the waste bin or shredder.
Each of these stages divides into separate activities which are not always discrete but merge with one another:
Preparation
Problem identification
Briefing or report specification, terms of reference 
Information and fact gathering
Analysis
Identification of main message and submessages
Production
Structuring
Writing, testing, revising, editing
Summarizing
Production and distribution
Follow through
Presentation and follow up
PROBLEM IDENTIFICATION
Because people seem either to write or commission reports at the slightest excuse you must assume that in most cases a formal, written report is not in fact wanted.
As a manager you should be much too busy to waste time on producing bits of paper.
A verbal report will usually be enough.
If requested to write a report you will need a clear, and agreed, statement of the problem or issue.
You should be able to answer these two questions:
this report is essential because…
unless this report is produced then…
The answer to these is not that your boss will be mad if you do not deliver.
It must be a proper justification which shows that your time is not likely to be wasted on a low priority.
If you are a self starter and have decided on your own initiative that your boss needs yet another report, then check that you do possess convincing evidence that the issue is significant and it is not merely you that wishes to seem important.
BRIEFING AND TERMS OF REFERENCE
A substantial report warrants a substantial briefing.
Even short reports justify proper briefing.
Beware the quick corridor comment: ‘Johnson, let's have a report from you on…’.
This is not a serious demand.
Offer either a quick verbal response shortly afterwards or a one page memo.
A briefing ensures that all concerned realize what is wanted.
Some briefings even lay down the report structure and main topics to be covered.
Any report which demands  more than a full day of your time, or of your subordinates', should have written terms of reference.
These guidelines also apply:
I
the problem must be clearly defined and the issue demanding management attention should be fully documented
2
the tighter the brief as defined by the ultimate report user, the more the latter is likely to be satisfied with the end result
3
the looser the brief the worse the likely result and the longer the report
4
key variables must be defined.
These include: deadlines; what documents and resources are available or accessible; whether the emphasis is to be mainly on fact gathering or on interpretation and proposals; who is to be consulted; how much travel time and cost is justified; whether there is to be an intermediate or informal feedback stage; how will the final report be presented; who will have access to it?
5
the report writer(s) should be free to discuss with those commissioning the document, before, during and after the investigation
6
All deadlines are to be met
7
no matter how long, or short, the final report will start with a one or two page summary.
INFORMATION AND FACT GATHERING
Most reports fail not through lack of facts but because they contain too many.
You are preparing a management report not an encyclopaedia.
First try to list on paper all the main information and facts which you feel will be essential.
Keep asking: ‘but why is that piece of information essential?’.
The more data you acquire the harder it may prove to make sense of it all.
Resist the understandable temptation to demand ever more facts.
Management is about dealing with uncertainty, you can never obtain perfect information.
Be prepared to abandon lines of enquiry which are not producing results that will easily meet your deadline.
It is better to report that you had insufficient time to collect certain data than to produce half baked results.
There is no such thing as an objective fact.
All facts are selective.
Choosing implies judgement and bias.
The natural sciences were once used to point to what we meant by objective information, but quantum physics, for example, has shown that even observing situations can alter them.
In mere management reports the only realistic hope is to offer information which you feel is highly relevant and presents a properly balanced picture.
Where possible, evidence should be quantified so that some idea of its size and importance can be gained.
For numerical facts these principles apply:
1
Most people can usually recall only a few numbers when these have two figures in them.
Ruthlessly round and simplify all numbers, eliminating decimal points
2
all numbers must be essential and not garnish
3
all figures must be reliable; where possible explain the degree of reliability
4
all numbers and calculations must be accurate, that is, devoid of error
5
numbers prove nothing by themselves.
There must be a clear link between information and argument.
ANALYSIS
Facts do not ‘speak for themselves’.
If left to do so they will let you down.
You now have to turn a mass of information into a coherent argument.
The task of drawing out the main points from the mass of data takes considerable practice and is time consuming.
The analysis stage is when your information and conclusions are turned into a message, or series of messages that create the essence of your report.
You will need to ask yourself:
1
how hard is the evidence, will it stand up to scrutiny?
2
what are the underlying value judgements?
3
do the facts support my conclusions and why?
4
how can I undermine and also defend my arguments?
IDENTIFICATION OF MAIN MESSAGE
The analysis stage may throw up numerous conclusions that you feel are fit for managers who await the report.
You will also possess a large amount of information.
On a single sheet of paper write down the main message of the report.
You should be able to reduce this to two or three simple sentences.
This is your theme, your most telling argument, recommendation or proposal.
The value of identifying a single main message cannot be overstated.
Simple such a step may be, but simplicity is what will make your management report a winner.
In practice it is not always easy to stand back from the mass of information and choose a main message and a few submessages.
A useful device is to find  an empty room, away from all your papers, documents, and other distractions.
For precisely two minutes explain to an imaginary senior manager what your report is all about.
Two or three practice sessions will soon evolve your main theme.
In addition to your main theme or message there may be a series of submessages, minor recommendations or conclusions.
Again the problem is to winnow these down to manageable proportions.
There may be many things you would like to say in this report but there will only be room for important ones.
Aim to convey in the body of the report a maximum of seven key messages.
There is considerable evidence that people only remember or absorb up to seven points in any communication situation.
By restricting yourself to seven or less you will enhance your chances of making the report effective.
STRUCTURING
The actual report must now be built into a logical, convincing sequence.
Not only must it have an overall structure which makes sense, but individual paragraphs and sentences must knit together in a coherent fashion that others can readily follow.
A well tried general format is:
1
management summary (a 1–2 page precis of your report)
2
introduction
3
background analysis or body of report
4
conclusions (draw all the threads of the report together)
5
recommendations (proposals for action without reasoning or justification)
6
appendices.
If the report looks as if it will be over 15–20 pages you should be having second thoughts about its suitability.
Perhaps more facts and information can be consigned to a separate supporting document containing appendices material only.
On the rare occasion when over 15–20 pages seems justified add an index page immediately after the management summary and before the introductory section.
Do not forget to add the title and date at the start.
WRITING, TESTING ETC
If the previous stages have gone well the actual task of writing may now be relatively painless.
Indeed much of the material will probably already be in various stages of readiness.
The main job is to begin fitting everything together into a single, coherent whole.
Few people write a first draft perfectly and you should expect to complete several revisions.
With modern word processing facilities this is now a much easier task.
However the sheer flexibility of such facilities tends to encourage authors to produce drafts well before they have got all their thoughts in order.
Consider each paragraph.
Does it follow sensibly from the previous one?
Can you really see the link and will the reader?
Within each paragraph consider the various sentences and whether they each knit together logically.
Even experienced report writers often find that their thoughts have rushed ahead of them and there is the occasional sentence that has no relationship to the rest.
Do the various decisions or recommendations clearly follow from the evidence?
This area is a common weakness in reports leading to rapid rejection or scepticism.
Because you are so familiar with the evidence it may seem obvious that certain proposals or actions should follow.
But will the reader easily grasp the link?
It is worth checking carefully to ensure that the links links are strong ones.
If you are hoping that your proposals will be adopted by senior management you will need to ensure that your report anticipates their possible reactions.
Based on research here are some basic guidelines:
1
require a commitment of organizational resources for a relatively short period of time
2
permit variations in the way that proposals are to be implemented
3
demonstrate that the proposal is capable of achieving desired outcomes
4
clarify the extent to which the proposal provides an improvement over present methods
5
indicate the reason for the proposal's superiority over other suggestions
6
justify costs
7
ensure all proposals are easily understood
8
demonstrate the ease with which the outcome of proposals can be evaluated
9
demonstrate why the problem dealt with by the proposal is important.
When you have a version of the report that is nearly acceptable it is time to test it.
This is usually a painful process which most authors secretly hate!
It means giving the report to someone who knows little or nothing about the actual subject and asking them to say what they don't understand about it, right down to individual words and sentences.
‘But I'm writing a report for someone who knows the background, the jargon and the problem.
What's the good of asking an idiot to comment on it?’
This understandable reaction is, nevertheless, an excuse.
It avoids confronting the basic requirement of a successful management report, namely that it is absolutely, and impressively, clear in its content, logic and general argument.
For this anyone who is literate can comment.
During this stage you are seeking to make the report utterly convincing and readable.
This means having:
1
clear, short and relevant opening paragraphs to each section
2
short sentences and paragraphs; over 25 words or lines respectively can prove overpowering
3
virtually no jargon
4
no spelling mistakes or other literals
5
a very simple paragraph numbering system
6
clearly numbered pages
7
paragraph headings regularly throughout to help the reader
8
decisions/proposals presented in a neutral but thoughtful way
9
the report date marked
10
a clear title page.
SUMMARIZING
The effort of identifying your main message, described earlier, can pay off spectacularly.
A well-presented summary section may prove so compelling that the rest of the report is hardly questioned or challenged.
It might be heartbreaking but the summary plus the recommended actions may prove to be all that is ever needed or read.
One glance at your well laid out, impeccably presented sequence of facts and arguments may be enough to convince an experienced manager that you have done a sound job.
The summary may be totally accepted as a basis for decision.
Consider this to be not a failure but an accolade.
A good management summary should not extend beyond two pages.
It should explain what the report is about, its main findings and principal proposals.
It should be totally self-contained.
PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION
There are so many ways of physically producing attractive looking reports that one is almost spoilt for choice.
The main points to consider are:
1
allow plenty of time in your total schedule for the physical typing and reproduction of your report.
Book the facilities well in advance 
2
all material should be impeccably typed or printed, double spaced with at least 1½inch margins on either side
3
reproduction should be immaculate and totally legible throughout
4
the pages should be bound together so that they cannot easily fall apart and in a form which is easy to open and handle
5
all charts, diagrams and tables should be labelled and professional in their standard of presentation
6
the overall appearance should be attractive and inviting to read.
Sadly many reports then die at the distribution stage.
Incorrect addressing, postal errors, wrong handling at the receiving end can all subvert your efforts, particularly where timing is critical.
Where possible, when your report returns from reprographics, deliver it yourself to the main users.
Finally ask yourself this question: Who will be offended if they don't receive a copy of my report?
If feasible find a way to let them see it.
You could be saving yourself much trouble later on.
PRESENTATION AND FOLLOW THROUGH
Such is the relief of producing the final report that there is a great temptation to sit back and wait for congratulations.
After all, if it is any good it should be able to do its job without further help.
Or should it?
You will increase the chances of your report being acted upon if you plan to invest a substantial amount of time, at least as much as in the writing stage, on promoting your report.
Try and present your report and its main findings in person, to those who commissioned it.
One presentation may not be enough.
It may require a campaign to get your message across to everyone who matters in the organization.
You simply cannot assume that because the report has been well received that it will automatically produce action or a decision.
A management report based on careful study and analysis is frequently shelved through sheer inertia.
There is no real resistance to it but the management effort of getting to grips with its content and the various implications may be unpalatable.
Thousands of research reports for example, annually die a sad, but predictable death, because the authors mistakenly believe their efforts should end once the report has been delivered to management.
Follow through is essential.
Some methods you can use to promote your report are:
1
a series of planned verbal presentations and seminars
2
issuing summary sections on key aspects of the report
3
publishing progress reports on what is happening to your document
4
ensuring that it is on the agenda of various organizational meetings and is discussed systematically and in depth.
Follow through will cost you dearly in time and effort but it may reward you handsomely in terms of what happens to your report.
Controlling your time
One look at Margaret's desk tells you she is not in control of her time.
There is paper everywhere, some spread all around the office in every conceivable place and untidily on the few shelves available.
Yet Margaret holds a responsible position in marketing and is by no means untalented.
Like many managers Margaret seems unable to say ‘no’ to the paper work, to the phone calls that come unchecked at any time, or to the people popping into her office for advice, or sometimes just a friendly chat about a project or some personal matter.
When other staff are away Margaret appears to be left keeping the ship afloat by answering messages, doing jobs that are not really hers, and by the end of most days she is usually totally exhausted.
Saying ‘no’ to many things at work is another way of declaring ‘I've got a clear idea about my priorities.’
The essential ingredients of gaining control of your time are knowing what is important and what is less so, ruthlessly putting your precious time and energy where it will produce the highest return and refusing to be swamped with other people's inefficiency.
Before going further let us dispose of one standard excuse that usually crops up when people talk about time pressures.
It is definitely not anybody else's fault that you are facing these strains.
True, every job has its tensions and, above all, stresses which are difficult to avoid.
But getting control of your time is your responsibility and this task belongs to no one else but you.
BOUNDARIES
In any management job you must seek to draw boundaries around your work territory.
Not only should you understand these boundaries but they must be conveyed somehow to your subordinates and above all, your boss.
The better the boss, the more he or she will try to test out your capacities.
By definition this means trying to give you more work and responsibility that you can probably handle.
Fail to control your work boundaries and you will assuredly be on the receiving end, like Margaret, of endless inappropriate delegation, buck passing and management by inertia.
Management by inertia is a particularly common syndrome and easily recognized.
It is where you face jobs which you know are important in organization terms and which, though not your responsibility, will apparently not get done unless you act.
The temptation therefore is to take them on, regardless of what they do to your own carefully worked out plan of action and priorities.
Often the task you end up doing as a result of management by inertia is not merely inappropriate for you but very time consuming.
The latter may be in many small chunks of time adding up to a large commitment, or it may be a single large time requirement.
Management by inertia usually indicates that something has gone wrong in the control process of allocating tasks between different levels in the organization.
In a small enterprise or department, management by inertia is a deadly disease.
The senior manager may be unable to cope with his or her own work either and so much of the overflow simply drifts down to the next level.
It goes down, rather than up, probably because there is no way out higher up.
It takes a tough, well organized subordinate to cope with management by inertia.
The main tool for fighting it is to have a carefully agreed work programme with your boss.
Let the latter realize that virtually nothing is going to deflect you from reaching your agreed objectives.
Management by inertia is such a draining and wasteful approach that you must be prepared to resist its consequences with vigour.
To deal with management by inertia here are some basic suggestions:
1
Develop a clear view of your immediate work priorities.
Write these down and get them properly agreed with your boss.
Make the latter aware of your intention to concentrate on these tasks, if necessary, at the expense of other intrusions.
In discussing this mention the kinds of unacceptable time wasters that, henceforth, you will be resisting.
2
Strengthen your resolve to let some things go undealt with and go wrong if necessary.
3
Attempt to keep a detailed written list of the inappropriate tasks which come your way.
4
Send back up the hierarchy any work which significantly diverts you from the agreed priorities.
5
After completing your priorities to the satisfaction of your boss, discuss in depth the list of tasks that arrived through management by inertia, but don't use that phrase!
Time pressures of various kinds are also a significant factor causing managerial stress.
The latter has two potentially very damaging consequences from your point of view:
1
it causes physical and often mental problems which may lead to you becoming seriously ill
2
it has an adverse effect on your decision making.
Lack of adequate time to organize and manage your day is too vague a concept.
Real time pressures arise when you are faced with complex tasks and do not have sufficient leeway to consider the best form of action.
In decision making lack of adequate time means that you will make choices without sufficient thought for the consequences.
It will also mean that you do not have scope for considering all the potential alternatives thoroughly before making your final selection.
Research into reducing stress has indicated that three factors play an important role as far as managers are concerned when they come to make decisions:
1
the awareness of the serious risks attached to whatever alternative is chosen
2
the hope of finding a better alternative
3
the belief that there is adequate time to search and deliberate before a decision is made.
Thus making time, especially in decision making, is essential if you are to deal adequately with important tasks which face you as a manager.
Many people have studied how managers use their time and there are numerous texts on how to make better use of this most precious asset.
However there are two main approaches to help you use your time more effectively:
the systematic monitoring and analysis method
the task setting and vigilant method.
SYSTEMATIC MONITORING
This tends to be a particularly American approach and is based on analysing intensively your use of time in mind boggling detail.
Not only must you keep an almost minute by minute diary of what you are doing and why, but once you have accumulated all the information you must then analyse it.
Just about everything is analysed in detail.
You list all your interruptions, when they occurred, who made them and the reason.
Then you dissect the results in order to draw some conclusions for taking countermeasures.
Similarly you list all the phone calls, meetings, documents produced and processed and other activities such as specific work contacts in order to devise a better way of coping with these factors.
To help you in your analysis, there are special diary sheets which demand information from you.
Once documented the data can be rearranged in a way that reveals how you can reorganize matters to give you more time.
Similarly you do make the attempt and gradually refine the questions to a point where you for a week or more.
This clock has several buttons on it which you can press to indicate the kind of activity in which you are currently engaged.
For example, writing letters, attending meetings, making phone calls, reading reports and so on .
After a few weeks the time log sheets are analysed for you by a specialist who duly reports back on how you have been spending your time.
The results from the mechanical time log are presented in graph, chart and tabular form.
From these you can begin questioning why you are spending so much time on certain activities and less on others.
Sometimes the results of the time log exercise are startling and provide a sound base for rethinking your work in terms of the balance between different kinds of activity.
TASK SETTING AND VIGILANT METHOD
The task setting and vigilant approach to gaining control of your time is less analytical and more practically orientated.
It starts with the assumption that you probably haven't got time to analyse your use of time!
Instead this second approach asks you to question in some depth your aims and objectives.
In other words you start by asking the question: What are the most important things I have to do?
Start with some life goals rather than merely the more prosaic work ones.
For example, you begin to ask yourself what would you see as important to accomplish in the next six months, the next 12 months and maybe the next couple of years.
You restrict yourself to half a dozen goals in each case.
Then, just to get you really thinking, you answer a second crucial question: What would I do if I had only six months to live?
Although this second query sounds very far from the job of getting better control of your time at work it does however serve to make you question some fundamentals.
After all, if you have begun addressing yourself for the first time to such an issue you are more likely to be able to have the courage of your convictions at work in trying to tackle, for example, management by inertia.
These two key questions are not answered definitively first time round.
It may take you several weeks to refine the answers.
The important point is that you do make the attempt and gradually refine the questions to a point where you are reasonably satisfied with the answers.
Next you begin breaking down the aims into individual goals.
The latter  will help specify how you are intending to reach each aim.
You thus end up with a whole batch of specific tasks to carry out, some over several months, even years.
Finally you attach priorities to these tasks and all other activities then have to be fitted in around these priorities.
For example, if you have decided that it is essential for your long term plan to learn about computers then every moment that you are not doing this activity is a wrong use of your time.
You therefore, constantly and vigilantly, ask yourself, ‘why am I not doing a priority task instead of this one?’
What this approach soon reveals is that you often spend large amounts of time not on the things that matter but on activities which are relatively easy to devote time to, while the more difficult tasks tend to be pushed aside simply because they are more difficult.
On a daily basis these questions should lead you to keep a list of specific activities which you currently see as important to complete in some way.
Ideally you should review this action list daily and never let a day pass without doing something to progress your priorities in even a minor way.
There are many ways of categorizing activities so as to ration your time properly.
One that seems to work well for many managers is merely to divide up the list into three types of activity:
1
MUST do
2
SHOULD do
3
NICE to do
Once you use this approach regularly it is surprising how often you catch yourself doing the tasks which feel immediately rewarding rather than those which are essential.
PAPER
In far too many management jobs there is the tyranny of the in-tray.
Every day, and sometimes hourly, another batch of papers reaches the manager demanding his attention.
As fast as the stuff is dealt with and shoved in the out-tray, in comes another load.
The paper flow seldom has much real relationship to achieving your priorities.
It has the illusions of being part of the process by which your priorities may be achieved but, looked objectively, it is unlikely that it really contributes to this aim.
You will however monitor, progress chase, instruct and communicate through paper.
It is doubtful however if this is how you will really make things happen which is what management is really about.
To do this you will  be involved in meeting staff, attending meetings, talking to people on the phone, travelling, discussing, negotiating and persuading.
But the paper must be dealt with and you need to find ways to master it, before it masters you.
For some managers a busy looking, paper strewn desk, seems to convey that they are very busy and working hard.
While this may be true sometimes there is also often much truth in the saying that ‘an untidy desk means a cluttered mind’.
Two basic rules for dealing with paper which many managers have found work well in practice are:
1
never let the incoming paper pile up.
Send it on soon and work to a deadline
2
never let the paper come into your office unsorted and without relevant back-up material already attached.
Ideally you should handle each piece of paper only once, though this is not always possible.
At least avoid the pending tray syndrome.
This magnet for unwanted paper will fill up and overflow with monotonous regularity and should be abolished.
If you are simply waiting for some other piece of paper to arrive put the original item on a bring forward file with instruction to your clerk or secretary.
The only paper on your desk should be that on which you are currently working and material waiting to receive your attention for the first time.
Abolishing your pending tray will transform your handling of paper.
It will force you to think and plan what to do with every item and if necessary give specific instructions about when it should be brought back for your attention.
Organizing the incoming flow is equally vital.
If you have any serious claims to be a manager you must refuse to accept paperwork direct from the mail room.
The latter has no interest in sorting material beyond seeing that items addressed to you arrive at their right destination.
Somehow you must organize a buffer between you and any mail delivery system.
All items should reach you in carefully labelled folders:
1
items for action, material addressed personally to you and non routine memoranda
2
material for signature, presented to you in a single ‘correspondence’ folder with each item separated by a blotter page
3
reports, government circulars, trade and professional information and general documentation allied in some way to your job and its responsibilities
4
background reading such as journals, house magazines, etc.
If you only have a very limited amount of clerical back-up at least see that this is devoted to taking away the paper and putting it where you will be able to find it again if necessary.
Maximize the number of outgoing items which your assistant can draft and sign for you.
Computer systems are playing an important role in reducing paper in the office.
Look into the possibilities in your organization for using new technology to help you gain better control of your time.
OTHER TIME TIPS
Finally, here are some well tried time tips which can make life easier in gaining more control over your work:
1
write memos on the received item and send it back.
This is quicker
2
always dial your own outgoing calls, it's quicker
3
ensure that all telephone messages reach you on proper telephone message pads and ensure that your message takers are trained
4
delegate authority for tasks and decisions down as far as possible
5
refuse to take work home regularly more than three nights a week.
More than that and your family life is at risk
6
If you spend more than 10 per cent of your time travelling examine your priorities carefully to see how to reduce this time loss
7
establish the principle that when your office door is open you are willing to accept ‘drop in callers’ but when it is shut you cannot be disturbed except for a real emergency
8
be willing to take time away from the office to work in a quiet place such as a library when you want to get an important job done to a deadline
9
if you ask a subordinate to write you a report explain that you are expecting it by a specific date and always with a one page management summary
10
do not personally progress chase except as a final resort.
There are doubtless many other tips that you could add to this list from your own experience.
Perhaps the most important regular question to keep asking yourself, even have it up on your wall where you can see it often, is: Am I making the best use of my time right now?
Meetings
The Chairman placed a large digital clock on the conference table where everyone could see it.
He paused to let the effect sink in and to allow the participants to notice that the machine was not showing the correct time.
With a slight smile the chairman announced: ‘this clock shows the cost of this present meeting in terms of dollars per minute.
As you can see we've so far spent just under 500 dollars!’
The remainder of the meeting was conducted at an unusually vigorous pace.
A large amount of your time as a manager is almost certainly devoted to meetings, often quite expensive ones.
Whether formal or informal, these get togethers are the way that most organizations, particularly the large ones, function.
You probably think that most meetings are a waste of time and you may well be right.
There is much research to support your opinion.
But your job is not to deter people from having meetings, merely to ensure that the necessary ones are fully productive.
Here are the main reasons why meetings matter to you:
1
they focus attention and feelings on what the organization is all about
2
people tend to support decisions which they have helped to make
3
they can make people more accountable for decisions taken
4
group discussion is a powerful tool for persuading, analysing and creativity
5
they help unfreeze fixed ways of thinking and generate new or more ways of tackling a problem
6
they are an important forum for: selling proposals; justifying decisions already made; stopping some decisions being made
7
they help you gain power.
Of these, only the last is perhaps contentious.
Nowadays power tends to be a slightly dirty word as far as organizations are concerned.
You are more likely to hear the more anodyne: personal authority, or influence.
But old fashioned power is what managers seek, whatever name you call it.
You do not need to be chairman of the meeting to wield power, various other roles and devices will also serve your purpose.
Keeping minutes, for example, creating the agenda, and providing regular kinds of information which a meeting needs, are all ways to exert power indirectly.
Similarly, by playing roles such as mediator, ideas person, sceptic, analyst, summarizer, you can also have a major impact not only in the meeting but far beyond it.
You can also enhance your authority by choosing carefully which meetings to attend.
Meetings can build your image, perhaps by impressing your boss or subordinates.
They also represent opportunities to demonstrate good leadership.
Occasionally you can use meetings to reveal good news, or encouraging events that are happening under your command.
Like the corrosive effects of steady doses of pessimism, the constant injection of a note of optimism can alter the whole tenor of a meeting.
If people look forward to a meeting because of the atmosphere which you help create it will add to your personal influence.
Although it is easy to dismiss meetings as time wasters, the above indicates why you should take them seriously.
In many organizations where communications in various directions are poor and managers are feeling powerless to influence events, the single most sensible action by senior staff can be to promote more face-to-face meetings.
PURPOSE
The meetings which you attend reflect varying purposes but the main ones are to:
co-ordinate and control
negotiate
consult and inform
solve problems and make decisions
plan.
Unproductive meetings often occur because those who are attending are unclear why they have come!
Whether you chair meetings or have subordinates who do, make sure that a conscious effort goes into clarifying the reasons for the gathering.
It often helps if, at the start of the meeting, the chairman, or another member, restates the purpose of meeting.
This can degenerate into a meaningless ritual if the meetings are very regular but is effective for ad hoc ones and those on an occasional basis.
COSTS
Despite the advantages of meetings the cost is usually high.
It is not just the salaries of the people attending.
There is also the preparation and circulation of papers before and afterwards, the arrangements to notify people, ensuring that rooms are booked and tables are laid out properly and so on.
Try to bring home to your subordinates the cost of these gatherings, but without appearing to ban them.
This cost consciousness can be generated if you attend certain meetings yourself and lead a discussion about the price being paid for such activity.
In large organizations a personal visit to meetings not directly under your control may be impractical.
So here are some other well tried methods:
1
ask all chairmen of meetings to use an electronic clock to show the escalating costs as the meeting progresses, based on the combined salaries of those attending
2
get tough and put a formal limit on all meetings under your direct control.
For example, suggest that no meeting lasts beyond 90 minutes.
In one organization the chief executive walks out of meetings after precisely 90 minutes, no matter how involved the discussion has become
3
monitor the frequency of meetings under your control.
Unless you are given convincing reasons for not doing so, insist on a reduction
4
ask each committee or team that meets regularly to calculate its running costs and then insist that these are halved.
Where there are several similar teams meeting separately for identical purposes publish the comparative costs of the respective meetings and again insist that these are halved
5
ask teams and committees that meet regularly to suggest ways of streamlining their procedures to save time and money
6
investigate who attends meetings and why; eliminate passengers
7
check whether more junior people can attend, thus saving costs and providing a valuable learning experience for less experienced staff
8
hold more small and informal meetings
9
use internal telephone link ups instead of some face-to-face meetings.
New phone systems will accommodate a ‘conference’ of 10 or more people
10
use closed circuit television and cross country link ups via Telecom and  other commercial facilities.
Compare carefully the costs of these link ups with the true costs of bringing people together physically.
IN THE CHAIR
As chairman your duties are concerned with making the meeting effective.
There are countless books and pamphlets on chairmanship but the words do not amount to much until you actually take charge.
That is why training in managing meetings may be helpful.
Even if you are not chairman, someone should be.
Few meetings of more than three people work successfully without someone acting as chairman.
Sometimes the chairmanship may never be explicitly stated and occasionally the role may be shared between several people.
Even with training, an area which justifies your attention is the preparation for meetings.
Many managers feel that they understand how to run meetings so well that they hardly need to prepare at all.
Not only is this arrogant but also a sure way to lose power and to convince others that the meeting is not worthwhile.
As chairman you are responsible for calling the meeting, holding it together, and devising an effective way of working.
This can eat into the rest of your working day but you must be properly briefed and have given thought to managing the event.
No matter who else gets out of their depth or loses track of what is being attempted, you at least must retain a clear view of the task.
Thus in preparing for your meeting be sure of the objective and give consideration to the possible scope of the discussion.
Try to decide what are the essential aspects to be covered in the time available.
You will also need to consider what information and experience the members might have or need, the questions that might be asked and the possible answers.
Decide how controversial some subjects might be and then try to plan how you will deal with these difficult areas.
Anticipate the conclusions for each item discussed and where possible begin to define potential follow-up action.
None of this need take much time.
With practice you will do it instinctively.
Those attending will look to you, the chairman, to limit or control the amount of time spent on various topics.
You can encourage some pre-conditioning by placing an approximate time allowed next to each item on the agenda.
But your pre-meeting estimates may quickly turn out to be wrong.
Be flexible, if necessary suggest that more time should be devoted to an item at a separate meeting.
Fix the date there and then, while everyone is motivated to go on talking.
Another important aspect of pre-meeting planning is agenda management.
This is a much underrated activity and there is no real excuse for neglecting it.
Here are some of the main agenda tasks:
I
always have a written agenda for formal meetings held regularly, distribute it well in advance giving locations, date, starting and approximate finishing times
2
encourage everyone to contribute to agenda creation (see , for example‘The problem list ’ in chapter 19 on page 154)
3
ensure that all items reach the agenda maker at least half way between one meeting and the next
4
send all relevant agenda material to members at least three quarters between the end of one meeting and the next
5
construct the agenda with care, put easy items at the beginning, difficult items in the middle, and finish off with non controversial issues so that people leave the meeting on an ‘up’ note
6
follow each agenda quickly with a set of minutes which will help clarify action required, by whom and when, from any more general descriptive material about the contents of the discussion.
REWARDS
As chairman you can make or break the meeting by rewarding the wrong kind of behaviour by participants.
For example, if you permit the meeting to start late, because not everyone has arrived, then those who come on time are being punished for their good behaviour!
Those who arrive late are being rewarded by having the meeting delayed for their benefit.
Be ruthless about arriving on time yourself and starting promptly.
To avoid a reputation for being unreasonable, allow a strict margin of five minutes over the starting time and absolutely no more.
If certain key individuals have still not arrived start without them or cancel the meeting.
You will only have to cancel once for the message to be understood.
Similarly, reward those who have carefully studied the papers in advance, not those who haven't done their homework.
For example, if someone says that they did not have time to read the material and asks for a summary from the author or chairman, politely refuse.
Instead, suggest that they sit quietly and listen to the discussion.
If you suspect that others also haven't read the papers always confront directly on the issue.
Ask who has read them and offer congratulations.
If there are very few, apologize profusely to the author, or to the person taking the minutes.
Suggest that perhaps the meeting reconvene in half an hour after studying the material.
This is a last resort tactic however.
Finally, reward those who have read the papers by giving them the most  opportunities to talk about the material and to express their views.
There is nothing more infuriating and destructive than having the discussion dominated by those who have not got a proper grasp of the subject because they have failed to read the material provided.
Some signs to look for in detecting when meetings are failing are:
1
discussion in the meeting drags on interminably
2
adverse member behaviour such as late arrivals, interrupting, whispering, disinterest, personal animosity, lack of participation in the discussion etc
3
The wrong people attend
4
meetings go too fast or too slowly
5
excessive conflict
6
a general pooling of ignorance through lack of information, knowledge or skills
7
the meeting takes the wrong direction by cutting across existing organizational strategy
8
no (or poor) records kept
9
chairman becomes over involved in pursuing a particular line and loses role as neutral.
MANAGING CONFLICT
How do you respond to conflict?
Most managers have to learn how to deal with this, particularly in meetings.
It is worth analysing your reaction to conflict situations since you may unwittingly be making them worse.
For example, in one senior management group the chairman could not abide conflict.
He would become so uncomfortable that he would eventually leave the table and make some more coffee!
The conflict was merely postponed to either later again in the meeting or the next one.
But his flight made him feel slightly better.
Perhaps you deal with conflict by becoming aggressive.
This may only serve to aggravate matters further and undermine your role as a neutral.
Do you react by becoming rather subdued and leaving the protagonists to fight it out?
This too may merely serve to let the situation spiral out of control.
You should have at your fingertips some basic methods of handling conflict in meetings since it is almost inevitable and occasionally healthy.
The main rule is:don't suppress conflict by declaring it out of order .
This is a sure way of making it pop up again repeatedly, either in the meeting or elsewhere.
Once you have spotted a growing conflict situation, be positive, insist on the pros and cons of the situation being systematically aired.
A good  technique is to have a flip chart or white board, divide it with a line down the middle and ask someone to write up the arguments for and against.
This concentrates attention on the facts and away from personalities and feelings.
But do not ignore feelings.
As chairman you should be asking yourself three key questions throughout the meeting:
1
What is the speaker meaning, rather than what is being said?
2
What is the speaker feeling?
3
What are other people in the meeting feeling?
Using these questions to monitor what is happening will help you spot conflict early and react to deal with it.
Once you have noticed that someone is feeling strongly about something find a way to acknowledge this as chairman.
For example, if someone is looking agitated or clearly fuming with anger, indicate openly that you can see they are upset.
Encourage them to express these feelings by suggesting that they state what exactly is worrying them.
Steer them away from attacking other individuals in terms of personalities.
Press people to clarify their disagreements with examples.
Many conflicts in meetings disappear rapidly once you get down to detail and factual cases.
A classic device for eliminating open conflict between two parties is to ask each to describe the other's case, to the latter's complete satisfaction.
Finally, conflict highlights a painful dilemma facing managers who chair meetings.
There may be a choice between concentrating on the group task or dealing with the conflict.
Let's look at this dilemma more closely.
CHAIRMAN'S DILEMMA
As a manager chairing the meeting you may focus your energies on helping the group deal with the intellectual side of its job, ie the task in hand.
While you do this you may have little spare capacity for monitoring the feelings of people in the meeting and spotting members who are silently expressing messages such as dissent, apathy, boredom, anger, confusion and so on.
Research also indicates that a chairman who concentrates almost exclusively on the task in hand will seldom be particularly liked, although probably well respected.
The alternative focus for your energies is on group maintenance, that is giving warmth, support and encouragement to members.
In this role you are smoothing ruffled feathers, drawing forth other people's skills and creative abilities and, at its most basic, helping people to enjoy themselves.
It is seldom possible to be simultaneously promoting group maintenance and also staying task centred.
You will either have to switch continually from  one kind of activity to the other, or divide the role up.
Thus one way of handling this dilemma is to share group maintenance with another member of the meeting who seems to do it well.
There is usually at least one person who seems extra sensitive to how other members are feeling and who tries to reduce conflict.
While ideally this should be the chairman there may be someone even better at it in the group.
This ‘nice guy’ is an invaluable asset and can allow you to put all your efforts into driving the group forward to complete its task.
Be sure though to let the ‘nice guy’ have his say and in conflict situations bring him into play by asking for his views.
Alternatively, you can concentrate on group maintenance, spend most of your time monitoring how members are reacting and responding to both feelings and unspoken messages.
This will not leave much space for promoting the task.
If you have a forceful team member who seems able to keep the group on track, then encourage this person to develop this role.
Ask the task orientated member to regularly sum up where the meeting has reached.
Request his views on whether the meeting is making progress at the right pace and whether he has any ideas on ways of moving things forward.
As chairman you are expected to stay neutral, especially if you are the most senior person present.
You cannot both chair the meeting and hard sell an idea to members.
If you have strong feelings about a situation declare an interest and suggest that someone else temporarily takes the chair.
This will not be seen as a sign of weakness but a real sign of strength.
Delegation
Delegation is about power sharing and also about handing out work tasks.
All managers do both to some degree, but it is the sharing of power and one's personal authority that cause even talented managers to experience anxiety and even indecision.
Delegation depends as much upon the personality of the delegator as upon the abilities of the person to whom power is given.
The amount of delegation that occurs is thus highly variable and seldom entirely predictable.
Delegation can be to individuals, groups and even other organizations.
It involves getting someone other than you to make and carry out decisions, and to achieve results, for which you are nevertheless ultimately responsible.
You are thus delegating the right to achieve failure as well as success.
The test of whether you are delegating is whether you have conveyed to someone else, part of your own authority.
 Although delegation occurs in many ways we are concerned here with transfers to specific individuals.
On your behalf they may perform:
1
a role, or
2
a task.
Managers are frequently willing to transfer responsibility for performing certain tasks, particularly under supervision.
There may be more reluctance, even strong resistance, to a transfer of role.
Task delegation is thus more common, since for most managers there is little choice but to hand on work.
Not only may the manager have insufficient personal skills to do everything, but also far too little time.
WHY DELEGATE?
In the 1960s, Ford of Britain prepared a manual on delegation for its staff.
Brief and to the point it explained that:
Executive positions exist because there are problems that cannot be solved by most employees.
The executive keeps the wheels turning not by  solving routine questions but by tackling the tough ones.
He can delegate other parts of his job and still have enough policy making decisions and planning left to keep him occupied.
Delegation thus involves a pattern of human relationships.
This pattern influences how much delegation occurs and to whom.
It influences the manager's daily activities and decisions and can have extremely beneficial results for the organization.
However, lip service is often paid to the desirability of delegation without accompanying it by actual practice.
There are two main reasons why you should seek to disperse some of your own hard won power:
1
there are substantial gains for you
2
there are substantial gains for others.
Gains for you
To delegate tasks and, along with this, some of your power gives you more time to do other things which you regard as important.
It releases you to spend effort on higher priorities such as planning and innovation and for co-ordinating activities in your department or unit.
As the Ford booklet points out, there is more than enough of these demanding tasks to keep you busy.
Large scale problems or decisions are usually more effectively tackled by being systematically broken down into more manageable components.
By harnessing the energies of others to work on these components managers can achieve results which would otherwise be beyond them as individuals.
When properly performed, delegation generates new ideas, insights and ways of doing things.
There are probably many situations where you as a manager have become so used to a task or a situation that it is no longer easy to bring to it a vigorous or fresh approach.
Delegation achieves this at minimal cost.
Through delegation you can make proper use of specialist skills which may be at your disposal.
Even if you have an accountancy qualification, for example, it may be better to let another qualified member of the profession do work on your behalf while you shift to a non accountancy task.
Finally, delegation ensures that you do not fall into the fatal trap of trying to become or seem  indispensable .
The graveyards are full of people who thought, wrongly, that they could not be replaced.
Instead, a really effective manager works hard at becoming  dispensable , before moving on to more important roles and tasks.
Gains for others
A principal reason for delegating tasks to others is to develop and train them.
Delegation in fact provides a vital, on the job learning experience for which there is no real substitute.
When you hand over some of your power you also ensure that, from the recipient's point of view, their job is enlarged in new or exciting ways.
Job enrichment is part of your general responsibility as manager.
Research has underlined the benefits of both participation and consultation in gaining the commitment of others to important decisions or organizational change.
By sensible delegation you can motivate others and encourage a greater willingness to accept change.
Finally, being delegated to do something means that one is being trusted.
This feeling is a rewarding and hence motivating experience.
One is being given a chance to show what one can do and this realization often releases amazing reserves of energy, enthusiasm and creative flair.
OBSTACLES
Considerable though the gains can be from delegation, there are nevertheless some real obstacles that may lead managers to be wary about sharing their authority.
These obstacles include:
reluctance to let go
lack of skills
lack of acceptance
task definition
ego
cost
fear of excessive delegation.
1 Reluctance to let go
To permit others to do tasks which one can perform well oneself is often a painful and worrying experience.
If you normally insist upon and achieve high personal standards of performance the idea of not obtaining this can be almost unbearable.
Yet delegation means being prepared to accept:
1
the possibility of a longer time scale for task completion
2
the chance that there may be a result of lesser quality than you yourself could achieve 
3
a higher than normal risk of failure and the creation of undesirable side effects
4
a loss of personal enjoyment from performing a variety of activity and a loss of opportunity to maintain practice in certain skills.
2 Lack of skills
Sometimes delegation is genuinely not possible because there is no one capable of doing the task or role required.
But this is frequently more of a rationalization by reluctant managers.
Those to whom power is delegated often find unexpected ways of achieving the desired results, even demonstrating skills which they were previously not thought to have possessed.
The classic view that someone will ‘grow into the job’ may well be fully vindicated.
3 Acceptability
While you may be perfectly willing to hand over authority this action may not always be received with enthusiasm.
Indeed there may be strong opposition to taking on delegated tasks for fear, perhaps justified, that failure will prove personally very damaging.
More prosaically, resistance to delegation may stem from the conviction that one is being over exploited, being asked to do considerably more work but without any increase in pay.
This resistance can only be overcome as you gently persuade and cajole subordinates to expand their horizons.
Sometimes one wants to delegate a task to, for example, a supervisor, who is in turn responsible to a line manager.
While the former may relish the proposed new responsibility, the latter may actively resist releasing such a valued member of staff.
This may be justified on a variety of hard to refute grounds, such as the person is needed to keep production or a service going without disruption.
To deal with this may require a reassessment about what both subordinates do, an analysis of roles or tasks and ultimately positive managerial instruction.
4 Task definition
For delegation to work well the task must be clearly defined.
For all but the simplest actions there should preferably be a written brief which is discussed by all concerned.
Yet many tasks that are suitable for delegation may have to start with only a vague instruction.
The alternative would be to spend so much time defining the task or problem that the manager would indeed be better off doing it personally.
Some problems are typically ill defined in the early stages and then require refining during their resolution.
Yet vagueness in stating the task or problem  can often create resistance or a failure to accept the delegated task simply because the subordinate is not entirely clear what it is you want done.
5 Ego
Many tasks and roles are not only satisfying in a creative way, they also give a personal sense of value and importance.
Handing over these responsibilities to others is therefore sometimes rather threatening to one's ego.
Work itself plays a significant part in defining one's place in society.
It is not surprising that rationalizations are often made about why delegation is impossible when the true reason lies mainly within oneself.
Only by trying to stand back from the daily grind and reviewing one's long term goals can such opposition be slowly undermined.
Discussions with one's own boss can also open up the thinking process to consider alternatives for oneself.
6 Cost
Although delegation may release more time for you it will cost additional time for others.
Those to whom power is delegated may also need help from various sources, beyond their own skills.
Thus delegation can end up costing considerably more than non delegation and must be weighed carefully against the expected gains.
7 Fear of excessive delegation
It takes considerable experience to judge correctly when and how much power should be delegated.
Experimentation is fine, but in some cases the stakes are too high.
On the one hand you can fail to take enough risk and thus delegate insufficiently; on the other, there are dangers about going too far and jeopardizing important resources or results.
A conscientious manager who cares for his or her staff will rightly be concerned about not overloading subordinates.
But it is seldom that junior staff complain about too much delegation as opposed to too little.
WHEN TO DELEGATE
Since delegation can occur at any time a basic question you the manager should regularly be asking yourself is: ‘At this moment, am I making the best use of my time?’
Delegation may be particularly appropriate when:
1
the task is complex and needs breaking down into more manageable parts that use a wide range of skills
2
you are taking work home several nights a week 
3
subordinates ask for delegated powers or demonstrate potential for acquiring more responsibility
4
the task can be systematized or programmed in some way so that others can carry out the routines strictly to your requirements, thus  reoccurring items are frequently delegated without undue risks being incurred
5
others can do the work better, faster or more economically
6
you require the formulation of viable options for your analysis and consideration
7
decisions have already been made and implementation is the main activity
8
details are taking up too much of your time.
Finally, there are two general principles of delegation that have certainly stood the test of time.
First, always delegate to the lowest level possible in the organization.
As trends move away from very hierarchical forms of management the challenge is to find, not so much the furthest point away from you to which to delegate, but the most appropriate.
Secondly, always seek to delegate tasks which will stretch your subordinates.
As one experienced manager puts it: ‘I delegate till the pips squeak!’
WHEN TO AVOID DELEGATION
Delegation involves risk taking.
You are essentially gambling on the willingness of others to do something you would normally do yourself.
You are placing a trust in others that in various ways indicates that you have confidence in how they will perform.
Clearly if you have no confidence in those to whom you could potentially delegate this is not a wise policy.
More specifically, delegation is undesirable when:
1
the task is absolutely vital and only you can be sure that it will be done in time and to the required standards
2
confidentiality is crucial and it would be wrong to expect someone else to take over
3
the task requires great sensitivity and understanding and it would be inappropriate for others to substitute for you
4
the task is so vague and ill defined that there is a strong possibility that subordinates or others will waste too much time and effort trying to decide how they should proceed.
5
subordinates strongly and persistently resist delegation or are poorly motivated to take on wider responsibilities.
To this list we can also add some particular tasks that should not be handed over to subordinates or indeed other specialists who may be available to you:
6
setting objectives for your department or unit
7
organizing employees into a team that can perform efficiently with the least supervision and friction
8
communicating to keep employees challenged and informed through informal but planned face-to-face contacts
9
checking results and analysing them as guides to future action
10
developing immediate subordinates in skills and routine decision making so that the organization becomes self maintaining and flexible.
PROMOTING DELEGATION
Delegation is often a result of sheer necessity.
You may have little or no choice about transferring some of your authority because of time pressures placed on you by, for example, the actions of senior management.
Yet on many other occasions you may actively wish to promote delegation and there are a variety of useful methods which can stimulate it in practice.
The first requirement is to clarify the task, its timing and what if any resources are available to carry it out.
Delegation is certainly not handing the job over to someone else in a casual way and simply muttering ‘there you are, get on with it’.
Proper preparation and instruction are essential if you are to rest easy that the power you have handed over will be used effectively.
A further requirement is that the task or role which you are prepared to delegate must be seen as an important one.
While it is desirable that you too feel that way about it, it is essential that the person to whom you are delegating sees the task as valuable.
An important component of successful delegation is of course choosing the right people to carry out what you want.
They need the right skills and motivation or at least the chance that they can somehow acquire these.
Also, you must ensure that there is sufficient time and resources for them to have a reasonable likelihood of success.
The person to whom power is delegated must possess a measure of confidence in themselves.
While this may be acquired partly through acquiring delegated tasks it is little use choosing someone who feels totally inadequate when faced with new responsibilities.
One way of coping with  such anxiety is to prepare the subordinate first with special training, if necessary off the job.
In delegating you are saying ‘do this instead of me!’
Thus you must provide adequate back up advice should the other person run into difficulties.
Proper delegation does not mean abandoning the person.
What tasks or roles should you in fact delegate?
To answer this correctly you need to analyse the tasks that face you currently to decide how many of them can be handed on immediately, or later with careful preparation.
Each task must be judged in terms of the basic question: Do I need to do this or could someone else do it for me?
From this point you must then decide how far to push the delegated task down the organizational hierarchy.
The standard rule is: delegate to the lowest level possible, compatible with a reasonable chance of a successful outcome.
Another criterion that works well is to continue delegating up to the point where subordinates either actually object, or begin to fail to deliver successful results.
A standard technique that has stood the test of time is to analyse all paper work crossing your desk over a period of say a month.
The aim is to scrutinize it with a view to stopping it coming through the door next time.
You look for ways to ensure that either it can be regularly dealt with by someone else or at least that it should reach you partly or virtually completed.
In your search for things to delegate promote an active discussion amongst those employees for whom you have responsibility.
Discuss with them the issue of sharing tasks and power and let them suggest ideas for improved delegation.
Similarly, if you have junior managers reporting to you, ensure that they have a similar debate with their staff and follow this through to see that action occurs on the suggestions.
A classic way of finding out how much of your own job can and should be delegated is to put someone in charge while you are away.
This should involve making all key decisions and even moving into your office during your absence.
In this way they are seen by others as having authority and they gain a new measure of confidence in dealing with matters on your behalf.
On your return you should then carefully review with the person who has acted on your behalf the tasks which they did well and those which were less satisfactory.
Similarly, by identifying tasks which they enjoyed, you can begin to agree on sharing work and power in mutually acceptable areas of responsibility.
In creating an atmosphere in which delegation is expected and welcomed you need to show that you will accept the mistakes that others make on your behalf.
Those who act for you must feel confident that you will back them as long as they have genuinely done their best.
Two further key elements in successful delegation are monitoring and rewarding success.
The former requires you to demand constant, though not excessive, feedback on how matters are progressing which are no longer directly under your control.
You are fully entitled to expect these reports on progress regularly.
When they are written read them carefully, occasionally commenting on some particular aspect.
Knowing that you are watching events, albeit from a distance, is a powerful stimulant to better performance.
In due course you should find ways to reward the achievements of those who have acted on your behalf.
Such rewards are not necessarily about financial payments or promotion.
They can merely be well expressed thanks, comments in newsletters, public congratulations, even sometimes a small but symbolic gift.
Facts from figures
In 1982 one of Britain's leading computer magazines was told about Bart Kahn's new micro computer.
The machine had a massive storage capacity which could nevertheless fit into a handbag.
The magazine circulated his specifications, amounting to 70 pages of technical detail and carefully presented figures, all impressively precise.
The magazine applauded the theory and looked forward to seeing the new machine in action.
Several leading computer firms happily entered into expensive agreements with Bart Kahn.
However, his company Micro Xenox collapsed with debts estimated at £480,000 and Bart Kahn is reported to have disappeared from his Birmingham home leaving behind some very embarrassed computer executives.
An angry managing director of the computer magazine told The Guardian newspaper in November 1982, ‘we are suing Mr Kahn for £18,000 in cash, but have been unable to contact him’.
Bart Kahn's numbers and technical detail appear to have traded on the well known human failing of putting undue faith in well presented figures that look convincingly precise.
Fictitious precision though is just one of many ways in which managers can be misled by numbers.
Managers use numbers to make decisions and therefore need to be numerate.
This means being capable of thinking quantitatively and being relatively happy at using figures in a variety of ways in order to:
1
analyse situations
2
describe situations
3
draw conclusions
4
make predictions about the future.
As part of the manager's ability to use numbers there is a growing expectation that this will include a familiarity with some basic methods and principles of statistics.
Even if you avoid using statistics other managers may be less reticent.
To understand them and their arguments you will need to be able to challenge their statistics in an informed way.
Statistics have come to convey three rather different ideas:
1
numerical facts and figures, often shown as charts and graphs.
This is generally what the public thinks of when the word statistics is mentioned
2
a particular area of human knowledge, making practical use of mathematics
3
quantities or figures which have been calculated from information collected by sampling.
Statistical methods on the whole require simple arithmetical skills, namely adding, subtracting, multiplication and division.
A pocket calculator will do most of the work.
You just need to try and reason logically and stay calm!
Statisticians and others use these methods to extract facts and probabilities from lists, tables, masses of figures or any set of numerical data.
It is an investigational procedure involving either,
Counting:to produce discrete numbers, without fractions or decimals, or
Measuring:to create continuous numbers, taking almost any value, such as heights, weights, lengths etc.
When we describe or summarize numerical information to make it more usable we are essentially using descriptive statistics.
Much of your attention as a manager can sensibly be directed to learning how to simplify, organize and present data for descriptive purposes.
When numerical data is used for making generalizations about the world this is usually based on limited information or samples.
This type of statistical work is about inferring things from the data and is really a sophisticated form of guesswork.
SPECIFIC TECHNIQUES
Some people spend their whole lives doing statistics, covering a vast field of activity.
You may well ask what particular statistical skills you need as a practising manager.
But this is like wondering how much French or Italian to learn.
It depends on what you need it for and how much you are prepared to study.
There are broadly four key areas to become familiar with when dealing in statistics and then there are some specific techniques you can profitably learn.
You need to understand in broad terms:
1
how to collect and present numerical data in simple tables and in further summary form 
2
how to highlight and extract the main patterns, trends and exceptions in numerical data
3
how to use numerical data to draw convincing and credible conclusions
4
when to use and when to refrain from using certain basic statistical techniques.
A chapter such as this can only chart the territory and you will need to go further and read about statistics if this is a relatively new or strange area to you.
Nowadays, fewer and fewer people become managers without first having had some introduction to statistics.
However, many more then proceed to do a management job and soon forget this brief introduction because they are not immediately required to apply statistical learning to real life situations.
But sooner or later the need to use some aspect of statistics becomes obvious.
With this in mind, what methods should in fact be familiar to you?
For day to day purposes a knowledge of the following has generally been found to be useful to practising managers:
1
common and misleading numerical traps
2
how to use the decimal system and round numbers
3
how to group and arrange numerical data in rank order, in simple and useful tables and in percentage form
4
an appreciation of probability and the concept of the normal curve
5
how to calculate the three commonly used averages of the mean, the mode and the median
6
how to calculate moving averages and an index
7
an understanding of, and preferably an ability to use, the standard deviation
8
how to use simple tests of association between sets of data and how to measure the strength of the association
9
a grasp of the principles of sampling and its limitations.
Of course there are many more methods which a manager can learn to use, depending on the type of job which he does.
At one end of the scale a production manager may regularly use some quite advanced statistical methods as part of day to day control.
At the other end, a training manager may occasionally use some basic sampling methods and various evaluation techniques incorporating statistical methods.
To justify using statistical methods on the job, you need at least four prevailing conditions:
1
Confidence that you can understand and benefit from using statistical techniques in a particular situation
2
The requisite skill in the method you intend to use
3
Sufficient time to do the statistical work so that it is completed accurately and can be properly checked
4
A genuine need for the results which cannot be obtained in any other, equally credible way.
The techniques mentioned above are well explained in the recommended reading and there is no substitute for practising the skills on the job.
Underlying all of them is a form of thinking which might be called the ‘urge to quantify’.
This is simply the managerial wish to pin down facts wherever possible in the form of numbers of some kind.
Accountants seem to live that way and so do managers who have a grounding in disciplines such as engineering, economics or the natural sciences.
But many managers do not have such a background; for them the need to think quantitatively is sometimes alien, or at least a strain.
Because of this statistics are often dismissed as irrelevant or to be left to specialists.
In fact effective management means trying to think quantitatively and a readiness to use statistics starts from this assumption.
Behind some of the apparent management reluctance to become more actively involved in using statistical methods is a fear of numbers themselves.
This may stem partly from ignorance about specific techniques but some of it goes back further to past failures at school with arithmetic.
The important point about statistical methods however is that at least the ones mentioned above really do require only minimal arithmetical ability.
A major reason for a manager to understand something about statistics (and to overcome his fear of numbers) is to enable him to cope with other managers who use this method of proving a point or presenting a case.
COMMON AND MISLEADING NUMERICAL TRAPS
Rather less attention is paid in statistics books to some of the more common or misleading numerical traps that can radically alter the meaning of management data.
The numerical data can lead you astray in eight main ways:
1
arithmetical errors
2
false percentages
3
fictitious precision
4
misleading presentation 
5
incomplete data
6
faulty comparisons
7
biased sampling
8
effects of chance not being properly assessed.
The last two of these eight traps are commonly dealt with in basic statistical texts and cannot be sensibly covered here.
But let us look more closely at the other six trouble makers.
Arithmetical errors
It is surprising the extent to which published numbers are taken for granted as reliable.
Yet in even the most respectable and credible sources, arithmetical mistakes can, and occasionally do, creep in.
In management reports it is often worth adding up the columns of figures that are presented.
Similarly, if the subject matters to you it may be wise to check the author's calculations.
The value of careful checking was highlighted during the Edward Heath government in Britain during the 1970s.
A major blunder was caused because, while negotiating with the coal miners over their pay demands, a significant error was made in calculating the true level of previous pay awards and various overtime rates.
The result was that the Government virtually had to climb down over its much heralded claim that it was offering the miners a significant increase in pay.
False percentages
A fatal flaw in using percentages is to try and add them up when this is not really possible.
Trying to do so is the equivalent of adding oranges and lemons.
Watch out for percentages which are cumulated to produce a single and apparently sensible result.
For example, if the sales of car A rise by five per cent , sales of car B rise by 10 per cent and sales of car C by 20 per cent the total increase is most definitely not 5% + 10% + 20% = 35 per cent .
In fact when each rises by say, five per cent the total increase is still only five per cent.
Similarly if junior managers receive a three per cent salary increase, middle managers receive a five per cent and top managers a ten per cent increase the overall rise in salaries must be calculated from the original absolute numbers and not the percentage changes.
Also beware of the trick of falling percentages.
For example, staff turnover is 130 per cent less than last year.
This is impossible since turnover can only fall to zero, it cannot be less than this amount.
Exaggerated percentages are another way of distorting management information presented in a quantified form.
A 200 per cent increase looks huge but the base on which it is calculated may be small.
For example, sales of one rising to three.
Look for percentages which are shown without the original absolute numbers.
For instance: 70 per cent of all employees who were asked said that they liked working for the company.
This looks less impressive if you know that only 10 people were asked for their views and seven responded favourably.
Normally you should expect to see percentages shown alongside the original number.
In this way you can make more sense of the facts by having useful comparisons.
Comparisons are essential, isolated numbers or percentages merely distort the story.
Fictitious precision
The computer fiasco quoted at the start of this chapter underlines the importance of distrusting figures or data when they become over detailed.
Even if numbers are there in profusion and quoted to several places of decimals this does not necessarily mean that they are reliable or useful.
Always ask: how could they be so accurate?
Misleading presentation
Numbers can usually be presented in a variety of ways to suit the story that you want to tell.
There is, sadly, some truth in the saying that there are lies, damned lies, and statistics.
Profits, turnover, enquiries, for instance can be presented on a monthly, quarterly or annual basis, using percentages instead of actuals, in grouped format, as an index and so on.
Similarly, graphs can be presented without zero points, compressed or expanded scales and so on.
Diagrams can take perfectly reliable data and through over simplification deliberately or unintentionally mislead.
Always ask: could the form of presentation be distorting the true situation?
Incomplete data
A salesman whose last two months' returns fall below the required norm may be thought to be failing, until one knows that this is the first time that it has happened in five years.
Data must always be put into a fuller perspective in order to be useful.
Similarly seasonal effects may distort the situation if this is not taken into account.
Sometimes a certain piece of data may be deliberately omitted.
This may be done for a variety of reasons including someone's anxiety that the original figures were just too unlikely to be reliable.
Yet unlikely figures often have a nasty habit of turning out to be true.
Knowing the original figures may also change the meaning or alter the impact of the data.
In Britain, for instance one in 3.5 births are identical  twins.
This could in theory be rounded up to one in four or down to one in three.
A percentage misguidedly based on either would give two widely different figures, namely 25 or 35 per cent.
Faulty comparisons
A common mistake is to compare two figures which cannot be logically linked.
For example, leaving rates of women employees may show a worse picture than for male employees.
But the two sets of data may not be comparable if one group is part-time and recruited prior to having children.
Another common mistake is to compare a current figure with a previous but untypical period which was affected by special events like strikes or summer shutdowns.
EXTRACTING AND PRESENTING
Much of a manager's use of statistics is to demonstrate to others that there is a definite pattern and hence an important message inherent in the data.
Many of the techniques listed earlier help identify these patterns.
In addition, the use of graphs, charts, diagrams and other visual devices also convey numerical messages.
Though a picture may sometimes be worth a thousand words, this may not be true when it comes to drawing out facts from figures.
Graphs can be distorted by altering their scales, bar charts can be made to show misleading comparisons, and other kinds of aids are susceptible to being drawn to suit a particular bias.
Charts and other similar devices often prove of more use in trying to analyse facts from your own figures, rather than for presentation purposes.
By turning the mass of data into a simple chart or diagram you may find the underlying meaning of a mass of figures becomes more apparent.
Having achieved that, it may not be necessary to use the aid again.
Because much management data is used for descriptive purposes, showing present or past situations, rather than trying to make predictions, it is worth becoming adept at presenting statistical material in simple visual ways that others can readily understand.
You will be forgiven for not being a statistical wizard if your numbers ‘talk’.
Employee communications
In one of Britain's most successful confectionery firms strikes are unknown.
The managing director is paid top market rates for the job but the dynamic American parent company has given him just one warning: ‘If your employees strike, you're fired.’
The managing director makes very sure that he knows all that goes on in his firm.
He's in close touch with his employees, knowing many of them by their first names.
In this way he can ‘smell’ trouble long before it gets serious.
Each generation of managers, however, seems to end up learning the hard way.
The importance of communication to and from employees is readily accepted, in principle.
In practice the lesson must be learned anew.
Only then can the emphasis switch from confrontation to co-operation, the attitude shift from apathy to enthusiasm.
If employees are to work at their best they must:
1
know what they have to do and why
2
understand the purpose of their work and what their efforts will achieve
3
know how their personal efforts fit into the overall organization
4
understand where the organization's money goes.
Economic survival of the enterprise or its further progress depends on managers communicating effectively with employees.
Social trends are also placing growing pressure on managers to consult with employees.
The latter now hold expectations that they are entitled to know about matters which affect them, their jobs and their lives.
At school and university people are encouraged to question why things must be done, rather than accept orders passively.
This attitude is consequently permeating organizations and alert managers need to take this into account.
A summary of the long term movement in information sharing is shown opposite.
If you wish to do more than pay lip service to communication, consider these two key questions:
1
do I want the commitment of the employees to our organization?
2
am I willing to implement a formal communication policy?
Answering ‘yes’ to the second question means accepting some well tried principles of communication:
1
it is senior management's responsibility to initiate, devise, maintain and evaluate a viable policy and system of communication which is designed to inform employees regularly about the enterprise
2
top management need to devote a minimum of four full days a year to preparing data personally and having face to face meetings with one or more levels of employees to communicate crucial messages.
Top management must devote time to communications and also show that it has a real commitment to improving communications
3
it is your duty as a manager or supervisor to tell your subordinates all that they need to know to perform their work to the best of their ability
4
to maximize commitment to the objectives of the enterprise employees  must be told rapidly about all matters that affect them directly, and as soon as possible about matters that affect them less directly.
5
it is your duty as a manager to ensure that your group understands your message by, if necessary, discussing the message until it is understood.
Trade unions do not have the exclusive right to such face to face information sessions with employees
6
if information flow and exchange is to be effective it must be planned
7
paper should be used for conveying facts, but word of mouth for reasons
8
planned face to face information flow with feedback is the most effective vehicle for exchanging understanding but supporting media can improve effectiveness if appropriate and justified
9
it is your duty as a manager to do everything to beat the grapevine; never use it to convey messages; the grapevine always imputes evil motives to the most benign actions
10
Communication is not a discrete process separate from the organization's main activities.
It is an integral part of the management of the enterprise's human resources.
BARRIERS
To promote communication means from time to time analysing why there have been failures in the process.
Such failures are not inevitable though they may be hard to prevent.
A number of barriers to good communication also exist.
A principal one is a lack of management skill in the ability to communicate.
Few people admit to being inadequate in this area, most like to think that they communicate rather well.
Another major barrier is fear.
Managers may be reluctant to promote good communication actively for three main reasons:
1
fear that information will be used against them in a bargaining situation.
Virtually any fact can be misused.
The logic of this though is never give anybody anything in the way of information!
2
Fear that information will end up in the hands of competitors.
Experience has shown that generally employees can be trusted and that the advantages of giving adequate information outweigh the occasional risks
3
fear that improved communications will only lead to further, unreasonable demands for information.
The more adequate the information the less further demands tend to arise.
It is true that the nature of future requests may alter.
WHAT INFORMATION IS NEEDED?
The main criticism about information provided to employees is that it arrives too late.
Also when it refers to financial or economic affairs it is usually only bad news.
In considering your employees' need for information, you need to take into account:
1
What the employee wants to know and understand does not necessarily coincide with what the organization needs him to know and understand.
2
The first priority for a systematic communications programme is to meet the employee's personal need for information directly relevant to himself such as: the payments system; hours and conditions; status and boss (who gives me orders, who are my subordinates); amenities and fringe benefits; termination arrangements (what justice do I get); leave; discipline ( penalties , rules, grievance procedure); union and key officials; prospects; changes affecting him (new boss, working conditions, rearrangement of the plant, office accommodation) etc.
3
The second priority for a systematic communications programme is to provide all relevant information to the employee about his job such as: skills, resources and how flexible he can be; factors affecting performance (limits of responsibility, work targets); factors affecting the environment of the job; changes in any of these.
4
The third priority is to increase the scope of the employee's interest in information less obviously relevant to himself, that is background information such as: objectives of higher management; the aim of training and education; aims of the whole enterprise; information on policy and finances; changes etc.
A communication programme will change wants and needs for information.
6
Managers and supervisors have their own particular information needs.
7
One of the most important benefits of good communications is the employees' increased understanding of the managers' contribution to the organization.
8
It is the manager's responsibility to decide what and how to communicate and to adapt his approach in the light of experience.
A persistent management puzzle is deciding what exactly should be given to employees in the way of information beyond the broad principles outlined in  2, 3 and 4 above.
What are the limits?
How can you judge what employees really want?
Three simple rules of thumb are that information should be: capable of being understood, timely and relevant.
Information given to employees must be concise, clear and in easy to follow language.
Material which is difficult to understand or open to misinterpretation is a recipe for trouble.
Considerable effort by senior management needs to be devoted to refining information so that it is related to local units, uses easily understood concepts and yardsticks, has illustrations and examples, is consistent and is a careful balance between mentioning failures and successes.
Since employees often complain about receiving belated information particular management attention should be given to correct timing.
Learning about crucial matters to do with one's own job or work environment from sources such as the grapevine, or via newspapers, rather than from management, is bound to generate resentment and mistrust.
Equally, management should think through the message which it wants to convey to employees so that it does not arrive too soon in a half baked form, leading to demands for endless meetings and possible confrontation.
Relevance of information.cannot be decided without careful thought.
Perhaps the most basic check question to ask in this connection is: Why is this information not relevant?
It is certainly tempting to set artificial boundaries such as salary level, size of empire or status in order to determine which employees should receive which kind of information.
In practice these kinds of limits are too rigid.
More useful criteria would be the type of decision made such as policy or routine; or type of situation such as whether a crisis is likely to affect a large number of employees or a few; or whether the problem is a short or long term one.
To discover in more detail what information is relevant to the needs of employees requires a systematic investigation, often on a continuous basis.
Various techniques available to managers include:
1
data from employee surveys dealing with opinions and attitudes
2
management walkabouts
3
regular briefing sessions with middle management and supervisors
4
monthly lunches with a selection of employees
5
various mechanisms for anonymous comments and criticisms
6
trade union feedback.
Upward channels such as these not only tell management what employees are thinking but more specifically what information they want.
Downward channels are rather more diverse, each having its own special attractions.
These include:
1
seminars, conferences and briefing groups
2
mass meetings and speeches by management
3
notice boards, newsletters and internal newspapers, house journals etc
4
audio and video cassettes
5
tannoy announcements
6
memos
7
telephone answering service giving predetermined information
8
press, radio, television etc.
These channels are described in more detail in specialist publications which also offer helpful suggestions on how and when to use them.
A COMMUNICATION POLICY
An increasing number of organizations are formulating a written and relatively detailed statement of their communication policy.
They are choosing to do this because they have learned that without it they cannot sustain their good intentions.
The policy is shared with all who have responsibility for others.
Based on it management then devises a variety of systems to ensure that, from the employee's standpoint, the top brass ‘puts its money where its mouth is.’
An employee communication policy is meant to reduce, though not necessarily eliminate, mistakes, conflict and lack of motivation stemming from inadequate information.
It should normally be an integral part of a wide ranging personnel and employment policy consisting of other key strategies such as a no redundancy policy, fair promotion rules, pay for performance, common terms and conditions of employment, appeals procedure and so on.
Forward planning for this policy is essential and the principal elements are:
1
A statement of the basic role of communication .
For example, The purpose of this company's communication policy is relatively simple.
It is to help us reach our organization's main objectives.
It does this through encouraging a favourable internal climate of opinion in which all employees can feel involved with, and understand, the firm's affairs.
Communication is a basic part of every manager and supervisor's job; it is a continuous process, not a special once only exercise.
2
Basic objectives .
For example, to maintain channels of communication  both upwards and downwards; to monitor their effectiveness and advise on any necessary improvements; to refine and advise on messages from senior management to employees; to advise staff on communication techniques and messages.
3
Strategic objectives .
For example, to help sustain high morale by keeping employees informed about the progress of the enterprise and its contribution to the economy; to provide a regular forum for employee participation through regular departmental meetings; to select key messages for dissemination within the organization.
4
Specific projects .
These enable the basic objectives of any project to be achieved.
For example, to use particular channels of communication such as briefing meetings, video programmes, management information notes and so on .
While putting together such a policy is a prime management role, in larger organizations the personnel department may give a lead in this task.
The contribution may include: initiation and development, in which personnel specialists play an innovatory and dynamic role in promoting employee communications; training in communication skills; and review, in which personnel experts check and evaluate the impact and effectiveness of communications.
This form of support helps management to answer the check question: Is our communication and information programme working effectively?
It may sometimes be worth forming a special unit to support the creation, implementation, maintenance and evaluation of the policy.
The communication unit might consist of a number of specialists such as a personnel expert in communications, a journalist, a technical specialist and a back up advisory group drawn from all levels in the organization, and perhaps supplemented by occasional outside consultants.
The role of the unit may be a permanent or temporary one, depending on the job that needs doing.
Its brief might include these tasks:
1
identifying communication needs
2
advising management on how to improve the flow of essential information
3
devising a system for the upward flow of staff views and opinions
4
helping to develop new initiatives
5
improving levels of expertise in communication amongst management personnel
6
improving the awareness of the benefits of upward communication 
7
providing support to management in carrying out the communication programme
8
facilitating the flow of information from external sources.
The cost of a communication policy depends on what system already exists and prevailing staff/management attitudes.
It must involve written, verbal and visual methods.
Above all, it costs management time and commitment.
Inevitably the question arises: is a communication policy worth it?
The costs are seldom minor and the effort required usually considerable.
For organizations that want their employees to give of their best the conclusion must be that ‘we cannot afford not to have an effective communication policy’.
Verbal presentations
A core management skill is the ability to present reports.
Without it few executives reach great organizational heights.
People vary though in their preferences.
Some like the apparent safety of the carefully crafted written document.
Others swear by the power of the spoken word.
Verbal presenting skills are used in many situations such as formal speeches, reports to senior management, announcements, shareholders' meetings, sales conferences, union negotiations and communications with various levels of employees.
Self employed business people also find that they need these skills if they are to succeed in, for example, obtaining more money from the bank, winning a vital contract, gaining the commitment of staff.
No matter how well produced, written reports sometimes fail to command the degree of attention or concern which the situation justifies.
This is particularly true when you want to convey not merely facts but reasons, arguments, proposals.
In many situations there is little real choice as to whether a verbal or written presentation is desirable.
Where there is an opportunity to select the most desirable method of delivery the following signs indicate that a verbal report may be preferable:
1
an urgent decision is required
2
a specific occasion arises such as a public speech, a customer presentation, a board meeting where a verbal report is demanded
3
lack of time to produce a written document which will carry weight
4
recipients likely to be more susceptible to, or prefer, the message to be verbally delivered
5
complex facts or ideas must be communicated simply and there is a risk that the written word will fail in this
6
the presenter's personality will play a major part in conveying the message effectively
7
material to be communicated does not warrant a written document 
8
message to be communicated is best conveyed using a variety of visual and aural techniques
9
presenter feels that a verbal presentation will maximize the chances of achieving the desired results.
In summary, verbal presentations have four main purposes.
to persuade
to explain
to instruct
to update.
SOME TIPS ON MAKING A VERBAL PRESENTATION
Beware the lure of your own voice.
You may enjoy talking but this does not make you a wizard at verbal presentations.
Indeed it could be your biggest handicap.
Verbal fluency is an asset and for some people spoken presentations are easy.
But making effective verbal presentations is definitely not the same as talking in conversations.
Set aside adequate time for thought and planning.
Ten minutes and the back of an envelope is seldom enough except for the most gifted.
A poor verbal presentation will not only devalue your message but you along with it.
There are at least eight basic steps in preparing a presentation, the final one being the delivery itself:
STEP 1
Begin by defining your main message.
This requires answering a basic check question: What is the single most important result that I want from this presentation?
By thinking carefully about the answer you should be able to narrow down the essence of your case to a single sentence, and a short one at that.
Is your audience supposed to emerge with a general appreciation of a situation, or do you want some specific form of action?
Are you wanting commitment or merely agreement to seek further information?
Do not proceed until you have refined your aim down to a single prime objective and your message down to a single one sentence statement.
Your prime objective should assist you in coming to terms with the most  limiting aspect of verbal presentations.
It has generally been found that people can only absorb around seven key ideas in any verbal presentation, no matter how well conveyed.
For many situations which you will face as a manager it is safe to assume that your audience may only have time to grasp perhaps just three ideas.
Write down these three, or up to seven, ideas.
A helpful device is to print them on separate index cards which you carry around with you for a while.
Occasionally take them out and study them.
Think about whether they should be changed or simplified further.
This process will make you very familiar with your material and will provide valuable confidence when making your eventual presentation.
Your seven ideas should be subsidiary ones to the main theme you are trying to communicate.
Together they must serve to make a consistent and powerful message that comes across with absolute clarity.
STEP 2
Next you must identify the people who will receive your presentation.
If there are just a few of them write down their full names, titles and relevant facts about their background and attitudes.
Against each person put three reasons why they would be likely to find your presentation convincing.
Then list three reasons why they might have the opposite reaction.
This exercise will help refine how you will attempt to get your message across.
It may well force you to go looking for more information about your potential audience.
A well established rule is to create a sharp mental image of your audience.
You should be able to ‘see’ your audience in your mind's eye.
Defining your audience may lead you to alter some or all of your seven ideas.
If this occurs then be encouraged, it means that you are beginning to get your presentation right.
It should also lead you to ask another vital check question: Exactly how much time have I got for the presentation?
Verbal presentations often fail because the speaker tries to cram too much into too short a time, or goes on for far too long.
For presentations to senior management it is essential that you establish precisely how much time you are allowed, if necessary by asking the chairman.
Once you know the time boundaries you can plan your presentation in more detail.
Unless you are an especially skilled presenter never talk for more than half an hour without allowing your audience some kind of break.
STEP 3
Now comes the hard graft.
You must collect, sort and select all the facts, opinions, ideas, options and proposals which make up your particular message.
Again a useful device tested by time is to use index cards to separate facts from opinions, evidence from argument.
As your work proceeds you should begin to see where you are short of data, whether it is hard information or merely supporting material.
The latter could be anecdotes or opinions, jokes or personal experiences.
Even the most serious management report can usually gain from the occasional injection of levity, even if it merely serves to relieve tension.
Your data must be woven into a logical, coherent case that combines to communicate your main theme and subsidiary points.
To you the arguments may seem obvious, to others the connections only tenuous.
To carry conviction your presentation must move effortlessly from one statement to the next taking your audience with you.
Building a convincing verbal presentation means developing a framework.
This gives your messages a structure and thus an underlying strength.
Frameworks tell your audience that you are not merely throwing large quantities of words at them.
A typical framework beloved of salesmen is:
tell them what you're going to tell them
tell them
then tell them what you've told them!
Underlying this simplistic approach is sound reasoning, namely that your audience needs to know at all times where they are during your presentation.
They must not be allowed to lose sight of the prime message.
Another powerful technique is to begin your presentation by explaining simply the framework or structure you are adopting.
You set the scene, as it were, for your presentation and then proceed to follow the pattern laid down.
This can be reassuring to an audience and help to build credibility.
A framework which has been found to work well in practice is:
Introduction : this is the problem, or situation
Background : here are some essential facts
Interpretation : this is what I think the facts mean
Conclusion : this is what I feel we should do about it
Summary : to sum up what I've said.
Finally a framework which stretches back to distant school days but which retains its validity is that your presentation must have a clear beginning, a middle and an end.
Verbal, as opposed to written, reports give you more freedom to exploit your captive audience.
Therefore you can happily build word pictures with which to beguile and captivate an audience.
These pictures may take you into the far reaches of analogy, metaphor, anecdotes, jokes, personal experiences and even sheer fantasy.
All these can give added force to your message.
But if you are to leave your audience not merely entertained but also convinced, each word picture must have a purpose and be built into the logical framework so that the latter would be noticeably weaker without it.
STEP 4
Having created your verbal presentation you must now play a form of mental chess.
The object of the game is to out guess your potential audience.
What will be their objections to your presentation?
What questions will they raise and how will you deal with these?
This part of building a successful presentation demands a degree of intellectual honesty that may test even the most confident manager.
Somehow you have to play devil's advocate against your presentation and try to knock it to pieces.
It is no use, for example, avoiding awkward questions simply because you can't bear to think about them.
This sometimes happens when managers must prepare for press conferences and they develop a superb presentation only to drop through the floor when an awkward press vulture homes in on the one weak link in the chain of argument.
It can therefore pay to subject your verbal presentation to some extremely critical scrutiny before it reaches its final destination.
If necessary put together a group of people who you know will be sceptical and try the presentation out on them first.
It may be painful, but a lot less so than failing miserably when your presentation ‘goes live’.
Though you may identify a number of questions which may occur to your audience it is not necessary to answer all of them in your presentation.
Just deal with the more obvious ones.
Keep the rest of the answers in reserve in case they are needed.
It is sometimes worth telling your audience at the beginning: ‘Many questions may occur to you in the course of this report.
Some of them I will try to deal with as part of the presentation.
But if you have others which I do not deal with satisfactorily then please raise them at the end.’
STEP 5
You know what you want to say and mainly how to say it.
But nowadays there are many opportunities for livening up your presentation with audio visual aids.
These can help enhance your message if chosen and used wisely.
Given the variety of choices start by asking the check question: What aid could further convince or hold my audience apart from my voice?
Often your voice is more than enough.
Beware of resorting to a visual aid because it seems to look impressive.
Any aid must add real weight to your presentation and be an integral part of it.
The following simple rules apply:
1
no aid should detract from the smooth flow of your presentation
2
you must be totally familiar with the aid and its contents
3
inappropriate material is worse than useless
4
any visual material must be absolutely clear and legible to the person furthest away from it who is also rather short sighted
5
never use overhead transparencies, slides or flip charts to put up lists of words only
6
a visual aid with more than three or four words on it will probably fail
7
video and film must be of the highest professional standard and rigorously edited
8
each aid must have a simple, unmistakable ‘message’
9
professionalize any material you use.
STEP 6
Having created your presentation it is essential to practise it thoroughly.
Professional conjurers who do complicated and difficult tricks practise until they can totally forget the technique and concentrate entirely on the audience.
This should be your aim, to know your presentation so well that the mechanics of offering it are taken for granted.
If you have to read out your verbal presentation then you are asking for failure.
There are some exceptional occasions, when management want to convey a very precise message to a large number of employees, where reading the presentation may be justified.
But generally your presentation must be reduced to its bare essentials before giving it.
If you only feel comfortable writing out your verbal presentation then be prepared to devote considerable time to preparing to throw it away.
Read it aloud half a dozen times then try to set down the framework and some key ‘trigger words’ on half a dozen index cards.
These should allow you to make your full presentation without resort to the full notes.
If you positively must read your verbal presentation then why are you making it?
It is clearly not one of your strengths to give this form of management report and perhaps you should avoid it.
If it is unavoidable then type out the script in double spacing with bold headings.
Glance at the sentences and memorize the next few phrases and look at the audience while you are speaking.
People prefer to be looked at while you are talking.
Also, don't forget to smile; build a smile into your presentation at predetermined points if necessary.
There are innumerable books on public speaking, dealing with everything from how to project your voice to what to wear.
By all means read some of these but there is no substitute for practising on a live audience.
Do not be too proud to ask for help from your colleagues in hearing your presentation.
Your determination to ‘get it right’ will impress far more than a false sense of confidence or a reluctance to admit you could do with assistance.
STEP 7
The last stage in preparing your verbal presentation is one of checking date, time, place and circumstances.
More than one manager has devised a superb presentation only to find that the date was yesterday or the time half an hour earlier.
Your audience will not be exactly receptive if you have kept them waiting, no matter what your excuse.
Check out thoroughly the environment in which you will be making your presentation.
If you are addressing your senior manager will he be constantly interrupted by phone calls?
If that is possible then suggest that the venue is changed or that the phone is neutralized.
Find out if the venue will be noisy and whether you can expect it to be hot or cold.
Nor does this just apply to factories and canteens.
Some tall, air conditioned buildings can be freezing in summer and boiling in winter.
Will you get a clear run in your presentation or will you be interrupted by tea arriving, or latecomers drifting in?
For presentations to senior management you may find a vital member of the team arrives apologetically in the middle of your presentation.
How will you handle this event?
For example will you be ready to give a 30 second summary of what you are doing, or will the effort completely put you off your stride?
How will you judge the time, is there a clock in view or will you use your own?
Is it working properly?
These and other minor details are well worth  researching for important presentations.
Knowing, for example, where you will be sitting, or standing, the lay out of the audience and whether you will have a microphone all help in giving you confidence that you are fully prepared.
STEP 8
If the first seven stages have been carried out thoroughly then the actual presentation itself should not prove too daunting.
But the true test of success is when, at the end of your delivery, your audience reacts in the way that you had hoped.
There are innumerable guides to public speaking that offer advice not only on preparing the material but how to make your voice resonant, ways to use your eyes in order to hold your audience, microphone techniques, and so on.
But if you have many verbal presentations to make it may be better to attend classes in public speaking which are usually inexpensive, of a high standard and fairly brief.
No amount of attendance at classes or reading on the subject can substitute for the experience of making a verbal presentation as a manager in a situation where the outcome really matters.
Thus the final message of step 8 is prosaic: practise in real life situations as often as you can until, inevitably, you become both confident and effective.