

FROM MARCH THE ARCHERS WILL MUCK IN WITH EMMERDALE FARM
The country holds its breath.
So does the rest of Britain…for the all-happening, all-programme, all-channel, all-satellite, all-BBC Radio, all-entertaining TVTimes.
Thanks to changes in the law, for the first time ever, TVTimes will more than live up to its name and publish all the television times of not only ITV and Channel 4, but BBC 1 & BBC 2 as well as Satellite TV.
And that's not all — it'll even publish BBC Radio 1, 2, 3, 4, & 5.
With, of course, all the best stories and features on the programmes and the people who make them…it'll be even better value than ever.
From March the best of British Broadcasting comes together in pastures new.
The all-together better TVTimes.
TV Times
THE TIMES THEY ARE A'CHANGING
Not the Moulin Rouge
New High Street, Headington
Patrons who drive cars to the cinema are requested to park in St Leonard's Road Car Park off Windmill Road.
Cyclists are asked not to lean bicycles against adjacent shop fronts.
When leaving the late night performances, would patrons please be considerate of the residents of Headington who may already be asleep.
25–3 Mar Sun-Sat
Sex, Lies and Videotape
Dir.
Steven Soderbergh (USA/1989/Colour/101 mins) with James Spader, Andie MacDowell, Peter Gallagher, Laura San Giacomo.
Rarely in the history of the Cannes Film, Festival has a debutant director won the Palme d'Or; but then, rarely has such a formidable and original talent been displayed in a first film.
The opening sequence cross-cuts the reluctant confessions of a young wife (Andie MacDowell) to her therapist, with the arrival in town of a left-over hippie (James Spader).
The wife reveals that he and her yuppie husband are no longer having sex; only gradually does she learn that his potency is being energetically drained by her own nymphomane sister.
The stranger in town is a one-time college friend of the husband, now grown poles apart from him.
His admission that he is impotent and his perverse, compensatory hobby of making videotapes of women's sexual confessions proves a decisive challenge to both sisters…
25–3 Mar Sun-Sat
The Law of Desire
Dir.
Pedro Almodovar (Spain/1988/Cert 18/Colour/Subtitles/100 mins) with Carmen Maura, Eusebio Poncela, Antonio Bandras.
Sleazy, sexy, sophisticated and gay — but never insistently so — this is the tale of Pablo and Tino, two brothers who have lived apart since their parents separated when they were young.
But Tino, now Tina — she changed sex after moving in again with her father as his wife — despises men, while Pablo adores them.
Indeed, his passionate predilections form the basis of the plot, which is part thriller, part black comedy but also a serious exploration of the price paid for love and lust — if you're not very careful…
‘Carmen Maura is incredible as Tina, playing the magnetic transsexual with accomplished glee; Almodovar's dialogue is witty, the plot effortlessly intricate, and the boys wonderfully wicked.
Almodovar is the happiest, most entertaining hedonist in the world today.
No wonder the film won a standing ovation at the Berlin Film Festival: it is one of the best Spanish films for many a year.’
London Film Festival .
4–10 Mar Sun-Sat
Last Exit to Brooklyn
Dir.
Uli Edel (W. Germany/1989/Cert 18/Colour/102 mins) with Stephen Lang, Jennifer Jason Leigh, Burt Young.
A violent, harrowing but oddly tender adaptation of Hubert Selby's famous novel set in a harsh, poverty-stricken Brooklyn opens as a strike at a local factory explodes into confrontation.
Meanwhile, a union leader uses embezzled funds to explore his awakening homosexual desire and a prostitute frightened by an offer of love she cannot comprehend, plunges into a rampage of self-destruction.
Uli Edel has forged a remarkably coherent whole, cross-cutting from one story to another while retaining a precise delineation of character, picking out threads of compassion and love from a bleak tapestry of pain.
‘Not a comfortable film, but humane and savagely beautiful.
Time Out 
4–10 Mar Sun-Sat
Indiana Jones And The Last Crusade
Dir.
Steven Spielberg (USA/1989/Cert PG/127 mins) with Harrison Ford, Sean Connery, Denholm Elliot, Alison Doody.
The stunt-ridden opening, featuring a young Indie (River Phoenix), tomb-robbers and a Western-style punch-up on a moving circus train complete with roaring lion, seething snakes and snapping crocs, is a tease.
The plot proper, however, is the Big One — a quest for the Holy Grail.
To get things moving, wealthy collector Walter Donovan (Julian Glover)— who believes drinking from the cup will make him immortal — kidnaps Indie's father and lures the son to Venice where the search for a vital clue necessitates a flesh-crawling wade through flooded, rat-infested catacombs.
For good measure, Donovan is in league with the Nazis, making it a race against both him and the armies of darkness.
There are the customary chases and close-shaves, the best of which has Ford and Connery's car pursued by the flaming fuselage of a German plane.
Sean Connery enjoys himself hugely and brings a welcome warmth to balance Harrison Ford's cartoon machismo.
11–14 Mar Sun-Wed
Jean de Florette
Dir.
Claud Berri (France/1986/Cert PG/Colour/Subtitles/121 mins) with Gerard Depardieu, Yves Montand, Daniel Auteuil.
Winner of 4 British Academy Awards.
Gerard Depardieu plays a hunchback tax collector who inherits a Provence farm.
With a performance of such towering strength and breathtaking pathos that it would make the stones weep, Depardieu's bulk and energy turn Jean into a force of nature even when it is nature he is fighting.
15–17 Mar Thu-Sat
Manon des Sources
Dir.
Claude Berri (France/1986/Cert PG/Colour/Subtitles/120 mins) with Yves Montand, Danial Auteuil, Emmanuelle Beart, Hippolyte Girardot.
Ten years after the death of Jean de Florette his 18-year-old daughter Manon still haunts the hills overlooking the farm stolen from her father the canny Soubeyran (Montand) and his dim-witted nephew Ugolin (Auteuil).
Paradoxically, Ugolinhas fallen in love with Manon, though his declarations of love fall on stony ground leading in the end to tragedy.
11–17 Sun-Sat
Dead Calm
Dir.
Phillip Noyce (USA/1989/Cert 15/97 mins) with Nicole Kindman, Sam Neill, Billy Zane.
With its assured storytelling and skilful manipulation of expectation, this lean thriller provides stylish entertainment.
Seasoned seaman Sam Neill and his young wife sail their yacht off the coast off Australia.
Spotting a stricken boat, they are amazed when a terrified young man (Billy Zane) swims towards them, climbs aboard and tells them a horrifying story about an attack of food poisoning.
But when Neill rows to investigate, he is astonished to see his yacht, complete with his wife and dog, sail off in the opposite direction with the unhinged Zane at the wheel.
Bravura camerawork conspires with a scarce script and some edgy cutting to exploit every ounce of tension, right down to a killer ending.
A nail-biter that will have you chewing down to the second knuckle.
Angela Ford 
18–24 Mar Sun-Sat
Henry V
Dir.
Kenneth Branagh (UK/137 mins/1989/Colour/Cert PG) with Kenneth Branagh, Paul Scofield, Emma Thompson, Derek Jacobi, Judi Dench.
It isn't only the Bard that 28-year-old Branagh is taking on here; it's also the Olivier of film legend.
A relief as much as a pleasure to see him emerge with credit, both as director and performer.
For Olivier,Henry V was about things loftier than individual feelings; for Branagh, however, there is nothing loftier than individual feelings.
As Henry signs the new treaty at the French court, the camera moves in to a close-up as he recalls the faces of the people who have been friends to him in more dissolute days, and have now followed him into battle.
This moment is entirely cinematic and is Branagh's own, concerned with the humanity which forms the real fibre of all big historical moments.
18–24 Mar Sun-Sat
Au Revoir Les Enfants
Dir.
Louis Malle (France/1987/Cert PG/Colour/107 mins) with Gaspard Manesse, Francois Negret, Francine Racette.
Louis Malle's moving, semi-autobiographical film is set in a provincial boarding school at Fontainebleu in the last months of World War Two; twelve-year-old Quentin may be bright, but he doesn't understand why new boy Jean Bornet should be so bullied by pupils and protected by teachers.
Only when the Gestapo arrive in search of Jean — real name, Kippelstein — does he come to realise the full implication of their ‘difference’.
If the outcome of this sombre, lovingly detailed film is unsurprising, its emotional power is undeniable.
Malle establishes an authentic mood of unspoken suspicions and everyday secrecy, drawing upon performances, decor, even nature itself, to paint a portrait of childhood on the brink of discovery.
‘One of the best things to have happened to the French this year.’
25–31 Mar Sun-Sat
Dead Poets Society
Dir.
Peter Weir (USA/1989/Cert PG/Colour/129 mins) with Robin Williams.
‘Carpe Diem lads!
Save the Day.
Make your lives extraordinary!’
The casting of Robin Williams as English teacher John Keating is inspired.
Daring to teach the lessons that can't be found in textbooks, his eccentric methods promote spontaneity and idealism, but his students face stern opposition from school authorities when they choose to exercise their imaginations and resurrect ‘The Dead Poets Society’.
Keating's gospel breeds hope for some, frustration and despair for others.
Director Peter Wier brings to the film a sense of mysticism but, better still draws sensitive performance from his largely inexperienced cast.
25–31 Mar Sun-Sat
Parenthood
Dir.
Ron Howard (USA/1989/Cert 15/Colour/114 mins) with Steve Martin, Dianne Wiest, Tom Hulce, Rick Moranis, Jason Robards
Steve Martin's manically over-conscientious dad steals the show, whether the news that his small, diffident young son needs psychiatric help or chewing the pitch as his offspring fumbles at baseball, and entertaining at a kids' party as an unconvincing cowboy.
But he has it easy.
His own dad, Jason Robards, juggles with favourite younger son, ever-feckless Tom Hulce, divorcee Dianne Wiest's fruity teenage offspring barely communicates with her except to hurl insults about vibrators, and Rick Moranis's toddler is force-fed a flash card education in Kafka and karate…
DEAD POETS SOCIETY
Professional THEATRE for OXFORD at the Oxford Union, Abingdon, Banbury and Henley 3rd June — 17th August 1991
THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING EARNEST by Oscar Wilde
Wilde's masterpiece and one of the great comedies of the English language.
The main ingredients of this theatrical soufflé are well-known:
‘two suitors, two girls under the erroneous impression that they are engaged to a man called Ernest, a gorgon-like mother-in-law and a baby inadvertently left in a handbag at Victoria Station left-luggage office (the Brighton line)’
.
The action is farcical but the wit and the brilliant dialogue contain a highly intelligent, though good-natured (and far from earnest), satire of Victorian Society as embodied chiefly in the overbearing Lady Bracknell, Wilde's greatest comic creation.
In the ‘timeless world of pure play’ that Wilde creates in this comedy, young love triumphs in the end, improbably but hilariously, in spite of the confusion caused by the double lives of Jack and the Bunburying Algernon and the obstacles raised by the imperious Lady Bracknell.
This production played to full houses recently, and received enthusiastic reviews, in seven European countries.
THE GLASS MENAGERIE by Tenessee Williams
This is one of the great plays of American literature and indeed of modern English-speaking theatre as a whole.
The humour and pathos of the play are reminiscent of Chekhov, as are the search for a new way of life and the poignancy of parting and separation.
The Glass Menagerie is partly autobiographical and describes the conflict between a son, Tom, who is drawn to the sensuality of D.H.Lawrence's writings and who himself scribbles poems on shoe-boxes in the warehouse where he works, and a repressive and puritanical mother, Amanda, who is as passionately possessive of her children as she is unwilling to let go of her own lost youth.
Laura, Tom's sister, is slightly lame and pathologically shy; her only friends are the little glass animals she collects — until the arrival of Jim, the Gentleman Caller.
Laura remains the victim of her mother's shortcomings but Tom escapes Amanda's clutches and the spiritual impoverishment of low-income urban American life to become a poet and to sublimate his sister's suffering and enshrine her fragility in his writings.
This production, which updates the play and sets it in the sixties, toured the Continent and gave our company the reputation it now enjoys there.
A leading French newspaper columnist praised the production for
‘its remarkable freshness and youthfulness and its success in never allowing Tom's violent feelings to overstep the sensitivity and gentleness of the play.
The Glass Menagerie is relevant to all young people chafing under the yoke of parental control and is therefore as suitable for young as it id for older audiences’
LIFE IN A LOVE
The story of one of the great love affairs of nineteenth-century England, told in the words of the two lovers, Robert Browning and Elizabeth Barrett, through their poetry and letters.
Elizabeth's father tried to stifle adult love in his children, so that the great courtship had to be conducted mainly by letter — luckily for us, as the correspondence between these two great writers allows us to follow the growing involvement of two passionate and generous people and enjoy the meeting of two lively and imaginative minds.
Through his determination and vitality Browning led Elizabeth Barrett from the sick-room in which she languished almost as a prisoner and ‘carried her into the light and sunshine’, inspiring her finest poems and being inspired in turn to write his greatest works.
The story of the two poets, dramatic in itself, has been made into a play by Robert Southam.
The changing moods of the play are reflected in the songs of Schumann, whose love for Clara followed a remarkably similar course.
THE PROMISE by Aleksei Arbuzov
This is one of the best plays to have come out of Russia since Chekhov and received its first performance in this country in Oxford in 1966, with Judi Dench and Ian McKellen in the cast.
It is a moving story of love and friendship and follows the relationship of two young men and a girl from their teens to their early thirties.
It shows the appalling deprivation and human loss that Russians suffered during the Second World War and the difficulty that children of the thirties had in adjusting to life in post-war Russia.
Although, when the three friends reunite in 1959 after thirteen years, they have not achieved everything they hoped for as adolescents, we are left at the end of the play with a feeling of hope — not the kind of false hope prescribed by Soviet censors but the hope that comes from being young and strong and having lived through difficult times.
The parts of Marat yevstigneyev and Leodnik are played by Dominic Arnold and Russell Floyd, who also play Algernon and Jack in The Importance of Being Earnest and Tom and the Gentleman Caller in The Glass Menagerie .
The play has been translated from the Russian and is directed by Robert Southam.
HELLO AND GOODBYE by Athol Fugard
The play is by one of the leading English-speaking playwrights of today.
It is set in South Africa but is not primarily political and is not about apartheid; however, it subtly reflects the racial and social strains in South African society.
Hello and Goodbye is a powerful play about a brother and sister who come together again after years of separation.
The tension in the story is between their blood relationship and the different directions in which life has taken them.
Johnnie is unable to escape the paralyzing atmosphere of the family home and in the end can only take on the identity of his dead father.
(Johnnie's impotence has been said to reflect Fugard's own frustration at not being able to change South African society through his writings.)
As in other Fugard plays, the woman is the survivor; Hester leaves home once again for the hardship and loneliness of her life in Johannesburg, without the modest financial help she had hoped her return home would bring.
Athol Fugard is also the author of The Road To Mecca, Blood Knot, Boesman and Lena and other plays.
CHILDREN'S CORNER
A dramatization of stories in verse and prose for children from eight to eighty, featuring some of the best loved characters from children's fiction: the Pied Piper of Hamelin, the Little Prince, Winnie the Pooh, Christopher Robin.
Other poems and stories by Oscar Wilde, Lewis Carroll and Hilaire Belloc.
Songs and piano pieces by Debussy, Schumann and Tchaikovsky.
Children's Corner is full of treasures, promises younger spectators the magic of live story-telling and offers adults a return to some of the enchanted places of childhood.
CONCERTS
Running parallel with our summer season of six plays will be the latest of our well-established series of chamber music concerts.
Five of this summer's events will take place as usual in the beautiful eighteenth-century Holywell Music Room, the first room in Europe designed specifically for concerts and the scene of performances by Handel.
Details of our concerts are given in this leafelet.
CHANGES OF PLAN
This leaflet has been printed well in advance of the events advertised.
We hope no changes will be necessary but reserve the right to alter concert programmes or replace performers, if this is unavoidable.
ACTORS
Dominic Arnold trained at the Drama Centre and has since been working constantly, both in television and at Glasgow's Citizens' Theatre.
He plays Tom in The Glass Menagerie , Algernon in The Importance of Being Ernest and Marat Yevstigneyev in The Promise .
He is also a skilled photographer.
Francine Brody trained as an actress at RADA and at Pittsburgh University.
She has since spent seasons at the Newcastle Playhouse and in Durham, taking part in Death of a Salesman by Arthur Miller and other plays.
She has been active on the London fringe, playing the title part in Strindberg's Miss Julie , Gwendolen in The Importance of Being Ernest and other parts.
Francine plays Laura in The Glass Menagerie .
Sue Curnow has played a large number of parts in the theatre and on television in both England and New Zealand.
She trained at LAMDA, where she won the Best Actress of the Graduating Year award.
At the time of going to print she is with the Liverpool Everyman Company.
Recent parts have included Helena in A Midsummer Night's Dream and the title rôle in Euripides' Electra .
She plays Hester in Hello and Goodbye .
Russell Floyd trained at RADA, where he won some of the most important prizes.
He has worked widely since then in theatre and television, playing Romeo at the Wolsey Theatre in Ipswich, Sebastian in Twelfth Night and a leading part in the first revival since the eighteenth century of Sir Courtly Nice , performed at the Young Vic in London and the Swan Theatre in Stratford.
He plays Jack in The Importance of Being Ernest , Jim, the Gentleman Caller, in The Glass Menagerie and Leonidik in The Promise .
Janet Hargreaves has worked regularly in the West End, at the important provincial theatres (Birmingham, Nottingham, Chichester etc.) and on television in Dr Who ,Crossroads ,The Avengers ,Voyage Around My Father and many other plays and serials.
She played Mrs Thatcher in Anyone for Denis and in a television comedy.
Her countless other parts in the theatre have included Helene Hauff in 84 Charing Cross Road , Mrs Patrick Campbell in Dear Liar and Ruth in Coward's Blithe Spirit .
Jan plays Miss Prism in The Importance of Being Ernest .
Cavada Humphrey first appeared in Broadway in 1944.
She worked widely in the United States during the forties and fifties, playing, among other parts, Blanche in Tennessee Williams' A Streetcar Named Desire , then made her English début in the West End in 1960, playing Mrs Patrick Campbell.
Subsequent work in America included Goneril in King Lear , Lady Sneerwell in A School For Scandal and Madame Arcati in Blithe Spirit .
She plays Amanda in The Glass Menagerie .
Sarah Huntley trained at the Drama Centre and has since been working constantly, in television, in the West End, at the National Theatre, at Stratford East, Northampton and for the Kent Theatre Company.
Parts have included Lydia Langrish in Sheridan's The Rivals , Bianca in The Taming of the Shrew and Ophelia in Tom Stoppard's Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead .
Sarah plays Cecily in The Importance of Being Ernest .
Anastasia Malinoff trained at Webber Douglas and has since played Juliet, Lady Macduff, Jessica and Isabella at St George's Theatre in London, taken part in plays by Shaw and O'Neill at the Café Theatre in Frankfurt and the Vienna English-Speaking Theatre, played Hamlet (!) in a production that toured England and, at the time of going to press, is on a British Council tour of the Far East.
She has also taken part in films and television plays in Australia.
Anastasia plays Lika in The Promise .
Lucy Maycock trained at RADA, having first read English at Oxford, where she took part in many OUDS production, playing Juliet, Kate in The Taming of the Shrew and Charlotte Corday in The Marat/Sade .
Professional parts have included Hermione in The Winter's Tale .
She has also appeared in television plays.
Lucy plays Gwendolen in The Importance of Being Ernest .
Nancy Nevinson began her career at the Old Vic in the 1940's, working with Laurence Olivier, Ralph Richardson and Sybil Thorndike, in plays that included Richard III and Peer Gynt .
She toured India with John Gielgud in Hamlet and Coward's Blithe Spirit .
She worked at Stratford with Paul Scofield in Henry V and Cymbeline , in the West End with Edith Evans in Antony and Cleopatra and with Flora Robson and Ralph Richardson in The Aspern Papers .
Film credits include Zeffirelli's Jesus of Nazareth , with Robert Powell, Rod Steiger and James Mason,The Spy that Came in from the Cold , with Richard Burton, and Raise the Titanic , with Alec Guiness.
Robert Southam spent school holidays with the National Youth Theatre, read modern languages at Oxford and has since worked as an actor at some of England's leading provincial theatres (Manchester, Sheffield, Guildford etc.), in London, with Grotowski's company in Venice and for BBC Radio.
Theatre for Oxford has developed out of his theatre tours abroad, for which he has directed The Importance of Being Ernest , in which he also plays Dr Chasuble,The Glass Menagerie ,The Promise , Shaw's Village Wooing , Arthur Miller's Elegy for a Lady and Pinter's The Caretaker .
He plays several parts in this summer's Oxford season.
MUSICIANS
Andrew Ball read music at Oxford and went on to study piano at the Royal College of Music.
Recent London recitals have included the complete cycle of sonatas by Tippett, a programme of twentieth-century music for cello and piano with Alexander Baillie at the Queen Elizabeth Hall and recitals of works by Ives and Busoni at the Wigmore Hall.
He has performed in Hamburg, Amsterdam, at the Bath Festival and appeared with the Nash Ensemble and many other chamber groups.
David Cox studied the horn in New Zealand and has been working in London since 1984, with Quintus, the Albion and Almeida Ensembles, the Sixteen, the Hanover Band and the Academy of Ancient Music.
He teaches at the Guildhall School of Music.
Sophie Langdon enjoys an international reputation as a violinist, playing throughout Europe and North America.
She studied at the Royal Academy in London and the Juilliard School in New York.
She is a member of the Trio Zingara, which won the 1981 Munich International Competition, and leader and co-director of the Contemporary Chamber Orchestra.
Sophie is often to be heard on BBC Radio.
Her repertoire includes classical and twentieth-century classical music, including Ives and Copland.
Bernard Lansky studied the piano in his native Australia, in Paris and with Peter Wallfisch at the Royal College of Music.
He has won numerous scholarships and prizes and has performed in recitals and as an accompanist throughout England and in several Continental countries.
He is currently teaching at the Guildhall School of Music.
Timothy Mason won a music scholarship to King's College, Cambridge, and later studied in Paris with Maurice Gendron.
He has played with all the major London symphony and chamber orchestras.
He is principal cello of the English Baroque soloists, with whom he has recorded for Erato and Deutsche Grammophon.
He is also a member of the Gainsborough Quartet, the London Fortepiano Trio and the Age of Enlightenment.
He has a keen interest in contemporary music and is a founder member of the ensemble Capricorn.
John McDougall studied the bassoon at the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and at the Guildhall in London.
He has played and recorded as principal bassoon for the BBC Concert Orchestra, Scottish Chamber Orchestra, BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra and London Mozart Players.
Hew also plays regularly with Lontano and The Sheba Sound.
Tess Miller studied at the Royal College of Music and has performed and recorded in this country and abroad with most of the London chamber orchestras, both as soloist and orchestral player.
She was principal oboe with the Monteverdi Orchestra under John Elliott Gardiner and with the Academy of St Martins-in-the-Fields.
She has been a soloist at the Proms and is currently principal oboe with the London Bach Orchestra and the Orchestra of St John's, Smith Square, and Professor of Oboe at the Royal Academy and Trinity College.
Linda Nicholson is a member of the London Fortepiano Trio and is widely regarded as a leading fortepiano player.
She has won first prize in international competitions in Paris and Flanders.
She performs regularly as a soloist and in chamber music in many European countries.
She is currently recording all the Mozart piano concertos and all the violin sonatas with Hiro Kurosaki for EMI.
She has created one of Europe's major collections of keyboard instruments.
Julia Rayson was born and lives in Oxford.
She studies the clarinet in London, New York, Rome and Detmold, before becoming principal clarinet in a German orchestra and a member of the Düssesldorfer Wind Sextet.
She has played and recorded regularly for many years with the Melos String Quartet of Stuttgart.
As well as playing for Quintus, she is now also principal clarinetist with the City of Oxford Orchestra.
Paul Roberts' recent London recitals and broadcasts for BBC Radio 3 have earned him recognition as an artist of perception and imagination.
He has been particularly praised as an exponent of the French repertoire and plays regularly for Radio France and in French concert halls.
The Times described him as ‘the thinking person's pianist…
His selflessness demonstrated that Debussy's music can do without the fancy apparel that many other artists might unthinkingly have bestowed upon it.’
Allan Schiller is one of this country's most distinguished pianists.
He studied with Fanny Waterman and at the Moscow Conservatoire.
At the age of ten, he performed with the Hallé Orchestra under Sir John Barbirolli.
He has achieved much fame as a chamber music player (with the Coull String Quartet, for example) and is often to be heard giving solo recitals on BBC Radio 3.
He plays throughout Europe and North America and has made a good number of recordings.
Susannah Self studied at the Royal College of Music.
Her repertoire includes lieder and oratorios, though she has been most active as an opera singer.
She has sung at the Banff Centre in Canada, for Opera Roundabout, at Covent Garden and for the Royal Opera at the Donmar Warehouse.
Her most recent rôles include Dorabella in Cosi Fan Tutte , Mallika in Lakmé and Idamante in Idomeneo .
Neil Sissons studied at the Royal College of Music, before becoming organ scholar of Worcester College, Oxford.
He has performed on the South Bank and at the Greenwich Festival.
Neil teaches at the Guildhall School of Music in London and, like most of the artists listed here, teaches and plays regularly for the European Summer School of Arts and Languages at Oxford.
THEATRE FOR OXFORD
Our main aim is to offer Oxfordshire and its residents, visitors, graduates and undergraduates the best of late nineteenth- and of twentieth-century theatre by English-speaking playwrights, as well some outstanding modern works written in other languages and performed either in translation or by visiting companies in the original.
Our own professional company will present a form of theatre which, like chamber music, will make considerable demands on the talent and experience of a relatively small number of players.
The performances in Oxford itself of this summer's season of theâtre de chambre will take place in the Debating Chamber of the Oxford Union, often used as a theatre, well-known to television viewers and famous as a training-ground for many of this country's members of Parliament, including a number of Prime Ministers, as well as for the addresses there by statesmen from all over the world.
A marquee will be erected in the grounds of the Oxford Union, where drinks and a buffet supper will be served to our spectators.
The company was formed in 1982 and for the last six years, under the name of Touring Europe, has been mainly involved in taking plays in English to the Continent of Europe.
We have toured seven countries and performed to full and responsive houses and received enthusiastic reviews in Brussles, Paris and Versailles, Lyon, Bordeaux, Bonn, Munich, Milan, Turin, Pisa, Bologna, Madrid, Barcelona and Zaragoza, as well as in more than twenty other towns across Europe.
This year we shall be performing for the first time in Berne, Geneva, Luzern, Zurich and Prague.
Our tours have given many people abroad the impression that Oxford is one of the theatrical centres of England!
The company was formed by Robert Southam, who also acts and directs for the company and in 1979 launched the European Summer School of Arts and Languages at Oxford, which takes place at the University and offers courses in theatre, music, dance, painting, film-making and English and French literature to young people from all over Europe, including Oxfordshire.
The Summer School has been acclaimed by Le Monde and other leading European newspapers.
Our actors, with their wide experience of running theatre workshops both at the Summer School and throughout the Continent, aim to develop this side of their work in Oxfordshire.
CONCERTS
SUNDAY 23RD JUNE 8.0p.m.
Holywell music Room.
Piano recital by PAUL ROBERTS.
Images Books I and II by Debussy; three pieces from Miroirs by Ravel, including Alborado del Graciosos; Chopin's Preludes.
SUNDAY 30TH JUNE 8.0p.m.
Oxford Union.
An evening of Sevillana by one of Spain's leading groups of singers and dancers.
Sevillana are similar to Flamenco and take their name from the Andalusian city of Seville, from which they originate.
SUNDAY 14TH JULY 8.0p.m.
Holywell Music Room.
A Beethoven recital by TIMOTHY MASON (cello) and LINDA NICHOLSON (fortepiano).
Sonatas for piano and cello Op. 69 and 102 No. 1; Bei Männern Variations; Pathétique Sonata Op. 13 in C minor.
SUNDAY 21ST JULY 8.0p.m.
Holywell Music Room.
A concert by Quintus: ALLAN SCHILLER (piano), TESS MILLER (oboe), JULIA RAYSON (clarinet), DAVID COX (horn), JOHN McDOUGALL (bassoon).
Quintets by Mozart (K452) and Rawsthorne; Schumann's Adagio and Allegro Opus 70 for horn and piano; Ibert's Cinq Pièces en trio for oboe, clarinet and bassoon.
SUNDAY 28TH JULY 8.0p.m.
Holywell Music Room.
Violin and piano recital by SOPHIE LANGDON and ANDREW BALL.
Stravinsky's Divertimento; Debussy's Sonata; Beethoven's Sonatas Opus 30 No. 1 in A; Ravel's Sonata in G.
SUNDAY 4TH AUGUST 8.0p.m.
Holywell Music Room.
Recital of piano solos and duos by NEILL SISSONS and BERNARD LANSKEY.
Duos: Dvorak's Slavonic Dances; Debussy's Epitaphes Antiques; Brahms' Hungarian Dances.
Solos: Dvorak's Dumka and Furiant Opus 12; Debussy's Preludes Book I; Brahms' Handel Variations.
SUNDAY 11TH AUGUST 8.0p.m.
Oxford Union.
A programme of jazz and classical music, showing the saxophone as an instrument of both musical genres.
Further details to be announced.
BOOKING INFORMATION
Tickets for all performances, at Oxford, Abingdon, Banbury and Henley, and all concerts, may be obtained by cheque (payable to Theatre for Oxford) or credit card from Theatre for Oxford, 69 Oxford Street, Woodstock, Oxford OX7 1TJ.
The telephone will be answered from 6th May between 10a.m. and 8p.m.
Monday to Saturday, and from 10a.m. to 6p.m. on Sundays when a concert is being given.
The number is Woodstock (0993) 812547.
The Box Office at the Oxford Union will be open from 3rd June Monday to Saturday between 10a.m. and 1.0p.m. (8.30 on days when the last performance is at a later time).
It will also be open from 10a.m. on Sunday 30th June and Sunday 11th August.
The Box Office at the Holywell Music Room will be open from 10a.m. in the five Sundays when concerts are taking place there.
Tickets for performances at the Oxford Union and for all concerts may also be obtained from Tickets in Oxford, Information Centre, St Aldate's, Oxford.
Telephone: Oxford (0865) 727855.
Tickets for performances at Banbury may also be obtained from The Mill Theatre, Spiceball Park, Banbury.
Telephone: Banbury (0295) 252050.
Tickets for performances at Henley may also be obtained from Travelwright, 12 Friday Street, Henley-on-Thames (telephone: Henley (0491) 579110) and from the Town Hall after 10a.m. on performance days.
Tickets for performances at Abingdon may also be obtained from Centre Stage, 7A East St Helen Street, Abingdon (telephone: Abingdon (0235) 554060) and from the Amey Hall after 5.30p.m. on performance days.
PRICES
Students taking advantage of Price Code C, the student reduction and the 12% reduction for parties of 8 or more will be paying £4–84 per person!
Students with Aficionado tickets for Code C performances will be paying only £4–40 for each performance.
If you have a disability or special need, you are advised to telephone (0993) 812547 before buying tickets.
Seats are not numbered.
If you prefer the keyboard side or a particular part of the theatre, please arrive in good time.
Programmes are provided free of charge.
BOOKING FORM
If you order your tickets by post, please send SAE and the following information to Theatre for Oxford, 69 Oxford Street, Woodstock, Oxford OX7 1TJ:
Student and child reductions are not available by post or phone.
Pay the full price and you will be refunded at the door, on presentation of a valid card.
HOW TO FIND US AND WHERE TO PARK
The Oxford Union is situated right in the centre of Oxford, two minutes' walk from Carfax, in St Michael's Street, which leads off Cornmarket Street.
There are car parks on all sides: under Gloucester Green, at the end of George Street, and at Westgate.
The Holywell Music Room is also right in the centre of Oxford, in Holywell Street, which is the continuation of Broad Street.
The Amney Hall and Arts Centre is in the grounds of Abingdon School (and is being used for our performances by courtesy of the Headmaster).
Spectators are advised to leave their cars in the multi-story car park right in the centre of Abingdon; they then have a short walk along Park Road to the Amey Hall.
The Mill Theatre is on the Oxford Canal, two minutes' walk from Banbury Town Hall and the Bus Station.
There is a car park in Castle Street, a short walk from The Mill.
Henley Town Hall is right in the centre of town and is flanked by two car parks.
FOOD AND DRINKS
Food and drinks will be served in a marquee in the grounds of the Oxford Union between 5.50p.m. and 9.30p.m.
Drinks will also be served during the intervals of the three matinee performances.
Drinks will be served during the intervals of the concerts at the Holywell Music Room and the performances at Abingdon and Henley.
Spectators will also be served in the two attractive bars at the Mill Theatre in Banbury.
TIMES
Our concerts and plays last between 1¾ and 2½ hours, including the interval.
Doors normally open half an hour before a concert or performance of a play but, when there are two evening performances, spectators may be admitted only a few minutes before the second performance.
Latecomers will be admitted at a suitable break in the performance or programme.
Pegasus Theatre
Magdalen Road, off Iffley Road, Oxford OX4 1RE Tel:(0865) 722851
Home of the Oxford Youth Theatre
Calender of Performances
Spring Jan-Apr '91
Performances
Confluence
Monisha Patil Sat 26th Jan 8pm
A unique collaboration between Bharata Natyam Indian Classical dance, North Indian Hindustani music and flamenco music.
A full-length performance, which premiered at The Place Threatre's Indian Summer Festival in London, which involves young dancers from London and Oxford in some pieces.
‘Confluence’ offers new directions for Indian dance.
Presented in collaboration with the Oxford Bengali Cultural Association.
See also under Workshops
Sat 26th Jan 8pm £4/£3/£2
The Time of Her Life
Transfer Theatre
‘The Time of Her Life’ centres on a family of three related women: grandmother, mother — a busy G.P. and daughter.
When the G.P.'s daughter falls ill, her grandmother has to care for her.
So what is the cost of health and who pays?
Dreams, predictions, a haunting vocal soundtrack and a glamorous set establish Transfer's new show a characteristically rich theatrical presentation.
See also under workshops.
Wed 30 Jan–Fri 1 Feb 8pm £5/£3.50/£2.50
Ghosts
By Henrik Ibsen
In a triumphant return to Pegasus after their Autumn visit with Benjamin Zephania's new play, Tamba present ‘Ghosts’, Ibsen's controversial dissection of family harmony in Michael Meyer's lucid and cutting translation.
This will be Alby James' last production as Artistic Director and looks set to follow the tremendous impact of Temba's ‘Romeo and Juliet’.
New truths are found when stereotypes are broken.
Thu 7–Sat 9 Feb 8pm £6/£4.50/£3
Dance Dutch Week
Outstandingly good dance from Holland in a rare visit to this country.
Only a couple of English dates for each.
Another Pegasus exclusive.
Tiga Program
dansproduktie
dansproduktie are Holland's major showcase for young choreographic and dance talent.
Don't miss this opportunity to see the product of a European system that makes the best of emerging talent by staging work to a high standard.
Featuring three pieces by Phil Griffin, Dries van der Post and Guido Severien whose work links David Byrne, Jan Fabre and DV8.
Score by David Dramm payed live by percussionist Hans van der Meer.
Wed 13 Feb 8 pm £5/£3.50/£2.50
Friday
Julyen Hamilton
Julyen Hamilton's internationally acclaimed work exudes a sheer and dynamic physicality that is playful, entrancing and extraordinarily vivid.
Resident in Holland for the last decade, Julyen Hamilton is a dancer and teacher who's studied and developed improvisation and set dance derives much of its inspiration from Jazz.
Friday is a thrilling and playful solo dance piece and is based on Michael Tournier's novel of the same name.
It uses movement, decor and a specially constructed live and recorded sound score.
See also under workshops.
Top Girls
by Caryl Churchill
Oxford Polytechnic
‘I don't believe in class.
Anyone can do anything if they've got what it takes.’
What do you do if the Pope throws up at your dinner party?
What do you do if you're asked to give up your promotion for a man?
Marlene's got what it takes: nothing fazes her, except the ghosts of her past.
Caryl Churchill's play sets individual achievement against all women's struggle against oppression.
What do you have to give up to have it all?
Thu 21-Sat 23 Feb 8pm £4/£3/£2
Jazz Africa
Marvyn Afrika, Pitika Ntuli, Gail Thompson & Trio
One of the highlights of the Spring.
From South Africa to Oxford via eight other African countries.
Gail Thompson has composed and arranged the music for this blockbuster of an evening.
An evocation of and commentary on a great continent and its musics.
Piano, bass, sax, drums, percussion and voice.
A new commission and fresh outlook for jazz and poetry.
Book early.
Signed performance.
Mon 25 Feb 8pm £6/£4.50/£3
Tressell
Popular Productions
‘Tressell’ is based on the life and times of Robert Tressell, author of ‘The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists’.
It is a one man show from the Sheffield company who specialise in creating work with and for the Labour and Trades Union Movement.
‘Tressell’ is a moving tribute to the struggles of one of the founders of the modern labour movement.
This production is sponsored by Oxford City NALGO and Oxford Polytechnic NALGO.
Thu 28 Feb 8pm £4/£3/£2
In Our Own Time
Lucia Walker, Matilda Leyser, Emily Woof
Premiere of a new dance piece that will take a playful look at how long it takes to be serious, silly, thoughtful, beautiful and, above all, in time while dancing.
Lucia Walker is one of the key figures in the development of contact improvisation in this country.
Double bill with a piece produced through workshops with Lucia and Julyen Hamilton.
See also under workshops.
Fri 8 Mar 8pm £4/£3/£2
International Women's Day Cultural Event
A rich combination of women's cultural activities, featuring performance poetry, dance from Lucia Walker and company, some of the life-size figures from the photographic exhibition ‘Just the Job’ and Bea Freeman, who will present her film about ‘Just the Job’in which she also appears and which presents positive role models of Black women and women from other racially minorities, and the work they do.
Presented in collaboration with Apples & Snakes, Southern Arts, Oxford City Council and Oxford Independent Video.
Sat 9 Mar 8pm £4/£3/£2
Hippolytus
By Euripides
Shoestring
A melodramatic storyline of incestuous desire, Unrequited love and violent revenge; a mythic framework of gods in conflict and supernatural mosters thrown up by the sea.
Euripides' satire on the paranoia of the idealist has always been the cult play of the Attic repertoire.
East Oxford's specialists in Greek adaptations have played their savage and unpretentious rendering of the ancient text to full houses all over England.
Mon 4 Mar 8pm £4/£3/£2
Young Writers' Festival Finalists
Royal Court Theatre
A professional company from the Royal Court present some of the pick of the bunch.
New work by young women and men aged 10–25 which is exciting, provocative, imaginative and amusing.
Fri & Sat: ‘Happy Days’— a 19 year old's street sharp view of life and ‘And Pig in A Poke’— about a pig, families and sexuality.
Fri also ‘Sally's Suspected’— of burgling her own house; Sat also ‘Sleeping Ugly’— the fairy tale strangely revised and at 7pm ‘Claire’— a young woman and her inner world.
Fri 15 Mar 8pm & Sat 16 Mar 7 pm £4/£3/£2
The Fall of the House of Usher
Adapted by Steven Berkoff
Oxfordshire Touring Theatre Company
In a crumbling mansion on the edge of a lake from which a mist constantly rises, Roderick Usher and his sister live out their lives cut off from the rest of the world.
Until an old friend comes to visit and sees that the house is crumbling and dying around them and maybe with them.
Edgar Allen Poe's atmospheric horror story brought to life.
This production will have signing incorporated with the spoken word.
Mon 18 Mar 8pm £4/£3/£2
Platform Evenings
Oxford Youth Theatre
Featuring new and experimental piece by OYT members and other artists, an entertaining mixture of new talent and fresh pieces that have been developed during the spring season.
Mon 25 & Tue 26 Mar 8pm £3/£2.25/£1.50
The Tourist Trap
Round the Hat Rock
A tense story of fear, falsehood and a Full English Breakfast.
Set amid the creaking staircases and small bedrooms of small English guesthouses, ‘The Tourist Trap’ peeps through the keyhole of English respectability into a dimly-lit back room of voyeurism, deception and lies.
After the success of their hilarious debut ‘Rack Your Brains’, Round The Hat Rack return with a new physical comedy highlighting their stylish and visual wit.
Thu 11–Sat 13 Apr 8pm £4/£3/£2
Bouncers by John Godber
Four-Posta-Jelly
A typical evening's events down at Mr Conder's nightclub are related by four bouncers, who play over thirty different characters throughout the show.
‘Bouncers’ relies little on props or scenery, using mime and the audience's imagination to create the world of the nightclub.
A high energy, bitter-sweet survey of nightlife by a hot young company new to Oxford Youth Theatre.
Workshops
Bharata Natyam: Modern & Traditional
Monisha Patil
A workshop, lecture demonstration and video presentation showing how Bharata Matyam is finding innovation within itself in order to reach a wider international audience.
The ideal way to prepare for her evening performance.
Monisha Patil is well-known in Oxford for her excellent teaching.
Sat 26 Jan 11am–1.30pm £4/£3/£2/Free to OYT
Design Workshops
Transfer Theatre
Working with Antonio Bonicco, the designer of Transfer's show ‘The Time of Her Life’, you will make a special installation to develop the basic set in order that the play has a spectacular opening.
Antonio works with fabrics and urban waste materials, he also makes jewellery.
This intensive project will be on a large scale and will be glamorous.
Sat 26 & Sun 27 Jan 11am–5pm £10/£7.50/£5£ Free to OYT
Voice & Sound Workshop
Working with exciting musician/composer Jon Lever, you will explore your voice and how to treat it electronically in order to create a sound world for performance.
As well as working for theatre, he has composed the soundtrack for Tranfer's show ‘The Time of Her Life’, Jon Lever has extensive experience as a composer for dance.
Sat 6 Feb 1–4pm £6/£4.50/£3/Free to OYT
More Memorable Movement
Lucia Walker & Julyen Hamilton
A unique two-day dance workshop focussing on personal movement invention, a sense of phrasing and different ways of memorising this physical poetry.
This work derives from Lucia and Julyen's fascination with dance technique, improvisation, composition, the Alexander Technique and contact improvisation.
Booking priority given to people aged 14–25 who also do the follow-up workshop (See below).
Sat 16 10am-4pm & Sun 17 Feb 11am–4pm £15/£10/£5/Free to OYT
Basic Video
Maddie Shepherd
Beginner's course in how to use vidoe equipment: camera, sound lighting, editing in-camera and on a 2-machine suite: how to work as a team; how to look critically at your video work in order to improve it; how to begin to feel confident while using the equipment so that you can achieve what you want to achieve.
Places limited.
Sat 23 & Sun 24 Feb 11–4pm
Timely Manoeuvres
Lucia Wlaker
A weekend workshop rehearsal to prepare a performance piece as part of the Friday 8 March programme.
It will look at ways of structuring set and improvised material with an emphasis on rhythm, timing and melody.
Ideas and experiences of time will be a major focus.
Participants should really have attended the previous weekend workshop but please call Pegasus for more information.
Sat 2 & Sun 3 Mar 10am–4pm £10/£7.50/£5/Free to OYT
Technology & Design
Gavin Carter & Others
A weekend of seminars and practical workshops on lighting design and sound engineering.
The lighting section will focus on the different types of lighting required for theatre and for dance.
Sound will look at four track recording, live sound mixing, choice of microphones and the choice of the correct sound system for the space you are working in.
Sat 23 Mar 10am–4pm & Sun 24 Mar 10am–3pm £15/£10/£5/Free to OYT
Vidoe Production
Oxford Independent Video
How to plan, prepare, develop, cost, crew, video, post-produce, edit and screen a video tape.
What it means to think of and work for an audience.
How to create a video tape that people will want to watch.
How to involve people in the process of making a tape.
Phone (0865) 250150 to apply for a place.
Tutor: Maddie Shepherd
Sat 20 & Sun 21 Apr 11am–4pm £20/£15/£10
Other Workshops
Exclusively for 14–25 year olds — theatre, voice, music, technical, dance/theatre, script development, local research are listed in the accompanying Oxford Youth Theatre Spring Programme.
Oxford Youth Theatre
Oxford Youth Theatre is at the heart of Pegasus Theatre and is for 14–25 year olds living in Oxfordshire.
New people and beginners are always welcome.
No previous experience is required to become involved.
In fact, anyone interested in the performing arts can join.
There are no auditions but we do encourage a commitment to complete any workshop course or project.
Each season offers a wide range of courses or projects in theatre, dance, music, drama, lighting, sound, video, backstage work and administration.
Courses/projects are run during the evenings and weekends and occasionally during the day.
Please see separate Oxford Youth Theatre Spring Sheet for further information or phone Euton on Ox.
722851.
Workshops
The programme of workshops linked to shows is a central part of Pegasus' work.
They are mainly aimed at 14–25 year olds but all of those listed here are also available to older people.
All workshops are suitable for beginners as well as those who have some experience.
Please wear loose, comfortable clothes and soft shoes.
The workshops are designed to encourage and excite an interest in the different possibilities of performance.
If a workshop is linked to a show we always recommend trying to see the show, preferably first, if at all possible.
Pegasus Theatre Bookings
Can be booked from the Pegasus in advance by phone on (0865) 722851 — please pick up reserved tickets 45–30 minutes before the performance.
Also available from ‘Tickets in Oxford’, Information Centre, St Aldates (no extra charge).
Tickets are often available on the door but advance booking is recommended.
There are two kinds of discount: a middle price for people who are low waged and a low price for people who are under 18, unwaged, on disability and other state allowances, OAPs and students.
How to get to Pegasus
Pegasus is at the Iffley Road end of Magdalen Road in East Oxford, 2 miles from the City centre.
A Rose Hill bus will bring you almost to the door.
Parking — is strictly limited in the vicinity, there are often some spaces on site for people who need easy access.
Access — Pegasus and its facilities are fully accessible for people who use wheelchairs.
Two performances involve sign language interpretation: Mon 25 Feb & Tue 18 March
Didcot Railway Centre
September 1990 to Easter 1991 including Santa Steamings recreating the golden age of the Great Western Railway
Didcot Railway Centre Didcot — Oxfordshire Telephone (0235) 817200
Open Saturdays and Sundays throughout also Tuesdays to Fridays until 30 September 1990 and Tuesday 2 to Friday 5 April 1991
Steamdays on the first and last Saturdays of September, October, November, December, March and April.
The following special events are planned during the period from September 1990 to Easter 1991.
SEPTEMBER
Saturday 29 & Sunday 30
Autumn Steam Gala
Many locomotives in steam.
Earlyriser tickets for photographers from 8am (inc. breakfast — advance booking essential)
OCTOBER
Saturday 27
Photographers' Evening
Open till 9pm.
Night steam operation.
Kodak/Photorail competition for best photographs.
NOVEMBER
Saturday 10
Steamday for visit of No. 46203 Princess Margaret Rose
DECEMBER
Sundays 2, 9, 16, & 23
Santa Steamings
see opposite for full details
DECEMBER-JANUARY
Sunday 30 & Monday 31 Dec & Tues 1 Jan
New Year Steamings
MARCH/APRIL
Friday 29 March-Monday 1 April
Easter steamings
Full details of events in 1991 will be published in January
Open 11am-5pm (close at dusk in winter)
Last admission 30 minutes before closing
Children under 12 must be accompanied by an adult
Refreshment Room & Souvenir Shop
On Steamdays the admission price includes rides on the steam trains
Santa Steamings
Sundays 2, 9, 16, 23 December
A real treat for the children.
Take them to see Santa in his Steam Train Grotto.
Seasonal refreshments.
Free mincepies.
Advance booking is strongly recommended as the number of children visiting Santa may have to be limited.
Please complete the attached form.
Trains will run at regular intervals from 11am to 4pm.
Please give a first and second choice of date and approximate time you wish to visit Santa.
The splendour of the Great Western Railway lives on at Didcot Railway Centre.
In the original engine shed there is a fine collection of Great Western steam locomotives and there are many carriages and wagons.
A typical branch line country station complete with signal box has been created.
The small relics museum (closed in January & February) contains fascinating displays of many of the smaller items that form part of our railway heritage.
Lunches, snacks and drinks are served in the refreshment room.
A wide range of postcards, books, videos and other souvenirs is on sale in the shop.
On Steamdays visitors can enjoy rides in the 1930s steam trains and see the activities of a steam locomotive depot.
How to get there
Didcot is 53 miles west of London, 10 miles south of Oxford and is well served by British Rail with regular Inter-City 125 trains from London Paddington, Reading, Swindon, Bath, Bristol and South Wales.
Network South East trains from Oxford and Thames Valley stations link with Inter-City services from Birmingham, the Midlands and the South Coast.
On weekdays South Midland buses run from Oxford, Abingdon and Wantage, also Chiltern Queen from Wallingford.
The M4 motorway and A34 trunk road make Didcot easily accessible by car and coach or you can choose a scenic drive down the Thames Valley or over the Berkshire Downs.
Parking is readily available near the railway station entrance.
Parties are welcome on any day throughout the year but arrangements must be made in advance for visits on days when Didcot Railway Centre is not otherwise open.
Ride the Spiral at the Oxford Story
A Magical Mystery Tour
Open Every Day
A commentary is available in English
Take a seat aboard a flying desk and spiral backwards through the corridors of time on an exciting journey of discovery; the story of Oxford University is uncovered to reveal its remarkable impact on Western civilisation.
Learn about its famous students and of their astonishing discoveries.
Who worked out how rainbows form?
Who translated the Bible into English?
Who predicted space travel and submarines years before they became a reality!
This is the place where history is made; find out why Elizabeth I loved Oxford so, why Charles I had his headquarters here during the Civil War.
Seated in your medieval scholar's desk, centuries of fascinating personalities and great historical events are brought to life before your eyes as the Oxford Story unfolds before you.
Open every day.
Admission Prices
£3.00 Adult £1.50 Child under 16 £2.00 Students and OAPs during November–March only
For schools' parties and other group bookings contact Oxford (0865) 728822
Special Facilities
Wheelchair access and toilet facilities for the disabled — please make an advance booking.
Commentaries available in English, French, German, Italian, Spanish and Japanese.
Oxford Story Gift Shop open daily.
Open
Every day
09.30–17.00 April–June
09.30–19.00 July & August
09.30–17.00 September & October
10.00–16.00 November–March 1991
Closed Christmas Day only
The Oxford Story, Broad Street, Oxford OX1 3AJ
Phoenix One & Two
Walton Street Oxford Tel (0865) 54909/512526
Friday 18 January–Thursday 28 February 1991
Main Features
Fri 18 January–Thu 7 February
Reversal of Fortune (15)
Director: Barbet Schroeder.
Starring: Jeremy Irons, Glenn Close, Ron Silver, Annabel Scofield, Uta Hagen.
USA 1990. 110 mins.
Based on the book by defence attorney Dershowitz, REVERSAL OF FORTUNE opens with an extended aerial tour of quintessential Gatsby country, the mansion resorts of the super wealthy on Newport, Rhode Island.
And Jeremy Iron's glacial, compelling performance suggests that in some respects the rich are indeed different in Barbet Schroeder's film of the Claus von Bulow case in which the European husband of an American heiress was tried, convicted and subsequently acquitted of attempted murder.
Produced in the teeth of threatened legal action, Schroeder's treatment (screenplay by Nicholas Kazan) adopts a fragmented, even bizarre perspective that deliberately courts ambiguity and complexity.
In a shifting timescale circumstances are narrated in flashback, by the accused — and by the victim, Sonny von Bulow (Glenn Close), irreversibly comatose on life-support, years after an insulin dose of fatal proportions.
Suicide or murder?
Claus and Sonny agree with a sardonic account of gilded marriage from which passion and companionship have long departed, but the dramatic momentum accrues from the entry of Harvard law professor Dershowitz (Ron Silver) accepting a brief to appeal on the suspicion that, guilty or innocent, his client was convicted by prejudiced jurors on flimsy and suspect evidence.
Fri 18–Thu 24 January
Metropolitain (15)
Director: Whit Stillman.
Starring: Carolyn Farina, Edward Clements, Christopher Eigeman, Taylor Nichols.
USA 1990. 98 mins.
Lauded at Cannes, the first feature by journalist Whit Stillman is a drily satirical comedy of manners among ‘the Park Avenue Elite’, a group of debutante students living on the Upper East Side of Manhattan who meet almost nightly at Sally Fowler's apartment.
The soirée seems to be the setting for mere social chit-chat and the group includes breezy social climbers, demure maidens and worried intellectuals but what binds them together, apart from their social exclusivity, is the fear that their class is under threat.
And beneath the exchange of gossip and witticism, the doubts and foibles of their inner selves are revealed, a process accelerated by the appearance of gilded socialist Edward Clements.
Edward lives in a different part of town, he espouses different ideas — but he's also seeking acceptance, due to a romantic interest in shy, true-blue Serana.
‘An American oddball who, like Jim Jarmusch and Spike Lee, takes a sideways look at his own culture, Whit Stillman has directed a film so sharp and amusing that film-goers were shut out in droves from its many screenings in Cannes.
Avoiding the cheap temptation to satirize the group as empty-headed money-grabbers or upper-class clowns, Stillman extracts strong contributions from an unknown cast.
METROPOLITAIN is also a warm tribute to New York itself and the film aptly coats proceedings in the sad-sweet music of Mark Suozzo and Tom Judson.’
Screen International 
Fri 25 January–Thu 7 February
Hidden Agenda (15)
Director: Ken Loach.
Starring: Brian Cox, Frances McDormand, Brad Dourif, Mai Zetterling, Patrick Kavanagh.
UK 1990. 108 mins.
Ulster in the 1980s.
When an American member of the International League for Civil Liberties is shot dead in a police ambush, the killing is explained as an unfortunate but justifiable occurrence in the war against terrorism.
The incident triggers a publicity bombshell and the government despatches a senior policeman, Peter Kerrigan (Brian Cox), to head an investigation but his arrival in the Province is met with obstruction and hostility by the security forces.
In the course of his enquiry Kerrigan meets the victim's American partner, Ingrid Jessner (Frances McDormand) and their complex relationship lies at the heart of the film.
Together they discover that the circumstances of Paul's death have less to do with an alleged policy of ‘shoot to kill’ than the secret and politically motivated activities of non accountable intelligence services: activities which subvert the integrity of parliamentary democracy.
Awarded a special Jury Prize at Cannes (and the only British entry shown in competition), HIDDEN AGENDA marks the return of one of Britain's most radical and compromising directors.
Jim Allen's provocative screenplay clearly echoes the ramifications of the Stalker affair and the film's evident political sympathies and knowing references to dirty tricks campaigns against the Heath and Wilson governments in the 70s have already lead to outraged questions in the house.
That HIDDEN AGENDA was made at all is remarkable in the current state of British film production.
See it on a cinema screen — you're unlikely to have the chance on TV.
Fri 25–Thu 31 January
The Match Factory Girl (15)
Director: Aki Kaurismaki.
Starring: Kati Outinen, Elina Salo, Esko Nikkari, Vesa Vierikko, Reijo Taipale.
Sweden/Finland 1989. 70 mins.
Subtitles.
As might be expected, the recent film by prolific one-man Finnish film industry Aki Kaurismaki bears only slight resemblance to the story with a similar name by Hans Christian Andersen.
Conceived by the director of ARIEL and LENINGRAD COWBOYS with the ambition of ‘making Robert Bresson seem like a director of action pictures’, THE MATCH FACTORY GIRL unfolds in a style that is characteristically laconic and terse.
Iris (Kati Outinen) is a girl who works in a factory, exploited by family and colleagues alike.
Her mother and cold-hearted step-father tax her wage packet, the job is drudgery — and finally there's the man…whom Iris, with her mind full of trashy romances, mistakenly takes for the fairy prince she's awaited so long.
As Kaurismaki's associate Mikko Piela describes it with equally characteristic, and refreshingly literate, hyperbole: ‘THE MATCH FACTORY GIRL evokes such feelings of sorrow, pity and horror that the dusty bones of Aristotle himself must be clattering out of sheer cathartic pleasure.
But tossed about by a cruel world, Iris is not the sort of girl who quietly puts up with her destiny — just as the flower beneath which she reads for a moment, while a woman's revenge wreaks horrible havoc in the final minutes, is not just an ordinary cactus.
It is The Queen of the Night (Cactaeae Selenicereus Grandiflorus): which only flowers for one night a year, and withers away.’
Fri 25–Thu 31 January
The Mad Monkey (18)
Director: Fernando Trueba.
Starring: Jeff Goldblum, Miranda Richardson, Anemone, Dexter Fletcher, Liza Walker.
Spain/USA/France 1990. 108 mins.
Fernando Trueba's flamboyant Euro-thriller stars Jeff Goldblum as Dan Gillis, a latter-day American in Paris attempting to pick up the pieces of a failed marriage, approached with an offer to write a screenplay for charismatic first-time director Malcolm (Dexter Fletcher).
Gillis accepts, against the advice of his chair-bound agent (Miranda Richardson), but soon discovers that there's more than a movie at stake.
His life changes as he is drawn into a dangerous aura of incestuous relations surrounding the director and his beautiful sister Jenny (Liza Walker) to whom he is immediately drawn.
For Gillis infatuation slides into obsession, even as he becomes aware of ensnarement in a fatal web of greed, ambition and deceit, of a trap that threatens his sanity, his life and that of his son.
Mon 28–Thu 31 January
Texasville (15)
Director: Peter Bogdanovich.
Starring: Jeff Bridges, Cybil Shepherd, Annie Potts, Cloris Leachman, Timothy Bottoms, Randy Quaid.
USA 1990. 125 mins.
Picking up the story thirty years on, Peter Bogdanovich's eagerly anticipated sequel to THE LAST PICTURE SHOW substitutes elegiac lament with a wry comedy of the trials and absurdities of disillusioned middle-age.
It's 1984, and falling prices are wreaking havoc in the oil business.
Duane Jackson (Jeff Bridges) has survived rocky adolescence and service in Korea to earn big money in the 70s boom, but as Anarene prepares for centennial celebrations, with a replica of ‘Old Texasville’ in the town square, he's saddled with debts of $12 million, a marriage on the rocks and a tearaway elder son with a liking for older women.
Sonny (Timothy Botoms, focus of the earlier film) is afflicted with dementia and Duane's banker is facing indictment for malpractice.
And Jacy Farrow (Cybil Shepherd) is back in town, as alluring and distant as ever as she recovers from marital tragedy and a failed movie career.
To Duane's unease she becomes immediate confidant to his sharp-tongued wife — and he's soon convinced that his inadequacies and foibles are chief topics of discussion.
‘Highly amusing and interwoven with myriad characters, incidents, one-liners and tall stories to create a fabulous, funny and intelligent human patch work of a small Texas town.’
Sheila Whitaker 
Fri 1–Thu 7 February
Ghost (12)
Director: Jerry Kucker.
Starring: Patrick Swayze, Demi Moore & Whoopee Goldberg.
USA 1990 126 mins.
Sam Wheat (Patrick Swayze) and Molly Jensen (Demi Moore) are in love and have never been happier than they are now, living in their new Tribeca loft.
Tragedy strikes when Sam is killed by an assailant on a New York street.
Molly is left to grieve for Sam but, unbeknownst to her, he remains on earth as a ghost.
Desperate to contact Molly, who is unable to see or hear him, Sam discovers that he is only able to communicate with a psychic named Oda Mae Brown (Whoopee Goldberg), a charlatan astonished to discover her powers are authentic.
Sam's need to reach Molly becomes urgent when he learns her life is in danger.
Fri 8–Thu 21 February
Cyrano de Bergerac (U)
Director: Jean-Paul Rappeneau.
Starring: Gerard Depardieu, Anne Brochet, Vincent Perez, Jacques Weber,.
France 1990. 135 mins.
Subtitles.
Periodic revivals of silent classics such as NAPOLEON or Raymond Bernard's THE CHESS PLAYER serve as reminder that Jean-Paul Rappeneau's new film of Rostand's theatrical warhorse stands in line of one of the great enduring traditions of French cinema: the lavish historical spectacular.
Clearly established as the European success of the year after a triumphant progress from Cannes to the continental box office, CYRANO DE BERGERAC stars Gerard Depardieu in characteristic form as the 17th century soldier-poet, a stoic bearer of tragi-comic disfigurement, secretly in love with his cousin Roxanne (Anne Brochet).
But Roxanne loves another and Cyrano nobly agrees to act as the surrogate author of love letters from his comrade in arms, the dumbly handsome Christian de Neuvillette (Vincent Perez) until both suitors are called to duty in the war against Spain.
Mixing theatrical flourish and cinematic panache (with battles filmed in Hungary), CYRANO is a prodigious spectacle superbly mounted and designed.
‘Depardieu was born to play Cyrano.
Beginning with the whirling bustle of the theatre scenes, Pierre L'homme's camera and Rappeneau's eye for detail turn more intimate moments like the balcony scene into a wondrous symphony of white light flecked with shadows.
Splendid decor and costuming and an editing rhythm which matches the verse tempi, all contribute to this magical extravaganza.’
John Gillett 
Fri 8–Thu 14 February
The Nasty Girl (15)
(Das Schriecklicke Madchen)
Director: Michael Verhoeven.
Starring: Lena Stolze, Monika Baumgartner, Michael Gahr, Fred Stillkrauth.
Germany 1989. 92 mins.
Subtitles.
THE NASTY GIRL is an unlikely sounding entity: a fresh and inventive comedy — lyrical and lacerating by turns — that opens the lid on buried secrets in the collective German past.
Filmed in the Bavarian town of Passau where similar events occurred, THE NASTY GIRL follows the early progress of Sonja (Lena Stolze) from happy provincial childhood in the years of post-war austerity to top girl in class, romance with her teacher and local celebrity as winner of a national essay competition.
Until, encouraged to repeat the achievement, she chooses as subject: My Town in the Third Reich.
From relatives and town worthies, good democrats all, she meets evasion and condescension.
And when uncomfortable truths do emerge, despite memory ‘lapses’ and bureaucratic ‘inefficiency’, the once popular Sonja feels the cutting edge of guilt, outrage and scandal.
Brimming with visual tricks and stylistic sleights of hand, NASTY GIRL has deservedly made its mark in festivals around the world.
In the year of German reunification and national congratulation, Michael Verhoeven insists that ghosts from the past are alive and kicking in the ‘mature democracy’ of the west.
Fri 15–Thu 21 February
Come See The Paradise (15)
Director: Alan Parker.
Starring: Dennis Quaid, Tamlyn Tomita, Sab Shimono, Shizuko Hoshi, Stan Egi, Rinald Yamamoto.
USA 1990. 130 mins.
Before the Second World War ethnic Japanese were barred from applying for US citizenship; in the months following Pearl Harbour 110,000 people were described in a State Department report as comprising a ‘generally suspect ethnic group’ and forcibly relocated from west coast communities to internment camps in the remote deserts of California, Arizona and Colorado, where most remained until the closing months of the war.
COME SEE THE PARADISE is a story of epic scope, beginning in 1936 when union activist Jack McGurn (Dennis Quaid) flees New York and finds a temporary job as projectionist at a Japanese cinema in Los Angeles owned by the traditionally minded paterfamilias Mr Kawamura (Sab Shimono).
Falling for boss's daughter Lily (Tamlyn Tomita) and marrying her against family opposition, he becomes witness to a tragic, bitter and little-known episode of the recent American past.
Alan Parker follows on from controversial success with MISSISSIPPI BURNING to another examination of racial inequality and hatred.
If Quaid's role seems contrived and the film betrays signs of forced editing in the abrupt, jerky resolution of an expansive but slackly focused narrative, COME SEE THE PARADISE has notable compensations: convincing performances from an unknown cast (some of whom passed their childhood in the camps), a sharp sense of the sometimes bizarre and humorous manifestations of cultural miscegenation and a detailed evocation of period and locale.
Two years after David Puttnam's forced exit from Hollywood some film-makers — and former associates — persist in achieving mainstream films that surprise and inform.
‘Alan Parker's new film is also his best…
This movie takes us where no other Holywood film has.
The period recreation is lavish and, beneath the love story, the film pulses with anger.’
Adrian Turner, 20/20 
Fri 15, Sat 16, Thu 21 Thu 28 February
The Grifters (18)
Director: Stephen Frears.
Starring: John Cusack, Anjelica Huston, Annette Bening, Pat Hingle.
USA 1990. 110 mins.
Leading the field of revived interest in the hard-boiled fiction of Jim Thompson, Stephen Frears' first American film (the first off the slate from recently formed Martin Scorsese Productions) enters a sleazy world of lower echelon crime, focusing on the fatal interaction of small time con Roy (John Cusack), his estranged mother Lily (Anjelica Huston) and girlfriend Myra (Annette Bening).
As a ‘grifter’ preying on the gullible in bars and trains, Roy is constantly on the move — until the day a scam backfires.
Lily meanwhile works for the Mob, placing bets to shorten the odds at racetracks; when she impulsively decides to re-enter her son's life, after an absence of eight years, just in time to save it.
Later, at the hospital bedside, Lily meets Myra — who'll agree to do just about anything if she can get away with it.
But as Roy recuperates, three lives intertwine: to reveal dark, uncontrollable depths of sexuality, emotion and betrayal.
‘Right from the credits sequence, with a double becoming a triple screen we know we're in for a goody.
Frears' realisation of this mix of pulp fiction and Greek tragedy plays out the violence and psychology to superb, beautifully laid-back effect.’
Sheila Whitaker 
Fri 22 February–Sun 3 March
The Fool (PG)
Director: Christie Edzard.
Starring: Derek Jacobi, Maria Aitken, Cyril Cusack, Jonathan Cecil, Michael Hordern, Stratford Johns, Miranda Richardson, Mirian Margoyles, Corin Redgrave.
UK 1990. 137 mins.
Christine Edzard's remarkable adaptation of LITTLE DORRIT examined the destructive power of material greed through the higher and lower echelons of an entire society; her new film develops a similar theme in a similar setting: the London of 1857, where an obscure clerk (Derek Jacobi) moves freely between the world of the poor and that of wealth and privilege, presenting a different face to each.
On the one hand, as ‘Mr Frederick’, he is known as a simple-minded put-upon minion in a second-rate theatre, at home in the grubby, bustling world of teeming streets, pawn shops and flea-ridden lodgings in the East End.
But as ‘Sir John’ he is a shrewd man of the world, manipulating the foolishness and greed of those around him as he moves confidently through the social round.
But two worlds, poles apart from each other, are brought together at the end.
Christine Edzard's original script for THE FOOL was suggested by the writings of Dicken's contemporary Henry Mayhew whose collected interviews with traders, criminals, and performers of the capital are familiar to historians as London Labour And The London Poor .
Filmed like DORRIT in Edzard's own studio at Rotherhithe, THE FOOL recalls the former in a palpable recreation of a vanished world: a world of physical and spiritual claustrophobia, evoked with an almost fetishistic attention to detail.
With a crowded and varied cast of ‘Dickensian’ dimensions, THE FOOL portrays a society of fully-imagined reality with obvious parallels to our won.
Matinees & Late Night Films
Fri 18, Sat 19 January
Wild At Heart (18)
Director: David Lynch.
Starring: Nicholas Cage, Laura Dern, Dianna Ladd, Henry Dean Stanton, Crispin Glover, Willem Defoe, Isabella Rossellini.
USA 1990. 125 mins.
David Lynch follows BLUE VELVET with a controversial winner of the Palme d'Or at Cannes, a scarifying mix of extreme violence, mordant wit and laid back, absurdist humour in which road movie meets chase thriller and sweaty erotic romance in a joky narrative that playfully confounds audience expectations and genre conventions.
Thu 24 January
U2 Rattle And Hum (PG)
Director: Phil Joanou.
Starring: Bono, The Edge, Adam Clayton, Larry Mullen, B B King.
USA 1988. 99 mins.
U2 in America on the Joshua Tree tour, performing in concert, speaking out on contemporary events, visiting Elvis' grave in Memphis — and teaching B B King how to play one of their songs.
Thu 24 Fri 25 January
Brazil (15)
Director: Terry Gilliam.
Starring: Jonathan Pryce, Robert de Niro, Michael Palin, Kim Griest, Ian Holm, Bob Hoskins.
UK 1985. 142 mins.
Terry Gillam's blackly comic futuristic fantasy, set in an Orwellian world of all pervasive bureaucratic repression and lumbering 1940s technology, where Jonathan Pryce's timid, contented underachiever pursues the girl of his dreams and falls murderously foul of the system.
Funny, cruel, relentless; filmed with tremendous visual invention and an almost fetishistic attention to the minutiae of its imagined world.
Sat 26 January
Total Recall (18)
Director: Paul Verhoeven.
Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Rachel Ticotin, Charon Tone, Michael Ironside, Ronny Cox.
USA 1990. 109 mins.
A construction worker in the year 2084 is haunted by recurring dreams of a previous existence on Mars.
His fascination leads him to an agency which administers mental implants, so that he can have the vicarious experience of interplanetary travel injected into his memory.
But a malfunction occurs and he comes to believe that he really has been an intelligence agent who made a startling discovery on Mars…
Thu 31 January, Fri 1 February
Sea of Love (18)
Director: Harold Becker.
Starring: Al Pacino, Ellen Barkin, John Goodman, Michael Rooker, William Hickey.
USA 1989. 113 mins.
The best, most erotically charged thriller since JAGGED EDGE and FATAL ATTRACTION stars Al Pacino as New York detective Frank Keller, called in to investigate a series of killings: of men who have placed distinctive rhyming ads in the ‘lonely hearts’ columns.
Just turned forty, Frank is married to his job, his wife has left him for a colleague, and when he encounters the sexually predatory Helen (Ellen Barkin) he breaks one of the first rules in the book by falling for a suspect.
Despite his growing involvement, he can't scratch her from the list and another murder casts her every action in chilling, ambiguous light.
Thu 31 January, Sat 2 February
Last Exit to Brooklyn (18)
Director: Uli Edel.
Featuring: Stephen Lang, Jennifer Jason Leigh, Burt Young, Peter Dobson.
West Germany.
102 mins.
Based on the novel by Hubert Selby Jr (Subject of a celebrated prosecution in 1967 under the Obscene Publications Act), LAST EXIT is a tough, often harrowing film about life in a rough working class district of New York during the Korean War.
Uli Edel directs scenes of terrifying violence and suffering, but LAST EXIT TO BROOKLYN is also concerned with the assertion of human dignity and self-respect; demonstrating how some people, some of the time, struggle to retain a vestige of compassion and tenderness in brutal, degrading circumstances.
Fri 1, Sat 2 February
PRETTY WOMAN (15)
Director: Gary Marshall.
Starring: Richard Gere, Julia Roberts.
USA 1989. 100 mins approx.
After a string of commercial flops, Richard Gere has become a superstar once more with his starring role in PRETTY WOMAN, a contemporary updating of Pygmalion which enjoyed massive success in the US.
‘Corporate mogul Gere decides on the services of a $100-an-hour hooker Julia Roberts for one week.
How it all works out makes for a highly entertaining come-uppance of look-downers-on-others.
Gere's very good and Julia Robert's a dramatic delight.’
S.F. Guardian 
Thu 7–Sat 9 February
Jimi Hendrix at the Isle of Wight (U)
Director: Murray Lerner.
Producer: Alan Douglas.
UK 1990. 60 mins.
Three weeks before his death in London in September 1970, Jimi Hendrix drew an audience of over half a million from Britain, Europe and North America to a five day series of concerts on the Isle of Wight, ‘the last of the great tribal gatherings in the 60s tradition’.
Completed in 1990, ISLE OF WIGHT comprises a unique document of the star at the peak of his career.
Eleven tracks, digitally re-mastered, include:Message to Love ,Sgt Pepper ,All Along the Watchtower ,Voodoo Chile ,Machine Gun ,Dolly Dagger and In From The Storm .
Thu 7, Thu 14 February
Dangerous Liaisons (15)
Director: Stephen Frears.
Starring: Glenn Close, John Malkovich, Michelle Pfeiffer, Swoosie Kurtz, Uma Thurman.
USA 1988. 120 mins.
Colour
Scripted by Christopher Hampton from the epistolatory novel by Choderlos de Laclos about sexual gamesmanship among the French aristocracy in the closing decades of the ancient regime, DANGEROUS LIAISONS revolves around the schemes of the malicious, intelligent salon hostess Madame de Merteuil (Glenn Close) to revenge herself on a fallen lover by arranging the seduction of his virgin bride.
The task is entrusted to the equally rakish and cynical Valmost (John Malkovich) but with the intrusion of real feelings — love, obsession, jealousy and hate — events spiral violently out of control, bringing disaster to all concerned.
Impeccably designed, witty, malicious and genuinely tragic with a trio of compelling and intimate performances for Close, Malkovich and Michelle Pfeiffer.
Thu 21, Sat 23 February
Bad Influence (18)
Director: Curtis Hanson.
Starring: Rob Lowe, James Spader, Lisa Zane.
USA 1990. 102 mins.
Borrowing effectively from Hitchcock's STRANGERS ON A TRAIN, Curtis Hanson's nightmare thriller stars James Spader as Michael, a young, buttoned-down contender in the corporate arena in Los Angeles, headed for a passionless marriage with a suitably beautiful brunette.
When he's rescued from a bar room brawl, Michael meets Alex (Rob Lowe), a charismatic drifter who plays at life by his own rules.
He's charming, sly and manipulative and Michael is irresistibly attracted.
But after initiation into an exhilarating world of sex, drugs and high-stakes risk, Michael finds that rewards don't come cheap and Alex is a difficult friend to lose.
Fri 22–Sun 24 February
Tie Me Up!
Tie Me Down!(18)
(Atame!)
Director: Pedro Almodovar.
Starring: Victoria Abril, Antonio Banderas, Francisco Rabal, Julieta Serrano.
Spain 1990. 101 mins.
Subtitles.
In a story strikingly reminiscent of John Fowles' ‘The Collector’, Ricky (Antonio Banderas) seeks out and woos Marina (Victoria Abril), a prostitute with whom he once slept and now wishes to marry on his release from a psychiatric ward.
In typical Almodovar burlesque, Marina has become a star of pornographic and B-movies.
He kidnaps her in the hope that she will accept and return his affections and when he ties her up the sexual and emotional metaphors of the title abound.
Of course it all gets more complicated after that…
Pedro Almodovar's latest film marks his first attempt at a truly explorative internal narrative — as he explains: ‘You don't know it when you start to write a script, you think you're telling a story.
But at the end, the story tells you about you.’
Almodovar arrived for the Madrid premiere of TIE ME UP! in a dustcart, proclaiming his solidarity with the gypsies who daily collect cardboard and wastepaper in such vehicles to earn a living.
Despite such gestures, and growing international fame, Almodovar's work remains a quest for pleasure and happiness which seeks to incorporate the price that such demands necessitate.
Thu 28 February, Fri 1 March
Heathers (15)
Director: Michael Lehmann.
Starring: Winona Ryder, Christian Slater, Shannen Doherty, Lisanne Falk.
USA 1989. 102 mins.
The freshest, most original US film of 1989 features rising stars Winona Ryder and Christian Slater in a ferocious comedy about style-conscious peer groups, suicide cults and the mutual incomprehension of adolescents and elders in the High School jungle.
Attractive, popular and smart, Veronica hovers in the orbit of the ‘Heathers’, a four-girl clique who rule the roost at Westerburgh High.
But she's secretly ambivalent about her friends and an open breach looms when she's drawn to charismatic outsider J.D. who seduces her into an apparently humorous plan of attack.
But a rapidly escalating body count forces her to face up to what's really happening.
Thu 28 February–Sat 2 March
Parents (18)
Director: Bob Balaban.
Starring: Randy Quaid, Mary Beth Hurt, Sandy Dennis.
USA 1988. 85 mins.
‘Set in a small town Indiana suburb, Randy Quaid and Mary Beth Hurt play Nick and Lily Laemle, a young married couple whose dedication to self betterment, domestic order and keeping up appearances amounts to an obsession.
Shot in vibrant colours and from bizarre angles, their squeaky clean Space Age home epitomises this antiseptic respectability.
The only thing out of place in their suburban show home is their sensitive young son, Michael, whose disturbing nightmares hint at the darker forces seething beneath its spotless surface…’
Nigel Floyd 
Box Office Information
Tickets
Apologies for starting the new year by putting up ticket prices.
Increasing costs from distributors, supplements on film transport costs and an increase in the rates are just a few of the factors which make this necessary.
Monday to Friday shows commencing before 5.00pm: £2.30 (Friends £1.80).
All other times: £3.30 (Friends £2.80).
Children under 15 £1.80 at all times; OAPs, UB40s (proof of status required) £1.80 for all shows before 5.30pm.
Payment by cash or cheque (with cheque card).
All tickets purchased at the Phoenix Cinema are non-refundable and non-exchangable.
Please check your tickets carefully as mistakes cannot be rectified later!
Box Office Opening Hours
The Box Office opens 15 minutes before the first performance each day and closes 15 minutes after the start of the last performance.
Doors open 15 minutes before the start of each performance.
Latecomers are admitted at the discretion of the manager.
Friends of the Phoenix
Joining Friends of the Phoenix entitles you to 2 free tickets when you join, 50p off every ticket you buy, advance booking facility, free admission to Friends' Only screenings, and free mailing of the programme.
Membership costs only £15 per year.
(Cheques should be made payable to City Screen Oxford Limited, please.)
Film Certificate Categories
‘U’(Universal).
Passed for General Exhibition.
Open to all.
‘PG’(Parental Guidance).
Passed for General Exhibition.
Open to all.
Unaccompanied children admitted, but parents/guardians are advised that the film contains material they might prefer children under 12 not to see.
‘12’ Passed as suitable only for exhibition to persons of 12 or over.
When a programme includes a ‘12’ film no person under 12 can be admitted.
‘15’ Passed as suitable only for exhibition to persons of 15 years or over.
When programme includes a ‘15’ film no person under 15 can be admitted.
‘18’ Passed as suitable only for exhibition to adults.
When a programme includes an ‘18’ film no person under 18 can be admitted.
To Friends and Patrons of the Phoenix:
Advance Booking
We now offer an advance booking facility at this cinema.
Tickets may be booked in advance for the LAST EVENING PERFORMANCES, LATE NIGHTS and WEEKENDS on the basis of payment at the time of booking.
Visa facilities are available for telephone bookings.
FRIENDS may book tickets in advance without prior payment on the basis that tickets are collected not later than 15 minutes before the start of the programme.
We hope these improved facilities will make booking tickets easier.
Please note…
The Management reserves the right of admission.
Sorry, children under 3 are not admitted to any performance.
Wheelchair users are welcome at all performances, with level access to both screens — but please telephone the cinema well in advance.
Both theatres are available for hire.
For information telephone (0865) 512526.
The Phoenix Cinema is a NO SMOKING cinema.
The information contained in this brochure is correct at time of going to press, however, the Management reserves the right to cancel or alter the advertised programme in exceptional circumstances.
Cover photo: Cyrano de Bergerac.
Inset: Hidden Agenda.
‘Peace of mind’ guide to selecting where to stay in England
Choosing where to stay with confidence
Regular inspections of standards and facilities
This is your English Tourist Board ‘at a glance’ guide on how to choose where to stay in England.
Whether for business or leisure, selecting the accommodation that's just right for you need be guesswork no longer.
By means of Crowns and Keys you can tell exactly what services and facilities to expect.
From country cottage to grand hotel — all displaying the signs are inspected by the English Tourist Board each year to ensure what they claim is what you'll find.
We can also help you select a holiday park, for our Q for Quality scheme will show you just how good their standards are.
Now — give yourself a break!
England's a fascinating and beautiful country — so why not take off and give yourself a break?
With so much of interest to discover and such a wealth of magnificent coast and countryside to explore, within even an hour or two of home you could find yourself in a beautiful new world.
As for where to stay, the English Tourist Board's new schemes make choosing just the right place for you far more simple and reliable.
Holiday parks in which you can camp, or stay in a chalet or caravan are now remarkably good — so much so that if you haven't tried this kind of holiday for a few years you could be in for a very pleasant surprise.
If luxuriating in a country house hotel or having fun on a farm or enjoying a weekend by the sea appeals to you, why not get hold of our Where to Stay accommodation guides.
You'll find them a pleasure to browse through.
Why run away from home when we've a fascinating country of our own?
Escape to England for a change.
You'll love it.
Just stop where you see these signs
When you're away from home for business or pleasure, it's important that you choose the accommodation that suits your needs and the kind of break that you're looking forward to.
Until the English Tourist Board introduced their classification schemes, choosing somewhere to stay was always a bit of a gamble.
Now those hazy days are past.
Inside this leaflet you'll find our ‘at a glance’ guide on all you need to know when looking for somewhere to stay.
In a simple format, everything is clearly shown within each classification.
There are three schemes covering different accommodation options: a summary of each is given here.
The Crown Scheme
—(also operates throughout Scotland and Wales).
Covering motels, private hotels, guesthouses, inns, bed & breakfast, farmhouses.
This scheme is all about guaranteed facilities and services that you will always find.
Every establishment has been inspected and classified in one of 6 levels — from Listed to 5 Crown.
Simply, the more Crowns, the wider the range of facilities and services offered.
It's important to remember the classification tells you about the minimum facilities available: it could well be that a Listed establishment, for example, will also provide some of the services and facilities found at a higher Crown level.
The Key Scheme
Covering self-catering in cottages, bungalows, flats, house-boats, houses, chalets, etc.
This follows the same principles as the Crown Scheme but for self-catering accommodation.
Here there are five levels, indicated by Keys.
So, the more Keys the more facilities and equipment will be provided.
It's an easy way to tell if your chosen holiday home has a dishwasher for instance(a requirement for a 5 Key rating), or hot water at all times (everywhere from 1 to 5 Key).
All Key classified holiday homes will provide at least some of the facilities found in those of a higher classification.
So much for facilities — what about standards?
Crown and Key establishments are being assessed by our inspectors for their quality standards right now.
This means that soon, for even more peace of mind, you will know not only what services and facilities you'll find, but just how good they are.
There's more information inside about how we shall be acknowledging higher quality standards.
The Q Scheme
Covering holiday caravan, chalet and camping parks.
Our Q Scheme is slightly different from the Crown and Key Schemes, for here our inspectors have assessed the Quality standard of each park — the more ticks in the Q — up to— the higher the standard.
The full range of facilities offered by individual parks will be clearly shown in their own brochures.
All you need to know when looking for somewhere to stay in England
Hotels, Motels, Private Hotels, Guesthouses, Inns, B&Bs, Farmhouses
The Crown
Please bear in mind that all Listed and Crown places provide some of the facilities and services of a higher classification.
Meal Arrangements
The meal arrangements described above for 3, 4 & 5 Crown establishments are new requirements being introduced during 1990.
Places that cannot meet these new requirements by January 1991 may consequently lose a Crown.
Where this occurs there is no implication of a reduction on the range or standard of services offered.
Remember:Crowns are about the range of services and facilities.
More Crowns does not, necessarily, mean higher quality.
High quality standards can be found in every classification band, from Listed up to Crown 5.
We recognise that quality is important to you, so in-depth inspections are being carried out now to identify those places which take a pride in their higher standards — be it a small B&B or a large hotel.
Look out for — Approved, Commended or Highly Commended appearing on our signs.
Self-Catering: Cottages, Bungalows, Flats, Houseboats, Houses and Chalets etc.
The Key
Please bear in mind that all Key holiday homes will provide at least some of the facilities and equipment of a higher classification.
Remember:Keys are about the range of facilities and equipment.
More Keys does not, necessarily, mean higher quality.
Those holiday homes providing higher quality standards will have Approved, Commended or Highly Commended alongside the Keys.
Even a 1 Key holiday home can be Highly Commended if what it provides is to a very high standard.
Please note:During 1990 you will continue to see holiday homes advertised as ETB approved.
All have been inspected and found to offer high standards of cleanliness and at least an adequate range of equipment.
By January 1991 they will have been re-classified under the Key Scheme.
Holiday, Caravan, Chalet and Camping Parks
The ‘Q’
The Q Scheme —(also operates throughout Scotland and Wales) For holiday parks of every kind and size, the Q Scheme stands for Quality.
No park displaying a Q symbol is of a poor quality.
Our inspectors have awarded from ✓ to ✓✓✓✓✓ to denote the assured standards you will find — so here the more ✓s does mean the higher the quality.
For example even a small camping park can proudly display a Q with ✓✓✓✓✓ if what it offers, though limited in range, is of an exceptionally high standard.
The Rose Award
For the growing number who enjoy staying on a holiday caravan park, look out for those with a Rose Award.
These are awarded each year to those parks which not only provide facilities to a high standard but also have first class caravan holiday homes for hire.
Acknowledging higher quality standards
Within the Crown and Key schemes high quality can be found at every level.
During 1990 we shall be assessing such important aspects as warmth of welcome, efficiency of service and atmosphere, as well as the quality of furnishings, fitments and equipment.
Those places that provide quality standards significantly higher than those required for a simple classification will be able to display the terms Approved, Commended or Highly Commended.
Please remember that even a Listed or 1 Crown place, or 1 Key holiday home, can still be Highly Commended if what it provides is to an exceptionally high standard.
How to find where to stay
The English Tourist Board publishes an annual series of Where to Stay guides, packed with helpful information and good ideas.
Look out for its annual ‘Let's Go’ guide to off-season short breaks and its new ‘Home from Home’guide to off-season short breaks in self-catering holiday homes.
Where to Stay guides are available from good bookshops everywhere.
Tourist Information Centres too stock these and many other helpful publications.
Welcome to the K.C.E.C. Car Rally
There are several locations to visit in the time limit.
By using the map and clues you will eventually find your way to a fine hostelry out in the country.
A–M are directional clues.
1–38 are questions on the way
Scoring
5 points for each correct answer
1 point deducted for each minute over the limit
1 point deducted for each mile over the standard
Time Limit: 1 hour 30 minutes  Set Tripometer to Zero
Start Time:
Finish Time:
Time on Course:
Turn left out of School Drive.
At the roundabout take the A43 towards Bicester.
The clue to your first village on the route is:
A.
The end of THIS becomes the start of your first village.
The latter part of the village stops your mouth from fraying round the edge!
1.
Where can you find Albert Watson remembered in the village?
2.
Mr Spider has perhaps created his home here.
B.
Having answered Clue 2 you should be in the ‘Middle’ of the village and on the road to your next destination.
3.
Driving you round the bend — not so soon surely.
How many white arrows can you count?
C.
DON'T DIG ON! if you have not sifted out this strange village yet.
4.
Beware someone could be spying on your activities.
Why?
5.
There's a few sights in the village.
6.
It all seems Greek to me!
7.
If in trouble ring (0863) 733 226 but for what?
D.
Two Bobbies and perhaps Jack might meet you here.
8.
What is Mr Haynes proud of?
9.
Who has the jewel in this village?
10.
For whom the bell tolls!
Where and for whom?
11.
Has something gone off the rails here?
E.
You should be on the right track, although your next village might be more appropriate in East Anglia.
If you know why then you can put this little one to bed.
12.
Lots of little signs of services to this village.
How many and what are they?
13.
This fragrant herb is being carefully tended!
F.
A red top to the T doesn't mean No Entry.
14.
Evergreen this farm might seem to be.
15.
A sign of the old times round here perhaps.
G.
Time to back track and then on we go.
16.
What's on the ‘Corner’?
17.
Who dispenses justice round here?
18.
From where does he keep an eye on things?
H.
Half a MURMUR in this COTTAGE sounds out the next stop.
19.
Be on your guard as you travel — 2 pairs certainly seem to be.
What?
20.
Kidlington Running Club might have left their mark here.
When and on what?
21.
Definitely not battery operated around here, especially with so much room.
22.
Home again — who?
23.
No parking on the grass in this car park.
But what are you going to do if you park and with whom?
I.
Get your orders on where to go next.
These people will point you in the right direction to the next village.
24.
King of the Road, he is of this stretch.
25.
Are they always on Stop here?
No, not the traffic.
26.
This Tardis is well protected — by whom?
J.
Undo this T CARTON — above and below.
27.
Don't get cross with me, I'm on the level.
What are my colours?
28.
Zena doesn't play tennis here.
What is it?
I hope it doesn't drag on!
29.
Sheltered accommodation here is a little different.
Why?
30.
Productivity seems eggstraordinarily good in this hay yard.
Where and what?
31.
Don't plough on until you've picked up supplies.
From whom?
K.
At the roundabout head for your next village.
Is this the food of the Gods being taken to lions?
32.
Is there any need to signal along such a nice straight stretch of track?
33.
Round the bend several times here.
34.
What do you get while you wait?
L.
This Oxford College seems to be out of place.
35.
Can you find somewhere to offer up a prayer?
36.
He's at Ambrosden Court, initially.
M.
A fast finish over the humps.
37.
Don't plough on any more, just commemorate your finish by noting this special occasion.
38.
Well, you won't all fit in there, so park up opposite and come on in.
Find out when you have entered if any constabulary duties have been done.
Mileage
KIDLINGTON FLOWER FESTIVAL 1990
Proceeds for Christian Aid.
Thank you for your response to participate in the Flower Festival again this year.
This week-end event continues to excite enthusiastic support, demonstrating the strength of community life which exists in Kidlington.
Caring about others less fortunate than ourselves is important and the Christian Aid Committee is most grateful to all who give their time, talents, and money which gives this Festival of Flowers and Music such significance.
The week-end programme commences on:—
Saturday July 14th
9.30am.
A Short Service of Morning Prayer to which all are invited.
Thereafter the church is open to visitors until —
7.30pm.
A Concert to be given by the Woodstock Music Society Conducted by Paul Ingram.
Tickets £2.50 & £1.50 concession for non wage earners:
Tickets available from:—
Mill Street Post Office
Snips Hairdressers, Bicester Road
Knitwise, Garden City
Betty Angus, 52 Brasenose Drive Tel. 4609
The programme includes choral works and music for string orchestra.
Saturday evening closes with Compline — Night Prayer.
Sunday July 15th
Services at 8am and 10am as usual.
Church again open all day for visitors.
8.00pm A Service of Praise and Thanksgiving.
All are welcome.
Refreshments, including lunches, will be available throughout each day.
Betty Angus.
Beefeater STEAK HOUSES
Welcome TO THE CARPENTERS ARMS
THE BEEFEATER WELCOME
You can always be sure of a warm welcome when you visit your local Beefeater.
Our friendly, caring staff will make sure that your visit will be enjoyable, whatever the occasion.
AT BEEFEATER WE CARE FOR ALL THE FAMILY
So whether you're dining with the family, lunching with colleagues or relaxing with friends in the bar, your local Beefeater is the ideal choice.
STYLE & COMFORT
When you visit your local Beefeater, you'll discover that it has its own individual style and character with tasteful decor, comfortable furnishings and a relaxing atmosphere.
Dishes and wines featured are available at time of going to press 9/89.
SPOILT FOR CHOICE
There is a mouthwatering choice of excellent value for money dishes on the Beefeater menu.
New seasonal selections are added throughout the year; offering a variety of both traditional favourites, as well as more adventurous dishes.
For our younger visitors we offer’ Junior Diner’portions of selected dishes and for the very young, our famous totally additive free Mr. Men Meals are also available.
FRIENDLY BAR
The bar at your local Beefeater has a friendly atmosphere, where you can relax over a drink or enjoy a delicious bar meal.
GREAT HOSPITALITY AND SERVICE
We look forward to welcoming you, whether you're dining in the restaurant or relaxing in the bar.
We are sure you will find that our friendly efficient staff and comfortable surroundings will make your visit one to remember.
For details of Beefeaters nationwide telephone: 0293 776634
CARPENTERS ARMS
The site of the Carpenters Arms located in the heart of Old Botley, has boasted an inn since the late 1700's.
Now part of the Beefeater Steak Houses, the Carpenters Arms has been carefully restored to offer a pub restaurant.
The beautiful restaurant has a traditional feel, with splendid old timbers and a delightful new conservatory.
In the comfortable bar, our guests can enjoy a choice of excellent Morrells beer and a selection from the Beefeater Bar Range meals.
Hilton International
 Dear Mr Heaps 
At Hilton International, it's our intention to make you feel welcome and at home each and every time you're our guest.
How?
By recognizing you as a regular guest.
And by providing a service that caters to you, as an individual.
Our expertise in serving people from all over the world in renowned.
And has been for over 40 years.
However, times change.
Needs change.
And so does the level of service we now offer.
That's why we have created…
‘The Hilton Club’.
Offering recognition and service…the exact way you like.
When you're recognized personally by our staff.
When you can ring a special reservation number and your details are already known.
When your choice of newspaper and the drink you prefer are delivered to your room.
Or your suit is delivered in just three hours.
Dry cleaned.
Pressed.
And ready…for your meeting.
So you look and feel your best.
When you enjoy service like that, it can only mean one thing:
‘You must be a regular guest…and a member of the Hilton Club.’
As you know, all our guests enjoy great service.
Now, as a member of The Hilton Club, you'll enjoy great service…on your terms.
To make you feel even more comfortable.
Even more relaxed.
(Whether you are travelling on business or for pleasure.)
I've only given a hint of what you'll get as a Hilton Club member.
The brochure I've enclosed will give you the full picture.
Annual membership fees for The Hilton Club are £100.00 per year.
And membership is offered on a limited basis only.
To join, simply complete and return your Hilton Club application which also accompanies my letter.
I look forward to welcoming you as one of our first Hilton Club members soon.
Yours sincerely, Gillian Thornton, International Director, The Hilton Club
P.S. In the meantime, should you have any questions, please ring The National Director of The Hilton Club for your area.
Her name in Ms Lesa Fairbairn and she can be reached on (0923) 31333.
‘A new dimension in individual service for our regular guests.’
Hilton International is focusing its computer technology on meeting the needs of our cosmopolitan guests.
Those guests who will give us the opportunity to welcome them to our hotels for many years to come.
The result is a service that acknowledges their special needs as guests and, more importantly, as individuals.
The level of service offered by The Hilton Club is indicative of our commitment to quality now and in the future.
Another reason why discerning individuals from all over the world continue to prefer Hilton International.
HAPPY DAYS
SUMMER FARE
Selections from our new Summer Menu
IT'S YOUR CHOICE
Lighter meals or bar food
HAPPY DAYS
Great days out for you and your family!
SUMMER SAVERS make every day a Happy Day
WE'RE HAPPY TO SERVE YOU
and you'll be delighted with our new summer dishes.
BEEFEATER makes any day a Happy Day this summer.
You know you'll always receive a warm and friendly welcome.
And whether you are dining in the restaurant or relaxing at the bar, our helpful staff want to make sure you really enjoy your visit.
And you will, especially when you see what's new on the menu this summer.
Beefeater menus change to match the season, so here's a preview of some of the special dishes and wines we'll be featuring from June 10th alongside traditional favourites.
Start with our Fresh Melon — a quarter of juicy honeydew melon, served with a twisted orange slice and strawberry garnish.
Or Seafood Salad — a delicious combination of prawns, smoked salmon and crab pieces on a bed of mixed salad.
Served with a dipper pot of seafood sauce and brown bread and butter.
To follow why not try our new Rump Steak with Seafood Kebab — a delicious combination of a succulent 5oz rump steak cooked to your liking and a chargrill flavoured seafood kebab of swordfish, tuna, scallop, prawns, red and green peppers.
Served with mushrooms.
Or Salmon Trout — a grilled 7oz salmon trout fillet, served with a boat of creamy white wine and basil sauce and garnished with a lemon wedge.
And will you be able to resist desserts such as Black Velvet Pie — a smooth chocolate mousse flavoured with rum and dotted with chocolate chips set on a chocolate biscuit base, topped with creamy mousse and flakes of chocolate?
Or our special Happy Days Sunday — a delicious orange Maderia cake topped with lime sauce, smothered with ice cream, whipped cream and garnished with chopped nuts?
Whatever you choose, one of our carefully selected wines provides the perfect finishing touch.
We think you'll especially enjoy these three seasonal wines from our extensive list.
Vinho Verde — the ideal accompaniment with fish and shellfish.
Lambrusco Blush — light and fruity, enjoyable with any meal.
Asti Spumante— turns any occasion into a celebration!
SEE BACK FOR OUR SPECIAL SUMMER SAVER VOUCHERS
IT'S YOUR CHOICE
A delicious range of lighter meals and bar food.
Because you don't always want a large meal, Beefeater have a range of special Light ‘n' Early dishes served in the restaurant.
They're a tasty, lower cost, alternative for lunchtimes and early evening meals available before 7.30pm Monday to Saturday.
In addition to those Light ‘n' Early selections shown below, we've added a delicious Seafood Saladbowl especially for the summer.
All dishes are served with a choice of garlic bread, jacket potato, new potatoes or french fries.
And, as with main course selections, included in the price is a soft vanilla ice cream with a choice of toppings.
This summer, why not take advantage of our £10 set price Light ‘n' Early family meal?
See back page for details.
The best bar none
The Beefeater Bar gives you a thoroughly relaxed, informal setting for a fine choice of meals from our new Beefeater Range bar menu.
Take your pick from a choice of hot or cold dishes such as Steak & Kidney Pie, Cumberland Curls and a variety of fresh salads.
Or check out the chalkboard for daily specials.
And even if you just pop in for a welcome drink, look out for our Happy Days bar promotions.
Simply ask the bar staff for details.
SEE BACK FOR OUR SPECIAL SUMMER SAVER VOUCHERS
HAPPY DAYS
For the whole family
There's a welcome for every member of your family at Beefeater.
And we pay special attention to children.
Young guests up to the age of 14 can choose a special selection of dishes from the main menu.
Smaller children have their very own Mr Men menus, full of exciting, tasty dishes they love.
A three course meal costs just £1.75 and is completely free from any artificial colours and flavours.
While they're waiting, there are puzzles, games and stories to keep them amused.
And of course, high chairs are available on request.
When you bring your family to Beefeater, you're sure to have a Happy Day out.
Many have gardens with children's play areas and some will be holding delicious summer barbecues.
The key on the back gives a full list of facilities for each Beefeater.
When you dine using one of the Summer Saver vouchers at the back of this leaflet you'll receive our special Happy Days Book of Vouchers — save on a whole host of spectacular days out at twelve of Britain's best theme parks and family attractions.
It's free when you visit Beefeater between June 10th and September 1st 1990.
(While stocks last).
Seafood Salad, Rump Steak with Seafood Kebab, Salmon Trout with White Wine and Basil Sauce, Happy Days Sundae, and Fresh Melon
Saladbowl of Hot Filled £4.65, Steak and Kidney Pie £3.95, Roast Chicken £3.85, Fillet of Cod £3.75, Tagliatelle Bolognaise £3.65.
Country Broth and Fresh Hobbin, Chicken in the Basket, Fruit Surprise, Salad with Prawns, Ploughman's lunch
5oz Rump Steak, Giant Fish Stars, purple Thirst Zapper.
Have a Happy Day!
THE READER'S DIGEST ASSOCIATION LIMITED, 7–10 OLD BAILEY, LONDON, EC99 1AA
A chance to choose…music of a different kind!
In one unbeatable Collection — the starts and sounds that set the whole world rocking!
All-original hits from the glory days of pop, plus a FREE ALBUM of classical Elvis!(details below) 4 double-length cassettes or 8 LPs.
DON'T FORGET…
YOU COULD ALREADY HAVE WON THE £22,500 EXTRA PRIZE.
REPLY WITHIN SEVEN DAYS TO MAKE THE MOST OF ALL THE PRIZE-WINNING OPPORTUNITIES OFFERED YOU!
 Dear Reader,
Do you remember…
•when you could buy all of the top five best-selling singles and still have change form a pound?
•jiving in the aisles to Bill Haley's film, ‘Rock Around the Clock'?
•the shock of Buddy Holly's death in '59, then the loss of Eddie Cochran less than two years later?
•all the fuss when Cliff Richard made his début on ‘Oh Boy! ' and a national newspaper pronounced
‘this boy is too sexy for television'?
If you recall any of these events, you're a true child of rock'n'roll…someone from whom 112 ROCK'N'ROLL GREATS will have very special meaning.
It can be yours as an alternative to ‘Songs of Joy', and it's packed with scores of nostalgic, original hits from rock'n'roll's great heroes…the Everly Brothers, Little Richard, Fats Domino and many, many more.
This superb boxed set is a once-in-a-lifetime souvenir of a universally loved sound.
And it comes with an exclusive FREE GIFT featuring the greatest rock'n'roll star of all…
Elvis Rocks !
This extra cassette or LP of 14 Presley classics forms a perfect companion to the Collection — riveting best!
See the flap of this letter for full repertoire details.
The definitive treasury
112 ROCK'N'ROLL GREATS is quite simply the definitive rock'n'roll treasury a permanent reminder of the timeless talents and scintillating showmanship of the music's greatest stars.
Remember Buddy Holly's vocal acrobatics on Peggy Sue …and the sweet harmonising of Don and Phil, the Everly boys, on his like Bye Bye Love and Bird Dog ?
Who could forget Bill Haley's Comets, rolling on the floor with their guitars and saxes in the air, blaring out Rock Around the Clock ?
Here you'll find the ebullient Fats Domino, creator of I'm Walkin' and Be my Guest …black-leather clad Gene Vincent, with his slinky vocals in Be-Bop-a-Lula …and the cheery J.P.
Richardson, otherwise known as the Big Bopper, with everyone's favourite telephone song Chantilly Lace .
And there's more — Number Ones galore, from falsetto king Jimmy Jones' Good Timin' to Conway Twitty's It's Only Make Believe …hard-driving, hipswinging dance-hall blasters like Sandy Nelson's Let There Be Drums and Little Eva's The Locomotion …and the pick of songs honouring the softer side of rock…the Platters' The Great Pretender , Sam Cooke's You Send Me and Tab Hunter's Young Love to name just three.
The pick of a thousand hit parades!
In putting the Collection together, our music editors combed a thousand hit parades to bring you the finest moments in rock'n'roll.
Every track is handpicked, and every track you hear in the Collection is the original big-selling recording !
Johnny Tillotson's Poetry in Motion , Lesley Gore's It's my Party , Cliff Richard's Move It , the Ventures' Walk Don't Run , Eddie Cochran's C'mon Everybody …all sound as fresh today as they ever did.
Solid musical dynamite!
And of course the Collection comes to you with a written Guarantee assuring you of satisfactory playing condition or free replacement without question — and with a fascinating illustrated booklet telling you all about the stars and songs featured.
It's a smashing read.
Listen again to the hits that made the headlines — 112 memory-packed tracks in one electrifying Collection!
112 ROCK'N'ROLL GREATS
C'mon everybody take a tuneful trip back in time!
If you thought that the golden age of rock'n'roll faded with the Fifties, think again!
All the fun and thrills of that fabulous era are captured in 112 ROCK'N'ROLL GREATS, where you'll find over 90 top names presenting their biggest and best-remembered hits.
These are the tracks to which a whole generation dated and danced, the driving rock numbers and sweet teen love songs that formed such an unforgettable soundtrack to our lives.
And if you happen to be too young to remember rock'n'roll the first time around, this is the perfect way to discover what all the fuss was about!
The most complete Collection of rock'n'roll you could ever wish to own yours on four double-length cassettes or eight LPs.
1
Rock Around the Clock
The golden tracks from rock'n'roll's early years, by the stars whose names spelt glamour and excitement!
2
Rockin' Good Ways
Good-time hits from the rock'n'roll heart-throbs — Pat Boone, Paul Anka, Frankie Avalon and more!
3
Juke Box Giants
The hits that were the first choices on every juke box between 1956 and 1964 nostalgia-soaked favourites from rock's bright young stars.
4
Rock Softly
Rock'n'roll had a softer side, too — and here are the ballads that everyone remembers sung by some of the sweetest voices in pop.
5
Let's Have a Party
It's party time — and who better than Fats Domino, Johnny Tillotson, Little Eva and the rest to set the mood and get everyone dancing?
6
Rockin' Instrumental Hits
Metallic guitar chords, barnstorming organ sounds — the qualities of instrumental rock were many and varied.
Enjoy again 14 of the best instrumental sounds ever put on disc!
7
At the Hop
Memories galore of first dates, teenage crushes, high-school dances and rocking until midnight — captured forever in chartbusters like these…
8
England Rocks
The UK produced her own great rockers in the 50s — and she continues to do so, in the shape of red-hot revivalists like Shakin' Stevens and Alvin Stardust.
The best of British from yesterday and today!
REPLY NOW!
YOU COULD WIN UP TO £125,000
What 112 ROCK'N'ROLL GREATS offers you:
•112 hand-picked tracks, every one a pop and rock favourite by the original artist !
•Star names — 94 in all!
Singers, groups, dazzling instrumentalists.
•Exclusive compilation, available only from Reader's Digest.
•Faithful sound reproduction — every track transferred from original master tapes with meticulous care, and under rigorous quality control.
•Superb packaging in glossy library case, complete with index and specially commissioned booklet of notes and background facts.
•A Free album of Elvis favourites, as a thank-you to you!
•Written Guarantee of satisfactory playing condition, or free replacement without question.
•Choice of cassettes or LPs at the same price.
•Value for money!
By selling direct to you, we keep our prices at a down-to-earth level.
See the Terms of Offer panel for details of our interest-free instalment terms.
•Packing and delivery included in the price.
FREE when you send for 112 ROCK'N'ROLL GREATS…
The immortal Elvis sings his greatest ever rock'n'roll hits.
Elvis Rocks! 14 Golden Hits.
For millions around the world, Elvis Presley was rock'n'roll — the living embodiment of the music's power, drive and glamour.
Now you can enjoy again, in an album available only to orderers of 112 ROCK'N'ROLL GREATS, 14 of his greatest-ever performances…14 truly classic rock'n'roll tracks from a 20th-century legend!
14 historic hits from the greatest rock'n'roller of all!
CLAIM YOUR FREE ALBUM TODAY!
To send for 112 ROCK'N'ROLL GREATS and receive the special FREE Elvis Rocks!
ALBUM…detach ONE of these stamps (for either cassettes or LPs, as required) and stick it in the box on the front of your Grand Prize Certificate of Eligibility.
Then return the Certificate in the ‘YES' envelope provided.
How to order and claim your Free Gift
Ordering couldn't be easier.
Just take the appropriate stamp (for cassettes or LPs) from the flap of this letter and stick it in the box on the front of your Grand Prize Certificate of Eligibility.
Then post the Certificate without delay in the ‘YES' reply envelope provided.
We'll send Elvis Rocks ! with your Collection.
SEND NO MONEY AT THIS STAGE: only after 112 ROCK'N'ROLL GREATS is safely in your hands will payment be due, and instalment terms are available at no extra charge.
These are: £2.85 after delivery, followed by three monthly payments of £10.70 each.
(The total price of the Collection, whether you pay by cash or instalments, is £34.95 — and that includes packing and delivery.)
As soon as we receive your Grand Prize Certificate of Eligibility, we'll enter your numbers in the Draw, and we'll let you know promptly if you win a prize.
But please hurry — remember, you have just 14 days to qualify for a chance to add the £15,000 Bonus to the First Prize…and win a grand total of £125,000!
Good luck in the Draw!
Yours sincerely,
Reader's Digest Music Division
PS.
Don't forget — the £22,250 Extra Prize (which you may already have won) and the £27,750 ‘Early Bird' Prize can be claimed only within the next SEVEN days.
Reply NOW to make the most of all the opportunities offered to you!
The radio Rentals Saint & Greavsie Show
 Dear Mrs Clayton 
April 1990
‘Saint and Greavsie’, the well known television duo, are assisting Radio Rentals in the run up to the World Cup finals.
As one of our valued customers I am delighted to be able to make you this exceptional ‘Saint and Greavsie’ offer:
Rent a Ferguson Fastext T.V. and 14in colour TV all for only £17.99 a month!
That's right!
You can improve your television viewing with two great models from Ferguson.
For just £17.99 a month you can update to a fabulous 51cm (21in) Fastext TV and enjoy all the benefits of a 14in colour TV — giving you a saving of £1.99 a month every month off our normal rental rates!
This is what you get.
The Ferguson 51P7 has many superb features such as:-
•A 51cm Flatter Squarer Tube (FST) for superior picture quality, wider viewing angle and reduced reflection on screen.
•Infra-Red Remote Control allows you to operate all the television functions from the comfort of your armchair for totally relaxed viewing!
•Fastext for quicker, easier access to your favourite Teletext pages.
And that's not all
With a brand new Ferguson 14M1 14in colour TV you will have all the advantages of a second television at a special low price: whether it's in the kitchen, bedroom or children's room, a portable television offers you total viewing flexibility.
What you must do.
Take a look at pages 8 and 9 of the enclosed magazine for further details of the Ferguson 51P7 and 14M1.
To take advantage of this offer, which is available on our 18 month agreement, all you have to do is call into your local Radio Rentals shop with this letter.
Or, if more convenient, give us a call on 0788 544535 and we'll be happy to make the delivery arrangements for you.
Please hurry though, stocks are limited and this offer must close on Saturday 30th June 1990.
Your sincerely, Lindsay Robinson, Divisional Director.
P.S. Enclosed is an important leaflet highlighting local service telephone numbers for use during normal working hours.
It may be that your number is changing.
If so, please take note of it for future reference.
P.P.S. Your spring edition of our customer magazine is enclosed to keep you in touch with all the latest developments at Radio Rentals.